06GUANGZHOU14710
Guangdong IPR: Enforcement Efforts in 2005
Wed May 17 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Guangzhou
VZCZCXYZ0033
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHGZ #4710/01 1370010
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 170010Z MAY 06
FM AMCONSUL GUANGZHOU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8026
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEKJCS/DIA WASHDC
RHHMUNA/HQ USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS GUANGZHOU 014710 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USDOC FOR 4420/ITA/MAC/MCQUEEN, DAS LEVINE 
STATE FOR EB/TPP MASSINGA, FELSING 
STATE PASS COPYRIGHT FOR TEPP 
STATE PASS USPTO FOR DUDAS, BROWNING, BOLAND, ANTHONY, NESS 
STATE PASS USTR FOR MENDENHALL, MCCOY, ESPINEL, CELICO 
USDOJ FOR SUSSMAN 
DHS/CPP FOR PIZZECK 
USPACOM FOR FPA 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KIPR KJUS KCRM ECON ETRD WTRO CH
SUBJECT: Guangdong IPR: Enforcement Efforts in 2005 
 
REF: A) Guangzhou 13563; B) 05 Guangzhou 23057 
 
(U) This document is sensitive but unclassified.  Please 
protect accordingly. 
 
¶1. (U) Summary:  Guangdong officials praised their 
intellectual property rights (IPR) enforcement efforts and 
highlighted Guangdong enterprises' IP creation in the annual 
white paper on IPR enforcement and development.  Guangdong 
courts concluded 94 IPR-related criminal cases in 2005, 
involving 232 individuals.  The courts also completed 3,316 
IPR-related civil cases, up 83 percent from 2004.  The 
province has designated eight local courts to handle IPR 
cases, more than any other province.  According to the 
report, all provincial offices and large municipal offices 
are now using legal software, while smaller cities will 
complete the transition by the end of 2006.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) Econoff attended an April 20 press conference hosted 
by Guangdong IP agencies to publicize the province's 2006 
white paper on IPR protection and development.  Post has 
reported separately on Guangzhou's IPR white paper (ref A) 
and will report on Shenzhen's when it is released. 
 
Focus on Foods, Electronics, and Trade Fairs 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (U) Guangdong's white paper describes Guangdong IPR 
enforcement efforts from September 2004 to the end of 2005 
as a "special campaign" guided by the Guangdong IPR Working 
Group.  During this period, officials targeted counterfeit 
food and drugs, electronics, and household appliances. 
Optical discs were cited as a key product throughout the 
report, particularly compressed DVDs because of their high 
storage volume.  Priority venues for enforcement included 
wholesale markets, supermarkets, and trade fairs.  The 
report listed Guangzhou, Shenzhen, Foshan, and Dongguan as 
priority regions.  The Public Security Bureau (PSB)'s 
Mountain Eagle campaign, which lasted from November 2004 
through November 2005, was directed at protecting well-known 
trademarks of products that are closely related to people's 
daily life or health (ref B).  Guangdong officials have 
since announced the extension of the Mountain Eagle campaign 
through the end of 2006. 
 
Criminal Cases and PSB Investigations 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (U) According to the white paper, Guangdong courts 
concluded 94 criminal cases in 2005, involving 232 
individuals.  Guangdong public security offices investigated 
426 criminal IPR cases in 2005, solving 331 and arresting 
1,207 suspects.  Approximately one-third of these cases were 
trademark cases generated by the Mountain Eagle campaign. 
The report highlighted cases involving Viagra, Hennessy, and 
a Jieyang VCD production line in which 12 suspects were 
arrested.  The PSB seized a total of 15 CD production lines 
in 2005. 
 
Case Transfers 
-------------- 
 
¶5. (U) Guangdong AIC offices transferred 17 cases to the PSB 
in 2005, which involved 17 suspects.  Some of these cases 
included counterfeit products of Nike, Adidas, and Coach. 
According to the report, Guangdong Copyright offices 
transferred 51 IPR-related cases to the PSB for criminal 
prosecution in 2005, involving 57 suspects.  A June 2005 
campaign against A/V products in Guangzhou accounted for 
nine of these case transfers, as well as the closure of 67 
warehouses, eight wholesale locations, and 29 transport 
centers. 
 
Civil Cases 
----------- 
 
¶6. (U) Guangdong courts concluded 3,316 IPR-related civil 
cases in 2005, up 83 percent from 2004.  The report boasts 
that 45 percent of IPR cases in Guangdong courts were 
settled by mediation, including 58 percent of cases in the 
Shenzhen Intermediate Court. 
 
¶7. (U) Guangdong has designated eight local courts (courts 
of first instance) -- more than any other province -- to 
handle IPR cases in an effort to alleviate the workload of 
intermediate courts.  The report states that these courts, 
two of which are located in Guangzhou and Shenzhen, 
concluded 286 IPR-related cases in 2005. 
 
Software Legalization 
--------------------- 
 
¶8. (U) The report states that by the end of 2005 all 
municipal governments in Guangdong had "basically finished 
the work of software legalization."  At the press 
conference, an IPO official clarified that all provincial 
offices and large municipal offices are now using legal 
software.  Smaller cities, as well as county- and district- 
level offices, will complete the transition by the end of 
¶2006. 
 
Customs 
------- 
 
¶9. (U) Guangdong Customs officials seized 521 cases in 2005, 
up 11 percent from 2004.  516 of these cases were exports 
and 508 involved trademarks.  In export enforcement, 
Guangdong Customs targeted trademark counterfeiting and CD 
piracy.  Sixteen of the Customs cases involved large-scale 
CD counterfeiting.  Foreign brands protected include Nike, 
Pfizer, Motorola, Disney, Philips, Canon, and Citizen. 
Guangdong and Hong Kong customs authorities also conducted 
nine joint enforcement actions in border cities. 
 
Trade Fairs 
----------- 
 
¶10. (U) The two sessions of the Canton Trade Fair in 2005 
saw 375 patent infringement cases, 462 trademark cases, and 
45 copyright cases, according to the report.  The April 2006 
Canton Trade Fair saw 322 patent infringement cases, 139 
trademark cases, and 11 copyright cases, according to a 
trade fair representative.  (Note: According to a contact, 
the trade fair's method of recording complaints changed in 
¶2006.  Previously, authorities recorded only one complaint 
even if exhibitors infringed on multiple patents, 
trademarks, or copyrights.  Currently, each infringement is 
calculated as one complaint.  End note) 
 
¶11. (U) The Guangdong white paper highlighted the following 
trade fairs as the most important in the province.  All of 
them include IPR complaint offices staffed by enforcement 
authorities (typically the Intellectual Property Office 
[IPO] or the Administration of Industry and Commerce [AIC]). 
(Note: Draft trade fair regulations would require an IPR 
complaint desk to be onsite during fairs of three or more 
days.  End note). 
 
Canton Trade Fair (Guangzhou) 
 
China Int'l Toys and Gifts Fair (Guangzhou) 
 
Guangdong Int'l Beauty, Hairdressing, and Cosmetics Expo 
(Guangzhou) 
 
China Small and Medium-Size Enterprise Fair (Guangzhou) 
 
China Int'l Expo of A/V Industry Fair (Guangzhou) 
 
South China Book Festival (Guangzhou) 
 
Guangzhou Int'l Civil Engineering Expo (Guangzhou) 
 
China Int'l High-Tech Fair (Shenzhen) 
 
China Pottery Expo (Foshan) 
 
Textile, clothing, and furniture fairs (Dongguan) 
 
 
Patent and Trademark Applications 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶12. (U) The white paper states that Guangdong had the most 
patent applications and grants of any province in China in 
2005 for the 11th consecutive year.  Patents applications 
were up 38 percent in 2005, totaling 72,220, accounting for 
19 percent of the national total.  Guangdong saw 102,998 
trademark applications in 2005 -- again the highest in China 
for the 11th consecutive year. 
 
¶13. (U) Guangdong enterprises received 20 "China Well-Known 
Trademarks" in 2005, and currently have a total of 56 -- 
ranking second nationwide.  Seventy-three Guangdong 
enterprises received the title "China Famous Brand", 
bringing the total to 165.  This bring Guangdong's share to 
17.8 percent of China's total, ranking Guangdong first 
nationwide for five consecutive years. (Note: This jump in 
well-known trademarks is part of a Chinese campaign to 
promote branding.  End note). 
 
¶14. (U) Eight Guangdong products, including Liusha pearls, 
Qindou mangoes, and Yugonglou pineapples, were given 
geographic indicator trademarks.  This brings the total to 
14, ranking fourth nationwide. 
 
Public Education 
---------------- 
 
¶15. (U) The report also highlights three universities and 
one institute in Guangzhou which have set up IPR schools: 
Jinan University, Zhongshan University, South China 
University of Technology and Guangdong University of 
Finance.  The report also mentions ongoing training and 
joint actions with Hong Kong IPR authorities, including an 
"expert group on IPR protection", a program on small and 
medium-size enterprise development, the "No Fakes" campaign 
for retail businesses, and a cooperative mechanism for 
handling cross-border IPR cases.  The most significant IPR- 
related event in Guangdong was a three-day seminar on IP 
education in China jointly hosted by the World IP 
Organization (WIPO) and the Guangdong IPO, though China has 
not yet signed on to the WIPO treaties. 
 
¶16. (U) The report emphasizes the importance of public 
education through commercial media, and lists the following 
media channels that were used in 2005 (sponsoring office is 
listed in parentheses): 
 
Advertisements on Guangdong TV (Guangdong IPO) 
 
Documentaries on CCTV and Guangdong TV (Guangdong PSB) 
 
A five-episode TV series on Shenzhen television (Shenzhen 
IPO) 
 
Advertisements on trademark protection on Dongguan 
television (Dongguan AIC) 
 
IPR publicity in the Nanfang Daily (one of Guangdong's 
largest newspapers) (Guangdong IPO and AIC) 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶17. (SBU) The Guangdong IPO press conference was largely a 
ceremonial occasion, taken up mostly by an IPO official 
reading from the white paper.  Though the report is largely 
a laudatory summary of enforcement actions, it does offer 
specific examples of prominent cases, important trade fairs, 
and types of media utilized in public education campaigns. 
The report lacked detailed statistics, however, particularly 
on criminal cases and transfers by type of infringement. 
Post has since submitted a request to Guangdong authorities 
for a breakdown of IPR-related criminal cases by code of law 
for 2004 and 2005. 
 
¶18. (SBU) Business contacts acknowledge that Guangdong is 
doing more to crack down on piracy and counterfeiting. 
However, virtually all of our contacts believe IPR 
violations are increasing and product quality is much 
better, making it more difficult to differentiate between 
the original product and a high-quality fake.  Of course, 
large quantities of poor-quality fakes are still in the 
markets in China, as well as exported. 
 
ROCK