07AITTAIPEI1933
TAIWAN: RESULTS OF BLUE LANTERN PRE-LICENSE 050055466
Thu Aug 23 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1933 2350822
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 230822Z AUG 07
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 6505UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001933 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE, SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/TC, ISN/MTR, AND PM/DTCC FOR BLUE LANTERN COORDINATOR 
JUDD STITZIEL, AIT/W 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC KOMC TW
SUBJECT: TAIWAN: RESULTS OF BLUE LANTERN PRE-LICENSE 050055466 
 
REF: 07 STATE 107098 
 
¶1. (SBU) Per reftel request, AIT/T visited the foreign consignee, 
Trebmotion Inc. (Trebmotion), and contacted the end user, Taiwan ROC 
ORDC Army Logistics Command (Taiwan Army). Based on the site visit 
and information collected by AIT/T, the subject business transaction 
appears to be legitimate. 
 
Taiwan Army: 
 
¶2. (SBU) Mr. Chen, Sheng-Kai, with the Procurement Office of the 
Taiwan Army, Ministry of National Defense (MOND), stated that he is 
not aware of a business relationship between the Taiwan Army and 
Trebmotion.  Mr. Chen, however, stated that the Taiwan Army does 
have a contract with Intake Power Corporation (Intake) for 
maintenance work on M9 Armed Combat Earth Movers (ACE).  He verified 
the contract number, item, and the end-use of the item as stated in 
the subject license application with Taiwan Army's contract with 
Intake. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Mr. Chung explained that the Taiwan Army has other 
contracts with Intake and that Intake is considered a 
recognized/official supplier/contractor for the Taiwan Army and 
MOND. 
 
Trebmotion: 
 
¶4. (SBU) AIT-T met with Peter Sun, head of Military Marketing and 
Service Group units of Trebmotion.  Mr. Sun explained that 
Trebmotion is a subcontractor to Intake to purchase parts for 
Intake's contract with the Taiwan Army for the repair/maintenance of 
M9 ACE.  Mr. Sun provided AIT with the contract between Intake and 
the Taiwan Army.  The contract number and the work ordered under the 
contract reconciled with the information AIT/T received from the 
Taiwan Army.  Mr. Sun also provided a copy of the contract 
Trebmotion has with Intake to procure parts and the purchase order 
between Trebmotion and Flight Source.  The item description and 
quantity matched on both documents.  Mr. Sun stated that the subject 
transaction is the first time for the company to buy parts from the 
United States for M9 ACE maintenance and the first time from Flight 
Source. 
 
¶5. (SBU) When asked if the Taiwan Army would know Trebmotion, Mr. 
Sun replied that it would not.  The Taiwan Army would, however, know 
Mr. Sun personally since he has been working on military-related 
issues for 36 years. Mr. Sun added that Trebmotion has subcontract 
relationship with SMR and Shan Chun Company, in addition to Intake. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Mr. Sun reviewed Trebmotion's storing and handling 
procedures for items it procures items from overseas.  According to 
Mr. Sun, Trebmotion has three leased warehouses; Crown Van Line 
Warehouse in Keelung, SMR Warehouse near Tao Yuan Int'l Airport, and 
Intake Warehouse in Kaohsiung County. Mr. Sun explained that 
low-value and non-sensitive items are stored in the SMR warehouse in 
Tao Yuan or at its Taipei office. Generally, however, items acquired 
on behalf of SMR and Intake are directly delivered to end users; 
high value, sensitive, or bulk items that are not put into immediate 
use are stored in the Crown Van Line warehouse, which has a physical 
security system. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Trebmotion was incorporated in 2001 as a sole 
proprietorship with Mr. Larry Sun as the principal.  At the time, 
its main business was research and development related to the 
consumer transportation industry such as motorcycles and cryogenic 
processing of materials.  About a year ago, Peter Sun joined the 
company and added two other business units: a Military Marketing and 
a Service Group to provide technical services--such as interpreting 
technical manuals into English--to the Military Marketing unit. 
Trebmotion does not manufacture but acts as importer, trader, or 
sales agent for end-users and government contractors.  Individually, 
Mr. Sun also acts as an overseas sales agent for Explomo Technical 
Service (Singapore), Marvin Land System (United States), ES GmbH 
(Germany) and Pearson Engineering (United Kingdom).  In addition to 
Messrs Larry Sun and Peter Sun, Trebmotion has seven employees in 
its Taipei office. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Mr. Sun stated that he is fully aware of restrictions on 
USML items, especially prohibitions against unauthorized 
re-transfers and re-exports of such items. 
 
YOUNG