07KHARTOUM1203
MEDIA REACTION CONTINUED: UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL
Thu Aug 02 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO9106
OO RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #1203/01 2141102
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 021102Z AUG 07
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8075
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 001203 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/SPG, SE NATSIOS, 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL UN KPAO UN SU
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION CONTINUED: UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL 
RESOLUTION 1769 
 
 
¶1.  (U)  SUMMARY.  On August 2, Sudanese media focused on Foreign 
Minister Lam Akol's press conference "welcoming" UN Security Council 
Resolution 1769.  Meanwhile, on Al-Jazeera broadcasts and in the 
Sudanese morning newspapers, the Justice and Equality Movement's 
(JEM) spokesperson called the resolution "a victory for the people 
of Darfur people."  Sudanese opposition political parties and 
re-printed international articles on the event presented a more 
cautious and skeptical reaction to the resolution.  END SUMMARY. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
FOREIGN MINISTER LAM AKOL WELCOMES HYBRID 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) Most Sudanese newspapers prominently featured the press 
conference of Foreign Minister Lam Akol, where he announced "our 
[the Government of Sudan's] acceptance of the resolution."  Akol 
also called the resolution "practical, as it took into consideration 
most of our concerns."  He stated his administration is "comfortable 
with the resolution," and added that it "is a result of long and 
tedious consultations involving lots of people and the Sudanese 
government." He stated that "This is the first time a country 
involved in the resolution has taken part in the consultations." 
With respect to the inclusion of the Chapter Seven which permits the 
hybrid to use military force to "restore international peace and 
security," Akol said this inclusion "only permits the use of force 
in self-defense to protect civilians in conflict zones without 
damaging Sudan's sovereignty." 
 
------------------------------------ 
JEM - "THIS IS A VICTORY FOR DARFUR" 
------------------------------------ 
¶3.  (U)  Also on August 2, the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM)'s 
spokesman Ahmed Hussein Adam told the English daily, "The Sudan 
Tribune" that "this resolution is a victory for the Darfur people." 
Adam specifically praised the inclusion of Chapter Seven.  Although 
optimistic about the resolution, JEM's spokesman urged the 
international community to pressure Khartoum to fully implement the 
resolution.  He alleged that "We know that within this regime there 
are those who are opposed to the peacekeeping forces and that they 
would obstruct its deployment.  The world should know that this 
regime is divided and there are some who work only for a military 
solution."  He also stated that JEM will work with the peacekeepers 
in order to facilitate their mission on the ground.  Further, he 
urged the AU-UN troops to hold dialogue with the armed rebel 
movements for the benefit of peace and security in the region. 
Nonetheless, he deplored the absence of a clear mention of the 
disarmament of the Janjaweed militia groups indicating that they are 
the main tool of Khartoum to commit genocide in Darfur. He also 
regretted that the resolution does not include any references to the 
International Criminal Court (ICC) and its role for bringing justice 
to Darfur. 
 
----------------- 
OPPOSITION VOICES 
----------------- 
 
¶4.  (U) The Sudanese daily "Ra'i al-Shaab," presented a different 
perspective on the resolution.  This paper, published by Hassan 
Al-Turabi's Popular Congress Party, included remarks from Sudan's 
main opposition groups.  Dr. Farouq Kadoda, a leader of the Sudanese 
Communist party, is quoted in one article as expressing his surprise 
at the Sudanese government's acceptance of the hybrid.  He also 
criticized the UN saying, "it would be of more benefit for the 
people of Darfur if the international community spent its money on 
development." 
 
¶5.  (U)  The usually pro-government "Ra'i al-Aam" also included the 
reactions of several opposition leaders.  In one article, Bashir 
Adam Rahama of the Popular Congress Party, stated that he welcomed 
the resolution, as it will protect the civilians that the government 
failed to protect.  Rahama added that the resolution is not the 
final solution for the problem in Darfur, and that the crisis needs 
"collaborative efforts from all parties."  Ali Al-Sayed, a leader in 
the Democratic Unionist Party of Muhammad Osthman Merghani, stated 
that this group rejects the resolution, and added that it will lead 
to a confrontation between the hybrid troops in Darfur, the rebels, 
and the Sudan Armed Forces (SAF).  Bakri Adeel, of Sadiq Al-Mahdi's 
Umma party, stated that his party is "disappointed" with the 
resolution, and added that "the hybrid force will stay as long as 
the troops in "Iraq." 
 
¶6.  (U)  The new English language, Southern-focused, "The Advocate," 
said that Sudan's Ambassador to the United Nations stated that 
despite the fact that the resolution was issued and approved it will 
"still be subject to study and evaluation by the Government." He 
downplayed the inclusion of Chapter Seven, stating that this 
inclusion is mentioned in only one article, and that it does "not 
touch on any of the Sudanese government's authority and 
responsibility." 
 
KHARTOUM 00001203  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
¶7.  (U)  Mohamed Abdella, in an editorial from the extremist, 
usually pro-government Al-Intibaha Daily, which advocates northern 
secession from the South, was extremely critical of the government. 
He accused the government of "faking victories" and described the 
government of Sudan as "lying and deceiving its people."  He went 
further to criticize officials who say that the hybrid is not a 
"force" but an "operation." He said government officials have used 
this word choice of "operation" to delude the Sudanese people into 
thinking that this is not a military force.  He claims that there is 
a "hidden agenda" behind the deployment of the hybrid. 
 
¶7.  (8)  The Sudan Tribune also reprinted articles from the 
international news media which included reactions from U.N. 
officials, "Sudan specialists," and advocacy groups such as Save 
Darfur, Enough, and Amnesty International.  Many of these reactions 
urged caution, encouraged further divestment and sanctions, and 
predicted that the Government of Sudan would obstruct the deployment 
of the hybrid.