04ANKARA4303
SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY, JULY 28, 2004
Tue Aug 03 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 004303 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU IZ
SUBJECT:  SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY, JULY 28, 2004 
 
 
THIS CABLE IS FROM AMCONSUL ADANA. 
 
¶1.  This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary for 
July 28, 2004.  Please note that Turkish press reports 
often contain errors or exaggerations; AmConsulate 
Adana does not vouch for the accuracy of the reports 
summarized here. 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
¶2.  Ulkede Ozgur Gundem, Vakit: 18 cattle were killed 
and many others were wounded in a mine explosion in 
Gunyuzlu village of Semdinli, Hakkari province, on July 
¶26. The cattle owner, Abdurrahman Tasli, appealed to 
the Hakkari Human Rights Association (HRA) for 
assistance in clearing mines and in seeking 
compensation for his losses. 
 
¶3.  Yeni Safak, Vakit: PKK/Kongra Gel militants 
activated a remote controlled mine they had planted on 
the Yuksekova-Semdinli highway when an armored 
personnel carrier (APC) passed by. One soldier was 
wounded in the incident. 
 
¶4.  Radikal: In their investigation of the July 26 
explosion at the Hakkari Security Directorate, police 
started collecting videotapes recorded at wedding 
ceremonies that took place the night the explosion 
occurred.  The police suspect that terrorists 
intermingled with people attending wedding ceremonies 
at the houses close to the Security Directorate. A 
bridegroom, Vahit Ilhan, whose house was very close to 
the Security Directorate, was detained for nine hours 
after the explosion, but was later released. 
 
¶5.  Ulkede Ozgur Gundem: A report entitled "13-17 June 
Diyarbakir Report" and prepared by the Initiative for a 
Turkey Without Mines stated that 21 persons lost their 
lives and 43 others were wounded due to mine explosions 
in the Southeast in the past six months. 
 
¶6.  Radikal: The Kurdish internet site Newroz claimed 
that US forces in Iraq raided the PKK-affiliated 
Kurdistan Democratic Solution Party (PCDK) in Kirkuk, 
Iraq. According to Kirkuk Security Director Aqid Serhat 
Kadir, US troops raided PCDK offices after a group of 
armed PCDK members opened fire on the US troops on 
patrol. The US officials at the American Embassy in 
Ankara did not deny the incident, but said that the 
Embassy would make an announcement after they obtained 
adequate information. 
 
¶7.  Yeni Safak: Based on a tip, Diyarbakir police and 
National Intelligence Organization members seized 11 
kilos of heroin and 68,000 roots of hemp in Beypinar 
and Kayadere villages of Silvan, Diyarbakir province. 
Three persons involved in the matter were arrested. 
 
¶8.  Turkiye, Yeni Safak, Tercuman, Evrensel, 
Cumhuriyet: The Police from the Anti-Smuggling and 
Organized Crimes Department of the Van Security 
Directorate seized 81.67 kilos of heroin destined for 
points outside the country in secret compartments of a 
truck they inspected in Gevas, Van province. Two 
persons were arrested and two others having connections 
with drugs are wanted by police. 
 
¶9.  Yeni Safak, Vakit: Foot and mouth disease was 
diagnosed in cattle and sheep in Ayvali village of 
Darende, Malatya province. The Malatya Provincial 
Director of Agriculture, Nedim Sahinligil, said foot 
and mouth disease was diagnosed in two villagers who 
had eaten meat with the disease, as well, and warned 
the villagers that they should not eat meat that has 
not been inspected by veterinary authorities. 
Sahinligil added that teams from his office started 
vaccinating cattle and sheep in the village. 
 
BUSINESS DEVELOPMENTS 
 
¶10.  Hurriyet (Cukurova Supplement): People have been 
showing great interest in the International Fairs 
organized in Gaziantep in the textile, food, and shoe 
sectors. The Gaziantep President of the Chamber of 
Industry (GSO), Nejat Kocer, said GSO would open the 
GAP 2004 Food, Food Technologies and Packing Fair 
between September 23-26; the Moteks and Gatemak 4th 
Fashion, Textile and Ready Wear Machinery Fair on 
September 30; and the GAP Shoe, Leather Works and Side 
Industries Fair between January 15-18, 2005. 
 
DEUTSCH