07STATE145910
DEMARCHE REQUEST: CANADA'S CONTRIBUTION TO THE
Thu Oct 18 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0014
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #5910 2911727
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 181718Z OCT 07
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY OTTAWA PRIORITY 0000UNCLAS STATE 145910 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CA EAID SOCI TBIO
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE REQUEST: CANADA'S CONTRIBUTION TO THE 
GLOBAL POLIO ERADICATION INITIATIVE 
 
 ¶1. This is an action request.  See paragraph 6. 
 
¶2. SUMMARY. In 2006, there were serious setbacks in the 
global fight to end polio with increased numbers of polio 
cases in Nigeria and India, continuing challenges in 
Afghanistan and Pakistan, and imported cases appearing in 
countries previously declared polio-free. There is a critical 
$60 million funding gap for 2007 and $355 million for 2008 
for the Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI).  The 
Government of Canada is at a key decision point regarding its 
contributions to GPEI. This action request is to encourage 
Canada to meet its Gleneagles commitment for contributions to 
global polio eradication.  Please slug responses to OES/IHB's 
(Tierra Copeland and Patricia Murphy). End Summary 
 
¶3. BACKGROUND:  Substantial progress has been made since the 
launch of the Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI) in 
1988, when polio was endemic in more than 125 countries, 
paralyzing 350,000 children each year.  The GPEI partnership 
includes the World Health Organization (WHO), the United 
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), Rotary International, and 
U.S. Government agencies (USAID and the Department of Health 
and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention HHS/CDC).  The U.S. Government has been the 
leading financial donor to the effort providing over $1.3 
billion since 1988 and representing nearly thirty percent of 
global contributions. 
 
¶4. Canada is the fourth largest donor to the Polio 
Eradication Initiative (US $182 million contributed since 
1988). Canada was the first nation to place polio eradication 
on the G8 agenda, doing so in 2002 at Gleneagles in the 
context of the G8 Africa Action Plan.  Canada contributed a 
total of USD $102.9 million during the 2003-2005 period but 
has pledged significantly less for the 2006-2008 period (USD 
$45.6 million).  Canada has a strong interest in Afghanistan 
and has doubled its commitments of aid to Africa. These 
regions are very important to polio eradication.  The 
Government of Canada is at a key decision point regarding is 
contribution to GPEI. 
 
¶5. As noted by U/S Dobriansky in a policy speech on polio 
delivered October 10, 2006, significant progress has been 
made globally; still, recent setbacks have put eradication 
efforts at risk.  In 2006, 1,998 people were paralyzed by 
polio and now only four countries (Afghanistan, India, 
Nigeria, and Pakistan) still suffer from endemic polio 
transmission.  Polio eradication is feasible, as demonstrated 
already in many countries around the world.  However, donor 
enthusiasm and financial contributions are waning, even in 
the face of re-emerging infections and increased risk for 
polio to regain a global foothold.  Challenges facing the 
polio eradication effort include: 
 
-- There is a major global funding gap of $60 million needed 
for GPEI to support vaccination campaigns and emergency 
operations in outbreak areas for the remainder of 2007.  As a 
result, the WHO anticipates that polio vaccination programs 
might be scaled back due to lack of financial resources.  In 
addition, it is estimated that there is a shortfall of 
pledges of, at least, $355 million for eradication activities 
projected for 2008. 
 
-- During the 2004-2005 period, polio spread from Northern 
Nigeria and India to 21 previously polio-free countries 
across the Middle East and as far east as Indonesia. 
 
-- Spread of polio has increased in 2006, with twice as many 
polio cases in five states in Northern Nigeria, and five 
times as many cases in India compared to the same period in 
¶2005. 
 
-- The remaining areas and populations of polio infections 
and transmission are among the poorest of the poor and are 
the most difficult to reach. 
 
-- Socio-political issues have complicated vaccination 
efforts.  For example, in the critical areas of India and 
Nigeria, there is great distrust of government, government 
programs, and resistance to vaccination, particularly among 
Muslim communities. 
 
-- Political will, on the part of the governments of 
Afghanistan, India, Nigeria, and Pakistan, is being severely 
tested to follow through on commitments to polio eradication 
in their respective countries. 
 
¶6. ACTION:  Embassy is requested to urge senior officials in 
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Finance, and 
Privy Council Office that Canada consider increasing its 
support for the WHO and UNICEF-led Global Polio Eradication 
Initiative, including an additional pledge for 2008-2009. 
Embassy may draw on the following talking points: 
Begin Talking Points 
 
-- The United States is very concerned that given the 
continued endemic transmission of polio in Nigeria, India, 
Afghanistan, and Pakistan, a threat remains for importations 
to polio-free countries. 
 
-- The United States acknowledges Canada's strong leadership 
in placing global polio eradication on the G8 agenda at 
Gleneagles.  We appreciate Canada's exemplary past 
contributions to the Global Polio Eradication Initiative 
(GPEI).  There is an urgent $60 million funding gap for the 
remainder of 2007 and $355 million for 2008 for GPEI.  We 
urge Canada to maintain its leadership by at least 
maintaining past levels of financial support to GPEI. 
 
-- The United States has given generously -- $1.3 billion 
since 1988 and $132 million in 2007 alone.  We are urging out 
partners to help close the funding gap. 
 
End Talking Points 
RICE