07STATE40220
GUIDANCE FOR UNOMIG RENEWAL DISCUSSIONS
Wed Mar 28 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0003
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #0220 0880008
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 282359Z MAR 07
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO RUEHSI/AMEMBASSY TBILISI IMMEDIATE 0000UNCLAS STATE 040220 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNSC PREL GG RS
SUBJECT: GUIDANCE FOR UNOMIG RENEWAL DISCUSSIONS 
 
¶1.  (U)  This is an action request, see paras 2 and 3 below. 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  USUN is authorized to engage on the German draft 
text in para 4 below in Western Friends of Georgia 
discussions in New York, and is authorized to seek and accept 
the following changes to the text: 
 
-- PP5:  Insert "in Abkhazia, Georgia" between "urgently 
required" and "to". 
-- OP 6:  Replace "noting" with "Condemn" or "Deplore". 
--  OP 7:  Restore language from UNSCR 1615 (particularly OPs 
16, 18, and 19) and previous resolutions regarding refugees 
and internally displaced persons or replace with similar 
language that achieves the same goals and clarifies the right 
of return  to all of Abkhazia, Georgia., 
-- OP8:  Insert "of the sides" after "civil society". 
 
USUN should report results to Department and await 
instructions before agreeing to any other changes from other 
delegations.  USUN should also inform the western Friends 
that we are prepared to engage on the alternate language 
offered by the Germans and Georgians and are prepared to 
offer up additional/alternate language, if necessary, for use 
in further negotiations of the entire Friends. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  Department requests USUN ask the German Mission, 
as Chair of the Friends of Georgia, approach UNDPKO at the 
highest appropriate level with the following objectives: 
 
--  Express U.S. appreciation for the efforts of UNOMIG and 
SRSG Arnault. 
 
--  Encourage the Secretariat to recommend a 12-month 
extension for UNOMIG in the next report, which is due at the 
beginning of April, to provide stability and predictability 
to the mission. 
 
--  If asked, note that a twelve-month extension does not 
preclude SRSG Arnault from requesting an increase in UNOMIG's 
size before the next mandate renewal. 
 
¶4.  Begin draft resolution text. 
 
The Security Council, 
 
PP1   Recalling all its relevant resolutions including 
resolution 1716 of 13 October 2006 (S/RES/1716); 
 
PP2   Welcoming the reports of the Secretary-General on the 
activities of the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia 
of 11 January 2007 (S/2007/15) and (3) April 2007; 
 
PP3   Supporting the sustained efforts of the 
Secretary-General and of his Special Representative with the 
 
SIPDIS 
assistance of the Group of Friends of the Secretary-General, 
including Russia in its capacity as facilitator, and of the 
OSCE; 
 
PP4   Stressing the importance of close and effective 
cooperation between UNOMIG and the CIS peacekeeping force as 
they currently play an important stabilizing role in the 
conflict zone, and recalling that a lasting and comprehensive 
settlement of the conflict will require appropriate security 
guarantees; 
 
PP5   Stressing that economic development is urgently 
required to improve the livelihoods of the communities 
affected by the conflict, in particular the refugees and 
internally displaced persons; 
 
¶1.    Reaffirms the commitment of all Member States to the 
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of 
Georgia within its internationally recognized borders, and 
supports all efforts by the United Nations and the Group of 
Friends of the Secretary-General which are guided by their 
determination to promote a settlement of the Georgian-Abkhaz 
conflict only by peaceful means and within the framework of 
the Security Council resolutions; 
 
      ¶2.    Requests  both sides to make full use of all 
existing mechansims as described in the relevant Security 
Council resolutions in order to come to a peaceful 
settlement, and to comply fully with previous agreements 
regarding ceasefire and non-use of violence; 
 
¶3.    Recalls, with a view to achieving a lasting and 
comprehensive settlement, its support for the principles 
contained in the &Paper on Basic Principles for the 
Distribution of Competencies between Tbilisi and Sukhumi8 
and calls for a constructive  political dialogue under the 
aegis of the United Nations on this basis; 
 
¶4.    Endorses the Proposals for Confidence-building Measures 
presented by the Group of Friends of the Secretary-General 
during the meeting held in Geneva on 12 and 13 February 2007 
under participation of the Georgian and Abkhaz parties, and 
urges both parties with the assistance of UNOMIG and of 
international partners and the support of the Group of 
Friends of the Secretary-General to immediately engage in 
implementing these measures (without conditions); 
 
      ¶5.    Welcomes progress achieved by both sides towards 
the implementation of resolution 1716 (2006); 
 
¶6.    Notes with concern the attack on villages in the Upper 
Kodori valley carried out in the night of 11 and 12 March 
2007; 
 
      ¶7.    Stresses the urgent need to alleviate the plight 
of refugees and internally displaced persons and the need for 
a perspective of life in security and dignity in particular 
for the a new generation growing up outside Abkhazia, 
Georgia, and, recalling the right of return for all 
internally displaced persons to Abkhazia, Georgia, calls on 
both sides to implement the UNHCR,s Strategic Directions for 
the return in the first instance to the Gali region; 
 
¶8.    Welcomes existing and encourages further contacts 
between representatives of civil society; 
 
¶9.    Underlines that it is the primary responsibility of 
both sides to provide appropriate security and to ensure the 
freedom of movement of UNOMIG, the CIS peacekeeping force and 
other international personnel and calls on both sides to 
fulfil their obligations in this regard; 
 
¶10.   Welcomes the efforts being undertaken by UNOMIG to 
implement the Secretary-General%s zero tolerance policy on 
sexual exploitation and abuse and to ensure full compliance 
of its personnel with the United Nations code of conduct, 
requests the Secretary-General to continue to take all 
necessary action in this regard and to keep the Security 
Council informed, and urges troop-contributing countries to 
take appropriate preventive action including the conduct of 
predeployment awareness training, and to take disciplinary 
action and other action to ensure full accountability in 
cases of such conduct involving their personnel; 
 
¶11.   Decides to extend the mandate of UNOMIG for a new 
period terminating on 15 April 2008; 
 
¶12.   Requests the Secretary-General to make use of this 
extended mandate in order to support the parties in 
implementing measures to build confidence and to establish an 
intensive and meaningful dialogue, and to inform the Council 
in his next report on the situation in Abkhazia, Georgia, on 
progress made in this respect; 
 
¶13.   Strongly supports the efforts of the Special 
Representative of the Secretary-General and calls on the 
Group of Friends of the Secretary-General to continue giving 
him their steadfast and unified support; 
 
¶14.   Decides to remain actively seized of the matter. 
 
End draft resolution text. 
RICE