08STATE105173
IMPLEMENTING UN SECURITY COUNCIL RESOLUTIONS ON
Thu Oct 02 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
O 020117Z OCT 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO ALL DIPLOMATIC AND CONSULAR POSTS COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI IMMEDIATEUNCLAS STATE 105173 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KNNP IR MNUC PARM
 
SUBJECT: IMPLEMENTING UN SECURITY COUNCIL RESOLUTIONS ON 
IRAN 
 
¶1.  (U) This is an action request.  Please see 
paragraph 4. 
 
¶2.  (U) OBJECTIVE:  To reaffirm the importance of 
implementing all UN Security Council resolutions 
(UNSCRs) adopted on Iran following the adoption of UNSCR 
¶1835. 
 
¶3.  (U) BACKGROUND:  On Saturday, 27 September 2008, the 
UN Security Council adopted resolution 1835 by 
consensus.  This resolution reaffirmed the requirements 
of each of the resolutions adopted by the UN Security 
Council to date and called upon Iran to abide by its 
UNSC obligations, IAEA Board of Governors' requirements, 
and the provisions of the Treaty on the Nonproliferation 
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) without further delay.  The 
text of the resolution is contained in paragraph 5.  The 
adoption of this resolution also demonstrated to Iran 
that the international community is resolved and unified 
to prevent its acquisition of a nuclear weapons 
capability and to counter its defiance of its 
international nuclear obligations. 
 
¶4.  (U) ACTION REQUEST:  Posts are requested to provide 
appropriate host government interlocutors with a copy of 
the text of UNSCR 1835 and the non-paper in paragraph 6 
outlining the Chapter VII sanctions that have been 
adopted by the UNSC on Iran to date.  Posts should 
reinforce that the robust implementation of these 
measures is critical so as to ensure that Iran is 
compelled to comply with its UNSC, IAEA, and NPT 
obligations.  Posts should emphasize that UNSCR 1835 was 
adopted by consensus and demonstrates that the 
international community is resolved and unified in its 
efforts to prevent Iran's acquisition of a nuclear 
weapons capability. 
 
¶5.  (U) BEGIN TEXT OF UNSCR 1835 
 
The Security Council, 
 
Taking note of the September 15, 2008 Report by the 
Director General of the International Atomic Energy 
Agency on the Implementation of the NPT Safeguards 
Agreement and relevant provisions of Security Council 
resolutions (GOV/2008/38), 
 
Reaffirming its commitment to the Treaty on the Non- 
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), 
 
(1)  Reaffirms the Statement of its President, 
(-S/PRST/2006/15), of 29 March 2006, and its resolution 
1696 (2006) of 31 July 2006, its resolution 1737 (2006) 
of 23 December 2006, its resolution 1747 (2007) of 24 
March 2007, and its resolution 1803 (2008) of 3 March 
2008; 
 
(2)  Takes note of the 3 March 2008 Statement of the 
Foreign Ministers of China, France, Germany, the Russian 
Federation, the United Kingdom, the United States of 
America, with the support of the High Representative of 
the European Union, describing the dual-track approach 
to the Iranian nuclear issue, 
 
(3)  Reaffirms its commitment within this framework to 
an early negotiated solution to the Iranian nuclear 
issue and welcomes the continuing efforts in this 
regard; 
 
(4)  Calls upon Iran to comply fully and without delay 
with its obligations under the above mentioned 
resolutions of the Security Council, and to meet the 
requirements of the IAEA Board of Governors; 
 
(5)  Decides to remain seized of the matter. 
 
END TEXT OF UNSCR 1835 
 
¶6.  (U) BEGIN U.S. NON-PAPER 
 
-- On 27 September 2008, the UN Security Council voted 
unanimously to adopt resolution 1835.  The Security 
Council's action and the expedited manner in which it 
was taken makes clear that Iran's nuclear weapons 
ambitions remain both a serious concern and a priority 
issue for the international community. 
 
-- This resolution sends a strong signal of continued 
international resolve and unity in our goal of 
preventing Iran from developing a nuclear weapons 
capability. 
 
-- UNSCR 1835 underscores Iran's requirement to 
cooperate fully with the International Atomic Energy 
Agency (IAEA), as well as Iran's legally-binding 
obligation to suspend its uranium enrichment, 
reprocessing and heavy water-related activities without 
further delay. 
 
-- The passage of UNSCR 1835 reiterates the commitment 
of the P5+1 to the dual-track strategy, despite Iran's 
repeated rejection of P5+1 incentives. 
 
-- UNSCR 1835 also reaffirms the previous resolutions 
adopted by the UN Security Council on Iran and the 
sanctions that three of these imposed upon Iran.  These 
targeted sanctions restrict a range of Iranian 
activities and interactions with the international 
community in order to increase the pressure on Iran's 
leadership to seek the path of negotiations and 
cooperation, rather than continue with its policy of 
defiance. 
 
-- Below is a summary description of the measures 
related to Iran's nuclear program adopted by the UN 
Security Council to date and the requirements that they 
impose on UN Member States. 
 
-- The United States urges all UN Member States to 
implement these provisions robustly in order to support 
a diplomatic resolution to international concerns with 
Iran's nuclear program. 
 
TECHNOLOGY TRANSFERS 
 
-- States are required to take the steps necessary to 
prevent the transfer to Iran of all items controlled by 
the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG), except: 
 
---- Equipment in section B.1 of Part 1 of the 
Guidelines, when intended for use in light water 
reactors; 
 
---- Low enriched uranium when it is incorporated in 
assembled nuclear fuel elements for light water 
reactors; and, 
 
---- Dual-use items when necessary for IAEA technical 
cooperation projects with Iran or for exclusive use in 
light water reactors. 
 
-- Note: although cooperation on light water reactors is 
exempted in the UNSCRs, the United States remains 
concerned that such cooperation presents a risk of 
diversion to prohibited activities. 
 
-- States are also required to prevent the transfer to 
Iran of dual use items, even if not controlled by the 
NSG, if the state determines that they would contribute 
to Iran's proliferation sensitive nuclear activities. 
 
-- States are required to take the steps necessary to 
prevent the transfer to Iran of all items controlled by 
the Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR). 
 
-- States are similarly required to prevent any 
technical assistance or training to Iran that would 
enable it to engage in uranium enrichment-related, 
reprocessing, or heavy water-related activities, or 
those associated with its development of nuclear weapon 
delivery systems. 
 
-- Iran is prohibited from transferring items controlled 
by the NSG and MTCR abroad. 
 
FINANCIAL SANCTIONS 
 
-- States are required to freeze the assets of those 
individuals and entities identified in UNSCRs 1737, 1747 
and 1803, including, notably, Iran's Bank Sepah. 
 
-- States are required to prevent the provision of any 
financial assistance, investment, brokering or other 
services, and the transfer of financial resources and 
services that would facilitate its proliferation 
sensitive nuclear activities or development of nuclear 
weapon delivery systems. 
 
-- States are called upon to not enter into new 
commitments for grants, financial assistance, and 
concessional loans to the Government of Iran, except for 
humanitarian purposes. 
 
-- States are called upon to exercise vigilance in 
entering into new commitments for public-provided 
support for trade with Iran, including granting of 
export credits, guarantees, or insurance to their 
nationals and entities involved in such trade. 
 
-- States are called upon to exercise vigilance over the 
activities of financial institutions in their 
territories with all banks domiciled in Iran, in 
particular Bank Melli and Bank Saderat, and their 
branches and subsidiaries abroad. 
 
TRAVEL RESTRICTIONS 
 
-- States are called upon to exercise vigilance and 
restraint in permitting the travel of designated 
individuals in UNSCRs 1737, 1747, and 1803. 
 
-- States are prohibited from permitting the travel of 
the following individuals, unless approved by the UNSC 
Iran Sanctions Committee on humanitarian grounds: 
 
---- Mohammad Qannadi, AEOI Vice President for Research 
and Development; 
 
---- Dawood Agha-Jani, Head of the Pilot Fuel Enrichment 
Plant (Natanz); 
 
---- Behman Asgarpour, Operational Manager (Arak Heavy 
Water Research Reactor); 
 
---- Seyed Jaber Safdari, Manager of the Natanz 
Enrichment Facilities; and, 
 
---- Amir Rahimi, Head of the Esfahan Nuclear Fuel 
Research and Production Center. 
 
ARMS-RELATED PROVISIONS 
 
-- Iran is prohibited from transferring any arms or 
related materiel. 
 
-- States are called upon to exercise vigilance and 
restraint in the sale or transfer of arms contained in 
the UN Register on Conventional Arms to Iran. 
 
INSPECTIONS 
 
-- States are required to take necessary measures to 
prevent the transfer to Iran of proscribed items as 
defined by UNSCRs 1737 and 1803, as discussed in the 
section on Technology Transfers. 
 
-- States are also called upon to conduct inspections of 
cargoes to and from Iran when being transported by the 
Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines or Iran Air 
Cargo, provided there are reasonable grounds to believe 
that the aircraft or vessel involved is transporting 
proscribed goods. 
 
END U.S. NON-PAPER 
 
¶7.  (U) Posts are requested to report any substantive 
responses by 3 October 2008.  Richard Nephew (ISN/RA, 
202-736-4730, NephewRM@state.sgov.gov), Heather Von 
Behren (IO/T, 202-647-2753, VonBehrenHW@state.sgov.gov) 
and Victoria Taylor (NEA/IR, 202-647-2516, 
TaylorVJ@state.sgov.gov) are the Department's POCs for 
this activity. 
 
¶8. (U)  Minimize considered. 
RICE 
 
 
NNNN 
 



End Cable Text