08STATE25858
OSCE PERMANENT COUNCIL:  RESPONSE TO CIO SPECIAL
Wed Mar 12 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO2992
RR RUEHAST RUEHFL RUEHLA RUEHMRE RUEHPOD RUEHROV RUEHSR
DE RUEHC #5858 0721648
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 121644Z MAR 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUEHVEN/USMISSION USOSCE 8587
INFO ORG FOR SECURITY CO OP IN EUR COLLECTIVEUNCLAS STATE 025858 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AM KDEM MO OSCE PGOV PHUM PREL
SUBJECT: OSCE PERMANENT COUNCIL:  RESPONSE TO CIO SPECIAL 
ENVOY TALVITIE'S REPORT ON ARMENIA AND MOLDOVA 
 
 
Â¶1. (U) Post is authorized to present the following statement 
at the Permanent Council meeting in Vienna on March 13. 
 
Begin text: 
 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The United States greatly appreciates the diligent efforts of 
Ambassador Heikki Talvitie, the special envoy of the Chairman 
in Office, to help defuse the tense situation in Armenia 
following the violence on March 1.  Ambassador Talvitie, we 
appreciate your timely briefing before the Permanent Council 
concerning both Armenia and Moldova. 
 
These are difficult times for Armenia and its citizens, times 
which demand principled leadership and national 
reconciliation.   The OSCE can, and should, contribute to 
this process. 
 
Armenia stands at a crossroads.  We deplore the tragic 
violence of March 1 that resulted in at least 8 deaths.  We 
call for for the prosecution of all those who committed 
unlawful acts of violence and violated election laws. At the 
same time, arrests of opposition political leaders only 
jeopardize Armenia,s reputation as a country that shares the 
OSCE,s fundamental principles of freedom, democracy, and 
human rights.  The government and opposition must coalesce 
around a path toward a shared democratic future.  The state 
of emergency should be lifted, a free press and all civil 
liberties should be restored, and a genuine political 
dialogue should be launched between the government and 
opposition.  The alternative is a vicious cycle in which 
social tension increases, police and security personnel 
respond with force, public outrage builds, and the crisis 
only deepens.  Using the good offices of the OSCE Mission and 
the Chairmanship, we should encourage all parties to pursue 
reconciliation, democracy, and respect for human rights. 
Armenia,s democratic future should be determined in the 
ballot box and at roundtable discussions, not in the streets. 
 
 
On the issue of Nagorno-Karabakh, we are deeply concerned by 
the escalation of tensions on the Line of Contact and deplore 
the loss of life during recent hostilities.  We urge the 
parties to exercise maximal restraint and restore a full and 
unconditional ceasefire.  The casualties along the Line of 
Contact underscore the urgent need for the sides to endorse 
the proposed Basic Principles for the peaceful resolution of 
the conflict.  There is no military solution to the 
Nagorno-Karabakh conflict.  We recognize Azerbaijan,s 
territorial integrity and hold that the status of 
Nagorno-Karabakh is a subject for negotiations in the 
framework of the Basic Principles. 
 
Turning to the situation in Moldova,s Transnistria region, 
the United States is heartened by the commitment the Finnish 
Chairmanship in Office has displayed to finding a way 
forward. In particular, we commend Ambassador Talvitie for 
his dedication to building confidence among all the parties 
and we endorse his call to get negotiations back on track. We 
hope the informal 3 2 discussions today in Vienna will open 
the door to further discussions under the 5 2 format as soon 
as possible. 
 
In this regard, we recognize, too, the valuable work being 
done by the OSCE Mission in Moldova and its new Head of 
Mission, Ambassador Philip Remler.  Day-to-day work on the 
ground to promote free movement, economic development and 
political dialogue is indispensable to building a solid 
foundation for resolving the Transnistrian conflict, which 
has gone on far too long. 
 
The United States remains committed to the search for a 
solution that upholds Moldova,s sovereignty and territorial 
integrity.  The people who inhabit all parts of Moldova 
deserve a secure, peaceful and unified future.  We wish 
Ambassador Talvitie well in his efforts to promote mutual 
engagement and confidence building, a goal that has our full 
support.  We would welcome formation of joint working groups 
on practical matters by the parties to the conflict, as 
Moldova,s President Voronin has proposed and which the OSCE 
Mission in Moldova would help to facilitate. 
 
We extend thanks once again to Ambassador Talvitie for his 
report and for his good work. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
End text 
RICE