08STATE17204
SOMALIA -- INSTRUCTION CABLE ON AMISOM RESOLUTION
Wed Feb 20 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #7204 0512041
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O P 202037Z FEB 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS STATE 017204 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNSC PREL PHUM KCRM PBTS PHSA EWWT SO XA XW
SUBJECT: SOMALIA -- INSTRUCTION CABLE ON AMISOM RESOLUTION 
 
¶1.  USUN is instructed to vote in favor of the following 
Security Council Resolution on AMISOM slated to be adopted 
on February 20: 
 
Begin text 
 
The Security Council, 
 
PP1 Recalling its previous resolutions concerning the 
situation in Somalia, in particular resolution 733 (1992), 
resolution 1356 (2001), resolution 1425 (2002), resolution 
1725 (2006), resolution 1744 (2007) and resolution 1772 
(2007), the statements of its President, in particular 
those of 13 July 2006 (-S/PRST/2006/31), 22 December 2006 
(-S/PRST/2006/59), 30 April 2007 (-S/PRST/2007/13), 14 June 
2007 (S/PRST/2007/19) and 19 December 2007 
(-S/PRST/2007/49), 
PP2 Reaffirming its respect for the sovereignty, 
territorial integrity, political independence and unity of 
Somalia, 
 
PP3 Reiterating its commitment to a comprehensive and 
lasting settlement of the situation in Somalia through the 
Transitional Federal Charter, stressing the importance of 
broad-based and representative institutions reached 
through a political process ultimately inclusive of all, 
as envisaged in the Transitional Federal Charter, and 
reiterating its support for Somalia's Transitional Federal 
Institutions, 
 
PP4 Welcoming the appointment by President Yusuf of Prime 
Minister Nur "Adde" Hassan Hussein, the subsequent 
appointment of a new Cabinet under the Transitional 
Federal Government, and the relocation of the Transitional 
Federal Government to Mogadishu, 
 
PP5 Commending the work of the Special Representative of 
the Secretary-General (SRSG), Mr. Ahmedou Ould-Abdallah, 
and affirming its strong support for his efforts, 
 
PP6 Underlining the importance of providing and 
maintaining stability and security throughout Somalia, and 
underscoring the importance of disarmament, demobilization 
and reintegration of militia and ex-combatants in Somalia, 
 
PP7 Condemning all acts of violence and extremism inside 
Somalia, and expressing its concern regarding the 
continued violence inside Somalia, 
 
PP8 Stressing concern at the upsurge in piracy off the 
Somali coast described in paragraph 22 of the 
Secretary-General's report, and recalling the joint 
 
SIPDIS 
communiqu, of the International Maritime Organization and 
the World Food Programme of 10 July 2007, 
 
PP9 Reiterating its appreciation of the efforts of the 
international community, in particular the African Union, 
as well as the League of Arab States, the Intergovernmental 
Authority on Development and the European Union, to promote 
peace, stability and reconciliation in Somalia, and welcoming 
their continued engagement, 
 
PP10 Recalling that cooperation between the United Nations 
and the regional arrangements in matters relating to the 
maintenance of peace and security, as are appropriate for 
regional action, is an integral part of collective 
security as provided for in the Charter of the United 
Nations, 
 
PP11 Welcoming the communiqu, of the African Union Peace 
and Security Council of 18 January 2008, which states that 
the African Union will extend the mandate of its mission 
to Somalia (AMISOM) for an additional six months, 
 
PP12 Emphasizing the contribution that AMISOM and its 
Ugandan and Burundian contingents are making to lasting 
peace and stability in Somalia, including the important 
work that the Ugandan forces have carried out in providing 
medical care for Somali citizens, condemning any hostility 
towards them, and urging all parties in Somalia and the 
region to support and cooperate with AMISOM, 
 
PP13 Welcoming the sustained commitment of the Government 
of Uganda to supporting the efforts of AMISOM over the 
last year and to the Government of Burundi for its recent 
deployment, 
 
PP14 Taking note of the Secretary-General's report on 
Somalia of 7 November 2007 (S/2007/658), in particular 
paragraph 32, and expressing its appreciation for his 
support of AMISOM, 
 
PP15 Underlining that the full deployment of AMISOM will 
help facilitate the full withdrawal of other foreign 
forces from Somalia and help create the conditions for 
lasting peace and stability there, 
 
PP16 Noting that the communiqu, of the African Union Peace 
and Security Council of 18 January 2008 calls for the 
United Nations to deploy a peacekeeping operation to 
Somalia that will support the long-term stabilization and 
post-conflict restoration in the country, 
 
PP17 Recalling the request in its statement of 19 December 
2007 (S/PRST/2007/49) that the Secretary-General report to 
the Security Council on the development of contingency 
plans for the possible deployment of a United Nations 
peacekeeping operation to succeed AMISOM, as set out in 
resolution 1772 (2007), 
 
PP18 Determining that the situation in Somalia continues 
to constitute a threat to international peace and security 
in the region, 
 
PP19 Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United 
Nations, 
 
¶1.  Decides to renew the authorization of Member States of 
the African Union to maintain a mission in Somalia for a 
further period of six months, which shall be authorized to 
take all necessary measures as appropriate to carry out 
the mandate set out in paragraph 9 of resolution 1772 
(2007) and underlines, in particular, that AMISOM is 
authorized to take all necessary measures as appropriate 
to provide security for key infrastructure and to 
contribute, as may be requested and within its 
capabilities, to the creation of the necessary security 
conditions for the provision of humanitarian assistance; 
 
¶2.  Affirms that the provisions set out in paragraphs 11 
and 12 of resolution 1772 (2007) shall continue to apply 
to the mission referred to in paragraph 1 above; 
 
¶3.  Urges Member States of the African Union to contribute 
to AMISOM in order to help facilitate the full withdrawal 
of other foreign forces from Somalia and help create the 
conditions for lasting peace and stability there; 
 
¶4.  Urges Member States to provide financial resources, 
personnel, equipment and services for the full deployment 
of AMISOM; 
 
¶5. Reaffirms its intention to take measures against those 
who seek to prevent or block a peaceful political process, 
or those who threaten the Transitional Federal 
Institutions or AMISOM by force, or take action that 
undermines stability in Somalia or the region; 
 
¶6. Looks forward to the Secretary-General's forthcoming 
report, due on 10 March 2008, including specific options 
to strengthen the ability of the United Nations Political 
Office for Somalia (UNPOS), support the full deployment of 
AMISOM, and to prepare for the possible deployment of a UN 
peacekeeping force to succeed AMISOM, and affirms its 
intention to meet again promptly following the release of 
the report to consider what further action it might take 
in light of the options and recommendations contained 
within it. 
 
¶7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue and 
intensify his efforts to promote an ongoing political 
process which is ultimately inclusive of all, including by 
assisting the Transitional Federal Institutions' role in 
delivering this and services to the Somali people and by 
working together with the international community, 
including the African Union, the League of Arab States, 
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the 
European Union, and the International Contact Group on 
Somalia and its members; 
 
¶8. Calls upon all international organisations and Member 
States to support the SRSG in his work in order to enhance 
security and bring a comprehensive and lasting peace to 
Somalia and requests that they work through him at all 
times so that a co-ordinated effort can be attained; 
 
¶9. Urges the Transitional Federal Institutions and all 
parties in Somalia to respect the conclusions of the 
National Reconciliation Congress (NRC) and to sustain an 
equally inclusive ongoing political process thereafter, 
ultimately involving all stakeholders including political 
leaders, clan leaders, religious leaders, the business 
community, and representatives of civil society such as 
women's groups and encourages them to unite behind the 
efforts to promote such an inclusive dialogue; 
 
¶10. Welcomes the efforts of the Transitional Federal 
Government towards producing a plan for implementing the 
NRC conclusions including the completion of the 
constitutional process, and reiterates the need for 
agreement on a comprehensive and lasting cessation of 
hostilities and a roadmap of the critical path for the 
remainder of the transitional process, including free and 
democratic elections in 2009 as set out in Somalia's 
Transitional Federal Charter; 
 
¶11.  Emphasizes the continued contribution made to 
Somalia's peace and security by the arms embargo imposed 
by resolution 733 (1992), as elaborated and amended by 
subsequent resolutions, demands that all Member States, in 
particular those of the region, comply fully with it, 
reiterates its intention to consider urgently ways to 
strengthen its effectiveness; 
 
¶12. Encourages Member States whose naval vessels and 
military aircraft operate in international waters and 
airspace adjacent to the coast of Somalia to be vigilant 
to any incidents of piracy therein and to take appropriate 
action to protect merchant shipping, in particular the 
transportation of humanitarian aid, against any such act, 
in line with relevant international law, and welcomes the 
contribution made by France to protect the World Food 
Programme naval convoys and the support now provided by 
Denmark to this end; 
 
¶13. Reaffirms its previous resolutions 1325 (2000) on 
women, peace and security, and 1674 (2006) and 1738 (2006) 
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, and 
stresses the responsibility of all parties and armed 
groups in Somalia to take appropriate steps to protect the 
civilian population in the country, consistent with international 
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law, 
in particular by avoiding any indiscriminate attacks on 
populated areas; 
 
¶14. Strongly supports and encourages the ongoing 
humanitarian relief efforts in Somalia, recalls its 
resolution 1502 (2003) on the protection of humanitarian 
and United Nations personnel, calls on all parties and 
armed groups in Somalia to take appropriate steps to 
ensure the safety and security of AMISOM and humanitarian 
personnel, and grant timely, safe and unhindered access 
for the delivery of humanitarian assistance to all those 
in need, and urges the countries in the region to 
facilitate the provision of humanitarian assistance by 
land or via air and sea ports; 
 
¶15. Reaffirms its previous resolution 1612 (2005) on 
children and armed conflict and recalls the subsequent 
conclusions of the Security Council Working Group on 
Children in Armed Conflict pertaining to parties to the 
armed conflict in Somalia (S/AC.51/2007/14); 
 
¶16. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter. 
 
END TEXT. 
RICE