08STATE36720
UN SECURITY COUNCIL RESOLUTION FOR THE EXTENSION
Wed Apr 09 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO6940
OO RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHC #6720/01 1000025
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O R 090019Z APR 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 1265
INFO DARFUR COLLECTIVE
RUEHGI/AMEMBASSY BANGUI 0993UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 STATE 036720 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL UNSC KPKO SU
SUBJECT: UN SECURITY COUNCIL RESOLUTION FOR THE EXTENSION 
OF THE UNMIS MANDATE 
 
 
¶1.  The Department asks USUN to circulate to the P-3 the 
(below) draft UN resolution for the extension of the 
mandate of the UN Mission in Sudan (UNMIS).  At its 
discretion, USUN may also share this draft with the UN 
Department of Peacekeeping Operation and with other 
members of the Council.  The following resolution text is 
a US draft which also includes preliminary input from UK 
counterparts: 
 
¶2. The Security Council, 
 
PP 1.  Recalling all its resolutions and presidential 
statements concerning the situation in the Sudan, 
 
PP 2.  Recalling also its previous resolutions 1674 (2006) 
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, which 
reaffirms, inter alia, the relevant provisions of the 
United Nations World Summit outcome document, 1612 (2005) 
of 26 July 2005 on children in armed conflict, 1502 (2003) 
on the protection of humanitarian and United Nations 
personnel, 1325 (2000) on women, peace and security. 
 
PP 3.  Reaffirming its commitment to the sovereignty, 
unity, independence, and territorial integrity of the 
Sudan and to the cause of peace, 
 
PP 4.  Welcoming the resumption of participation by the 
Sudan People's Liberation Movement (SPLM) in the 
Government of National Unity (GNU) on 27 December 2007, 
 
PP5.  Commending the work of the United Nations Mission in 
Sudan (UNMIS) in support of the Comprehensive Peace 
Agreement, commending the continued commitment by 
troop-contributing countries in support of this mission, 
and also commending UNMIS's efforts in assisting in the 
transition of the African Union Mission in Sudan (AMIS) to 
the UN-AU Mission in Darfur (UNAMID). 
 
PP6.  Recognizing that successful implementation of the 
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) is essential to 
sustainable peace and stability in the region including 
Darfur; and condemning acts of violence perpetrated by all 
sides, 
 
PP7.   Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General 
on Sudan dated x April 2008, including his recommendations 
and taking note of the report on children and armed 
conflict in the Sudan dated x. 
 
PP8   Recalling the commitment of the international 
community to support the Comprehensive Peace Agreement 
process, including through development aid, and urging 
donors to support implementation of the Comprehensive 
Peace Agreement and to honor all pledges to this end; 
 
PP9   Recalling the need for UNMIS to make full use of its 
current mandate and capabilities with regard to the 
activities of militias and armed groups in Sudan, as 
stated in Resolution 1663. 
 
PP10  Welcoming the Final Peace Agreement signed on xx 
April 2008 between the Government of Uganda and the Lord's 
Resistance Army, commending the efforts of United Nations 
Special Envoy Chissano in assisting with achieving this 
Agreement, and calling upon both sides to meet fully their 
commitments under it. 
 
PP11.  Determining that the situation in the Sudan 
continues to constitute a threat to international peace 
and security, 
 
OP 1.  Decides to extend the mandate of UNMIS until 30 
April 2009, with the intention to renew it for further 
periods; 
 
OP 2.  Requests the Secretary-General to report to the 
Council every three months on the implementation of the 
mandate of UNMIS, progress on implementation of the CPA, 
and respect for the ceasefire, and to provide an 
assessment and recommendations on measures UNMIS might 
take to further support elections, and to advance the 
peace process  by 15 March  2009; 
 
OP3.  Stresses the importance of full and expeditious 
implementation of all elements of the Comprehensive Peace 
Agreement, the Darfur Peace Agreement, and the October 
 
STATE 00036720  002 OF 003 
 
 
2006 Eastern Sudan Peace Agreement and calls for all the 
parties to respect their commitments to these agreements 
without delay; 
 
OP4.  Urges full cooperation of the National Congress 
Party (NCP) and the SPLM in carrying out the 
responsibilities of the Government of National Unity for 
the protection of civilians in armed conflict; 
 
OP5.  Stresses the critical role of the Assessment and 
Evaluation Commission (AEC) in overseeing and reporting on 
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and 
calls for strengthening of the Commission's autonomy and 
urges all parties to cooperate fully with the AEC and to 
implement its recommendations; 
 
OP6.  Urges the immediate implementation of the Abyei 
Boundary Commission report by all parties, 
 
OP7.  Calls for all parties to cooperate with full 
unrestricted UNMIS monitoring and verification in the 
Abyei region, without prejudice to the final agreement on 
the actual borders between the two sides, and urges UNMIS 
to deploy troops and other appropriate personnel to the 
Abyei region, including areas of Kordofan; 
 
OP8.  Calls on all parties to redeploy their forces away 
from the disputed 1 January 1956 border and fully 
establish an interim administration in Abyei as called for 
by the CPA; 
 
OP9.  Urges donors to offer support, both materiel and 
training, coordinated by UNMIS in consultation with the 
Joint Donor Board, to enable the full establishment and 
operational effectiveness of (Joint Integrated Units) JIUs 
as soon as possible, including through support to the JIU 
support cell; 
 
OP10.   Urges UNMIS consistent with its mandate, to assist 
in voluntary disarmament and weapons collection and 
destruction efforts in implementation of plans under the 
CPA for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and 
urges UNMIS, consistent with its mandate and in 
coordination with the relevant parties, to increase its 
support for the National Disarmament, Demobilization and 
Reintegration Coordination Council and the Northern and 
Southern DDR Commissions, and further urges donors to 
respond to calls for assistance from the joint United 
Nations DDR Unit, and to strengthen its conflict 
management capacity by developing and executing an 
integrated strategy to support local conflict resolution 
mechanisms; 
 
OP11.   Encourages UNMIS, consistent with its mandate, to 
continue efforts to assist the parties to the CPA in 
restructuring the police service in Sudan, including in 
South Sudan, and to assist in the training of civilian 
police; 
 
OP12.  Urges the Government of National Unity to prepare 
expeditiously for the conduct of free and fair census and 
elections, including by releasing the required remaining 
funds to the CBS for the conduct of a national census, 
 
OP13.  Urges UNMIS to begin immediate preparations to 
support the conduct of national elections, including 
support for the development of a national strategy for the 
conduct of elections with close collaboration with UNDP 
and the parties to the CPA, and urges further the 
international community to provide technical and material 
assistance for electoral preparations. 
 
OP14.   Encourages UNMIS, consistent with its mandate, to 
assist the parties to the CPA in addressing the need for a 
national inclusive approach, including the role of women, 
towards reconciliation and peacebuilding. 
 
OP15.  Calls upon the parties to the Comprehensive Peace 
Agreement and the communiqu, signed between the United 
Nations and the Government of National Unity in Khartoum 
on 28 March 2007 to support, protect, and facilitate all 
humanitarian operations in the Sudan; 
 
OP16.  Welcomes the continuing organized returns of 
internally displaced persons from Khartoum to Southern 
Kordofan and Southern Sudan and that of refugees from 
countries of asylum to Southern Sudan and encourages the 
promotion of efforts, including the provision of necessary 
resources to the Office of the United Nations High 
Commissioner for Refugees and implementing partners, to 
ensure that such returns are sustainable, and further 
 
STATE 00036720  003 OF 003 
 
 
requests  UNMIS, within its capabilities and areas of 
deployment, to coordinate  with partners to facilitate 
sustainable returns, including by helping to establish the 
necessary security conditions; 
 
OP17.  Stresses that conflict in one area of Sudan affects 
conflict in other areas in Sudan and in the region, and 
therefore urges UNMIS to coordinate closely with UNAMID 
and with the UN Mission in the Central African Republic 
and Chad (MINURCAT) to maximize protection of civilians 
and further requests UNMIS to coordinate with humanitarian 
agencies, within its capabilities and areas of deployment, 
to facilitate the provision of development assistance. 
 
OP18.  Calls upon the Government of National Unity to 
cooperate fully with all United Nations operations within 
its territory in the implementation of their mandates; 
 
OP19.  Reiterates its concern over the restrictions and 
all impediments placed on the movements of UNMIS personnel 
and materiel in Sudan, and the adverse impact such 
restrictions and impediments have on UNMIS's ability to 
perform its mandate effectively and on the ability of the 
humanitarian community to reach affected persons, calls in 
this regard for all parties to cooperate fully with UNMIS 
and to facilitate the performance of its mandate, and in 
particular calls on the GNU to comply with its obligations 
under the Status of Forces Agreement; 
 
OP20.  Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take 
the necessary measures to ensure full compliance in UNMIS 
with the United Nations zero-tolerance policy on sexual 
exploitation and abuse and to keep the Council informed, 
and urges troop and police-contributing countries to take 
appropriate preventive action including pre-deployment 
awareness training, and other action to ensure full 
accountability in cases of such conduct involving their 
personnel; 
 
OP21  Encourages UNMIS to provide technical and logistical 
support to demarcation of the North-South border, if and 
as requested by the parties. 
 
OP22.  Decides to remain actively seized of the matter. 
RICE