08STATE36044
BAHRAIN WELCOME INFORMATION FOR THE GLOBAL
Mon Apr 07 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO5674
OO RUEHDE RUEHDIR
DE RUEHC #6044/01 0982240
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O R 072234Z APR 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUEHMK/AMEMBASSY MANAMA IMMEDIATE 4352
INFO GULF COOPERATION COUNCIL COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 STATE 036044 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DTRA PARM PREL PTER KGIC KNNP BA
SUBJECT: BAHRAIN WELCOME INFORMATION FOR THE GLOBAL 
INITIATIVE TO COMBAT NUCLEAR TERRORISM 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action request; please see paragraph three. 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶2. (U) Bahrain became a partner nation to the Global 
Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism (GI) on March 24 when 
Foreign Minister Sheikh Khalid bin Ahmed al-Khalifa presented 
Secretary Rice with a formal GI endorsement.  Bahrain is the 
 
SIPDIS 
67th GI partner nation and the first in the Gulf region. 
Department requests that Embassy Manama designate a GI 
Coordinating Officer (GICO) at Post and provide GI welcome 
information to the Government of Bahrain (GOB).  The demarche 
should be conducted jointly with Russian Federation 
counterparts if possible.  End summary. 
 
---------- 
Objectives 
---------- 
 
¶3. (U) Department requests Embassy Manama to pursue the 
following objectives: 
 
--Designate a Global Initiative Coordination Officer (GICO) 
as Post's main point of contact and action officer for Global 
Initiative efforts.  All posts in current partner nation 
capitals currently have GICOs and the designation has proved 
effective for coordination.  Department requests GICO's full 
name, e-mail addresses (unclassified and classified), and 
phone number. 
 
--Demarche the GOB, with Russian Federation counterparts if 
possible, relaying the welcome information for new GI partner 
nations (paragraphs 5-10). 
 
--Provide the GOB with the following Global Initiative 
documents:  plan of work; plan of work calendar; terms of 
reference; statement of principles; and explanatory notes. 
These documents will be e-mailed separately to Post once a 
GICO is identified.  Note that the terms of reference and 
statement of principles are public documents while the 
explanatory notes, plan of work, and plan of work calendar 
are not public documents. 
 
------------------ 
Reporting deadline 
------------------ 
 
¶4. (U) Department requests that Embassy provide GICO (action 
officer) information by April 11.  Department requests that 
Embassy report results of the welcome demarche by April 18. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
Background:  GI new partner welcome information 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶5. (U) The United States and Russian Federation, as GI 
co-chairs, welcome Bahrain as a new partner nation to the 
Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism.  The co-chairs 
look forward to Bahrain's active participation and 
contribution to the Global Initiative. 
 
¶6. (U) The co-chairs encourage Bahrain to participate in 
upcoming Global Initiative activities included in the Plan of 
Work, particularly the Deputy Foreign Minister-level 4th 
Global Initiative plenary meeting to be held in Madrid June 
16-18.  The co-chairs encourage all partners to submit new 
activities to the Plan of Work.  Partner nations may also 
wish to work with one another to co-host an activity. 
 
¶7. (U) All partner nations are encouraged to conduct regional 
outreach to non-partner nations with a view to expanding the 
number of nations in the Global Initiative.  The Chairmen's 
Statement from the Third Meeting provides general guidance, 
and can be found at: 
www.state.gov/r/pa/prs/ps/2007/jun/86331.htm. 
 
¶8. (U) All new partner nations are requested to provide 
government-wide Global Initiative point(s) of contact (POC) 
information including, for each individual:  name, title, 
agency, telephone number, fax number, and e-mail address. 
POCs will be included in regular correspondence related to 
the Global Initiative.  POC information will be included in 
the Plan of Work, accessible by all GI partner nations.  In 
the near future, GOB POCs will be granted access to the 
Global Initiative Information Portal (GIIP) website, which 
 
STATE 00036044  002 OF 002 
 
 
permits partner nations to share information on a voluntary 
basis. 
 
¶9. (U) U.S. Government POC information for the Global 
Initiative:  Mr. Tim Katsapis, Senior Advisor for 
International Security and Arms Control, telephone: 
001-202-647-0072, e-mail:  katsapise@state.gov; Mr. Andrew 
Grant, Acting Director, Office of Weapons of Mass Destruction 
Terrorism, U.S. Department of State, telephone: 
001-202-647-4170, fax:  001-202-647-4920.  E-mails regarding 
the Global Initiative can also be sent to 
globalinitiative@state.gov. 
 
¶10. (U) Russian Federation POC information:  Mr. Vladimir 
Titorenko, Department of New Challenges and Threats, Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs, telephone:  7695-244-2694, e-mail: 
dvbr@mid.ru. 
 
---------------- 
Point of contact 
---------------- 
 
¶11. (U) All cables associated with the Global Initiative 
should be slugged to the department for ISN/WMDT and T:  Tim 
Katsapis as well as the relevant regional bureaus.  E-mails 
regarding the Global Initiative can also be sent to 
globalinitiative@state.gov. 
RICE