08STATE78372
SOMALIA: TALKING POINTS FOR JULY 23 CONSULTATIONS
Mon Jul 21 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #8372 2032315
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O P 212309Z JUL 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHNR/AMEMBASSY NAIROBI PRIORITY 0000UNCLAS STATE 078372 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNSC PREL PHUM SO XA XW
SUBJECT: SOMALIA: TALKING POINTS FOR JULY 23 CONSULTATIONS 
 
Â¶1.  USUN is instructed to draw from the following talking 
points for the July 23 UN Security Council consultations 
on Somalia. 
 
Begin points: 
 
-- I would like to welcome Somali Foreign Minister Ali Ahmed 
Jama to the Council today (or if the Prime Minister, I would 
like to welcome back to the Council Somali Prime Minister Nur 
"Adde" Hassan Hussein).  I would also like to thank the 
Special Representative for the Secretary General to Somalia 
Ahmedou Ould-Abdullah and (DPA briefer) for their briefings. 
 
-- While progress is being made on the political front, the 
United States remains extremely concerned with the desperate 
humanitarian and security situation in Somalia. Today, I 
would like to make three points. 
 
-- First, on the political situation -- the United States 
would like to reiterate its strong support for the agreement 
between the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) and the 
Alliance for the Re-Liberation of Somalia (ARS) that was 
initialed on June 9 in Djibouti.  We urge all Parties in 
Somalia, whether signatories or not, to adhere to the terms 
of the agreement and to engage in peaceful dialogue towards a 
lasting solution. 
 
-- We are supportive of the efforts of the UN Political 
Office in Somalia (UNPOS) to implement the provisions of the 
Djibouti Agreement, particularly their efforts to establish a 
Joint Security Committee.  We support the relocation of UNPOS 
to Somalia as soon as necessary security conditions are put 
in place to provide for the mission's safety.  We are pleased 
that the Department of Safety and Security has conducted a 
preliminary study on this topic and we look forward to their 
report. 
 
-- Second, despite the substantial political progress that 
has been made in the last few months, the security situation 
in Somalia remains dire.  We are troubled by the significant 
increase in reports of criminal activities in southern and 
central Somalia, as well as in the semi-autonomous region of 
Puntland, which led to the UN downgrading the security 
situation in Puntland from a Phase III to a Phase IV. The 
Council has stated its intention, including in resolution 
1772 (2007), to take measures against those who seek to 
prevent or block the National Reconciliation Congress or a 
peaceful political process, or those who threaten the 
Transitional Federal Institutions or AMISOM by force, or take 
action that undermines stability in Somalia or in the region. 
 
-- In the Djibouti Agreement, a joint request from the TFG 
and the ARS was made to the Security Council to authorize and 
deploy an international stabilization force within the coming 
four months.  In recent weeks the Prime Minister of 
Somalia Nur "Adde" Hassan Hussein has called on the UN to 
deploy a UN peacekeeping operation to Somalia as soon as 
possible. The United States supports this request and 
stresses the need for the Security Council to begin serious 
deliberations on what role the UN should play in addressing 
the dire security situation in Somalia. 
 
-- Security Council Resolution 1814 specifically requested 
the Secretary General "continue his contingency planning for 
a possible deployment of a UN Peacekeeping Operation to 
Somalia to succeed AMISOM, including of additional 
scenarios...and considering additional options for the size, 
configuration, responsibility and proposed area of operation 
of the mission depending on different conditions on the 
ground."  The Council asked the Secretariat to report on this 
planning within 60 days.  The most recent report does not 
appear to reflect these additional plans.  Therefore, we urge 
the Secretariat to provide the Security Council with further 
contingency planning, as requested in Resolution 1814, by 
August 15. 
 
-- Last month, the United States, France, the UK, Panama, and 
several other nations co-sponsored Resolution 1816, which 
authorized states, working in collaboration with the TFG, to 
enter Somali territorial waters to repress acts of piracy and 
armed robbery at sea.  We have been encouraged by the 
response we have received to 1816 from the international 
community and we continue to urge all states to assist in 
this important effort.  Those without naval capacity can also 
help by providing logistical assistance in the disposition of 
victims, witnesses, and suspected pirates. 
 
-- The United States reiterates its strong view that the 
international community must act now to help create the 
conditions for lasting peace and stability in Somalia.  The 
people of Somalia cannot wait for the ideal conditions to 
arise before the UN gets involved in helping to stabilize the 
security situation there. 
 
-- Third, the United States is very alarmed at the continuing 
humanitarian crisis in Somalia.  The Secretary-General stated 
in his July 16 report that humanitarian condition in Somalia 
has "taken a dramatic turn for the worse," and we agree with 
this assessment.  The ongoing conflict, increasing food 
prices, and deepening drought have threatened to create a 
humanitarian disaster on an almost unimaginable scale.  Some 
2.6 million people in Somalia, 35% of the entire population 
of that country, now depend on some type of humanitarian 
assistance.  The UN estimates if the situation continues to 
deteriorate that number could increase to 3.5 million. 
 
-- Compounding this crisis is the appalling actions by 
terrorists, insurgents, and organized criminal groups in 
targeting humanitarian workers for assassination and 
kidnapping.  This year alone, 15 aid workers have been 
killed, deliberately targeted by various groups.  In the last 
several weeks, the Al-Qaeda affiliated Al-Shabaab have 
claimed responsibility to the cold-blooded executions of 
three aid workers.  Those who commit these despicable acts 
against those willing to risk their lives to help others, 
need to be held accountable for their actions.  We call on 
the Somali people to reject the actions and propaganda of 
those responsible for these horrific actions, and to support 
those who have signed the Djibouti Agreement and are working 
toward a peaceful Somalia. 
 
-- We are cautiously optimistic that, with the strong support 
of the international community, recent political gains could 
translate into an improved security situation in Somalia. 
However, the Somali people need increased UN assistance and 
intervention now.  We urge the Secretariat to continue its 
further contingency planning for a possible UN Peacekeeping 
Operation expeditiously and to present these further options 
to the Security Council for review by August 15.  Thank you 
Mr. President. 
 
emd points 
RICE