09STATE120323
Guidance: Middle East Consultations, November
Sat Nov 21 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0073
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #0323 3250349
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 210344Z NOV 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV IMMEDIATE 0000
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM IMMEDIATE 0000UNCLAS STATE 120323 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL UNSC IS KPAL
SUBJECT: Guidance: Middle East Consultations, November 
24 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action request.  USUN may draw from 
para two elements when making its intervention during 
the upcoming Middle East consultations in the Security 
Council on November 24. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Begin elements: 
 
I thank Under Secretary-General Pascoe for his report. 
 
Advancing the cause of comprehensive peace in the Middle 
East is among the United States' most important foreign 
policy endeavors.  Our goal is clear: two states living 
side by side in peace and security -- a Jewish state of 
Israel, and a viable, independent Palestinian state with 
contiguous territory that ends the occupation that began 
in 1967, as well as peace agreements between Israel and 
Syria and Israel and Lebanon and the full normalization 
of relations between Israel and its neighbors. The 
President, the Secretary of State and Special Envoy 
Mitchell continue to work for the prompt resumption and 
early, successful conclusion of negotiations between the 
parties. 
 
The Palestinian Authority and President Abbas are making 
steady progress to construct the foundation for a viable 
and responsible Palestinian state.  We welcome the PA's 
development of a detailed, two-year plan to build 
institutional capacity, and we are pleased to see the 
rise in economic activity and quality of life in the 
West Bank.  Israel has taken constructive steps to 
facilitate this progress, removing key checkpoints and 
withdrawing troops to the outskirts of four cities, but 
much more needs to be done. 
 
As we have noted, the United States does not accept the 
legitimacy of continued Israeli settlements, and has 
called for settlement activity to stop.  The Israelis 
have responded to our call by expressing a willingness 
to significantly curtail settlement activity. While this 
falls short of our request, if acted upon, it would have 
a meaningful and significant effect on the ground. 
 
In this context, we were dismayed at the Jerusalem 
Planning Committee's decision to move forward on the 
approval process for the expansion of Gilo in Jerusalem. 
We also object to the continuing pattern of evictions 
and demolitions of Palestinian homes.  The status of 
Jerusalem is a permanent status issue that must be 
resolved through negotiations between the parties. 
 
At a time when we are working to re-launch negotiations, 
neither party should engage in efforts or take actions 
that could unilaterally pre-empt, or appear to pre-empt, 
negotiations.  Our focus remains on re-launching 
negotiations as soon as possible, and we therefore call 
on all parties to avoid taking steps that would make 
this effort more difficult. 
 
If Hamas is serious about delivering a Palestinian 
state, then it will accept the building blocks of that 
state: renunciation of violence, recognition of Israel, 
and acceptance of previous agreements between the 
parties.  Hamas' approach, which continues to represent 
a threat to international peace and security, was a 
cause of the conflict in Gaza last winter.  In light of 
Hamas' efforts to rearm, all UN members must fulfill 
their responsibility to prevent illicit arms smuggling 
into Gaza. 
 
At the same time, we call for a reopening of the 
crossings, with an appropriate monitoring regime, to 
allow for the entry of legitimate goods into Gaza, 
consistent with UN Security Council Resolution 1860. 
Unless this occurs, hardships and stress that civilians 
in Gaza face in their daily lives will persist. 
 
We have repeatedly made clear our serious concerns about 
the Report of the UN Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza 
Conflict and its recommendations.  That said, we also 
take seriously the allegations of human rights and 
humanitarian law violations in the report, and note 
Israel's recent statement that all the incidents cited 
therein have been or are being examined.  We continue to 
support the need for accountability through thorough and 
credible domestic investigations.  The report has been 
addressed by the Human Rights Council and the UN General 
Assembly and does not need to be addressed by this 
Council or in other international fora.  We do not 
believe that Hamas has any willingness to investigate 
and expose its own violations, and demand an end to its 
deliberate targeting of civilians and its use of the 
population of Gaza as human shields. 
 
Finally, turning to the situation in Lebanon, we welcome 
the formation of a new Lebanese government and look 
forward to its participation in this Council next year. 
We reiterate our long-standing support for the work of 
the Special Tribunal for Lebanon and the importance of 
ending impunity for political violence.  We also note 
the need for all parties to fulfill the provisions of 
Security Council resolutions 1559, 1680 and 1701.  We 
look forward to the summary in the next 1701 report of 
the inquiry by the UN Interim Force in Lebanon into the 
October 12 munitions explosion in Tayr Felsay. 
 
End elements. 
CLINTON