09STATE48531
LETTER OF CONGRATULATIONS FROM PRESIDENT OBAMA
Wed May 13 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
O 130017Z MAY 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY REYKJAVIK IMMEDIATEUNCLAS STATE 048531 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPDC PREL IS
SUBJECT: LETTER OF CONGRATULATIONS FROM PRESIDENT OBAMA 
TO ICELAND PRIME MINISTER JOHANNA SIGURDARDOTTIR 
 
¶1.  Please deliver the following message from President 
Obama to Iceland's Prime Minister.  The White House does 
not plan to release the text of the message but has no 
objection if the Government of Iceland wishes to do so. 
There will be no signed original. 
 
¶2.  BEGIN TEXT: 
 
Dear Madam Prime Minister: 
 
Please accept my congratulations on the renewal of your 
mandate as Prime Minister and your party's success in 
Iceland's recent elections. I look forward to working 
with you closely. 
 
The United States greatly values its strong relationship 
with the government and people of Iceland, which is 
based on our common democratic values and our 
commitments as allies.  I remain dedicated to ensuring 
these ties become even firmer. 
 
The United States and Iceland have worked together on 
numerous initiatives over the past decades, including on 
disarmament and promoting respect for human rights. 
Among new challenges, we must work together to ensure 
success in addressing the global economic crisis and in 
meeting new demands posed by the transformation in the 
Arctic. 
 
I wish you and your government every success as you 
serve your nation during a period of great challenges 
and even greater opportunities.  You can count on my 
friendship and that of the American people. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Barack Obama 
 
END TEXT. 
 
CLINTON