09STATE52499
CYPRUS - UPCOMING MANPADS DESTRUCTION EVENT
Thu May 21 00:00:00 +0200 2009
SECRET//NOFORN
Secretary of State
R 212101Z MAY 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY NICOSIAS E C R E T STATE 052499 
 
 
NOFORN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/21/2019 
TAGS: PARM PERM PETR PREL CY
SUBJECT: CYPRUS - UPCOMING MANPADS DESTRUCTION EVENT 
 
REF: A. IIR 6 823 0080 09 
 
 
Classified By: EUR DAS, Acting, Anita Friedt, E.O.12958, 
1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action request.  Please see para 6 
below. 
 
¶2. (C) SUMMARY. A team of U.S. and UK technical experts, 
in a multilateral effort under Organization for Security 
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) auspices, will assist the 
Republic of Cyprus (RoC) with the destruction of 324 
MANPADS and 101 associated gripstocks during demolition 
operations June 9-12, 2009.  This assistance is the next 
step in the U.S.-UK-led, OSCE-facilitated response to a 
request from the ROC Defense Minister for technical 
assistance and capacity building. The PM/WRA 
representative will use this opportunity to offer the ROC 
additional bilateral assistance with future reduction of 
excess weapons and unstable munitions, as well as 
improvements to physical security and stockpile management 
of retained stocks.  End Summary. 
 
GOALS 
 
¶3. (C) Washington intends to complement the current 
MANPADS reduction project with an offer of further U.S. 
bilateral assistance. This would include the destruction 
of excess or outdated small arms and light weapons (SA/LW) 
and unstable munitions in Cyprus, as well as improvements 
in physical security and stockpile management (PSSM). 
Ideally this assistance would be in the form of 
U.S.-Cyprus bilateral cooperation; however, future 
OSCE-facilitated efforts that would transition to a 
U.S.-Cyprus mechanism could be possible. 
 
¶4. (C) A bilateral approach to SA/LW destruction and PSSM 
improvement in Cyprus follows longstanding USG policy to 
facilitate the demilitarization of the island.  Following 
on the positive meeting between Secretary Clinton and FM 
Kyprianou in Washington April 20, this cooperation would 
demonstrate USG support for the ongoing Cyprus 
negotiations and desire for an enhanced bilateral 
relationship. 
 
¶5. (S//NF) The Intelligence Community (IC) is very 
interested in the possibility of acquiring French-made 
MISTRAL MANPADS.  Intelligence suggests there are 65 
MISTRALs in Cyprus; the IC has previously been unable to 
acquire a MISTRAL.  Efforts to this end would be a 
long-term goal of this cooperation and would be 
coordinated through PM, EUR, Embassy Nicosia, and the 
CIA's Counterterrorism Center. 
 
NEXT STEP/ACTION REQUEST 
 
¶6. (C) Washington requests that Embassy Nicosia set up a 
meeting with the appropriate parties within the ROC to 
discuss possible bilateral cooperation for the destruction 
of excess or outdated conventional weapons and unstable 
munitions and improvement of PSSM for retained stocks. 
The desired date for the meeting is June 10, 2009 as 
PM/WRA will have a representative available in Cyprus on 
that date.  Department requests Embassy Nicosia approach 
host nation and respond by June 1, 2009. 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
¶7. (SBU) On October 29, 2008, the Defense Minister of the 
ROC made a formal request to the OSCE for technical 
assistance with the destruction of 324 SA-7 MANPADS and 
101 associated gripstocks.  The ROC accepted British and 
U.S. destruction expertise offered under an OSCE flag.  An 
initial assessment and project development visit took 
place March 10-12, 2009.  The PM/WRA representative 
reported that the trip went smoothly, and the U.S. and UK 
experts were impressed by the excellent cooperation and 
support from the Cypriot National Guard.  At that time, 
dates were set for a test destruction on March 20, 2009 
and the complete destruction operations on June 9-12, 
¶2009.  The March 20, 2009 test destruction went smoothly 
and the team is still planning to assist the ROC in 
destroying the rest of the aging stockpile in June.  In 
response to ROC's request, a major element of the June 
destruction event will be enhancing ROC domestic 
capabilities for stockpile reduction. The OSCE report also 
recommended a follow-on effort focused on PSSM that would 
be managed by the U.S. 
 
 
CLINTON