10STATE14003
Guidance: Middle East Consultations, February 18
Wed Feb 17 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0007
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #4003 0481736
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O P 171733Z FEB 10
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV PRIORITY 0000
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 0000UNCLAS STATE 014003 
 
SENSITIVE  SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL UNSC IS LE KPAL
SUBJECT: Guidance: Middle East Consultations, February 18 
 
¶1. (SBU) This is an action request.  USUN may draw from 
para two elements when making its intervention during 
Middle East consultations in the Security Council on 
February 18. 
 
¶2. (U) Begin elements: 
 
Thank you, Mr. President.  Thank you Under 
Secretary-General Pascoe for your briefing. 
 
The United States' commitment to the goal of 
comprehensive 
peace in the Middle East remains strong and unwavering. 
The resumption of negotiations toward a two-state 
solution 
is the only realistic way forward.  We encourage the 
international community, especially members of this 
Council, to support this goal, and to underscore it 
publicly, with the parties, and in their diplomacy with 
all states in the region. 
 
Only through good-faith negotiations can the parties 
mutually agree on an outcome that ends the conflict and 
reconciles the Palestinian goal of an independent and 
viable state based on the 1967 lines, with agreed swaps, 
and the Israeli goal of a Jewish state with secure and 
recognized borders that reflect subsequent developments 
and meet Israeli security requirements. 
 
Secretary Clinton consulted with Quartet representative 
Tony Blair last week and, as you know, announced that, 
consistent with Prime Minister Fayyad's plan for a future 
Palestinian state, Blair will intensify his partnership 
with Special Envoy Mitchell in support of political 
negotiations. 
 
With full support from and coordination with Special 
Envoy 
Mitchell, Tony Blair will continue to mobilize the 
efforts 
of the international community: to build support for the 
institutional capacity and governance of a future 
Palestinian State, including on the rule of law; to 
improve freedom of movement and access for Palestinians; 
to encourage further private sector investment; and to 
bring change in the living conditions of the people in 
Gaza. 
 
Also last week, Special Envoy Mitchell consulted with the 
Secretary-General on his efforts.  He will return to the 
region in the near future. 
 
The Quartet has long called on all parties to uphold 
their 
Roadmap obligations.  We renew this call.  A freeze on 
settlement activity is an Israeli obligation under the 
Roadmap; we do not accept the legitimacy of continued 
Israeli settlements.  That said, we also believe that the 
settlement moratorium declared by the Israeli government 
is a significant step that could have a meaningful effect 
on the ground. 
 
All permanent status issues, including the status of 
Jerusalem, should be resolved through negotiations.  We 
disagree with some Israeli actions in Jerusalem affecting 
Palestinians in areas such as housing, including the 
continuing evictions and demolitions of Palestinian 
homes. 
 
At the same time, we call on the Palestinian Authority to 
fulfill its Roadmap obligations to ensure security, 
reform its institutions of governance, and act decisively 
to prevent incitement.  In addition, the Palestinian 
Authority should continue to take all measures to create 
a positive climate for negotiations to end this climate. 
 
We call on Israel to reopen its border crossings with 
Gaza, with appropriate monitoring to address security 
concerns.  This would allow for greater movement of 
people 
and humanitarian and reconstruction materials, consistent 
with Resolution 1860 and the 2005 Agreement on Movement 
and Access, thus alleviating the hardship and stress that 
civilians in Gaza face. 
 
Hamas continues to refuse to accept the Quartet 
principles 
that are the building blocks of an independent 
Palestinian 
state: renouncing violence, recognizing Israel, and 
accepting previous agreements and obligations, including 
the Roadmap.  It continues to choose hateful rhetoric and 
violence over showing any interest in contributing to 
building a future for the Palestinian people. 
 
We remain concerned about Hamas interference with 
international efforts to deliver humanitarian assistance 
in Gaza, continued arms smuggling, and the launching of 
terrorist attacks against Israel.  And we call for the 
immediate release of Gilad Shalit, abducted and held by 
Hamas since 2006. 
 
With respect to the Secretary-General's report on 
Follow-up to the report of the United Nations Fact- 
Finding 
Mission on the Gaza Conflict, we note that Israel and the 
Palestinian Authority are taking steps to investigate 
alleged violations.  In light of this, additional UN 
action is not required, and inappropriate action would be 
counter-productive.  Hamas is a terrorist organization, 
and it has neither the ability nor the willingness to 
examine credibly its deliberate and repeated violations 
of 
humanitarian law. 
 
Let me conclude by turning to the situation to the north. 
We call upon all parties to fulfill the provisions of 
this 
Council's Resolutions 1559, 1680 and 1701. 
 
We also are concerned by escalating rhetoric by 
politicians in the region.  As members of the Security 
Council, we must lead the way in setting a constructive 
example.  Bellicose rhetoric by any side will not advance 
our shared goal of achieving comprehensive peace in the 
Middle East. 
 
End elements. 
CLINTON