10STATE17616
TRAVEL WARNING: YEMEN
Thu Feb 25 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO3423
OO RUEHIK
DE RUEHC #7616/01 0561749
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 251745Z FEB 10
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO ALL DIPLOMATIC AND CONSULAR POSTS COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHFSI/DIR FSINFATC IMMEDIATE
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RUEHPH/CDC ATLANTA IMMEDIATE 8138
RUCPDOC/ALL USDOC DISTDIR COLLECTIVE WASHINGTON DC
RHMCSUU/CDRAMC FT BELVOIR VA//AMCMI-SS//
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC//XOXXI// IMMEDIATE
RHMFIUU/HQ AFOSI DOQ ANDREWS AFB MD//IVOA//
RHMCSUU/FAA NATIONAL HQ WASHINGTON DC//ACI-400//
RHMCSUU/COMNAVAIRSYSCOM PATUXENT RIVER//MD/1031B/
RHMFIUU/NRC WASHINGTON DC//INFOSEC// IMMEDIATE
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCJ2-JIT//
RUCPCIM/CIM NTDB WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RHMCSUU/COGARD INTELCOORDCEN WASHINGTON DC
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HI IMMEDIATE
RHMFISS/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL IMMEDIATE
RUEHTRO/AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI IMMEDIATE 2873
RUEHRY/AMEMBASSY CONAKRY IMMEDIATE 3714
RUEHPU/AMEMBASSY PORT AU PRINCE IMMEDIATE 0963
INFO RUESBKC/ATO ASIA IMMEDIATE 2024UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 STATE 017616 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CASC PTER ASEC YM
SUBJECT: TRAVEL WARNING: YEMEN 
 
STATE 00017616  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶1. The Department of State warns U.S. citizens of 
the high security threat level in Yemen due to 
terrorist activities.  The Department recommends 
that American citizens defer non-essential travel 
to Yemen.  American citizens remaining in Yemen 
despite this warning should monitor the U.S. 
Embassy website and should make contingency 
emergency plans.  This replaces the Travel 
Warning for Yemen issued June 26, 2009. 
 
¶2. The security threat level remains high due to 
terrorist activities in Yemen.  The U.S. Embassy 
in Sana'a, Yemen closed on January 3 and 4, 2010, 
in response to ongoing threats by Al-Qaeda in the 
Arabian Peninsula (AQAP) to attack American 
interests in Yemen. Following the attempted 
attack aboard Northwest Airlines flight 253 on 
December 25, 2009, Al-Qaeda in the Arabian 
Peninsula (AQAP) publicly claimed responsibility 
for the incident and stated that it was in 
response to what they described as American 
interference in Yemen. In the same statement, the 
group made threats against Westerners working in 
embassies and elsewhere, characterizing them as 
"unbelievers" and "crusaders."  On the morning of 
September 17, 2008, armed terrorists attacked the 
U.S. Embassy in Sana'a, Yemen.  A number of 
explosions occurred in the vicinity of the 
Embassy's main gate.  Several Yemeni security 
personnel and one Embassy security guard were 
killed, as were a few individuals waiting to gain 
entry to the Embassy, one of whom was a U.S. 
citizen. 
 
¶3. U.S. Embassy employees have been advised to 
exercise caution when choosing restaurants, 
hotels or visiting tourist areas in Sanaa in 
order to avoid large gatherings of foreigners and 
expatriates.  Only limited travel outside of the 
capital is authorized at this time. 
 
¶4. U.S. citizens who travel to or remain in Yemen 
despite this warning should exercise caution and 
take prudent security measures, including 
maintaining a high level of vigilance, avoiding 
crowds and demonstrations, keeping a low profile, 
varying times and routes for all travel, and 
ensuring travel documents are current.  American 
citizens in Yemen are advised to exercise 
particular caution at locations frequented by 
foreigners countrywide, including restaurants and 
hotels frequented by expatriates.  From time to 
time, the Embassy may restrict official Americans 
from restaurants, hotels, or shopping areas.  The 
Department of State strongly encourages American 
citizens to consult the most recent Warden 
Messages on the U.S. Embassy website to get up- 
to-date information on security conditions. 
Americans who believe they are being followed or 
threatened while driving in urban centers should 
proceed as quickly as possible to the nearest 
police station or major intersection and request 
assistance from the officers in the blue-and- 
white police cars stationed there. 
 
¶5. The Department remains concerned about 
possible attacks by extremist individuals or 
groups against U.S. citizens, facilities, 
businesses, and perceived interests.  On June 12, 
 
STATE 00017616  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
2009, seven Germans, one Briton, and one South 
Korean were kidnapped in Saada resulting in three 
confirmed deaths.  There have been no claims of 
responsibility in this incident and the 
investigation is ongoing.  On March 15, 2009, 
four South Korean tourists were killed in a 
suicide bomb attack in the city of Shibam in 
southern Hadramout province.  On March 18, 2009, 
a South Korean motorcade was attacked by a 
suicide bomber near Sana'a International 
Airport.  On January 17, 2008, suspected al-Qaeda 
operatives ambushed a tourist convoy in the 
eastern Hadramout Governorate, killing two 
Belgians.  On July 2, 2007, suspected al-Qaeda 
operatives carried out a vehicle-borne explosive 
device attack on tourists at the Belquis Temple 
in Marib, which resulted in the deaths of eight 
Spanish tourists and two Yemenis.  The targeting 
of tourist sites by al-Qaeda may represent an 
escalation in terror tactics in Yemen.  On 
February 3, 2006, 23 convicts, including known 
affiliates of al-Qaeda, escaped from a high- 
security prison in Sana'a, some of whom remain at 
large.  Two of the escapees were killed in 
vehicle-based suicide attacks on oil facilities 
near Mukalla and Marib on September 15, 2006. 
Those attacks were followed by the arrest the 
next day in Sana'a of four suspected al-Qaeda 
operatives, who had stockpiled explosives and 
weapons. 
 
¶6. The Government of Yemen has been battling al 
Houthi rebels in and around the northern 
governorate of Sa'ada intermittently since 2004. 
A ceasefire was announced on February 12, 2010. 
 
¶7. U.S. citizens traveling in Yemen should be 
aware that local authorities occasionally place 
restrictions on the travel of foreigners to parts 
of the country experiencing unrest.  In addition, 
the U.S. Embassy itself often restricts travel of 
official personnel to the tribal areas north and 
east of Sanaa, such as the governorates of Amran, 
al-Jawf, Hajja, Marib, Sa'ada, and Shabwa. 
Travelers should be in contact with the Embassy 
for up-to-date information on such restrictions. 
 
¶8. Travel by boat through the Red Sea or near the 
Socotra Islands in the Gulf of Aden presents the 
risk of pirate attacks. In 2009, over 70 vessels 
were reportedly attacked.  Since the beginning of 
2010, 4 vessels reportedly have been seized in 
the area, with one released in February.  As of 
February 2010, 11 vessels were believed to be 
held for ransom, including the yacht of a British 
couple.  Following the April 2009 hijacking of a 
U.S. cargo vessel and the subsequent rescue of 
the vessel's captain, resulting in the deaths of 
three pirates, Somali pirates threatened to 
retaliate against American citizens transiting 
the region.  The threat of piracy extends into 
the Indian Ocean off the Horn of Africa as well. 
See our International Maritime Piracy Fact 
Sheet.  If travel to any of these areas is 
unavoidable, travelers may reduce the risk to 
personal security if such travel is undertaken by 
air or with an armed escort provided by a local 
tour company. 
 
¶9. U.S. citizens should register at the Consular 
Section of the U.S. Embassy in Sana'a and enroll 
in the warden system (emergency alert network) to 
obtain updated information on travel and security 
 
STATE 00017616  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
in Yemen.  This can be done online prior to 
arrival in Yemen at State Department's travel 
registration website. 
 
¶10. The U.S. Embassy, Sana'a is located at Dhahr 
Himyar Zone, Sheraton Hotel District, P.O. Box 
¶22347.  The telephone number of the Consular 
Section is (967) (1) 755-2000, extension 2153 or 
¶2266.  For after-hours emergencies, please call 
(967) (1) 755-2000 (press zero for extension) or 
(967) 733-213-509.  From time to time the Embassy 
may temporarily close or suspend public services 
for security reasons.  Emergency assistance to 
U.S. citizens during non-business hours (or when 
public access is restricted) is available through 
Embassy duty personnel. 
 
¶11. Current information on travel and security in 
Yemen may be obtained from the Department of 
State by calling 1-888-407-4747 within the United 
States and Canada or, from outside the United 
States and Canada, 1-202-501-4444. These numbers 
are available from 8:00am to 8:00pm Eastern Time 
Monday through Friday (except U.S. federal 
holidays.)   U.S. citizens should consult the 
Country Specific Information for Yemen and the 
Worldwide Caution on the State Department's 
Internet site.  Up-to-date information on 
security conditions can also be viewed at U.S. 
Embassy Sana'a's American Citizens Services web 
page. 
 
¶12. Minimize considered. 
CLINTON