05BAGHDAD4106
MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, CONSTITUTION,
Tue Oct 04 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 BAGHDAD 004106 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ BAGHDAD
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, CONSTITUTION, 
ELECTIONS, POLITICAL PARTIES, CORRUPTION; BAGHDAD 
 
SUMMARY: Discussion on the Constitution, Elections, 
Political Parties and Corruption were the major editorial 
themes of the daily newspapers on October 4, 2005. END 
SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "What If We Said No to the Constitution?" (Al-Zaman, 
10/4) 
¶B. "The Referendum Represents a Difficult Equation" (Al- 
Zaman, 10/3) 
¶C. "Does Amr Musa Dare Visit Baghdad?" (Al-Bayyna, 10/4) 
¶D. "Yes to the Constitution" (Al-Dawa, 10/4) 
¶E. "Disagreements" (Al-Sabah, 10/4) 
¶F. "Hooray to Amr Musa" (Al-Siyada, 10/4) 
¶G. "Other Thieves" (Al-Dustoor, 10/4) 
¶H. "Where Are the People Who Reject the Constitution 
Headed?" (Al-Ittihad, 10/4) 
 
---------------------------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "What If We Said No to the Constitution?" 
(Al-Zaman, independent, anti coalition, published this page- 
three editorial by Hadi Jalo Mar'ee) 
 
[Editor's note: Until yesterday (10/3/05), Al-Zaman's 
editorial position was staunchly anti-constitution] 
 
"Before October 15th, the groups that want to reject or 
approve the constitution are working hard to mobilize more 
supporters towards their positions; this can be described as 
electoral advertising in preparation for the public 
referendum. 
 
"I think that it is very important for Iraqis to accept the 
constitution not because it guarantees our future, but 
because if the constitution is rejected the whole political 
process will collapse and render useless the giant efforts 
of the past two years and perpetuate instability. If this 
constitution passes, there will be a permanent government 
for at least four years and this government will be able to 
launch a large campaign of reconstruction in Iraq. 
 
"We do not want to go backwards and for this reason we have 
to accept the current constitution. However, this does not 
mean that those who call for rejecting the constitution have 
illegitimate demands. It seems that they do not reject the 
whole constitution but rather want to amend some of its 
articles. As a result, their demand is legal even if other 
groups disagree. 
 
"The United Iraqi Alliance [Shi'a] totally refuses to strike 
the deba'athification clause from the constitution but I 
think this matter will be amended in the future because 
there is no use for any group to insist on disagreement. 
There must be compromises to reach solutions concerning 
pending issues in the constitution or else, rejection will 
destroy the whole process. As Iraqis, we want Iraq to be 
united and developed and we are not pleased when our cities 
are destroyed and our people are being killed. May God show 
us the right way for the sake of our beloved country." 
 
¶B. "The Referendum Represents a Difficult Equation" 
(Al-Zaman, independent, anti coalition, published this page- 
five editorial by Hadi Jalo Mar'ee) 
 
"From 3 October 05 [Editor's Note: Due to a technical error 
this translation (from 10/3) did not appear in yesterday's 
Iraq Media Reaction Report. This editorial marks a dramatic 
shift in Al-Zaman's position-now in support of the 
constitution] 
 
"The constitutional committee has completed the drafting of 
the constitution and it has submitted the draft document to 
the National Assembly after making some amendments. Those 
amendments were made to satisfy other groups that 
participate in the constitutional process. The United Iraqi 
Alliance [Shi'a], the Kurdish coalition, and Sunni 
representatives all had disputes over the issues of 
federalism, the distribution of resources, the role of 
religion as well as other secondary objections. However, it 
seems that the draft constitution will be put to vote on 
October 15th and on that day, the Iraqi people will have 
their final say about approving or rejecting the 
constitution. 
 
"We know that there are many political groups trying to 
influence people to approve the constitution. But, at the 
same time there are other groups that have made their best 
efforts to reject this constitution. Those who failed to 
include their demands in the draft constitution have started 
to mobilize people in Sunni areas in an attempt to reject 
the constitution on referendum day. This is a difficult 
mission to implement because most of cities that are likely 
to reject the constitution suffer from instability and a 
lack of security. 
 
"In addition, citizens in those areas feel frustrated due to 
the deterioration of the security situation and this may 
affect their participation in the referendum. We can 
hypothesize that voters in those areas would go to polling 
centers in large numbers so that they could reject the 
constitution--there are no real guarantees that we will have 
enough voters to reject the constitution. Moreover, those 
who want to reject the constitution could not make alliances 
with other groups that oppose it. We have heard that the 
Sadrists have announced that they will not work through 
alliances but will depend on their own policy to study the 
constitution's articles and will then make a decision and 
recommendation. 
 
"Hence, it seems that the attitude of those who want to 
approve the constitution is stronger than those who want to 
reject it. For this reason, we have to think deeply about 
how to use wise methods to engage in dialogue and discuss 
issues in order to reach an agreement concerning the 
constitution." 
 
¶C. "Does Amr Musa Dare Visit Baghdad?" 
(Al-Bayyna, affiliated with the Hezbollah Movement in Iraq, 
published this front-page unattributed editorial) 
 
"All news reports say that the Secretary General of the Arab 
League, Amr Musa, will visit Iraq soon. Some of these 
reports indicate that Musa made suggestions that Iraqis 
reconcile with Saddam loyalists and Ba'athists. Moreover, 
reports have said that Musa wants the elected Iraqi 
government to implement his orders. If those reports are 
true, we want to ask the following questions: `Can a killer 
who is well known for his hatred against Iraqis be our 
guest? Is it acceptable for the butcher of the Arab League 
to visit us while we know nothing about his agenda?' 
 
"If Amr Musa came to apologize and begin a new relationship 
with Iraq, we would welcome his visit because Iraqis are 
accustomed to welcoming their guests and they do not reject 
visitors. But, after the hospitability period ends we would 
tell him to leave and let him know that it is our poor 
people who will judge him-they are the ones who have learned 
to not let their enemies escape without punishment. 
 
"On the topic of reconciliation, the Iraqi people do not 
want anyone to interfere in their affairs. We do not have 
any conflict with the so-called Sunnis. In fact, our real 
problem is with the killers and extremists. We consider 
Sunnis to be honorable Iraqis and we do not think that 
whoever loves Iraq (even if they had disagreements with us) 
would call for killing Iraqis. In spite of our different 
sects and nationalities we are all Iraqis and we are ready 
to engage in dialogue with anyone, providing that the cursed 
Arab League does not interfere." 
 
¶D. "Yes to the Constitution" 
(Al-Dawa, affiliated with the Al-Dawa Islamic Party in Iraq, 
published this page-four editorial by Haneen Al-Wannan) 
 
"Iraqis are waiting for referendum day-a day that represents 
a new awakening for each Iraqi and represents progress 
towards civilization, which we missed out on because of the 
tyrant's regime. Iraqi civilization produced the first 
constitution in the world, which is the Code of Hammurabi; 
it was later that divine constitutions appeared to guide 
humanity on the path toward goodness. When Islam was 
revealed new regulations, for freedom and dignity for 
humanity, were established for individuals in order to 
create a just society. 
 
"Islamic doctrines are still in effect today which is why 
Islam is considered the main source of legislation in this 
era.Iraq functioned under a temporary constitution during 
the former regime, because it served the opportunist's 
interests; people were unable to organize their political, 
economic, and social life. People merely waited for rulers 
to issue new regulations, which suited the rulers and no one 
else. 
 
"But today we are basking in the glory of a tremendous 
national day, which witnesses the drafting of the 
constitution by Iraqi hands (from all over the country). 
This constitution is not temporary, but it is permanent. 
Thus it cannot be changed according to rulers' (dictators) 
desires. This constitution represents hope; therefore women 
should step ahead of men in voting `yes' to this 
constitution, just as they did in the last election." 
 
¶E. "Disagreements" 
(Al-Sabah, independent, pro-coalition, published this front- 
page editorial by Mohammed Abdul-Jabbar) 
 
"It is meaningless to deny the disagreement between the 
President Al-Talabani and the PM Al-Ja'afari, because it is 
well known by many people inside the ruling circle. Such 
disagreements are typical in democratic regimes. 
Disagreements among officials in democratic regimes are 
allowed, but that's not the case in dictatorships because 
the leader behaves as the only ruler, and all disagreements 
with him are forbidden-discord could lead to detention or 
assassination. 
 
"The current Iraqi body is a coalition government that 
includes a republican presidency, a national assembly, a 
supreme judicial council, and a cabinet. Therefore, it isn't 
expected that all parts of this government would be in 
harmony and it is quite possible that disagreements would 
surface around specific issues. Recently reports of 
disagreements between Al-Ja'afari and Al-Talabani were made 
public and several letters were reportedly sent to Al- 
Ja'afari by the President and a few ministers who complained 
that they received no response from PM Al-Ja'afari. It is 
necessary that people know such things, because we are in a 
democratic country now and people have the right to know 
everything that happens in the ruling circle." 
 
¶F. "Hooray to Amr Musa" 
(Al-Siyada, independent, published this last-page editorial 
by Abdul Karim Mahmud) 
 
"Yesterday, the Arab League's Ministerial Committee on Iraq 
decided to send the Secretary General of the Arab League, 
Amr Musa, to Iraq to meet with Iraqi political groups and to 
discuss convening a national reconciliation conference. 
 
"We welcome this visit because Amr Musa is well known for 
his attitudes toward Iraq and Iraqis. However, this visit 
has come very late due to the negative Arab attitudes that 
unfortunately, laid the ground for the occupation of Iraq. 
Consequently, this has led to disasters and our people have 
paid the price of this occupation. For the Iraqi people who 
are concerned with their identity (Arabism) and national 
unity, this visit is important. It is also important to 
those who reject sectarianism and division. 
 
"We say hooray to Amr Musa and hooray to Iraqi national 
reconciliation that unites all Iraqis and will not 
marginalize any sect or political group. In this way, we 
will be able to give our people more chances to express 
their opinions so that they may judge issues that will 
determine the future of this country." 
 
¶G. "Other Thieves" 
(Al-Dustoor, independent, no bias, published this front-page 
editorial by Bassem Al-Sheikh) 
 
"At a time when some people view the constitutional 
referendum as an opportunity to overcome a stage of the 
political process in Iraq, others see it as an opportunity 
for financial profit through exploiting funds allocated for 
the referendum. 
 
"While honest Iraqis struggle on a daily basis, other 
individuals aim to rob Iraqis of funds meant to support 
their participation in national duties, and this has 
extended to the IECI (Independent Electoral Commission of 
Iraq) itself after falling victim to the fraud of an 
advertisement company during the previous elections when 
around half a million dollars were embezzled with the 
cooperation of officials within the commission, and today we 
are witnessing the same scheme again. So will Iraqis 
continue to be vulnerable to ongoing thefts?" 
 
Headed?" 
(Al-Ittihad, affiliated with the PUK, published this page- 
five column by Hamza Shamkhi) 
 
"After the fall of the dictatorship and Saddam's escape on 
April 9, 2003, many parties, organizations and movements 
that opposed Saddam's regime have appeared on the political 
scene. Many of them worked to unify positions and coordinate 
to convene a national conference and form a political mass 
to lead the new Iraq through its sensitive stage. 
 
"At the same time, other groups have appeared but they have 
rejected all aims and efforts to consolidate new national 
attitudes and provide alternative solutions to administer 
the country (rather than the foreign forces) after the fall 
of the former regime. These groups rejected the Governing 
Council and everything that resulted from it. They also 
rejected the Iraqi Transitional Government. Their rejection 
continued after that and it included the previous election; 
they disputed the former election's legitimacy and results 
despite the fact that millions of Iraqis participated in 
that election. Moreover, the rejection continued to include 
the TNA (Transitional National Assembly) which was formed on 
the basis of those elections. The permanent constitution 
drafting process faced their rejection also and they have 
called for a boycott or vote against the constitution in the 
upcoming referendum. Now, they are preparing to reject the 
upcoming Iraqi elections [in December] and refuse to 
recognize the new National Assembly and Iraqi Government. 
 
"Actually, the continued rejection by those groups without 
providing alternate solutions is putting them in the 
position of restricting the entire political process. This 
means that they want to disrupt the political process 
because there is no justification for boycotting and 
rejecting any step towards the progress and independence of 
Iraq. There are many points that Iraqi sects are in dispute 
about--they need further discussion and negotiation to reach 
real harmony. Foreign troops will not withdraw from Iraq 
with such rejection but rather will leave the country if 
there are no rejections of the political process. Therefore, 
every sect should take its historic responsibility to face 
internal and external danger in stead of rejection and 
boycotting." 
 
KHALILZAD