05BAGHDAD3407
PRIME MINISTER JA'AFARI'S TWELVE POINT SECURITY
Thu Aug 18 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 003407 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PINS MOPS PREL IZ
SUBJECT: PRIME MINISTER JA'AFARI'S TWELVE POINT SECURITY 
PLAN 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  SUMMARY: Prime Minister Ja'afari distributed a 
Twelve Point Security Plan on August 6. The plan sets goals 
and priorities for the Ministries of Interior and Defense, 
the National Security Advisor and other related ministries 
and Iraqi government entities as they work towards bringing 
stability to Iraq in the lead up to voter registration, the 
October 15 constitutional referendum, and the December 15 
election. END SUMMARY. 
 
----------------- 
THE TWELVE POINTS 
----------------- 
¶4.  (SBU)  Ja'afari's twelve point plan, as given to us by 
National Security Advisor Rubaie, is as follows: 
 
-- POINT 1: IMPROVE INTELLIGENCE COORDINATION, led by the 
National Security Advisor (NSA) who will: provide direction 
to establish and sustain the National Intelligence 
Coordination Council (the NICC); develop a comprehensive 
national intelligence framework for the four national 
intelligence services that establishes ministerial 
intelligence roles and responsibilities and sets procedures 
for interagency coordination between them and the Coalition; 
and, provide unified reports to the Prime Minister and others 
tasked with addressing security issues. 
 
-- POINT 2: EXECUTE PRECISE OPERATIONS TO ELIMINATE 
TERRORISTS, led by the Minister of Defense who will: develop 
and sustain the capabilities of the Intelligence Services 
that belong to the Ministry of Defense and Ministry of 
Interior in a manner that will allow them to better support 
counter-terror operations; develop a campaign plan to defeat 
the insurgency outside of Baghdad by securing Ramadi and 
Fallujah in order to prevent the influx of terrorists and 
their supplies along the Euphrates River valley and by 
improving security in Mosul, Tal Afar, Samara, Baquba and 
northern Babil; continue to secure the peace in Najaf and 
Kirkuk.  Finally, take action to concentrate on foreign 
fighters and those Iraqis who support them to isolate them 
from the rest of the insurgents. 
 
-- POINT 3: DEVELOP FLEXIBLE AND HIGHLY MOBILE FORCES, led by 
the Minister of Defense who will: continue increasing the 
size and capabilities of Interior Ministry Intervention 
Forces and Police Commandos, and Ministry of Defense Iraqi 
Army forces to facilitate the transition of security from the 
Coalition Forces to the Iraqi Security Forces (ISF); and, 
establish more police and military units that are able to 
respond quickly to terrorist events. 
 
-- POINT 4:  PROTECTION OF BAGHDAD, led by the Minister of 
Interior who will: exploit the momentum of Operation 
Lightning by following on with Operation Thunder to further 
fragment the terrorists within the city; develop a plan to 
defeat the insurgency within Baghdad; and, secure the Baghdad 
International Airport Road. 
 
-- POINT 5:  REGAIN CONTROL OF AND IMPOSE AUTHORITY OVER THE 
NATIONAL BORDERS, led by the Minister of Defense who will: 
diplomatically engage neighboring nations to disrupt external 
support of foreign terrorists; increase the presence of Iraqi 
Security Forces on the border and implement procedures to 
control entry points in the Ninewa and Anbar provinces; 
continue conducting security operations to deny safe haven to 
terrorists in the mentioned border region; and, agree upon a 
list of those wanted from Syria. 
 
-- POINT 6:  MOBILIZE THE SUPPORT OF THE IRAQI PEOPLE IN THE 
STRUGGLE AGAINST TERRORISM, led by the State Minister for 
National Assembly Affairs who will: develop an information 
campaign to drive a wedge between the population and 
terrorists; emphasize that Iraqis are taking responsibility 
for security operations and that this will lead to more 
security self-reliance; demonstrate the correlation between 
economic development and the importance of the ISF in 
providing security; publicize the methods used by terrorists 
against innocent Iraqis. 
 
-- POINT 7:  ACTIVATE FINANCIAL AND ECONOMIC MEANS TO 
STRENGTHEN COUNTER-TERRORISM OPERATIONS, led by the Minister 
of Planning or the Minister of Finance, who will: increase 
the distribution of wealth from oil revenues to increase the 
quality of life for the population; consider a future shift 
to a more market driven economy; increase private sector 
economic development throughout the country in conjunction 
with the growth of the ISF; outline an employment program 
based on large improvements in the public sector; and, 
maintain a strong budget to fund ministries charged with 
security. 
 
-- POINT 8:  IMPROVE THE LEVEL OF POLITICAL PARTICIPATION, 
led by the National Security Advisor, supported by the 
Transitional National Assembly to: develop a national 
dialogue focusing on the reintegration of parties that did 
not participate in the January elections and putting forth 
the possibility of either a general, special, or limited 
amnesty; hold a conference to address the issue of Iraqis 
killing Iraqis; continue measures that encourage Sunni 
participation in the political process; address the situation 
in Tal Afar politically in a low-key, non-official way; and, 
develop plans to protect the free political expression of all 
Transitional National Assembly members and all Sunni members 
of the Constitutional Drafting Committee. 
 
-- POINT 9:  VITAL INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION, led by Deputy 
Prime Minister Chalabi to: improve inter-ministerial 
communication to synchronize protection of infrastructure; 
increase the security of ISF recruitment centers; reassess 
the protection of International Zone entry points; and, focus 
on oil infrastructure security.  This last item will be the 
responsibility of the Minister of Defense. 
 
-- POINT 10:  DEVELOP JUDICIAL, INVESTIGATIVE, AND 
INTERROGATION PRACTICES CONSISTENT WITH THE RULE OF LAW, led 
by the Minister of Justice to: build capacity at the national 
and local levels to detain and interrogate suspects in 
accordance with the law; ensure that the interrogation of 
security detainees focuses on terrorists, with the goal of 
producing actionable intelligence to combat the insurgency; 
implement legal procedures that expedite the processing of 
detainees that will also reduce the strain on the detention 
system; enact a law against committing or instigating acts of 
terrorism or of harboring terrorists; and, sustain the 
commitment to protecting human rights and the rule of law. 
 
-- POINT 11:  PROTECT NEIGHBORHOODS AND DISTRICTS, led by the 
National Security Advisor whoQill either (a) establish local 
militia units to protect the safety of neighborhoods (first 
choice) or (b) establish "neighborhood watch" or "night 
guards" to be affiliated with local police and army units. 
 
-- POINT 12: PRESSURE NEIGHBORING COUNTRIES, led by the 
Minister of Foreign Affairs in conjunction with the National 
Security Advisor, who will: pressure Syria to stop supporting 
terrorism via financial, human, and material means in Iraq, 
to hand over wanted individuals, and to increase border 
controls.  In addition, pressure will be brought to bear on 
Egypt, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia to stop supporting terrorism 
in Iraq. 
 
--------- 
FOLLOW-UP 
--------- 
 
¶5. (SBU)  The Prime Minister's Security Plan requires that 
the responsible Ministers respond within thirty days of 
August 8, 2005, with their implementation concepts, lists of 
required resources, and proposed timelines for their plans. 
The Embassy, with MNF-I, will continue to monitor 
developments and provide further information as it becomes 
available. 
Khalilzad