05BAGHDAD3792
GLOBAL RESUMES NORMAL OPERATIONS AT BAGHDAD
Wed Sep 14 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS BAGHDAD 003792 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DOT FOR FAA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR ECON ETRD PGOV PREL IZ
SUBJECT: GLOBAL RESUMES NORMAL OPERATIONS AT BAGHDAD 
AIRPORT 
 
¶1. (U) Summary:  Following GOI assurances of partial 
payment of $12.5 million on claimed arrears, Global 
Risk Securities (GRS) resumed full operations at 
Baghdad International Airport (BIAP) at 0600 hours 
September 10.  All flights - civilian, commercial, and 
military - are operating normally.  Post received 
verification that the payment was made September 13, 
clearing the way for Global and the Ministry of 
Transportation (MOT) to begin negotiations on the 
remaining arrears and a future contract.  End summary. 
 
---------- 
Background 
---------- 
 
¶2. (U) On September 9 at 0600 hours, Global Risk 
Strategies suspended its operations at BIAP, 
effectively closing the airport to all civil and 
commercial flights.  The military side of the airport 
remained open to military flights and pre-selected 
civil reconstruction flights on a priority basis. 
 
¶3. (U) Global has been working at BIAP since February 
of 2005 without a signed contract.  It had received no 
payment for its services from the GOI since then until 
September 13 in spite of repeated promises from MOT. 
Global claims it is owed $23 million in arrears and is 
demanding a new contract within 10 days. 
 
¶4. (U) During Global's operations stand-down, the MNF-I 
at BIAP raised its security posture and was ready to 
take over the perimeter and checkpoint security 
stations.  The civilian terminal was closed and pre- 
selected reconstruction flights diverted to the 
military runway.  USAF air traffic controllers operated 
the tower during this period.  Global employees 
remained at their security posts throughout the stand- 
down, but closed BIAP checkpoints to the public and 
halted all passenger screening and processing 
operations in the BIAP civilian terminal. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Global raised the matter with Deputy Prime 
Minister Chalabi, who, in collaboration with the 
Minister of Finance and U.S. Embassy personnel, reached 
the settlement leading to the partial payment of 
arrears to Global and its resumption of operations. 
 
----------------- 
Current Situation 
----------------- 
 
¶6. (U) Post has received verification that the wire 
transfer for the partial payment of $12.5 million did 
go through September 13.  Now Global will try to set a 
date to begin negotiations with the MOT to resolve 
Global's outstanding claims and reach an agreement on a 
new contract. Chalabi has said at least four security 
companies are interested in providing security services 
at BIAP. 
 
Satterfield