05BAGHDAD4079
BAGHDAD HAS A NEW MAYO
Mon Oct 03 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS BAGHDAD 004079 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV IZ
SUBJECT: BAGHDAD HAS A NEW MAYO 
 
REF: BAGHDAD 3344 
 
¶1. (U) On 01 October Mr. Saber Al-Esawi became the new 
Mayor of Baghdad.  Esawi replaces Baghdad Governor Hussein 
Mohammed Ali al-Tahan who had occupied the office since 
seizing the position by force, with approval of the Baghdad 
Provincial Council (BPC), on 8 August (ref). 
 
¶2. (U) The BPC in August sought  to fill the mayor's 
position  as soon as possible.  Esawi was overwhelmingly 
chosen by BPC members to fill the position.  Esawi delayed 
assuming  the office of mayor earlier for two reasons.  He 
remained in his home, limiting his outside activities and 
recovering from wounds suffered from a 20 August 
assassination attempt.  In addition, neither Esawi nor the 
members of the BPC wanted him to assume the office until 
his nomination was approved by the Iraqi Council of 
Ministers.  The council approved and endorsed his 
nomination on 29 September. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Esawi is a member of the Shia Islamist party SCIRI 
and his appointment as permanent mayor to replace the 
political independent Ala Tamimi represents another step in 
SCIRI's consolidation of its authority in Iraq's capital. 
That said, compared to many politicians involved in local 
Baghdad politics Esawi is a humble, unassuming, self- 
effacing man.  Before assuming the office Esawi was a 
member of the BPC and Chairman of the Essential Services 
Committee on the council.  From this position he had  a 
detailed view of the city's problems and how to address 
them. Our own sense of the man after numerous conversations 
is that he is qualified to fill the position of mayor and 
could be a real plus in city administration . END COMMENT. 
Satterfield