05BAGHDAD4856
DAILY IRAQI WEBSITE MONITORING - December 5, 2005
Mon Dec 05 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS BAGHDAD 004856 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: DAILY IRAQI WEBSITE MONITORING - December 5, 2005 
 
SUMMARY: Discussion of Iranian interference in Iraqi 
domestic affairs is the major editorial theme of Iraqi, 
Arabic language websites on December 5, 2005. END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "Why Don't Iraqis Reject the Iranian Sistani's 
Interventions?" (Kitabat, 12/5) 
 
---------------------------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "Why Don't Iraqis Reject the Iranian Sistani's 
Interventions?" 
(Editorial by Jawad Kadhum Al-Najaf - Kitabat (Writings) 
Website (http://www.kitabat.com) - independent based in 
Germany) 
 
"As expected, Iranian intelligence has stepped-up its 
efforts before the elections with the goal of scamming the 
Shiites of Iraq into taking control of political decision- 
making, robbing the wealth [of Iraq], and assuming power. 
 
"I can't understand how a self respecting nation could 
permit the intervention of an Iranian foreigner, such as Al- 
Sistani, in its internal affairs and allow him to exploit 
the emotions of simple people to deform the democratic 
process. And what's with the silence towards the domination 
of a number of Shiite parties instigated by Iranian 
intelligence seeking to exclude the honorable people of Iraq 
from participation in their decision making process? 
 
"How long will these despicable Iranian individuals 
manipulate the fate of Iraq, tear apart its social fabric, 
and push it towards joining Iran and enslaving Iraqis to 
serve Persians? 
When will Iraqi Shiites recognize that all Iranians whether 
Al-Sistani, Abdul Aziz Al-Hakim, Solag, Al-Ja'fari, and 
others couldn't care less about the interests of Iraq and 
the Shiite population within-they are only concerned with 
their personal interests and those of Iran, and see Iraq as 
nothing more than a bridge to the achievement of their 
plots. 
 
"This mass stupidity of the Shiites of Iraq and their 
submission to the domination of rotten Iranian mobs is 
amazing. Where is our national pride? Why don't Iraqis 
reject these interventions and rebel against the strongholds 
of Iranian intelligence in Iraq and drive them across the 
border?" 
 
KHALILZAD