05BAGHDAD4210
MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, CONSTITUTION,
Wed Oct 12 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 BAGHDAD 004210 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, CONSTITUTION, 
REFERENDUM, NATIONAL RECONCILIATION; BAGHDAD 
 
SUMMARY: Discussion on the Constitution, Referendum, and 
National Reconciliation were the major editorial themes of 
the daily newspapers on October 12, 2005. END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "Yes. No" (Al-Mada, 10/12) 
¶B. "Democracy of the Constitution" (Al-Watan, 10/12) 
¶C. "Yes to the Constitution" (Baghdad, 10/12) 
¶D. "The Homeland Comes First, and `Yes' to the Constitution 
is in Our Interest" (Al-Taakhi, 10/12) 
¶E. "The Constitution. Instead of Rice in Our Share of 
Rations!" (Al-Mashriq, 10/12) 
¶F. "Faithful Day" (Al-Adala, 10/12) 
 
---------------------------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "Yes. No" 
(Al-Mada, independent, published this back-page editorial by 
Nazar Abdul Satar) 
 
"The referendum is very crucial. If we examine our decision 
about voting `Yes' or `No' to the constitution, we will 
reach an interesting conclusion which will show us that the 
Iraqi people have increasingly begun to believe in the 
political process. The dissenting political groups have 
started to believe in the legitimacy of the political 
process even though they reject it. Therefore, this 
indicates that there is a significant change towards 
stability and positive interaction. 
 
"The referendum can be interpreted as an agreement toward 
reconciliation and it is an admission of the legitimacy of 
the TAL's (Transitional Administrative Law) timetable. The 
referendum shows that democracy is progressing in Iraq--we 
will see voters who vote `Yes' and at the same time we will 
see others vote 'No' to the constitution. 
 
"In fact, the progress of the democratic process will not 
end with the announcement of the referendum's results but it 
will endure. The upcoming election is approaching and will 
be held after the referendum. At that time, there will be 
many chances available to crystallize opinions. The 
referendum has unified the Iraqi people to utter one word 
that will make a difference in Iraq. The Iraqi people will 
go to the ballot boxes and these boxes will determine their 
future. Participation in the referendum means that we accept 
and legitimize democracy. It also means that we trust one 
another and love our country. We all agreed to head to the 
ballot boxes because we believe in the future of the new 
Iraq." 
 
¶B. "Democracy of the Constitution" 
(Al-Watan, affiliated with the Iraqi National Movement led 
by Dr. Hatem Mukhles) 
 
"Iraqi politicians wrote a draft constitution for the 
country that has divided Iraqi political groups--there are 
some politicians who rejected the draft and at the same time 
there are others who have accepted it; we see some people 
who are optimistic about this draft while we see others who 
have reservations about it. 
 
"These conflicting attitudes have caused many constitutional 
committee members, the National Assembly, and leaders of 
political parties to give their opinions on the 
constitution. Some of them said that disharmony over the 
draft constitution represents a healthy and democratic 
practice while others opined that the era of 99% votes in 
favor is over-that Iraq is now in the age of democracy, 
federalism and pluralism and it is now possible for 
disagreement amongst Iraqis. On the other hand, we have 
heard some say that this draft disengages Iraq from its Arab 
and Islamic identity because it states that Iraq is a part 
of the Islamic world and its people are part of the Arab 
nation. Actually, Iraq is not a merely part of the Arab 
nation but it is the main part of the Arab nation. 
 
"Nevertheless, we are waiting for October 15th so that we 
will know whether this draft will be approved or rejected. 
On this day, the people of Mesopotamia will give their final 
word about the draft constitution. They will prove to the 
entire world that they are the benefactors of the first 
civilization and those who taught humanity how to write and 
enact laws. On October15th, the Iraqi people will practice 
democracy for the first time in their lives because it is 
the democracy of the constitution." 
 
¶C. "Yes to the Constitution" 
(Baghdad, pro-coalition, affiliated with INA (Iraqi National 
Accord) led by Iyad Allawi published this page-two 
unattributed editorial) 
 
"Iraq is a multicultural country comprised of many 
religions, sects, and ethnicities, all of whom have suffered 
from the unjust aggression of dictatorial policies and 
wars-conflicts that have resulted in infants recognizing the 
smell of gunpowder before taking their first sips of milk. 
"In the democratic environment following Saddam's downfall, 
you can always find someone calling for the rights of this 
sect or that religion, hoping to reap benefit (financial or 
otherwise) from the Iraqi people in a way that is close to a 
dictatorial style and doing their best to stand in the 
limelight, forgetting that all Iraqis have suffered. 
Although some Iraqis have suffered more than others all 
should enjoy rights because they have lived under 
oppression. 
 
"We are in need of a common framework to structure our lives 
in adherence to the principles of justice and equality-which 
means a constitution. While it is true that our civilization 
was the first to establish democracy, there is a stark 
difference between those who memorize lessons and those who 
comprehend them completely. Democracy is an instrument we 
should implement in our dealings with each other, not merely 
mimicking what slogans proclaim. 
 
"Therefore, each of us should accept concessions to make 
progress on Iraq. Voting `Yes' to the constitution is a 
great patriotic duty and we can discuss unresolved issues at 
a later date in order to ensure everyone's rights. Voting 
`Yes' to the constitution will clear the way for choosing a 
strong, elected government capable of amending whatever we 
want in the constitution. Moreover, voting `Yes' to the 
constitution is best, because the alternative is so 
difficult and not even in the benefit of those who reject 
it." 
 
¶D. "The Homeland Comes First, and `Yes' to the Constitution 
is in Our Interest" 
(Al-Taakhi, affiliated with the KDP led by Al-Barzani, 
published this page-five editorial by Hussein Al-Jaff) 
 
"The Iraqi tent is large and there is enough room for 
everyone in it; Iraq's interest must come first. The 
people's prosperity and development should be everyone's 
responsibility: officials, employees, or citizens. As the 
prophet Mohammad said, `All of you are in charge and each 
one is responsible for his group.' Therefore, responsibility 
is collective, and the homeland should come first. Today our 
homeland needs us to stand with it in order to pass through 
the crisis; the international conspiracy against it, the 
Arab's ungratefulness, and the remnants of the former 
regime's aggressions against our homeland. 
 
"The homeland obliges us to vote `Yes' to its future on 
referendum day, because this constitution will bring us 
happiness in a free, pluralistic, federal, democratic 
country in which everyone will be equal. Justice, in dealing 
with everyone, will be the ideal characteristic of the new 
regime. 
 
"On Saturday, Iraqis will stab the dagger of national unity 
into the hearts of Iraq's enemies and the enemies of its 
future." 
 
¶E. "The Constitution. Instead of Rice in Our Share of 
Rations!" 
(Al-Mashriq, independent, anti-coalition, published this 
page-three editorial by Dr. Hameed Abdullah) 
 
"All Iraqi families have received their copies of the draft 
constitution with their monthly food rations, which are 
always missing several items such as sugar, rice, tea, 
flour, and lentils. 
 
"Our  deprived  people wish the government would  distribute 
the   rice  and  sugar  together  with  the  copy   of   the 
constitution because the Iraqi people have suffered  from  a 
lack  of  sugar  and  rice  during  the  oppressive  embargo 
previously   imposed  upon  Iraq.  In  addition,   terrorism 
prevents vehicles that carry food supplies from reaching the 
warehouses of the Ministry of Trade. May God help the Iraqis 
who have suffered from the embargo and terrorism. 
 
"Our  food  rations  are shrinking day by  day  and  we  can 
predict  that  one  day  the Iraqi  family  will  receive  a 
matchbox as the only item available through food rations. We 
are  sure that the Ministry of Trade's employees will  blame 
terrorism  rather  than corruption.  Poor  Iraqis  wish  the 
government  would  distribute the  draft  constitution  with 
rice.  In this way, all Iraqis will be interested in reading 
this  draft.  As  it  is  now,  they  have  a  copy  of  the 
constitution but they do not have rice or sugar and for this 
reason  they  will leave the copy on the shelf because  they 
are  not interested in reading it. Then, Iraqis will  go  to 
the ballot boxes to have their say on the constitution and I 
am  sure  that they will feel that they are following  their 
politicians'  desires--just  like  the  old  saying  (people 
follow their king's religion). 
 
"The word of yes or no on the constitution means nothing  to 
Iraqis. The Iraqi people elected those who they thought were 
qualified  and  perfect  to lead the political  process  but 
then,  following  the elections, they were shocked.  Nothing 
changed,  especially  concerning the  deterioration  of  the 
security  situation, which is still worsening.  Iraqis  will 
say  a resounding `yes' but they will say this for the rice, 
tea, sugar, security, law and justice." 
 
¶F. "Faithful Day" 
Al-Adala, affiliated with SCIRI led by Abdul Aziz Al-Hakim, 
published this page-three editorial by Dr. Ali Khalif: 
 
 "With just 72 hours left, until Iraqis are due to decide on 
the draft constitution in the upcoming referendum, meetings, 
negotiations and ongoing talks among Iraqi political leaders 
are   an  attempt  to  add  some  amended  articles  to  the 
constitution  to  gain Sunni support  for  the  draft.  This 
attempt  reflects  the  patience of  Iraqi  national  forces 
trying  to  respond  to difficult Sunni  demands  and  reach 
something  that  Sunnis  can agree on  to  hold  all  Iraqis 
together for the coming decisive moments. 
 
"Last  minute  talks  and  dialogue among  Iraqis  political 
forces  will  continue until national forces guarantee  that 
Sunnis  are  satisfied and have confidence  that  the  draft 
constitution will represent their interests and  that  Iraqi 
national  forces  have  a  real  desire  to  maintain  their 
country's unity and to ensure the participation of all sects 
in  the  political process in Saturday's vote. Sunni demands 
have  shown that they reject all kinds of changes  and  they 
are  still sticking to the once-dominant Sunni minority idea 
that would reject the constitution. 
 
"Regardless  what negotiations and meetings result  in,  all 
Iraqis  are  aware  that the constitution represents  unique 
guarantees to move Iraq to a better future and start  Iraq's 
rebuilding  stage--voting `Yes' will open a new  bright  and 
secure life, and pave the start for the next election. 
 
"To  begin with, something is better than nothing--yes there 
are  reservations about some of constitution's articles  but 
this  is the best among the possibilities; especially  since 
Iraq has just emerged from a dictatorial regime and suffered 
for  a long time. Now should be the time to determine a free 
and democratic future. 
 
"Iraq's enemies are planning to make the constitution fail, 
but Iraqis are aware that the draft constitution represents 
a bright future for Iraqis and that referendum day will be 
the faithful day for all our martyrs in the mass graves of 
Halabja, Al-Anfal and all those who have sacrificed their 
lives for such a great day and for their faith and 
principles." 
 
KHALILZAD