06BAGHDAD4311
PRT TIKRIT: MOVING GOVERNANCE FORWARD IN SALAH AD
Tue Nov 21 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHGB #4311/01 3251209
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 211209Z NOV 06
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8119
INFO RHEHWSR/WHITE HOUSE SITUATION ROOM WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITYUNCLAS BAGHDAD 004311 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM EAID IZ
SUBJECT: PRT TIKRIT: MOVING GOVERNANCE FORWARD IN SALAH AD 
DIN 
 
REF: BAGHDAD 3946 
 
¶1. (U) This is a PRT Tikrit, Salah ad Din cable. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Institution of democratic principals and processes 
in the provincial government of Salah ad Din (SaD) hinges 
on the proper separation of powers between the Governor and 
the Provincial Council.  At present, the relationship 
between these two branches of the provincial government is 
largely driven by personalities.  We see the following 
initiatives as key to defining the independent roles of 
each branch of the provincial government, increasing 
transparency and accountability, and helping make elected 
leaders answerable to their constituents.  The PRT intends 
to focus its governance resources on these initiatives. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
Instituting Rules and Procedures in the Provincial Council 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Institution of internal rules and procedures in 
the Provincial Council (PC) is crucial for normalizing the 
council's operations, decision-making process, 
transparency, and accountability.  At present, the PC does 
not hold regular meetings, take minutes, or record 
votes. 
 
¶4. (SBU) The PC legal committee drafted internal rules and 
procedures two years ago, but they were never implemented. 
The PC, in conjunction with the PRT, recently updated the 
rules, and the PC plans to vote on their implementation at 
its next meeting.  The PRT is also working with the ISF to 
ensure the safe passage of members to the meetings, as 
security has previously prevented members from traveling to 
Tikrit to attend meetings.  (NOTE: Copies of the PC's 
internal rules and procedures are available at the website 
listed in para 12. END NOTE.) 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
Holding Regular Meetings between DGs and the Governor 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) Holding regular meetings between the Ministries 
Directors General (DG) and the Governor and Deputy Governor 
is important to ensure that the Governor has proper 
oversight of the DGs' operations and that the DGs are fully 
informed of the provincial government's priorities. 
Currently, the communication gap that exists between the 
Governor and the DGs prevents municipal services from 
effectively reaching SaD residents. 
 
¶6. (SBU) The PRT is working to establish regular meetings 
between the Governor's office and the DGs, but the 
initiative has been met with some opposition.  The DGs have 
been very supportive of holding the regular meetings. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
Establishing Rules and Procedures for the PRDC 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶7. (SBU) Establishing rules and procedures for the PC's 
Provincial Reconstruction and Development Committee (PRDC), 
SaD's primary decision-making body on reconstruction and 
large capital projects, is vital to guaranteeing that 
reconstruction money is spent properly and that projects 
are allocated and contracted fairly.  Presently, the PRDC 
has no internal rules, making the project decision-making 
process opaque and inconsistent. 
 
¶8. (SBU) The PRT will be working with the PRDC to draft 
internal rules and procedures and to work them through the 
approval process.  We intend to use Economic Support Funds 
(ESF) to encourage this process.  ESF monies will also 
provide the committee its initial funding in FY 2007 and 
ensure that the established procedures work effectively. 
With the ESF monies working to streamline the PRDC's 
operations, the committee should be ready for its full 
funding when it arrives from the GOI later in 2007. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
Increasing the Information Flow to the PC 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) Increasing the flow of information from the DGs to 
the PC is essential for the PC to make proper funding and 
policy decisions.  At present, the PC receives little 
information about the status of service delivery and 
project implementation. 
 
¶10. (SBU) This problem is two-fold.  The Governor does not 
provide the information from the DGs, and the PC does not 
 
ask for it.  As a first step for increasing the information 
flow, the PRT has helped the provincial government create a 
project database that records projects, descriptions, and 
status (both financial and engineering).  The PRT is also 
working with the Governor to ensure that information is 
available and with the PC to inform members about how this 
information is necessary. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) We believe that regularizing procedures will be 
an important tool in ensuring transparency and 
accountability.  The overall positive response we have 
received from our interlocutors bodes well for improved 
functioning of the provincial government, although the 
proof will only be seen after several months of use.  END 
COMMENT. 
 
¶12. (U) For additional reporting from PRT Tikrit, Salah ad 
Din, please see our SIPRNET Reporting Blog: 
http://blogs.csp.sgov.gov/blojsom/blog/ salahaddin/. 
KHALILZAD