07BAGHDAD4107
RRT ERBIL: UN SRSG DE MISTURA ADDRESSES KURDISH
Mon Dec 17 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXYZ0010
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHGB #4107 3511803
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 171803Z DEC 07
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4908
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS BAGHDAD 004107 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PTER IZ
SUBJECT: RRT ERBIL: UN SRSG DE MISTURA ADDRESSES KURDISH 
ASSEMBLY ON ARTICLE 140 
 
REF: BAGHDAD 4068 
 
This is an Erbil Regional Reconstruction Team message. 
 
¶1.  (U) Summary:  In a Kurdistan National Assembly (KNA) 
session December 17, United Nations Special Representative of 
the Secretary General (UN SRSG) Staffan de Mistura presented 
UNAMI's proposal for a six-month technical delay of the 
Article 140 process and offered UN technical support to serve 
as the "engine to accelerate the process."  KRG's 
representative to the GOI's Article 140 Committee, Mohammed 
Ihsan, said the KRG supports the UN proposal, but the KNA 
must decide whether or not the proposal is accepted.  KNA 
Speaker Adnan Mufti concluded the session by calling on KNA 
members to meet again December 26 or 27 to decide whether or 
not to accept the proposal.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (U) KRG's representative to the Article 140 Committee, 
Mohammed Ihsan, opened the session by noting that the GOI 
would still bear the responsibility of finishing the process, 
even if the deadline is missed and the UN provides 
assistance.  He said UNAMI had offered technical support, for 
six months only, and the KRG would be willing to accept the 
assistance.  However, he noted, the KNA must make the 
decision on whether or not to accept the UN's proposal, as 
Article 140 stipulates that the people must decide the fate 
of the disputed areas. 
 
¶3.  (U) UN SRSG Staffan de Mistura began by emphasizing his 
experience in the Kurdistan Region of Iraq in 1991, and that 
he understood the suffering of all Iraqis under Saddam 
Hussein's regime.  He noted that UN Secretary General Ban 
supported the UN's role in Iraq, as evidenced by the UNSCR 
¶1770.  He said that although there were "concrete facts and 
deadlines" in the constitution, there was no way to organize 
a referendum before the end of the year.  But, he added, "we 
cannot let the process fade away, through constant 
postponements."  He said he had proposed a six-month 
technical delay and UN assistance, in person and in writing, 
to the GOI Presidency Council, Prime Minister Maliki, and KRG 
Prime Minister Nechirvan Barzani.  Holding up a UN folder, de 
Mistura said the folder contained the letter and also a UN 
press release, which demonstrated the UN's public commitment 
to Article 140.  He said the political leaders mentioned 
above had accepted his proposal. 
 
¶4.  (U) De Mistura asked the KNA to "keep Article 140 alive" 
and to decide to support his proposal.  He said UNAMI would 
serve as "the engine that accelerates the process" and would 
provide international legitimacy.  He admitted that the UN 
had often disappointed, and was not a perfect organization. 
But, he added, "I was here in 1991, with the UN flag, we were 
here with you."  He also noted that UN technical support for 
the 2005 constitutional referendum had been crucial, and the 
referendum had been a success.  He said KNA members must 
think "with their heart and mind" and that "courage is in 
acting rationally." 
 
¶5.  (U) Adnan  Mufti, KNA's speaker, responded to de 
Mistura's presentation by asking KNA members to mull over a 
decision during the Eid al Adha holiday, and return to the 
KNA December 26 or 27 to make a decision.  (Note: Eid al Adha 
is normally a four day holiday, and is due to begin 
Wednesday, December 19.  Given that the holiday will fall 
partially over the week-end, the KRG may announce official 
holidays on December 23 and 24.  End Note.) 
 
¶6.  (U) Kemal Kerkuki, KNA's deputy speaker concluded the 
special session by blaming the GOI for the failure of the 
Article 140 process.  He said that the GOI had managed to 
hold two elections and a referendum since 2003, so why was 
the GOI unable to organize a referendum on Article 140?  He 
said that political groups are against the process, and that 
Maliki himself was to blame for Article 140's delay. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Comment:  KRG President Barzani has consistently 
stated that the KNA must approve any delay.  While the KNA 
has no formal legal authority over Article 140, its 
endorsement by the KDP, PUK, and smaller parties would 
maintain Kurdish unity and shield the KDP and PUK leadership 
from criticism.  End Comment. 
CROCKER