07BAGHDAD404
Iraqi Kurdistan Region Media Summary --
Wed Feb 07 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO0127
RR RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #0404/01 0380630
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 070630Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9462
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000404 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
UNCLASSIFIED 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PKPA PGOV ECON IZ TU US
 
SUBJECT:  Iraqi Kurdistan Region Media Summary -- 
      February 5, 2007 
 
¶1.  (U)  This is a Regional Reconstruction Team (RRT) cable. 
 
Sulaimaniyah to Give Fuel to Owners of 300 Private Generators 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶2.  (U)  Kurdistani New reports that the Sulaimaniyah provincial 
government will supply 50% of the diesel fuel and electrical cables 
needed to run 300 private electricity generators in the city. 
 
President Masoud Barzani is factor of unity in Iraq 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶3.  (U)  Khabat newspaper reports on a speech given by Nassar 
al-Ruba'i, head of al-Sadr faction of the Iraqi National Assembly, 
following his visit to the Kurdistan Region last week.  In the 
speech al-Ruba'i said, "President Massoud Barzani and the KDP are 
playing a positive role in bringing Iraqi political factions and 
ethnic groups together.  We have discussed the new security plan 
with him." 
 
GOI Article 140 Committee Approves Plan to Relocate "Arabs of 
Arabization" 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶4.  (U)  GOI Minister of Interior Dr. Hashim al-Shibli and KRG 
Minister for Extra-Regional Affairs Dr. Muhammad Ihsan led a meeting 
of the GOI Higher Committee for the Implementation of Article 140 to 
discuss a plan to relocate "Arabs of Aribization" in Kirkuk to their 
original homes.  The committee approved two resolutions.  In 
Resolution #3, it specifies that the families will be relocated to 
the areas they came from, they will be paid 20 million Iraqi Dinars, 
each family will be given a piece of land in the areas where they 
are relocated, and all official government registrations (including 
food ration cards) must be transferred to the new home.  Relocated 
Arabs who are currently government employees will be guaranteed a 
government job at their new homes. 
 
¶5.  (U)  In Resolution #4, it specifies that contracts for 
agricultural land currently held by "Arabs of Aribization" will be 
terminated.  The two resolutions are set to be put into effect on 
March 15 if they are approved by Iraqi Prime Minister Nuri 
al-Maliki. 
 
KRG Representative to U. S.  Speaks to Congress 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶6.  (U)  Major newspapers reported that KRG Representative to the 
United States, Qubad Talabani, spoke to the Senate Foreign Affairs 
Committee.  He said the Kurdistan Region would need a guarantee from 
the United States if it pulls out of Iraq.  He said that the 
referendum on Kirkuk should be held by the end of 2007 because 
"postponing the referendum will develop tensions in the area." 
 
Kurdish National Anthem Debate Continues 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶7.  (U)  Peyamner, the Kurdish News Agency, reported that following 
the statement of President Masoud Barzani opposing any changes in 
the Kurdish National Anthem, the head of KDP faction in KNA, Sherwan 
Haidari, told them, "There is a draft of law in the KNA to make 'Ay 
Raqib' the new Kurdish National Anthem". 
 
Former Congressman Tom Downey Interview with Khabat 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶8.  (U)  Former Democratic Congressman from New York Tom Downey gave 
an interview with Khabat newspaper.  In the interview he said, 
"Three regions is the best solution for Iraq because Iraq contains 
many different nations and ethnicities."  He said he doesn't support 
the pull back of American troops from Iraq. 
 
Commentaries: 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶9.  (U)  Kawa Ameen writes a commentary about the refugees at the 
UNHCR-run refugee camp in Makhmour.  He says that the people in the 
camp are Kurdish people and have been made to be immigrants in their 
own land.  He says that UNHCR, the KRG, and the Iraqi government 
have ignored the problem and failed to give the people of the camp 
any humanitarian aid.  Turkey accuses the camp of being a military 
base for training PKK fighters, but this is not true.  This is 
proven when a few days ago the Iraqi forces, supervised by the 
American forces, blockaded the camp on a search for weapons and they 
didn't find any.  So now that all the rumors have been proven false, 
he says, "it is time for all concerned sides to apologize to those 
people.  UNHCR and the KRG should give all the people in the camp 
asylum...and allow them the freedom to travel freely and look for 
jobs in southern Kurdistan cities."  He cites the example of 
 
BAGHDAD 00000404  002 OF 002 
 
 
Sweeden, where refugees can become citizens after some period of 
time. 
 
¶10.  (SBU)  This media summary is prepared by Public Diplomacy 
Assistant Tawar Rasheed.