09BAGHDAD2570
Response to MERO Interim Report on Regional Embassy (REO)
Thu Sep 24 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXYZ0139
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHGB #2570 2671416
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 241416Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 4827UNCLAS BAGHDAD 002570 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASIG AMGT ABLDG ASEC IZ
SUBJECT:  Response to MERO Interim Report on Regional Embassy (REO) 
Office Hillah, Iraq 
 
REF:  Butenis-Arnston Information Memo 5/5/2009 
 
(SBU)  Sensitive but Unclassified.  Protect Accordingly. 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY.  Dated March 24, 2009, State IG Middle East 
Regional Office (MERO) Interim Report on Role, Staffing, and 
Effectiveness of the Regional Embassy Office (REO) in Hillah, Iraq 
(MERO-IQO-09-04) made a number of recommendations about the future 
of the REO.  Specifically, it recommended that Embassy Baghdad and 
OPA minimize unnecessary capital improvements to the REO, relocate 
the Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) Babil from the REO to 
military Patrol Base (PB) Hillah, curtail or transfer REO Hillah 
security and support staff to other locations in Iraq, and return 
the Hillah hotel to the Government of Iraq. 
The Office of Provincial Affairs (OPA) agrees with most of these 
recommendations, except for that of moving PRT Babil to Patrol Base 
Hillah.  Instead, by mid-October, the PRT will be moved to Kalsu, a 
more appropriate location on U.S. military forward operating base 
(FOB) outside of the city.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) The Interim Report's specific recommendations and OPA's 
responses to them are: 
 
Recommendation 1:  Continue the stoppage or curtailment of all 
capital improvement projects at REO Hillah. 
 
Response 1:  All capital improvements non-essential to life support 
or security at REO Hillah were halted in preparation of an 
anticipated decision on PRT Babil relocation and Hillah hotel 
decommissioning. 
 
Recommendation 2:  Relocate PRT Babil and other U.S. Government 
employees to the U.S. Army's Patrol Base Hillah. 
 
Response 2:  OPA management and Multinational Corps-Iraq (MNC-I) 
determined that the patrol base's downtown location would be 
inappropriate to house the PRT.  The closure of the REO and 
departure of the civilian security staff will radically change the 
movement profile of the PRT.  Instead of moving in armored Suburbans 
with civilian contract protective security details, PRT staff will 
travel to meetings and other events in tactical military vehicles 
driven by military movement teams.  Moving the PRT and its military 
support units to PB Hillah - located nearly in the center of Hillah, 
would have given the appearance of violating Article 24 of the 
U.S.-Iraq Security Agreement, which requires the U.S. military to be 
out of Iraq's cities by June 30, 2009.  Instead, OPA and MNC-I have 
agreed to relocate the PRT to FOB Kalsu, north of Hillah and well 
outside of the city. 
 
Recommendation 3:  Curtail or transfer REO Hillah security and 
support staff to other locations in Iraq. 
 
Response 3:  OPA, the Embassy Baghdad Management section and the 
Regional Security Office have been planning and coordinating on the 
relocation and/or curtailment of the civilian contracted static 
security force as well as "life support" staff.  The protective 
security details were reduced in August as the military assumed 
responsibility for transporting PRT members. 
 
Recommendation 4:  Decommission and return the Hillah hotel property 
to the Iraqi government. 
 
Response 4:  The decommissioning and return of the Hillah hotel 
property is included as part of the PRT Babil relocation, and that 
will begin as soon as the PRT has moved.  A requirement of the 
decommissioning process is a formal notification to Congress of 
Embassy Baghdad's intention to close the REO.  The Embassy asked the 
Department to send the Congressional notification on August 10, 
¶2009. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The Conclusions and Recommendations section of the final 
report also called for an acceleration of plans to relocate the PRT 
and decommission the Hillah hotel.  Specifically, the report stated 
"OIG concludes the Embassy should consider closing REO Hillah within 
Q"OIG concludes the Embassy should consider closing REO Hillah within 
the next two to four months based on the estimates provided to the 
Embassy."  OPA was not opposed in principal to an accelerated 
relocation and beginning the decommissioning of the Hillah hotel. 
However, planning and coordination between USG civilian, military 
and Iraqi military stakeholders, as well as the ongoing security and 
political developments complicated an accelerated timeline. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The logistical complexities of moving the PRT to FOB Kalsu 
made it impossible to accelerate relocation of PRT Babil and 
decommissioning of the Hillah Hotel.  That said, the relocation of 
PRT Babil, closure of REO Hillah and decommissioning and return of 
the hotel are now proceeding.  OPA and Embassy Baghdad Management 
expect to have relocated the PRT by mid October 2009 and, following 
the move, inventory and decommissioning, Embassy plans to return the 
hotel to the Iraqi government at the end by December 2009. 
 
Haslach