08BUENOSAIRES225
ARGENTINE PRESIDENT KIRCHNER ENGAGES CONSTRUCTIVELY WITH
Mon Feb 25 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Buenos Aires
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBU #0225/01 0561316
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 251316Z FEB 08
FM AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0295
INFO RUCNMER/MERCOSUR COLLECTIVE
RUEHQT/AMEMBASSY QUITO 1049UNCLAS BUENOS AIRES 000225 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL OREP PTER KIRF PHUM KV IR VZ AR
SUBJECT:  ARGENTINE PRESIDENT KIRCHNER ENGAGES CONSTRUCTIVELY WITH 
CODEL ENGEL 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary and introduction:  Argentine President Cristina 
Fernandez de Kirchner (CFK) engaged enthusiastically for an hour in 
her office February 21 with visiting U.S. Congressional delegation 
headed by Representative Eliot Engel (D-NY), chairman of the House 
Subcommittee on the Western Hemisphere, and the Ambassador.  In the 
very positive, upbeat meeting, the codel congratulated the President 
on Argentina's economic recovery, and she drew attention to 
employment gains and other positive social indicators.  They 
reviewed the potential for greater cooperation in areas such as 
science and technology, including renewable energy.  The codel 
raised concerns about Iranian political activities in the region, 
and the President promised to combat vigorously anti-Semitism and 
other forms of discrimination and said she would fight terrorism 
"out of conviction."  The codel urged passage of legislation 
criminalizing trafficking in persons, and Rep. Engel made a pitch 
for recognition of Kosovo's independence.  CFK expressed her 
admiration for the United States' bipartisan practices and her 
desire to work to improve bilateral relations.  The Casa Rosada gave 
high-profile media attention to the meeting, and 
Ambassador-designate Timerman told the Ambassador subsequently that 
CFK was enthused about prospects for relaunching relations.  End 
summary. 
 
¶2. (U) U.S. participants included Representatives Jerry Weller 
(R-IL), Gene Greene (D-TC), Maurice Hinchey (D-NY), Virginia Foxx 
(R-NC), and State DAS Joel Starr.  GOA participants included Chief 
of Cabinet Alberto Fernandez, Foreign Minister Jorge Taiana, and 
Argentine Ambassador to the United States Hector Timerman. 
 
------------------------------------ 
CFK on Argentina's Economic Recovery 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶3. (SBU) Rep. Engel congratulated President Cristina Fernandez de 
Kirchner (CFK) on winning the elections.  He said that growing up in 
a blue-collar family instilled in him the belief that government's 
role is to improve the lives of working people.  CFK's political 
record demonstrated to him that she shared the same perspective. 
Rep. Weller added that he was a big supporter of female 
participation in political life, noting that he was married to Zury 
Rios Sosas, a leading member of the Guatemalan Congress.  CFK 
described her election as Argentina's first democratically-elected 
female President as "eventful", and noted that what was even more 
"remarkable" was Argentina's economic recovery from the 2001-02 
economic crisis.  She cited several GOA socio-economic achievements 
accomplished during the administration of her husband, former 
President Nestor Kirchner:  1) Argentina's unemployment fell from 
24% to 7.5%; 2) salaried workers earned the equivalent of 34% of GDP 
in 2003 and now earned 41%; and 3) the value of Argentina's exports 
grew 67% in the last year.  Rep. Hinchey commented that 
congratulations are overdue for Argentina's economic success. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
CFK Desire to Expand Energy and S&T Cooperation 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Rep. Weller and Rep. Hinchey both expressed the codel's 
desire to build the US-Argentine relationship.  Weller expressed 
appreciation for GOA efforts to combat the drug trade and terrorism, 
as well as its ongoing commitment to rebuild Haiti.  Hinchey then 
asked what the USG could do to improve the bilateral relationship. 
CFK noted that when she was a guest at the 2004 Democratic National 
Convention, she participated in a meeting for foreign visitors 
hosted by former Secretary of State Madeleine Albright.  According 
to CFK, participants in the meeting concluded that the U.S. was not 
paying enough attention to Latin America.  CFK said she agreed with 
that assessment. 
 
¶5. (SBU) CFK said there were a number of areas where the U.S. and 
Argentina could cooperate more, such as in the areas of science and 
technology.  She added that she had just created a Ministry of 
Science and Technology.  When Hinchey asked about Argentina's energy 
situation, CFK stated that they are trying to diversify their energy 
sources and move away from over-reliance on natural gas and oil. 
This is another area for more U.S.-Argentine cooperation.  Rep. 
Greene noted that the U.S., like Argentina needs to diversify its 
power sources.  He stated that wind power has great potential in 
southern Argentina, and that a number of U.S. companies are working 
in this area.  "We know that decreasing the use of coal and 
petroleum is better for the environment, and we need to focus on 
developing natural gas, wind, and nuclear power," he stated.  CFK 
agreed. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
CFK: LatAm will Reject Iranian Propaganda by Instinct 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Turning to Iran, Weller observed that no nation in the 
Western Hemisphere has suffered more than Argentina from 
Iran-sponsored terrorism and praised CFK for being a strong advocate 
 
for the Jewish community.  He raised the U.S. Congress's concern 
over Bolivian President Evo Morales' February 18 announcement that 
Iran will open a regional television station in Bolivia.  He 
cautioned that the channel could be used as a vehicle to broadcast 
anti-Semitic propaganda. 
 
¶7. (SBU) CFK indicated she was not aware of the potential TV 
broadcasts but recalled that shehad served on the congressional 
joint committee charged with investigating the terrorist bombings of 
the Israeli Embassy in 1992 and the AMIA Jewish cultural center in 
¶1994.  She downplayed the concern over the possibility of the 
Iranian TV channel being used to spread anti-Semitism propaganda, 
saying that Latin American would reject this "by instinct."  "Latin 
America has a lot of problems, but anti-Semitism is not one of 
them," she insisted.  She noted that Argentina had just hosted an 
Arab-Latin American Summit and claimed that the Saudi Foreign 
Minister told her he was "amazed at how well Muslims, Jews, and 
Christians exist in Argentina."  She noted that the Jewish people 
have suffered throughout history, and that others have suffered 
persecution as well, not just Jews.  She assured the delegation that 
she would "guarantee" that Argentina would never accept policies 
that discriminate on the basis of religion, color, gender, or sexual 
orientation.  "I am very passionate about this," she said, adding 
that she did not believe anti-Jewish ideas could take root today in 
Argentina and said Argentina would remain strongly committed in the 
fight against terrorism.  We do this not just because we have been 
victims but out of conviction, she concluded. 
 
¶8. (SBU) CFK noted that she was invited last year to speak at the 
Venezuelan Jewish Community's 40th anniversary celebration and was 
aware of their fear of pressure on them.  Engel expressed his 
appreciation for CFK's efforts to help the embattled Jewish 
community in Venezuela.  He indicated that he had also been invited 
to visit Caracas, but had not yet accepted the invitation due to 
conflicting advice on whether or not his visit would help or hurt 
Venezuela's Jewish community. 
 
---------------------- 
Trafficking in Persons 
---------------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) Rep. Foxx said that she is a conservative Republican but 
also a champion of women's rights and a member of the Women's Caucus 
in the U.S. House of Representatives.  The U.S. Congress was 
strongly supportive of global efforts to combat trafficking in 
persons, particularly education programs to prevent people from 
falling prey to traffickers, assistance to protect victims, and 
greater efforts to prosecute traffickers.  In that last connection, 
she understood the Argentine Congress was working on federal 
anti-trafficking legislation, and expressed support for its prompt 
passage and implementation.  CFK acknowledged that it was a 
legislative priority. 
 
-------------------------- 
Venezuelan Agents in Miami 
-------------------------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) Rep. Engel said he agreed with CFK that the U.S. had not 
paid enough attention to Latin America, a region we neglect at our 
own peril.  He said he hoped we could work together on this, despite 
the bad start because of the misunderstanding over the Miami court 
case against four aliens charged with acting as unregistered agents 
of a foreign power in the United States.  The way the case was 
publicly presented "pained us," he said.  The case would follow its 
due course, he added, because that's the way our system works. 
Whatever happens in that court case, he and his subcommittee would 
regard Argentina as a partner and seek to work closely to strengthen 
relations. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Kosovo and the Malvinas/Falklands 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) Rep. Engel thanked the President for Argentine cooperation 
in security issues, including the tri-border area, 
counter-narcotics, and counter-terrorism, and then he raised Kosovo. 
 Acknowledging Argentina's sensitivities (related to its claim to 
the Falklands/Malvinas), Engel noted that he had visited Kosovo 
10-12 times.  He took an interest in Kosovo because when he first 
got involved in politics, Albanian-American constituents started 
educating him about the extent of repression against ethnic 
Albanians in the region.  He had long supported Kosovo independence, 
and he hoped we could address Argentine concerns so that it, too, 
could help Kosovo. 
 
¶12. (SBU) CFK said recognition of Kosovo independence was 
problematic due to Argentina's need to avoid doing or saying 
anything that could undermine its claim to the Malvinas/Falklands. 
While the GOA could recognize and honor the U.S. position, its 
overriding concern was to protect its claim to the 
 
Malvinas/Falklands, which was "enshrined in our constitution."   She 
noted that the GOA had been trying to get HMG to family members of 
Argentine troops killed in the 1982 war to charter a flight to the 
islands to visit the tombs of their loved ones.  She said HMG had 
yet to grant this "humanitarian gesture" because of resistance from 
the islanders. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
Bilateral Relations and Argentina's New Ambassador 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶12. (SBU) CFK thanked Engel for his remarks regarding the Miami 
court case, which she considered an unfortunate incident.  She said 
the codel's visit was "a very important gesture," which she 
appreciated and that she wanted to improve bilateral relations, 
which is one of the reasons Hector Timerman would soon be 
Argentina's Ambassador in Washington.  Engel said he hoped to make a 
positive contribution to the bilateral relationship.  He said he 
looked forward to working with Timerman.  CFK said Timerman was a 
close advisor and good friend, "one of my most intelligent 
appointments."  She credited Timerman for her first visit to Israel, 
when she received a human rights award from the University of 
Jersualem.  CFK recalled that Timerman had been an exile in the 
United States, became an American citizen, and eventually 
relinquished that citizenship in order to take up responsibilities 
as Argentina's consul general in New York City.  She said he 
remained deeply grateful to the United States and would work 
diligently to help the bilateral relationship. 
 
------------------------- 
A Fan of the American Way 
------------------------- 
 
¶14. (SBU) CFK drew the meeting to a close with praise for the United 
States.  "Don't forget -- Argentina's Constitution is a copy of the 
U.S. Constitution," she said.  Sadly, Argentina had lost its 
bipartisan system when it "exploded" in the 2001 crisis.  That 
bipartisanship had never worked so well in Argentina as it has in 
the United States.  She said she greatly admired the civic spirit of 
the United States, particularly the commitment, once an election was 
over, to pull together behind the winner, and the willingness to put 
country over party, national interests over partisanship. 
 
¶15. (SBU) Comment:  CFK had her media advisors give prominent 
attention to the meeting, and it was widely and positively covered 
locally.  GOA Ambassador-designate Timerman told the Ambassador 
February 22 that he had met later in the day with CFK and that she 
was very upbeat about the meeting and about relaunching efforts to 
improve bilateral relations with the U.S. 
 
WAYNE