05LIMA3784
A NEW INTERVIEW WITH SL LEADER COMRADE "ARTEMIO"
Thu Sep 01 00:00:00 +0200 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Lima
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 LIMA 003784 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/29/2015 
TAGS: PTER ASEC SNAR PINS PGOV PE
SUBJECT: A NEW INTERVIEW WITH SL LEADER COMRADE "ARTEMIO" 
 
REF: A. LIMA 1794 
     ¶B. LIMA 1471 
     ¶C. 04 LIMA 292 
 
Classified By: D/Polcouns Art Muirhead for Reason 1.4 (B, D) 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY. A Peruvian newspaper and a TV news program 
made public an interview with Sendero Luminoso (SL) Commander 
"Artemio," head of the largest SL faction still involved in 
combat operations. Leading daily La Republica published a 
portion of the interview on 8/28. Later that evening, Cuarto 
Poder broadcast video footage. The interview was the first 
given by Artemio since he spoke twice in early 2004 to the 
British and Peruvian media (Ref C). Ministry of Interior 
sources believe the person interviewed was in fact Artemio, 
the alias used by Peruvian Citizen Jose FLORES Leon; however, 
Defense Ministry sources believe the interview may be a hoax. 
While the interview did not indicate a change in SL beliefs 
and strategy, it did provide information on the group,s 
internal factions and on its involvement with cocaleros. END 
SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (U) The interview took place in a jungle region of Huanuco 
province, fifty minutes hike away from Aucayacu in the Upper 
Huallaga Valley, the area where Artemio,s group operates. 
Roughly ten other masked SL members accompanied him, carrying 
weapons and clad in fatigues and black t-shirts emblazoned 
with an SL slogan and hammer and sickle. Artemio began the 
interview by addressing international, national and regional 
political issues. His responses to many topics were 
predictable: the U.S./Andean Free Trade Agreement is 
imperialist and imposes a neoliberal model; President 
Alejandro Toledo is pro-imperialist; Peru,s economic growth 
has only benefited big business and not the people; the 
central government is not decentralizing as it claims. He 
periodically referenced and read off typical SL statements of 
party dogma that he held in his hand. 
 
¶3. (U) The SL leader stated that his group,s armed actions 
consist of four types: agitation and propaganda, guerrilla 
combat, sabotage, and selective annihilation. These tactics 
are consistent with the recent attacks for which SL has 
claimed responsibility. 
 
¶4. (U) Artemio also demanded the end of alternative 
development programs in their current form, arguing that 
USAID, the GOP's anti-drug agency DEVIDA and NGOs benefit 
directly from international investment while the population 
only receives crumbs. In their place, he called for larger 
infrastructure projects, e.g., electricity and highways. He 
also dismissed any possibility of solidarity with the people 
on the part of Huanuco Regional President Luzmila Templo, 
despite the fact that she has backed a regional ordinance 
legalizing coca production. Her interests, he asserted, are 
in winning votes for a future congressional candidacy. 
 
¶5. (U) While the SL leader denied a direct link between his 
armed movement and cocaleros, he professed support for the 
latter, stating that his group defended cocalero interests, 
but not narcotrafficking.  Evidence of this was his claim of 
responsibility for the ambush of NAS helicopters in April 
2005 (Ref A). Artemio stated that his group has shown 
solidarity for all forms of popular organization, be they 
campesino or cocalero. He further stated that the appearance 
of new popular groups since 2000 has been a positive sign, 
but that he was disappointed that the groups remain divided 
and that the coca farmers have taken a sectarian position 
rather than aligning themselves with the agricultural sector. 
He called for the integration of cocalero, campesino and 
other popular movements. He also expressed "solidarity" 
against the government "persecution" of SUTEP, Peru,s 
teacher,s union. 
 
¶6. (U) This call for unity was also made for SL itself. 
Artemio recognized that factions exist, even within his own 
Upper Huallaga region, though he attempted to gloss over 
them. He claimed to work with the groups led by Clay and Lee 
but not with Omar and "Proseguir" (the faction promoting 
continuation of the armed struggle). He looked for SL to 
regroup during its "Second Congress," but did not give 
further details. Regardless, he asserted that the common 
denominator for all factions remained their allegiance to 
jailed leader Abimael Guzman. 
 
¶7. (C) COMMENT: Based on analysis of the images and 
declarations, the Ministry of Interior believes the interview 
was in fact with Artemio, who they have identified as 
Peruvian Citizen Jose FLORES Leon. However, the Commander of 
the Army and the Army Director of Intelligence told the DATT 
that judging from the unsophisticated responses and less than 
perfect physical condition of "Artemio," they believed it was 
possible the interview could be a hoax. 
 
¶8. (C) COMMENT CONTINUED: Regarding the content of the 
interview, although Artemio presents an ambivalent 
relationship with the cocaleros, the ties between the groups 
appear certain, as the cocaleros are an important piece of 
the SL,s shifting strategy of greater integration with the 
local population (Ref B). Artemio has also attempted to align 
his group with other popular social movements. This outreach 
runs contrary to SL,s traditional rigid, non-negotiable 
sectarianism. While Artemio,s group remains entrenched in 
the Upper Huallaga, political alignment may have emerged as a 
new option for a group formerly committed only to armed 
struggle. END COMMENT. 
STRUBLE