05LIMA2030
PERU PARTIES SIGN ETHICAL ELECTION PACT GEARING UP
Tue May 03 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Lima
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 LIMA 002030 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PE
SUBJECT: PERU PARTIES SIGN ETHICAL ELECTION PACT GEARING UP 
FOR 2006 
 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY: Twenty-one political parties and organizations 
signed a comprehensive "E...

id: 31924
date: 5/3/2005 22:46
refid: 05LIMA2030
origin: Embassy Lima
classification: UNCLASSIFIED
destination: 
header:
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.



----------------- header ends ----------------

UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 LIMA 002030 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PE
SUBJECT: PERU PARTIES SIGN ETHICAL ELECTION PACT GEARING UP 
FOR 2006 
 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY: Twenty-one political parties and organizations 
signed a comprehensive "Ethical Elections Pact" (EEP) on 
4/28.  The EEP signatories agreed to conform to existing 
legal limits on when, where, and what type of political 
propaganda can be promoted, as well as the prohibition 
against using State resources for campaigns. The agreement 
also includes provisions requiring candidates to submit 
written summaries of their qualifications and in-depth plans 
for how they would govern.  The EEP is a positive step, and 
includes compliance mechanisms designed to ensure that 
violators are subjected to public censure.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.    On 4/28, twenty-one political parties, including all 
leading contenders for the Presidency, signed the Ethical 
Elections Pact (EEP) pledging to reject dirty politics and 
avoid empty campaign promises.  The agreement was drafted by 
the National Electoral Board (JNE) in conjunction with the 
National Accord (an official forum made up of major political 
parties, labor centrals, and civil society organizations), 
the Civil Association Transparencia, the Andean Commission of 
Jurists, and International IDEA (Institute of Democracy and 
Electoral Assistance).  The pact includes commitments to 
abide by electoral law provisions, as well as new commitments 
not currently in the law. 
 
¶3. The EEP begins with a commitment to a just and transparent 
general election process focusing on ideas and programs in 
lieu of personal attacks and aggressive or intimidating 
politicking.  To better inform the electorate, the EEP 
commits parties and candidates to submit to the JNE detailed 
plans for government and their curriculum vitae and 
qualifications.  Both are new commitments not currently in 
GOP law.  The plans for government aim beyond a party 
platform with candidates obliged to describe their near and 
long-term government program proposals and how they will fund 
and implement these proposals.  The EEP, in conformance with 
existing law, also limits the content of election propaganda 
and where and when it may be displayed.  Prohibited election 
advertisements include anything that offends or denigrates 
political competition or uses religious themes. Restrictions 
on diffusion include explicit hours for loudspeakers, written 
permission requirements for use of private buildings, and 
prohibitions on the use of official public buildings. 
Additional limitations on campaigning are in effect 24 hours 
before election day. 
 
¶4. The EEP, in conformance with existing law, requires 
neutrality by State officials in elections.   Ninety days 
before the election, officials running for re-election are 
prohibited from inaugurating or inspecting public works, 
speaking about their political competitors during official 
events, and using any government funds for the benefit of the 
campaign.  The EEP also covers media obligations, and the 
media is requested to promote the pact, provide informative 
coverage of the political organizations, and respect the 
dignity of candidates.  Lastly, the EEP includes a commitment 
by the signatories to clean-up public areas after the 
elections are completed via a "Ciudad Limpia" campaign. 
 
¶5. The EEP includes a mechanism for judging whether 
signatories are complying via a new Honor Tribunal.  This 
Tribunal will hear complaints and allegations that are 
not/not under the purview of the JNE and establish procedures 
and penalties to be approved by the signatories.  The Honor 
Tribunal will be composed of three civil society 
representatives appointed by consensus of the signatories. 
The Tribunal will seek to resolve issues without sanctions, 
but the signatories agree to abide by the decisions of the 
Tribunal. 
 
¶6. Twenty seven parties were invited to sign the pact. The 
six who did not are: Resurgimiento Peruano, Y se llama Peru, 
Movimiento Nueva Izquierda, Nueva Mayoria, Cambio 90, and Si 
Cumple (the latter three are linked to ex-President Alberto 
Fujimori).  Though their party representatives signed on to 
the agreement, Alan Garcia (APRA), Lourdes Flores (Popular 
Christian Party), and Valentin Paniagua (Accion Popular) did 
not personally attend the signing ceremony. 
 
¶7. COMMENT: The EEP represents a maturation of the democratic 
process in Peru and should help to increase the strained 
public confidence in political parties.   Though explicit 
sanctions and fines are currently limited to public officials 
who overstep their bounds in seeking re-election, public 
embarrassment for noncompliance should provide teeth to the 
agreement. The proof will be in how the signatories behave 
under the campaign pressures when election day approaches 
next year.  END COMMENT. 
STRUBLE 

=======================CABLE ENDS============================