05LIMA4548
NEW LABOR MINISTER
Fri Oct 21 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Lima
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS LIMA 004548 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PINR PE
SUBJECT: NEW LABOR MINISTER 
 
REF: A. LIMA 3778 
 
     ¶B. LIMA 3735 
     ¶C. LIMA 3337 
 
Sensitive But Unclassified, Please Handle Accordingly. 
 
¶1. (U) President Alejandro Toledo, on 10/7, swore in Carlos 
Alberto Almeri Veramendi as Minister of Labor and Job 
Promotion.  A bio for Minister Almeri follows. 
 
¶2. (U) Almeri was elected to Congress in 2001 as a 
representative from Loreto Department for the ruling Peru 
Posible (PP) party.  In the current session, he was Vice 
President of the Justice and Human Rights Commission and 
served on the Constitution and Rules Commission.  From 2002 
to 2003 he was President of the Congressional Labor 
Commission.  Almeri is a lawyer by training specializing in 
tax law.  He became a member of PP in 1999 and currently 
serves as legal representative for the party.  He worked as a 
court-appointed attorney in Callao,s Superior Court in 1991, 
and as a court-appointed attorney in the Navy,s 13th Court. 
He graduated from San Marcos National University in 1989.  He 
worked as a taxi driver in 1981 and a private chauffeur in 
¶1983. Almeri was born in Lima on Sept 16, 1962.  Almeri took 
over as Labor Minister from Juan Sheput who resigned in order 
to run for political office. 
 
¶3. (SBU) On 10/19 Almeri told the Ambassador that his 
priorities for his remaining 9 months in office are to 
promote debate on labor reforms (firing and vacation) and the 
transition of small and micro enterprises to the formal 
economy. 
 
¶4. (SBU) COMMENT:  Almeri is widely viewed as a party 
stalwart put in office to quiet the demands from provincial 
PP legislators for higher level posts with patronage 
opportunities.  Given President Toledo's and Prime Minister 
Kuczynski's signals that labor reform will not/not move 
forward at this time (Ref A, B, and C), it appears that 
Almeri will be little more than a place-holder for his term 
of office.  END COMMENT. 
STRUBLE