06BEIJING14635
JULY 12 G-8 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: CHINA SUPPORTS
Wed Jul 12 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO6338
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHBJ #4635/01 1931022
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 121022Z JUL 06
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1549
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 014635 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM CH KN IS
SUBJECT: JULY 12 G-8 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: CHINA SUPPORTS 
INCREASED DIALOGUE BUT NOT READY TO DISCUSS MEMBERSHIP; 
JOINT EFFORT REQUIRED FOR SIX-PARTY PROGRESS 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  President Hu Jintao will lead China's delegation 
to the G-8 Outreach Meeting July 16-17 in St. 
Petersburg, according to Assistant Foreign Minister 
Cui Tiankai.  The meeting will be a dialogue between 
the G-8 and leaders from six developing countries: 
China, India, Brazil, South Africa, Mexico and African 
Union (AU) rotating president the Republic of Congo. 
Key topics include energy security, prevention of 
infectious diseases, education and African 
development, as well as general discussions about 
trade, globalization, counter-terrorism and non- 
proliferation.  China supports increased dialogue and 
coordination with the G-8, but is not ready to discuss 
membership in the group.  No bilateral meeting between 
President Hu and PM Koizumi is anticipated.  China 
stated that the DPRK missile launch and resumption of 
Six-Party Talks may be discussed at the Outreach 
Meeting, although neither subject is on the agenda. 
Without efforts from all parties, China is not 
optimistic the Six-Party Talks will quickly resume. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
China Values Dialogue with the G-8 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  Assistant Foreign Minister Cui Tiankai briefed the 
press on July 12 about President Hu Jintao's 
participation in the upcoming G-8 Outreach Meeting, 
stating that China views positively greater global 
coordination and dialogue between the G-8 and 
developing countries.  China attaches importance to 
the role of the G-8 and places high value on this 
dialogue.  President Hu attended two prior Outreach 
Meetings and China is increasing cooperation with the 
G-8 and other such mechanisms that foster dialogue on 
global issues. 
 
¶3.  In addition to developing countries, Cui reported 
Russian President Putin invited current EU President 
Finland, current Commonwealth of Independent States 
President Kazakhstan, the heads of the United Nations, 
UNESCO, the World Health Organization, the 
International Energy Agency and the International 
Atomic Energy Agency to participate in G-8 meetings. 
 
The Agenda 
----------- 
 
¶4.  On July 16, Hu will attend a meeting with the 
leaders of the other five invited developing countries 
to discuss south-south and international development 
cooperation and will provide information about China's 
cooperation with Africa.  In addition, Hu will attend 
a tri-lateral meeting with the leaders of India and 
Russia to discuss topics of mutual interest.  Finally, 
he will participate in various bi-lateral meetings, 
the details of which have not yet been determined. 
Responding to a question, Cui stated that no bi- 
lateral meeting with Japan has been arranged. 
 
¶5.  On July 17, Hu will attend the plenary session of 
the Outreach Meeting, followed by a more informal 
lunch session.  At these meetings, Hu will set out 
China's assessments and positions on the various 
agenda items. In response to a question, Cui stated 
that the DPRK missile launch and resumption of Six- 
Party Talks could possibly be discussed during the 
more informal lunch session, and/or the bi-lateral and 
tri-lateral meetings as no agenda for these meetings 
has been established. 
 
China Not Ready For Membership 
------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  When asked if China would become a member of the 
G-8, Cui replied that the relationship is evolving. 
Cui stated that China attaches importance to the G-8 
and supports strengthening dialogue between the G-8 
and developing countries.  China will continue to 
exchange views and cooperate with the G-8 and is 
positive about future prospects.  China will proceed 
at a pace comfortable to both China and the G-8. 
 
¶7.  Cui stated that China is still a developing 
country and its economic role in global affairs is not 
as great as some say.  China plays a constructive role 
in the international arena to promote peace and 
stability and feels positive about deepening 
 
BEIJING 00014635  002 OF 002 
 
 
cooperation with the G-8, just as it cooperates 
through other mechanisms.  For example, China hosted a 
China-Arab summit in Beijing and will host similar 
China-Africa meetings.  China's cooperation with ASEAN 
is long-standing.  China also cooperates with the 
Group of 77.  China will continue to use different 
formulas and different methods to participate in 
dialogue and partnership on global issues. 
 
DPRK: Joint Efforts Required 
----------------------------- 
 
¶8.  Cui responded to repeated questions about the 
impact of the DPRK missile launch on the G-8 Outreach 
Meeting by reiterating that China expresses grave 
concern over the situation and remains in close 
consultation with all relevant parties.  China hopes 
all parties will remain calm, exercise restraint, 
proceed toward the common goal of peace and stability 
in Northeast Asia and not take any actions that will 
cause further tension.  He stated the issue may be 
discussed on the side-lines of the Outreach Meeting 
and at the more informal sessions, but it is not on 
the agenda. 
 
¶9.  Cui further stated that while China seeks early 
resumption of the Six-Party Talks, this is not 
contingent on the efforts of only the Chinese. 
Without effort from all parties, China is not 
optimistic that early resumption will occur, Cui said. 
 
¶10.  Regarding non-proliferation, Cui said China seeks 
to strengthen cooperation with all countries.  This 
cooperation is evolving, new problems emerge and all 
countries must be aware of new obstacles.  Cui noted, 
for example, the Joint Statement signed last September 
by all parties to the Six-Party Talks took cooperation 
and effort by all. 
 
Energy Policy 
-------------- 
 
¶11.  According to Cui, discussions about energy 
cooperation and energy security are the first priority 
of the Outreach Meeting and will be addressed.  The 
focus will be on regional cooperation.  China's bi- 
lateral relationship with Russia regarding energy 
cooperation is proceeding smoothly.  China has a 
longstanding strategic partnership with Russia on a 
variety of issues.  China has recently established a 
strategic partnership with India. 
RANDT