06CAIRO4338
AMB MEETING WITH TRADE MINISTER RACHID,
Wed Jul 12 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS CAIRO 004338 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NOT FOR INTERNET DISTRIBUTION 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD EG EAGR FCSC
SUBJECT: AMB MEETING WITH TRADE MINISTER RACHID, 
U.S.-EGYPTIAN BUSINESS COUNCIL 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY. On June 28, Ambassador met with Trade 
Minister Rachid and the U.S.-Egyptian Business Council. 
Topics included the future of FTA, QIZs, U.S. policy toward 
Egypt and the bilateral economic relationship. Ambassador 
called for an active business council while Minister Rachid 
praised the U.S.-Egyptian trade relationship and called for 
an agenda that does not focus solely on the FTA. END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Ambassador met with Trade Minister Rachid and the 
U.S.-Egyptian Business Council (USEBC) on June 28. The 
Ambassador emphasized the importance of the U.S.-Egyptian 
business relationship and the role of the newly revived 
USEBC. Minister Rachid's participation in the upcoming 
Strategic Dialogue will present an opportunity for both sides 
to revive momentum in trade relations that slipped since the 
FTA process was suspended. He noted QIZs have helped increase 
Egyptian exports to the U.S. and asked the Council members to 
provide specific recommendations regarding promotion of trade 
and investment in both directions. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Galal El-Zorba (Chairman, Federation of Egyptian 
Industries and President of the Egyptian side of the USEBC) 
spoke for Council members. Zorba said the FTA's "failure" was 
a setback and a huge disappointment for the Egyptian business 
community. He complained about political linkages in the FTA 
process, and charged that many U.S. policies were unrealistic 
or short-sighted. For example, he said that he could not 
understand the U.S. preoccupation with Ayman Nour. He also 
expressed frustration with some USG positions, such as on the 
delay of municipal elections, which did not matter to the 
Egyptian people. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Zorba said that without an FTA to move toward, he 
and his colleagues could not develop a meaningful agenda for 
the Council in time for their previously planned June 28 
meeting in Washington, D.C. Despite the postponement, he 
added, the Council would work through the summer to develop 
ideas for an agenda to present in September. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Minister of Trade Rachid tempered Zorba's 
complaints and urged the Council to take a more positive 
approach. Rachid stressed that even short of an FTA, the 
U.S.-Egyptian economic relationship is strong. There is still 
a healthy trading environment. Rachid said that the Egyptian 
business community should not focus solely on the FTA -- the 
private sector should put forth other issues through the 
senior policy attention the two governments had always 
offered both private sectors through the USEBC and its 
predecessor council. Responding to a question regarding 
intellectual property rights (IPRs), Rachid explicitly 
refused to implement what he called "TRIPS Plus" outside of a 
comprehensive trade negotiation process. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Agriculture Counselor Asif Chaudhry listed examples 
of USG trade concerns to the Council, namely restrictions on 
importing U.S. poultry and meat. Commercial Counselor Amer 
Kayani highlighted non-Agriculture barriers facing U.S. 
export, including violations of IPRs, pharmaceuticals and 
overly burdensome regulations in Egypt. The meeting concluded 
with an agreement to meet before September, and to develop a 
clear proposal from the Egyptian side for a possible meeting 
of the full Council in Washington, D.C. 
 
RICCIARDONE