06OTTAWA2158
CANADIAN VIEWS ON PRIVACY AND TRANS-BORDER
Mon Jul 17 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ottawa
VZCZCXRO1125
RR RUEHGA RUEHHA RUEHQU RUEHVC
DE RUEHOT #2158/01 1982020
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 172020Z JUL 06
FM AMEMBASSY OTTAWA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3177
INFO RUCNCAN/ALL CANADIAN POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEAHLC/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASH DC
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 OTTAWA 002158 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAN, EB/IFD/OMA, EB/CBA, 
TREASURY FOR IMI:HOEK 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CA ECON EFIN EAIR ECPS
SUBJECT: CANADIAN VIEWS ON PRIVACY AND TRANS-BORDER 
INFORMATION SHARING 
 
REF: A. OTTAWA 2149 
 
     ¶B. OTTAWA 2060 (NOTAL) 
 
 ¶1. (SBU)  Summary:  Canada's Office of the Privacy 
Commissioner found in a report released June 20 that while 
the Canada Border Services Agency (CBSA) has systems and 
procedures in place for managing and sharing personal 
information with other countries, it needs to improve its 
management of privacy risks and achieve greater 
accountability, transparency, and control over the 
trans-border flow of information (i.e., personal information 
that is collected or disclosed across international borders). 
 The report is available online at www.privcom.gc.ca.  In the 
past, the federal and provincial privacy commissioners have 
expressed concern about the protection of personal health 
data on Canadian citizens which a U.S. corporation may be 
processing as part of a data services arrangement with a 
Provincial Health Ministry.  More recently, a provincial 
privacy commissioner has raised concerns about certain 
medical diagnostic equipment capable of communicating between 
hospitals.  The patient data would travel from Canada through 
a communication node in the United States back to Canada. 
Also, a major credit card company recently told the 
Ambassador that possible future changes to Canada's 
Anti-Money Laundering and Anti-Terrorist Financing 
legislation and tighter controls on cross-border data flows 
could jeopardize much of its Canadian business.  End Summary. 
 
Border Services Agency on the Right Track, but Needs 
Improvement 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
Background 
 
¶3. (U)  The Office of the Privacy Commissioner of Canada, 
which operates independently of the GOC and is mandated by 
Parliament to act as an ombudsman, advocate, and guardian of 
privacy rights in Canada, released its annual report on the 
Privacy Act to Parliament on June 20.  The report contained 
an audit of the "Personal Information Management Practices of 
the Canada Border Services Agency" that focused on 
"Trans-border Data Flows." 
 
Reasons for the Audit 
 
¶4.  (U)  In her report, Privacy Commissioner Jennifer 
Stoddart pointed to the importance of Canada's exchange of 
information with the United States as the basis for the audit 
of the Canada Border Services Agency (CBSA).  The CBSA 
collects personal information about millions of travelers 
arriving in Canada that may include detailed financial, 
family history, and travel information, as well as personal 
identifiers such as social insurance and passport numbers. 
Much of this information is retained in an identifiable 
format either in hard copy (physical files) or in electronic 
databases. 
 
¶5.  (U)  The Privacy Commissioner stated a number of reasons 
for her focus on the flow of information between Canada and 
the United States.  First, the trans-border flow of personal 
information raises serious inherent privacy risks relating to 
jurisdictional differences in practices affecting the 
protection of personal information, the security of personal 
data in transit, and the adequacy of instruments governing 
the management of the personal information once it has been 
shared.  Second, there are clear indications that the 
Canadian public is concerned about the trans-border flow of 
their personal information to the United States. In a study 
commissioned by the Privacy Commissioner in 2004, 75% of 
respondents believed that the Government of Canada transfers 
Qcitizens' personal information to foreign governments for the 
purpose of protecting national security, with 85% of those 
surveyed reporting a moderate or high level of concern about 
these transfers. In the same vein, many have raised 
trans-border concerns about data mining, racial profiling, 
direct access to Canadian databases by the foreign 
governments (notably the U.S.) and secondary uses of the 
information. And third, as law enforcement and national 
security organizations around the world collect more 
information from more sources about more individuals, and as 
they use that information to identify possible threats, there 
is a perceived risk of incomplete or inaccurate data leading 
to undesirable consequences such as unnecessary scrutiny of 
individuals. 
 
 
OTTAWA 00002158  002 OF 003 
 
 
Privacy Commissioner's Suggestions 
 
¶6. (U)  The report found that CBSA has policies, procedures 
and systems in place for managing and sharing personal 
information with other countries. However, much can be done 
to better manage the CBSA's privacy risks and achieve greater 
accountability and control over personal information that 
flows across Canada's borders, according to the report: 
 
-- While written requests for assistance from foreign 
governments seeking CBSA documents are processed in 
accordance with agency requirements, much of the information 
shared between the CBSA and the United States at the regional 
level is verbal, and not based on written requests. This 
contravenes both CBSA policy requiring the creation of a 
record when customs information is disclosed and the 
Canada-United States Customs Mutual Assistance Agreement 
(CMAA) of June 1984 that requires customs requests for 
information to be in writing except where pressing 
circumstances exist. 
 
-- The CBSA needs a coordinated method of identifying and 
tracking all flows of its trans-border data. The CBSA cannot, 
with a reasonable degree of certainty, report either on the 
extent to which it shares personal information with the 
United States, or how much and how often it shares this 
information.  By extension, it cannot be certain that all 
information-sharing activities are appropriately managed and 
that they comply with section 107 of the Customs Act, which 
provides for protection of customs information and permits 
the disclosure of customs information to foreign governments 
and institutions in accordance with a written agreement or 
arrangement, and section 8 of the Privacy Act, which 
addresses when personal information under the control of a 
government institution may be disclosed to, among others, a 
foreign state. 
 
-- The information technology (IT) and management controls 
are sound for the Integrated Customs Enforcement System 
(ICES) and Passenger Information System (PAXIS).  These 
systems contain sensitive personal information about millions 
of travelers. Notably, foreign jurisdictions did not have 
direct access to these systems.  Also, electronic releases of 
information to the United States under the High Risk 
Travelers and Shared Lookout Initiatives of the CBSA are 
transmitted over secure communications channels.  However, 
opportunities exist to strengthen the controls to further 
reduce the risk that personal information could be improperly 
used or disclosed. 
 
-- The CBSA has not yet evaluated the effectiveness of the 
High Risk Travelers (HRTI) initiative with the United States 
because this project has not yet been fully implemented.  The 
Privacy Commissioner recommends that the CBSA assess the 
extent to which inaccurate or incomplete data may affect 
individuals or the CBSA's ability to identify, deter, or 
apprehend "high-risk" travelers.  An evaluation would help 
the CBSA demonstrate that the HRTI initiative has achieved 
its enforcement and intelligence objectives and, accordingly, 
that its collection, use and sharing of vast amounts of 
personal information about millions of travelers are 
justified. 
 
-- Since the CBSA is a new agency, the time is ripe for it to 
build and integrate a comprehensive privacy-management 
framework into its day-to-day information handling practices. 
 In particular, the Privacy Commissioner suggests that the 
CBSA work toward updating and strengthening the obligations 
QCBSA work toward updating and strengthening the obligations 
contained in its personal information sharing agreements with 
the United States. The CBSA should also consolidate its 
reporting of privacy incidents and look for ways to improve 
its mechanisms for monitoring cross-border disclosures of 
personal information to foreign law-enforcement agencies and 
other institutions. 
 
-- The Privacy Commissioner recommends that the activities 
associated with sharing data across borders should be as 
transparent as possible.  A clear and complete picture is not 
readily available with respect to what information is shared 
with whom, and for what purpose.  As is the case for 
departments generally, the CBSA does not provide enough 
detail on the trans-border flows of personal information, or 
account in a meaningful way for these flows to Parliament and 
the Canadian public. 
 
 
OTTAWA 00002158  003 OF 003 
 
 
Business Concerns on Possible Changes to Canada's Anti-Money 
Laundering and Anti-Terrorist Financing Laws and on 
Trans-border Data Flows 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶7.  (SBU)  On June 28, MasterCard Canada CEO Kevin Stanton 
called on the Ambassador to explain that MasterCard and other 
large, U.S.-based credit card firms (Capital One, CitiBank, 
MBNA, Chase and others) are concerned about possible changes 
to Canada's anti-money laundering and anti-terrorist 
financing laws.  Finance Canada is looking at possible 
changes, with a view of drafting legislation which could be 
introduced to Parliament in the fall. 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  Changes under study include modifications to "know 
your customer rules" which would require Canadian banks and 
other financial services firms to better verify the 
customer's identity when opening a new account or issuing a 
credit card.  According to Stanton, Finance Canada is 
considering changes that could make portions of MasterCard's 
current business model unviable in Canada.  At present, 
MasterCard largely issues its credit cards through 
non-traditional (non face-to-face) means - such as through 
phone, internet, or direct mail solicitation - rather than 
through personal applications at bank branches.  Such 
innovations have helped MasterCard to penetrate Canada 
effectively even though it entered the credit card market 
several years after its major competitor, Visa, which issues 
its credit cards through major Canadian banks.  Stanton told 
the Ambassador that if Canadian credit card applicants in non 
face-to-face transactions have to take an added step to 
verify their identity through personally providing officials 
with a certified copy of a passport, birth certificate, or 
other document, most will not bother to complete the process 
due to the inconvenience.  MasterCard believes that the GOC 
should allow the use of reliable third party databases to 
verify a customer's ID electronically, rather than in person, 
such as is being done in the UK and the U.S.  Stanton argued 
that this should be an adequate procedure since he did not 
think that acquiring a credit card presents the same money 
laundering or terrorist financing risk as opening a bank 
account, for example. 
 
¶9. (SBU)  Moreover, Jennifer Reed, Vice-President of Public 
Affairs for Mastercard Canada, pointed out in a letter to the 
Canadian Senate Banking Committee on June 21 that Mastercard 
already has robust anti-money laundering initiatives in place 
to deal with their customer financial institutions which 
subjects the institutions to due diligence reviews.  The 
customer financial institutions must, for instance, have 
written anti-money laundering programs in place, including 
appropriate customer identification controls.  Reed also 
wrote that the new legislation would stifle competition by 
shutting out new competitors and make it significantly more 
difficult for existing issuers without a branch network to 
attract new customers. 
 
¶10. (SBU)  In his meeting with the Ambassador, Stanton also 
outlined his firm's concerns about possible tighter Canadian 
controls on trans-border data flows.  This is a concern to 
MasterCard since virtually all its issuers process and store 
their credit card data outside Canada, including in the U.S. 
Stanton said that Canada's 2001 Personal Information 
Protection and Electronic Documents Act (PIPEDA) will be up 
QProtection and Electronic Documents Act (PIPEDA) will be up 
for review shortly, and he is concerned that there could be 
an effort to place specific restrictions on data going to the 
U.S., because of an "irrational" fear of U.S. spying. 
Stanton noted that no one seems concerned about data being 
stored in other countries, such as India.  He said that the 
federal Privacy Commissioner is under strong pressure from 
the Canadian Senate to take a tougher line on U.S. data, but 
claims that she privately wants to resist this with U.S. help. 
 
¶11. (SBU)  Post reported in refB public comments on the 
recent revelations in the U.S. press about the Terrorist 
Financing Tracking Program. 
 
Visit Canada's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/ottawa 
 
WILKINS