08BUENOSAIRES759
ARGENTINA: FBI'S DEPUTY DIRECTOR PISTOLE DISCUSSES
Tue Jun 03 00:00:00 +0200 2008
SECRET
Embassy Buenos Aires
VZCZCXYZ0001
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBU #0759/01 1551727
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
P 031727Z JUN 08
FM AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1231
INFO RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHMCSUU/FBI WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHMFISS/HQ USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DC PRIORITYS E C R E T BUENOS AIRES 000759 
 
SIPDIS 
 
WHA/BSC FOR DRUCKER, FRIEDMAN, AND SHOWELL 
NEA/IR FOR HWOOSTER 
S/CT FOR VIRGINIA PALMER AND ARNOLD SIERRA 
NSC FOR JUAN ZARATE 
FBI FOR DD PISTOLE AND OIO AD TOM FUENTES AND AMERICAS UNIT 
DOJ FOR DAG BRUCE SWARTZ 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/03/2018 
TAGS: PTER PREL PGOV KJUS SNAR KCRM ASEC AR FBI
SUBJECT: ARGENTINA: FBI'S DEPUTY DIRECTOR PISTOLE DISCUSSES 
COOPERATION WITH SENIOR OFFICIALS 
 
REF: A. BUENOS AIRES 00746 
     ¶B. BUENOS AIRES 00702 
 
Classified By: Ambassador E. Anthony Wayne for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D). 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: During his May 21-22 visit to Argentina, 
FBI Deputy Director John Pistole met with senior officials of 
the Argentine government, the Argentine Jewish community, and 
President Cristina Fernandez de Kirchner (ref A) to discuss 
U.S.-Argentine security cooperation.  Those leaders thanked 
Pistole for the USG's behind-the-scenes support in ensuring a 
positive outcome on the Marrakech vote to issue arrest 
warrants for suspects involved in the 1994 AMIA bombing. 
Justice Minister Anibal Fernandez updated Pistole on GOA 
efforts to combat trafficking in persons and his commitment 
to implement the new federal law.  President CFK assured the 
USG of her continued support for international collaboration 
against terrorism (ref A).  Press coverage of the visit was 
generally favorable and contributed to a GOA and public 
perception that the USG-GOA relationship is on course and 
improving.  End Summary. 
 
--------- 
The Visit 
--------- 
 
¶2. (C) FBI Deputy Director John S. Pistole met May 21-22 with 
senior officials of the Argentine government, including 
President Cristina Fernandez de Kirchner; Secretary of 
Intelligence Hector Icazuriaga and Deputy Secretary Francisco 
Larcher; Minister of Justice and Security Anibal Fernandez; 
Chief of Federal Police Nestor Vallecca; senior federal and 
provincial judicial and police officials; and visited with 
Jewish leaders at the site of the 1994 terrorist bombing of 
the Argentine Israeli Mutual Association (AMIA).  Media 
coverage of the visit was generally favorable, signaling 
positive steps in the bilateral relations between the two 
countries. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Ministry of Justice and Security 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (U) On May 21, Ambassador Wayne hosted a lunch for FBI 
Deputy Director John Pistole and Argentine Justice and 
Security Minister Anibal Fernandez.  DCM and FBI Legat also 
attended. 
 
¶4. (SBU) The Ambassador started the meeting by congratulating 
Minister Fernandez on recent drug seizures and arrests in the 
north of Argentina.  The Minister stated that operation was 
successful and important because of the level of traffickers 
arrested in addition to the 500 kilos of marijuana seized. 
The Ambassador mentioned $600,000 funding available to 
Bolivia, Peru, and Argentina for combating narcotics 
trafficking, and asked if the Minister had received a letter 
from his Bolivian counterpart regarding these funds.  The 
Minister said he had not received any such letter. 
 
¶5.  (C) Minister Fernandez responded to a question about the 
new money laundering law by saying he was working diligently 
on implementing the new law and personally guaranteed that 
the law will effectively address narcotics money laundering 
and terrorism financing.  He acknowledged the Tri-border area 
(TBA) of Argentina, Brazil and Paraguay as a source of 
terrorism financing, but stated the GOA needs specific 
information to act.  The Minister stated the GOA must 
prosecute narcotics trafficking because it also finances 
terrorism, but noted that terrorism is also financing by 
legitimate activities. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) DD Pistole inquired how the FBI could assis the 
GOA with its crime problem and the Minister responded that 
Argentina's crime rates and specifically homicides rates were 
significantly less than neighboring countries, as well as the 
United States.  However, the Minister stopped publishing 
national crime statistics, he said, because most of the 
statistics provided by the provinces were false. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Minister Fernandez noted that Argentina's 
trafficking in persons (TIP) law was only ten days old, but 
already six or seven important TIP investigations were 
underway.  He recently denounced in the press a judge who 
released a man who consorted with a 17-year old girl 
prostituted by an organized ring in Barrio Flores in Buenos 
Aires City.  He speculated that the Argentine Federal Police 
(PFA) and judge knew of the prostitution ring's operations 
and failed to act, and he felt personally embarrassed by this 
unacceptable situation.  Minister Fernandez said that, in the 
past, police corruption was covered-up to preserve the 
reputation and image of the PFA, but not under his 
administration.  He said corruption by local police was a 
really serious problem in the Northwestern provinces of 
Argentina in dealing with trafficking rings. The Ambassador 
cited police corruption problems encountered by the Argentine 
group Mothers Against Paco (crack cocaine). 
 
¶8.  (U) The Minister stated that the majority of the 
prostitution cases involve girls from Paraguay.  He commended 
Paraguayan President-elect Logo's recent announcement to 
place his sister in charge of Paraguay's anti-TIP efforts and 
opined that the designation indicated a serious commitment to 
address Paraguay's TIP problems.  He emphasized the 
importance addressing the social consequences of TIP and 
providing support to victims.  He described the June 11-12 
conference he was organizing to inform prosecutors and judges 
what the new federal anti-trafficking law and expressed 
appreciation for the U.S. experts who will participate. 
 
¶9.  (U) The Ambassador inquired about the status of judicial 
reform and the new code of federal criminal procedure 
proposed by the previous Minister of Justice.  The Minister 
responded that he is working on improving the efficiency of 
the judicial system, and noted that in the United States 
accused persons go to trial in eight to nine months, but in 
Argentina persons arrested today would not go to trial before 
¶2010.  He said introducing a judicial reform bill is a 
priority. 
 
¶10. (U) DD Pistole noted the international threat posed by 
cyber crimes, especially organized computer attacks against 
national infrastructure.  Minister Fernandez said the GOA is 
serious in combating Internet child pornography.  DD Pistole 
offered training at the FBI's Innocent Images center in 
Calverton, Maryland.  The Minister expressed strong interest, 
and said the GOA would put such training to good use. 
 
¶11. (U) The Minister mentioned ongoing social conflicts in 
Argentina and expressed the need to improve the distribution 
of wealth.  He noted that in 1985 the upper 10% of Argentine 
society earned 10 times more than the bottom 10%, but now 
(2005) the upper 10% earn 38 times more than the bottom 10%. 
 
¶12. (S) DD Pistole commended the Minister for the GOA's 
successful efforts to reinstate the AMIA Red Notices. 
Minister Fernandez expressed his gratitude for the assistance 
provided to the GoA's AMIA investigation by FBI Assistant 
Director Tom Fuentes and the Legat.  He stated that AMIA is a 
very important and sensitive matter for the GOA.  Interpol's 
decision to issue new AMIA Red Notices was very important to 
his government.  (Fernandez made no mention that an arrest 
warrant would be filed the following day for ex-president 
Carlos Menem and others for allegedly participating in a 
cover-up of an ""Argentine connection"" to the AMIA attack -- 
ref B.) 
 
¶13. (C) DD Pistole expressed USG concerns that Hizballah will 
retaliate against Israeli targets abroad for the assignation 
of Hizballah leader Imad Mughniyah.  The Minister noted that 
the GOA was concerned and alert, especially given the 1992 
and 1994 Hizballah bombings in Buenos Aires.  He opined that 
former President Menem's inconsistent foreign policy towards 
the Middle East made Argentina more vulnerable to terrorist 
attacks, while the more consistent policies of the Kirchners 
made Argentina less vulnerable.  Specifically he said Menem 
maintained good relations with too many Middle East figures 
connected at least indirectly to terrorism.  Minister 
Fernandez explained that President Kirchner's relationship 
 
 
 
with Venezuelan President Chavez who has close relations with 
Iran should not be confused with the Kirchners' policies 
regarding Iran, and he cited the Kirchners' decision to not 
meet with the Iranian president. 
 
-------------------- 
Federal Police Chief 
-------------------- 
 
¶14. (U) Federal Police Chief Nestor Vallecca reviewed his 
participation in the INTERPOL General Assembly meeting at 
Marrakech and praised the FBI's behind-the-scenes support and 
counsel by FBI Assistant Director Tom Fuentes, a member of 
INTERPOL's Executive Committee.  Vallecca noted that he and 
his INTERPOL chief learned a great deal in the process, 
especially diplomacy.  In discussing crime issues, Vallecca 
complained that while Argentina has banking regulations and 
money laundering/terrorism financing laws, banks are not 
reporting suspicious activity reports (SAR) to the Unidad de 
Informacion Financiera - UIF (Argentina's version of FinCEN). 
 Vallecca noted that the majority of cases at the UIF are 
initiated by police investigations, and that while UIF 
analysts and prosecutors are dedicated professionals, he 
feels vigorous prosecutions are lacking.  Regarding 
trafficking in persons (TIP), Vallecca admitted it is an 
evolving problem that his agency recently received 
jurisdiction to investigate.  The AFP chief acknowledged that 
his agency has much to learn regarding the issue, and 
welcomes any training and assistance from the FBI in 
dismantling organized trafficking in persons.  The AFP chief 
pledged his commitment to working with the FBI and the USG on 
issues of interest and concern to both countries. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
Federal, provincial and city officials share their 
concerns 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶15.  (U) Senior justice and law enforcement officials from 
the federal government, provinces of Buenos Aires and 
Cordoba, and the City of Buenos Aires discussed their special 
interests in crime issues at a reception hosted by the 
Ambassador in honor of DD Pistole's visit and the FBI 100th 
anniversary.  Provincial prosecutors and judges expressed 
keen interest in improving their knowledge and skill in 
pursuing TIP cases.  The prosecutor generals of Cordoba and 
Buenos Aires province are working with the GOA to develop TIP 
protocols and are looking to the USG for assistance. 
Cordoba's AG, Dario Vezzaro, is himself hosting a TIP 
conference and requested USG participation.  Both the FBI and 
the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement Service (ICE) 
pledged to participate with subject matter experts.  The 
officials expressed their appreciation for the USG's 
assistance in training police officers and prosecutors over 
the years and welcomed our continued support. 
 
---- 
AMIA 
---- 
 
¶16. (U) In his visit to the rebuilt site of the 
Argentine-Israeli Mutual Association (AMIA) building, DD 
Pistole laid a wreath in memory of the victims of the 
terrorist attack that killed 85 persons.  Leaders of AMIA and 
the co-located Delegation of Argentine-Israeli Associations 
(DAIA) welcomed the visit and thanked DD Pistole for the 
USG's unwavering support and technical assistance by the FBI 
in this case.  AMIA president Luis Grynwald noted that 2007 
was an important year for the organization with the victory 
over the INTERPOL red notices and former president Argentine 
President Nestor Kirchner's speech at the UN General 
Assembly.  AMIA and DAIA leaders voiced their concerns once 
again over what they characterized as a growing Iranian 
presence in Latin America and reiterated a call for INTERPOL 
member nations to detain the Iranian officials pursuant to 
Red Notices authorized by Interpol's General Assembly in 
Marrakech.  Jewish leaders noted that they share a common 
bond with the United States in that both are principal 
 
targets of Islamic extremists anywhere in the world and 
should therefore resolve to work together to deter the 
threat.  Also of great concern to Jewish leaders is 
Hizballah's growing influence within the impoverished areas 
of many countries, especially in Latin America, which is 
fertile ground for recruitment and radicalization. 
 
¶17. (C) During the Ambassador's reception, Ambassador 
Guillermo Gonzalez, MFA's point man in the AMIA case, 
expressed his utmost appreciation to DD Pistole for the FBI's 
role in helping the GOA secure approval for the INTERPOL Red 
Notices.  Ambassador Gonzalez specifically commended FBI 
Assistant Director Tom Fuentes' invaluable insights and 
influence at the organization's Executive Committee and 
General Assembly, noting the FBI's respected status (and that 
of AD Fuentes) helped influence other EC delegates to focus 
on the facts of the case. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶18. (SBU) The Pistole visit was another excellent opportunity 
for USG to showcase its longstanding commitment to bilateral 
cooperation on issues of mutual concern.  The visit received 
positive media coverage which showcased the mutual benefits 
of our close cooperation on sensitive issues, a lesson that 
is always worth repeating here. 
WAYNE