09CHENGDU114
SOUTHWEST CHINA: SICHUAN OFFICIALS ON GREEN ENERGY
Mon Jun 29 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Chengdu
VZCZCXRO1536
RR RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHCN #0114/01 1801154
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 291154Z JUN 09
FM AMCONSUL CHENGDU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3274
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RHMFISS/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 3949UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 CHENGDU 000114 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/CM, EEB/ESC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON ENRG EINV SENV CH
SUBJECT: SOUTHWEST CHINA: SICHUAN OFFICIALS ON GREEN ENERGY 
 
REF: BEIJING 1521, CHENGDU 062, CHENGDU 110 
 
CHENGDU 00000114  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) This cable contains sensitive but unclassified 
information - not for distribution on the internet. 
 
 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Summary: Sichuan has rich developed and potential 
hydro and biogas power resources, but far fewer solar and wind 
energy development opportunities, according to a recent 
presentation on "new energy" by the Sichuan Development and 
Reform Commission (SDRC).  Nonetheless, Sichuan is expanding its 
alternative power generation capacity to include solar and wind 
projects concentrated in a few select areas.  Although 
hydropower provides the majority of the electrical power output 
in the province, the SDRC says that biogas power generation is 
increasingly important in rural areas, and is emphasized in both 
national economic stimulus plan and quake reconstruction 
investments.  What Sichuan's alternative energy expansion means 
for potential investment opportunities remains unclear.  The 
Sichuan New Energy Promotion Association, established in 
December 2008, is -- according to its statutes -- mandated to 
assist with linkages between potential investors and local 
partners but, to date, we have seen little evidence of 
substantive action. End summary. 
 
 
 
Hydropower will remain primary energy source 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  During a recent  meeting with us, Wu Jianzhong, 
Deputy Director of the Energy Division of the Sichuan 
Development and Reform Commission, provided an overview of 
Sichuan's "new energy" projects, noting that the province's 
strengths lie in hydro and biogas electric power production.  He 
stressed Sichuan's extensive potential hydropower capacity, with 
781 rivers that individually each could produce more than 1 
gigawatt (GW) of power.  In total, he said, the province has 144 
GW of potential (yun cang liang) hydropower, 120 GW of which can 
be technically exploited, and 103 GW that can be economically 
exploited.  Wu said Sichuan exploited 35 GW of electric power in 
2008, of which 22.5 GW came from hydropower.  Provincial 
statistics show that these numbers are roughly unchanged from 
the previous year.  Sichuan, however, is actively expanding 
hydropower production.  In addition to about 50 small-medium 
hydropower projects specified in the current Five Year Plan 
(2005-2010), two major additional hydropower stations on the 
Jinsha River, Xiluodu and Xiangjiaba, are currently under 
construction.  When completed, their combined capacity is 
estimated at 18.6 GW.  (Note: China's Ministry of Environmental 
Protection on June 11 ordered the suspension of two other 
hydropower stations on the Jinsha River, at Ludila and 
Longkaikou, citing inadequate review of their environmental 
impact.) 
 
 
 
~but emphasis on bio-gas power generation is increasing 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶4.  (U) Although still occupying a very small proportion of 
Sichuan's overall electricity production, Wu emphasized the 
expansion of biogas energy projects throughout the province.  Wu 
said biogas is particularly beneficial to Sichuan's farmers who 
can, with an 8-10 cubic meter biogas pit, save 800 to 1,000 RMB 
(USD 117-147) on fuel and 150 RMB (USD 22) on fertilizer 
annually, significant amounts in rural Sichuan where per capita 
incomes average just over USD 600 annually.  By the end of 2008, 
Wu said that roughly 30 percent of the 14.3 million rural 
households that could set up biogas have already done so.  A 
separate consulate contact who has installed biogas power 
generation on his farm in Sichuan told us that an individual 
farmer could install a pit big enough for his needs, about 12 
kilowatts (KW), for between 2,000 - 4,000 RMB (USD 293 - 585). 
 
 
 
¶5.  (U) The May 2008 earthquake caused damage to 520,000 biogas 
pits, about 200,000 of which have been repaired to date, Wu 
reported.  Beyond these immediate repair needs, the $586 billion 
national financial stimulus plan and earthquake reconstruction 
funding are both playing a role in Sichuan's biogas expansion. 
Out of the 3 billion RMB (USD 439 million) allocated by the 
 
CHENGDU 00000114  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
central government for national biogas development, Wu said, 
Sichuan is receiving support for an additional 120,000 
households to benefit from biogas, but did not provide further 
specifics.  He also cited a $1.2 billion World Bank, French 
Development Agency and International Agricultural Development 
Fund project for quake reconstruction, of which $85 million is 
for biogas development. 
 
 
 
¶6. (U) Sichuan has set up larger-scale biogas distribution and 
power production, Wu noted.  Many townships have biogas service 
stations that are able to provide sufficient biogas for 300-500 
households.  Additionally, Sichuan has five biogas electric 
power stations that each produce 24 - 30 megawatts.  These power 
stations can be transmitted electricity to the power grid.  Wu 
said that economic electric power generation will help encourage 
development of biogas power that utilizes some of the province's 
11.5 million tons of animal waste and approximately 5 million 
tons of wheat straw. 
 
 
 
Ethanol Plans Still on the Books 
 
----------------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶7.  (U) In addition to biogas, Sichuan is developing its 
biodiesel and ethanol fuel capacity, Wu reported.  On the 
biodiesel front, the province relies on two types of trees grown 
in Panzhihua and Liangshan in the south for feedstock.  He 
referenced a plan by the provincial government and China 
National Petroleum Corporation (CNPC) to jointly produce 100,000 
tons of bio-diesel and 600,000 tons of ethanol fuel annually. 
Wu said this would include a new forestry base with an area of 9 
million mu (600,000 hectares).  (Note: This plan appears to be 
based on an agreement that the state-run China Daily newspaper 
reported was signed with CNPC in late 2006.)  He also said that 
Sichuan enjoys "good conditions" for expanding ethanol fuel 
production.  Annually, 30 percent of the 17-18 million tons of 
annual sweet potatoes produced in the provinces rot before they 
can be consumed. 
 
 
 
Solar and wind potential relatively weak, but still expanding 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
------------- 
 
 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Wu emphasized that despite Sichuan's relatively 
limited potential for solar and wind power generation, they are 
nonetheless putting efforts into development.  He said the 
autonomous prefectures of Ganzi, Aba, Liangshan, and Panzhihua 
each have 1,500-2,700 hours of sunshine annually.  Sichuan 
currently has 46 photovoltaic power stations, but Wu did not say 
how much power these stations generated.  He noted that 109,000 
households in Ganzi benefited from solar power in 2008, while 
11,000 households in Aba utilized solar stoves.  Several local 
press reports in recent months have reported on new solar power 
station projects, including one in Xichang, Liangshan's main 
city, and another in Daying.  (Note: Wu's discussion of areas 
with solar energy potential was somewhat more expansive than 
that described by a Dongfang Electric executive to Congenoff and 
reported in reftel B.) 
 
 
 
¶9.  (U) Local media have also reported on Sichuan's increasing 
involvement in producing inputs for the solar industry.  A June 
19 China Commercial News report describes Leshan, south of 
Chengdu, as having become "China's Silicon Valley" due to the 
large number of factories there producing poly-silicon for use 
in photovoltaic technology.  According to the article, Tongwei 
Company is the biggest producer there, currently producing 1,000 
tons annually and with plans to expand to 6,000 tons within 
three to five years and become China's biggest poly-silicon 
producer.  Leshan's annual output of poly-silicon is expected to 
more than double this year from 4,560 tons in 2008 to about 
10,000 tons in 2009, the article continued. 
 
 
 
 
CHENGDU 00000114  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶10.  (SBU) Sichuan has 3 GW of potential wind-generated electric 
power, Wu said. The areas which are rich in wind include the 
Anning River region in Liangshan autonomous prefecture, areas 
along the Min River in central Sichuan, and the Ruoergai area of 
Aba autonomous prefecture.  A demonstration wind power station 
is to be set up in Dechang County, Liangshan, with a capacity of 
50 megawatts.  If successful, similar projects will be 
introduced in the other appropriate areas of Sichuan, Wu told 
us. 
 
 
 
Sichuan New Energy Promotion Association unimpressive so far 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
----------------- 
 
 
 
¶11.  (SBU) Separately, a provincial New Energy Industry 
Promotion Association (Sichuan Sheng Xin Nengyuan Chanye 
Cujinhui), was registered as a non-government organization in 
December, 2008, with the approval of the provincial government's 
Economic Commission (Sichuan Sheng Jingji Weiyuanhui).  (Note: 
The Association's advisory and expert commissions' membership, 
heavily represented by party leaders, government officials, 
official research institutes, and state-owned enterprises, 
indicates that it is "non-government" in name only.)  According 
to its statutes, it is tasked with providing consulting services 
to both domestic and foreign enterprises to supply information 
on Sichuan's overall new energy situation and assisting with the 
establishment of cooperative linkages with potential local 
partners.  However, while its establishment is indicative of the 
new priority placed on these industries, it remains unclear 
whether it will play an active or substantive role.  Its main 
activities to date seem to have consisted of arranging visits by 
several of its leaders to local energy enterprises, and its 
leadership has so far remained unwilling to engage with our 
Foreign Commercial Service, for example.  It is possible that 
the Association was set up by provincial leaders to help 
position Sichuan to take advantage of central government 
resources in support of green energy, rather than as a genuine 
conduit for private sector investment. 
BOUGHNER