04WELLINGTON1069
NEW ZEALAND: 2004 ANNUAL TERRORISM REPORT
Wed Dec 22 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS WELLINGTON 001069 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR S/CT KINCANNON AND MCCUTCHEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER ASEC KCRM EFIN KHLS KPAO NZ
SUBJECT: NEW ZEALAND: 2004 ANNUAL TERRORISM REPORT 
 
REF: A. STATE 271719 
 
     ¶B. STATE 245841 
     ¶C. STATE 259427 
 
¶1.  Post offers the following submission for this year's 
terrorism report: 
 
BEGIN TEXT OF SUBMISSION 
 
¶2.  New Zealand has implemented all 12 UN terrorism 
conventions.  A Counter-terrorism bill passed in October 2003 
increased the government's ability to prosecute terrorist 
activities and threats.  The legislation ascribes severe 
penalties for dealing with unmarked plastics explosives and 
nuclear or radioactive material, harboring terrorists, 
contaminating food or water, and other terrorism-related 
offenses.  The 2003 bill follows directly from the Terrorism 
Suppression Act of October 2002, which allowed New Zealand to 
become a party to the UN Conventions on Terrorism Bombings 
and Terrorist Financing. 
¶3.  In December 2004, the Government introduced a bill into 
Parliament to extend by two years New Zealand's UN Security 
Council-related designations of terrorism organizations.  As 
passed, the 2002 bill mandates that all such designations 
expire in 2005 unless renewed by order of New Zealand's High 
Court.  The new bill would push that date to 2007.   As of 
December 2004, New Zealand had designated 420 terrorist 
organizations and was considering adding more to the list. 
¶4.  In September 2003, New Zealand appointed its first 
Ambassador for Counter-terrorism to coordinate New Zealand's 
response to terrorist acts, monitor international 
developments, and attend international meetings, in order to 
ensure that New Zealand has a stronger capacity to develop 
and implement policies on global terrorism and related 
security issues.   In its 2004 budget, New Zealand allocated 
funds for the creation of specially-dedicated National 
Security Teams to counter terrorism.  In May 2004, New 
Zealand hosted a counter-terrorism meeting for Pacific Island 
Forum members.  The meeting, which was funded through the 
Government's Pacific Island Security Fund, discussed the 
region's counter-terrorism obligations and the range of 
international assistance available to help countries meet 
these requirements. 
¶5.  New Zealand relies heavily on its aviation sector for 
tourism and to remain connected to the rest of the world, and 
takes seriously its security obligations under the 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO).  New 
Zealand expects to have ICAO-mandated explosive detection 
systems in place at New Zealand's international airports by 
October 2005. 
¶6.  New Zealand continues to support Operation Enduring 
Freedom in Afghanistan, including by leading the Provincial 
Reconstruction Team (PRT) in Bamiyan.  The country deployed 
61 military engineers (the Light Engineering Group, or LEG) 
to Iraq for one year to aid in reconstruction efforts there. 
 The Government allocated NZD 10 million (about USD 7.2 
million) for each of fiscal years 2003/4 and 2004/5 for aid 
and development work in Afghanistan and Iraq.  The money was 
disbursed through the PRT's and LEG's reconstruction work, as 
well as through the UN and NGOs. 
 
END TEXT OF SUBMISSION. 
 
Swindells