05CALGARY736
KING COAL'S COMEBACK
Thu Dec 15 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Calgary
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 CALGARY 000736 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAN, EB/ESC/ISC, EB/PPD 
 
USDOE FOR IA (DEVITO, PUMPHREY, DEUTSCH) 
 
MOSCOW FOR TOM HUFFAKER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG EPET ETRD PGOV SENV CA
SUBJECT: KING COAL'S COMEBACK 
 
REF: CALGARY 0622 
 
--------------- 
SUMMARY 
--------------- 
 
¶1. In a surprise to many energy economists, King Coal is 
returning to the throne. As recently as two years ago, many 
experts were predicting a rapid demise for a fuel long 
associated with black lungs and melting ice caps, but the 
outlook is once again promising for an industry older than the 
Industrial Revolution itself. Coal is the world's largest and 
one of its fastest growing energy sources, with its 38% share of 
global electricity generation likely to grow over the next two 
decades. While developed nations have largely shunned increasing 
coal use in favor of cleaner energy sources, the developing 
world has more than made up for the West's stagnant demand. 
Fueled in part by rising consumption in China and India, this 
unexpected increase has been the driving factor in the booming 
coal contract market, where several pricing records were broken 
earlier this year. 
 
¶2. As one of the world's larger coal-exporting regions, and a 
center of research for new coal technologies, Alberta stands to 
gain much from the new market realities. Alberta's nine thermal 
coal mines produce up to 30 million tons a year (followed 
closely by British Columbia producing primarily metallurgical 
coal) representing nearly half of Canada's yearly output of 67 
million tons (the industry employs about 4500 persons). 
Additionally, the province's coal industry has plenty of room to 
expand, with Alberta's 33.6 gigaton coal reserve comprising 60% 
of Canada's reserve, the tenth largest in the world. While 
unresolved environmental and economic issues may hamper the 
development of the province's coal industry, the opportunity for 
wealthy companies newly flush with resource dollars is 
substantial.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------------------- 
THE OTHER BLACK GOLD 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. With 60% of Canada's total coal reserves and enough 
in-province to last for nearly a thousand years at current 
extraction rates, Alberta has the potential to capture a large 
portion of the world export market. Thermal coal from Alberta 
mines contains less sulfur and burns cleaner than that of other 
provinces, making it an attractive fuel source in a 
Kyoto-constrained nation. Alberta currently produces about 30 
million tons of thermal coal each year, or 43% of Canada's 
total. The majority of production (about 80%) eventually makes 
its way to coal-fired power generators within the province, with 
the remainder shipped overseas, primarily to Japan and South 
Korea. Alberta is also one of the few provinces currently 
expanding coal power facilities, with 32% of all new electricity 
capacity from 1999-2007 coming from a fuel that is, almost 
literally, still cheap as dirt. 
 
¶4. Although the recent international recognition of Alberta's 
oil reserves has overshadowed a growing manufacturing capacity, 
an expanding telecommunications sector, and virtually everything 
else of interest in the booming province, increased demand for 
coal ensures the commodity's future as an integral part of the 
local economy. Provincial royalties from Alberta's nine mines 
amount to around C$10 million per year. While this figure pales 
in comparison to the C$14 billion the provincial government was 
paid in 2004 by the oil and gas companies, Alberta is hoping 
that high coal prices will result in more mines "paying out," 
allowing the province to benefit from taxes on profit. One 
oft-quoted statistic estimates that Alberta's coal reserve has 
twice the energy potential as all other non-renewable energy 
resources in the province, including crude oil, bitumen, and 
natural gas. At current rates of consumption, this 
oft-overlooked energy bonanza will last another 800 years. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------------ 
A LUMP OF COAL IN ALBERTA'S STOCKING 
--------------------------------------------- ------------------ 
 
¶5. According to Jim Popowich, President of Alberta-based coal 
giant Fording Canadian Coal Trust, "Unprecedented demand from 
China has driven the price of coking (metallurgical) coal to 
historic highs. Annual increases from China in their steel 
productions have dwarfed anything that we've seen in the past 
couple of decades". The Energy Information Administration (EIA) 
predicts world consumption of coal will increase by at least 40% 
by 2025. While metallurgical coal will fuel much of this 
increase, Alberta exporters are placing their bets on the 
thermal coal used for electricity generation. Many of the 
nations where demand for thermal coal is most rapidly increasing 
are in the developing world, where Kyoto restrictions do not 
apply and strong environmental lobbies have yet to form.  (Note: 
 Thermal coal is lower quality coal used to process heat, steam 
and electricity generation.  Metallurgical coal is higher 
quality used primarily for making steel in integrated steel 
mills using the basic oxygen furnace.) 
 
¶6. This isn't the first time rising interest in coal has created 
a mini-boom in the industry: Popwich adds that: "History has 
shown how sometimes we can be our own worst enemies, and that we 
go out and do a significant supply increase only to have the 
market fall on us." The Alberta coal industry has been more 
cautious during the recent upsurge in coal prices, with most of 
the increase in production coming from upgrades and the 
reopening of old mines. Long term prospects for growth are more 
promising; dozens of small companies have entered the market, 
several of them with plans for new mine expansions.  Allen 
Wright, Executive Director of the Calgary-based Canadian Coal 
Association of Canada (CAC) told us that in Canada, "Five years 
ago, half the companies in existence today hadn't started 
producing. Business is booming".  Wright previously told CG 
that, "there is more stored energy in Canadian coal than the 
country's oil, natural gas and oilsands combined", pointing out 
that coal makes up "more than 92% of North America's hydrocarbon 
reserves".  Insisting that coal gets a "bum rap", Wright 
outlined a future driven by new clean coal technologies, seeking 
ways to improve coal-burning technologies and reduce emissions. 
He also pointed out that Western Canadian coal is considered 
"cleaner" because of its low sulphur content. 
 
¶7. The value of coal is notoriously difficult to predict; in the 
absence of global standards like those for oil, natural gas, or 
gold, the price of coal is determined on a contract basis, with 
most companies and power facilities preferring to strengthen 
ties with existing suppliers than to develop new relationships. 
The average negotiated price in 2004 was US$64 per ton. 
Following a record US$125 per ton of coking coal secured by 
Alberta Grande Cache Coal Corporation in a contract earlier this 
year, the price has stabilized between US$110 per ton and US$120 
per ton. These prices recently prompted Australian think tank 
Access Economics to declare metallurgical coal the "most 
overvalued" mineral of 2005. Prices negotiated for thermal coal 
have been close behind, though generally lower because of the 
commodity's lower purity. A decrease in price is expected next 
year, but a return to the market of 2004 is unlikely. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
TRUST US, WE'RE NOT A MONOPOLY 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶8. The upswing in the coal market couldn't have come at a better 
time for Alberta. A comprehensive restructuring of the coal 
industry occurred in 2003, when five Canadian companies and 
mutual funds came together to create Calgary-based Fording 
Canadian Coal Trust, the second largest metallurgical coal 
producer in the world. Under Jim Gardner, first president of the 
Trust, Fording instituted many efficiency and belt-tightening 
measures, including the downsizing of hundreds of workers in 
British Columbia. The strategy would pay off in 2004, when 
Fording first turned a profit. The trust is still in the process 
of transformation and expansion, with employee rolls up 50% in 
preparation for mine upgrades next year. The majority of 
operations for Fording are in SE British Columbia, with five 
metallurgical mines in Elk Valley, and one nearby in Alberta. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------------ 
 
WITH GREAT PROFITS COME GREAT CHALLENGES 
--------------------------------------------- ------------------ 
 
 
¶9. However, the future of Fording and other coal producers based 
in Alberta is uncertain. While the industry is currently sitting 
on large cash reserves resulting from the high prices, rising 
transportation costs threaten to eat away at profit margins. 
Shipping costs for Fording were up by a third in 2004, with 
soaring fuel prices promising further damage to the company's 
bottom line. Another factor in rising expenses has been Canadian 
National Railway's tenuous relationship with labor; tensions 
between the railroad giant and unions erupted into a month-long 
strike in March of last year, causing expensive delays in coal 
shipments. Icy relations with the provincial and federal 
governments have also hampered further development for Fording, 
which will soon be forced to pay a higher royalty rate as its 
profits expand beyond the limits of its original tax shelter. 
Even more damaging to the Trust is legislation passed last year 
which causes organizations like Fording to lose their mutual 
fund status if they are more than 49% foreign-owned. Currently, 
Fording is 56% Canadian-owned, but with Asian investors eager to 
pour money into their mines, the trust is actively screening new 
shareholders to ensure compliance. 
 
¶10. Apart from Fording, numerous smaller coal mining companies 
have expanded operations in Alberta over the past five years. 
The largest, Luscar Energy Partnership, purchased Fording's 
thermal coal assets in 2003 and continues to be the most 
important domestic source of coal for Alberta power facilities. 
While coal is an international and "north-south" market, meaning 
Canada-US trade is larger than interprovincial, Luscar does play 
a significant role in providing eastern Canada with coal. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
CLEAN COAL: OXYMORON OR NEXT BIG THING? 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
 
¶11. Although Alberta may be in the middle of a quiet rediscovery 
of coal's benefits, many still view the energy source as a 
necessary evil, at best. In a nation already embarrassed by the 
prospect of being beaten by the United States in lowering 
greenhouse gas emissions, any support of coal technologies is 
sure to raise eyebrows. However, if the Canadian Clean Power 
Coalition (CCPC) has its way, much of coal's negative effect on 
climate change and air quality could be eliminated. The 
coalition, which receives substantial support from the province, 
Ottawa, and the coal industry, sponsors a research initiative 
aimed at building a commercially viable power facility fueled by 
coal and emitting zero greenhouse gases by 2012. With the first 
phase now completed, CCPC hopes to retrofit an existing 
coal-fired plant by 2007 to demonstrate new technologies 
developed in Alberta. Much of the research has been focused on 
coal gasification and the process of amine-scrubbing, through 
which carbon dioxide is separated from other waste gases 
produced by burning coal. A carbon sequestration project, 
located near Weyburn, Saskatchewan (reftel) is developing 
techniques for pumping carbon dioxide into the oilsands, hoping 
to replace natural gas as the primary method for bringing heavy 
crude oil to the surface. The fortuitous timing of the two 
projects may enable Alberta to free up valuable natural gas, 
increase crude oil yields, decrease carbon emissions, and 
increase the value of the province's extensive coal reserves 
over the next decade. 
 
¶12. Many conservationists argue that if this sounds too good to 
be true, it's because it is. The cost of carbon sequestration is 
still prohibitively expensive, and the possibility for leakage 
remains a concern. The diversion of funds to both projects has 
angered renewable energy researchers, who say Canada should 
focus more on developing proven technologies like solar or wind 
power rather than rehabilitating one of the world's worst 
contributors to global warming. 
 
----------------- 
COMMENT 
----------------- 
 
¶13. While the United States imports minimal amounts of Alberta's 
coal, the indirect impact of growth in the industry will be 
substantial. The development of clean coal technologies, as 
President Bush has recognized with the Clean Coal Power 
Initiative, will likely play a significant role in solving some 
of the worst environmental hazards facing the world, including 
climate change. The December 7th announcement from American 
clean coal proponent FutureGen concerning plans for the 
construction of a zero-emissions coal plant by 2012 emphasizes 
the importance of developing these technologies. The efforts of 
the CCPC and the Weyburn Project in Canada have proven the 
technical feasibility of clean coal; FutureGen is proving its 
economic. If the province's research into clean coal and 
development of its abundant resource wealth is successful, the 
resulting increase in natural gas and oil supplies, and decrease 
in emissions, will contribute to a more unified, cleaner, and 
less energy-dependent North America. 
 
¶14.  This cable was drafted by our fall intern, David Dill. 
AHMED