05WELLINGTON294
NEW ZEALAND GEARING UP FOR AUSTRALIA GROUP PLENARY
Fri Apr 08 00:00:00 +0200 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L WELLINGTON 000294 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NP/CBM VAN DIEPEN AND EAP/ANZ 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/08/2015 
TAGS: ETTC PARM PREL NZ CBE
SUBJECT: NEW ZEALAND GEARING UP FOR AUSTRALIA GROUP PLENARY 
 
REF: A. STATE 56903 
 
     ¶B. STATE 49648 
     ¶C. STATE 42674 
     ¶D. STATE 41247 
     ¶E. STATE 39371 
     ¶F. STATE 36488 
 
Classified By: Acting DCM Katherine Hadda, 
for reasons 1.4 (B), (D), and (H) 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary: New Zealand officials from the Prime 
Minister's External Affairs Bureau, Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs and Trade, and Customs Service will attend the April 
18-22 Australia Group (AG) Plenary in Sydney.  The group does 
not plan to present any papers or introduce any new 
initiatives at the Plenary, and are still reviewing the 
various U.S. proposals.  MFAT officials (strictly protect) 
say that New Zealand Customs will not take direction from 
other NZ ministries about how to spend travel funds. The 
officials recommend that U.S. Customs Service work directly 
with their counterparts on the margins of the meeting in 
order to ensure New Zealand Customs participates fully in AG 
meetings and exercises.  A briefing in New Zealand by U.S. 
Customs would also be useful.  End Summary. 
¶2.  (C) On March 21, Pol-Econ Couns delivered Refs B-F to 
Deborah Panckhurst, Deputy Director of the Disarmament 
Division at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade (MFAT). 
 Panckhurst was joined by Export Controls Officer Wendy 
Napier-Walker, who will be attending the April 18-22 
Australia Group Plenary.  On March 31, Pol-Couns provided Ref 
A nonpaper to Napier-Walker and Disarmament Division Director 
Caroline McDonald. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Regarding Ref D, Panckhurst and Napier-Walker said 
that the NZ delegation would not present any papers or 
suggest any initiatives at the Plenary.  Besides 
Napier-Walker, the delegation will include three Customs 
Officials: Mike Wotherspoon and Patrick Cruywajan of NZ 
Customs Service in Wellington; and Jimmy McCone, NZ Customs 
Liaison in Sydney. The delegation head will be Marlene 
Castle, Prime Minister's Department, a Chemical/Biological 
Weapons expert and long-time AG participant. 
 
¶4.  (C) Regarding Ref E, Panckhurst and Napier-Walker said 
they would share the U.S. proposals on pumps with the NZ 
Customs Service.  Pol-Couns asked that they let her know if 
Customs Officials felt it would be practically difficult for 
them to implement the proposed changes.  The idea is to make 
things easier, she said.  Panckhurst said they would also 
share the biological agents proposal with other agencies. 
While she herself is not an expert in this area, she said she 
thought New Zealand will be unlikely to object if other AG 
participants agreed to it. 
 
¶5.  (C) Both MFAT officials thought the U.S.-proposed 
regional Nonproliferation Seminar (Ref F) sounded useful. 
They highlighted proper identification of controlled chemical 
exports as a particular area of interest for NZ Customs. 
Often, they said, controlled and non-controlled substances 
have similar names and it is difficult to verify substances 
through testing. The two MFAT officials (strictly protect) 
confessed to Pol-Econ Counselor that it is very hard for 
their ministry to compel the participation of Customs Service 
in any activity, as the Service basically chooses its own 
agenda and travel.  NZ Customs rarely is willing to fund 
travel for officials to participate in Australia Group 
meetings in Europe, for example. Panckhurst suggested that 
direct approaches from U.S. Customs Service officials to 
their NZ counterparts on the margins of the Plenary would be 
the best means to get the NZ side on board.  She also 
suggested that a U.S. Customs Service visit to New Zealand to 
brief NZ Customs and other officials on AG issues would be 
useful. 
 
¶6.  (C) On April 8, Pol-Econ Couns checked back with 
Napier-Walker, who said that Ministries had met on April 6 to 
discuss their goals for the Australia Group.  She said that 
no formal decision had been taken on any of the U.S. 
proposals, but that the group would meet again on April 13 to 
conclude its discussions. 
 
Burnett