06OTTAWA963
CANADA'S NEW GOVERNMENT TALKS TOUGH ON DRUGS AND
Tue Apr 04 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ottawa
VZCZCXRO2215
PP RUEHGA RUEHHA RUEHQU RUEHVC
DE RUEHOT #0963/01 0942036
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 042036Z APR 06
FM AMEMBASSY OTTAWA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2007
INFO RUCNCAN/ALL CANADIAN POSTS COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 OTTAWA 000963 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR INL/LP ELIZABETH CARROLL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV SNAR CA
SUBJECT: CANADA'S NEW GOVERNMENT TALKS TOUGH ON DRUGS AND 
CRIME 
 
REF: (A) 05 OTTAWA 03636 
 
This message is Sensitive But Unclassified. 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Summary:  In three speeches over two consecutive 
days, Canada's new Conservative-led government has 
underscored the "dire consequences" that underfunded law 
enforcement and weak sentences have had on increasing rates 
of drug crime and has offered potentially significant reforms 
to address the trend.  The Conservative Party's "Big Five" 
point election campaign priorities included proposals for 
judicial reform.  With a speech to the Canadian Professional 
Police Association (CPPA) plus today's Throne Speech that 
outlines the legislative agenda, PM Harper has indicated his 
seriousness about delivering on this campaign promise.  End 
Summary. 
 
---------------------- 
LEGISLATIVE PRIORITIES 
---------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U)  In an April 3 speech to the CPPA, the Prime Minister 
talked tough about holding criminals to account, putting more 
police on the streets, promoting a national drug strategy and 
targeting sex offenders in order to address Canadians' 
concerns that "the safe streets and safe neighborhoods that 
Canadians have come to expect as part of our way of life are 
threatened by rising levels of crime."  Justice Minister Vic 
Toews, in his first public speech as Minister of Justice, 
bolstered Harper's remarks and promised to rectify the 
current shortage of some 1000 Royal Canadian Mounted Police 
(RCMP) officers in federal, provincial and municipal policing 
roles. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  Harper promised to introduce mandatory minimum 
prison sentences for drug traffickers and, in particular, 
marijuana grow operators and drug dealers, to promote a 
national drug prevention and education campaign and to 
eliminate the former Liberal government's marijuana 
decriminalization legislation.  In May 2003, Canada renewed 
its 1987 federal Drug Strategy and allocated approximately 
USD $355 million annually for programming. The supplementary 
2005 National Framework for Action to Reduce the Harms 
Associated with the Use of Alcohol and Other Drugs and 
Substances in Canada, developed cooperatively by Health 
Canada, does not, however, address judicial reforms, but 
rather focuses on promoting healthy environments and harm 
reduction, strategies not currently identified as priorities 
by the new government. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
CANADIANS CONCERNED ABOUT DRUG AND ORGANIZED CRIME LINKS 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
¶4.  (U)  In a survey conducted last week, 24 percent of 
Canadians questioned identified the need to reclaim the 
streets and crack down on crime as the Government's second 
highest priority, just four points behind support for health 
care delivery reforms.  The growth of organized crime groups, 
many of which either directly control or indirectly influence 
all aspects of the illicit drug industry, is of continuing 
concern to Canadian law enforcement (Reftel A).  In 2005, the 
RCMP identified 108 organized crime groups in British 
Columbia, doubling the 2003 figure. The public's concern and 
the Government's response is corroborated by data from the 
November 2004 Canadian Addiction Survey that reported an 
increase of alcohol, cannabis and other drug use over the 
past decade.  The most commonly used drugs were alcohol and 
cannabis, whose use doubled from 7 to 14 percent during the 
period.  Youth between 15 and 24 comprised the most frequent 
users. 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  COMMENT:  Canada had mandatory minimums for drug 
offenses until 1987, when the Supreme Court declared that 
Qthey violated the Charter of Rights and Freedoms guarantee 
against cruel and usual punishment.  Opposition NDP and 
Liberal party members have cautioned the Conservatives 
against enacting sentences that are dramatically higher than 
those currently contained in the Criminal Code.  However, the 
three opposition parties campaigned under platforms that 
including tougher penalties for crime and appear sensitive to 
the public's demands for increased penalties.  Justice 
Minister Vic Toews recently noted to media that the new 
measures will be introduced piece-by-piece to allow each to 
proceed through the legislative process on its own, rather 
than as an omnibus bill that could get delayed on a single 
point.  END COMMENT 
 
Visit Canada's Classified Web Site at 
 
OTTAWA 00000963  002 OF 002 
 
 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/ottawa 
 
DICKSON