07WELLINGTON764
U.S. Customs and Border Patrol's Assistant Commissioner
Wed Oct 17 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Wellington
VZCZCXRO2249
RR RUEHNZ
DE RUEHWL #0764/01 2901843
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 171843Z OCT 07
FM AMEMBASSY WELLINGTON
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4811
RUEAORC/US CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION WASHDC
RHEFHLC/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHINGTON DC
RULSDMK/DEPT OF TRANSPORTATION WASHDC
INFO RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA 4993
RUEHNZ/AMCONSUL AUCKLAND 1499UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 WELLINGTON 000764 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/ANP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON ETRD NZ
SUBJECT: U.S. Customs and Border Patrol's Assistant Commissioner 
Mullen consults with New Zealand interlocutors. 
 
¶1. Michael C. Mullen, Assistant Commissioner in the Office of 
International Affairs and Trade Relations at the U.S. Customs and 
Border Protection (CBP) was in Auckland, New Zealand from September 
9 to 12, 2007 to attend the NZ-US Partnership Forum and to meet with 
his counterparts in the GNZ especially those at the New Zealand 
Customs Service (NZCS). Most significantly he had an opportunity to 
consult with Martyn Dunne, Chief Executive Officer for NZCS. Mr. 
Mullen's message was to reaffirm CBP's interest in working 
strategically with the NZCS and to thank Mr. Dunne for his 
leadership role with the international intelligence community 
forums. He also reaffirmed CBP's commitment to the international 
intelligence community Conference Forums and provided an update on 
CBP activities related to the tasks accepted by the USG at the first 
Forum held on June 27, 2007.  Mr. Mullen also wanted to personally 
reassure GNZ officials that he saw no immediate impact on the way 
that CBP currently screens cargo destined for the U.S. - over time 
some changes may take place, but only after extensive consultations 
with the public and trade community and our foreign partners. He 
sought to allay local concerns following the recent announcement by 
the USG to implement the 9/11 Commission Recommendations Act, signed 
by the President on August 3, 2007, which requires 100% screening of 
all sea freight destined for the U.S. leaving foreign embarkation 
ports. 
 
¶2. Mr. Mullen also discussed a recent decision made by the USG to 
reorganize/enhance CBP's intelligence function.  This change, which 
is effective October 1, 2007, involves several offices being 
consolidated into a new Office of Intelligence and Operations 
Coordination.  This new office will be responsible for the entire 
intelligence cycle and ensuring that intelligence is packaged to 
serve CBP operators and is closely aligned with passenger and cargo 
targeting efforts. The office will be at the Assistant Commissioner 
level and consist of four divisions:  Intelligence and Situational 
Awareness, Targeting and Analysis, Field Coordination, and Incident 
Management and Operations Coordination. 
 
¶3. There were also discussions about the next international 
intelligence community's meeting in San Francisco. It is hoped that 
the meeting will afford an opportunity to discuss strategic 
priorities and future customs roles with the goal of establishing 
working sub-groups that will focus on specific areas of strategic 
cooperation amongst the members. During the last international 
intelligence community's meeting, CBP agreed to complete the 
following tasks: 
  --CBP agreed to create a straw man on the topic of Customs in the 
21st Century.  A copy of the draft was promised by September 15th to 
review prior to the next meeting. 
  --CBP is thinking about the future of discussions of customs in 
the 21st Century in conjunction with the World Customs Organization 
(WCO).  Mullen said it is important to have strong leadership in 
those discussions.   New Zealand has put forward very interesting 
ideas for this paper.  He asked if NZ would contemplate take an 
active stance in guiding these deliberations in the WCO. 
  --CBP agreed to reexamine the eight strategic priorities 
identified in the Intelligence Meeting held in March 2007 and to be 
prepared to discuss these strategic priorities.  This review is 
still taking place, and CBP should be ready for discussions by time 
the next International intelligence community meeting occurs. 
  --CBP agreed to host the next international intelligence community 
meeting in San Francisco in the Fall of 2007.  The dates under 
consideration are the weeks of October 29th or November 5th. 
  --CBP agreed to provide the members of the international 
intelligence community with information on its proposed Global Trade 
Exchange (GTX) initiative so that each member may determine its 
interest in participating in a trial of the data exchange. 
Additional information will be brought to the next international 
intelligence community meeting for GNZ consideration. 
  --The discussions regarding the benefits to be derived from our 
mutual recognition agreement appear to be proceeding well. 
 
¶4. During the last international intelligence community meeting, CBP 
agreed to following tasks: 
  --Create a draft document on the topic of Customs in the 21st 
Century; 
  --Reexamine the eight strategic priorities identified in the 
Intelligence Meeting held in March 2007 and to be prepared to 
discuss these strategic priorities; 
  --Host the next international intelligence community meeting in 
San Francisco, CA, in the Fall of 2007; 
  --Provide the members of the international intelligence community 
with information on the proposed Global Trade Exchange (GTX) 
initiative so that each member could determine its interest in 
participating in a trial of the data exchange. 
 
  ¶5. Post trip follow-up: 
 
WELLINGTON 00000764  002 OF 002 
 
 
  -- CBP to indicate whether Acting Commissioner Mullen or other CBP 
executive can travel to New Zealand later this year to brief the New 
Zealand Meat Industry Association Board regarding cargo 
requirements. 
-- CBP to contact the Department of Energy to determine if an 
official can brief New Zealand on the Megaports initiative. Note: 
National Nuclear Security Administration's (NNSA) Megaports 
Initiative teams up with other countries to enhance their ability to 
screen cargo at major international seaports. The Initiative 
provides radiation detection equipment and trains their personnel to 
specifically check for nuclear or other radioactive materials. In 
return, NNSA requires that data be shared on detections and seizures 
of nuclear or radiological material that resulted from the use of 
the equipment provided. The Megaports Initiative works closely with 
the Department of Homeland Security's (DHS) Bureau of Customs and 
Border Protection Container Security Initiative. Together NNSA and 
DHS engage other countries to help secure the international maritime 
trade lanes. End Note. 
 
 
McCormick