08OTTAWA123
CANADA WILL NOT ATTEND UN WORLD CONFERENCE ON
Thu Jan 24 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ottawa
VZCZCXRO0476
PP RUEHGA RUEHHA RUEHQU RUEHVC
DE RUEHOT #0123/01 0242049
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 242049Z JAN 08 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY OTTAWA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7189
INFO RUCNCAN/ALL CANADIAN POSTS COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 0375UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 OTTAWA 000123 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR DRL/MLGA LAURA JORDAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL CA
SUBJECT: CANADA WILL NOT ATTEND UN WORLD CONFERENCE ON 
RACISM 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  Canada took a firm stance against the UN 
World Conference Against Racism on January 23 when it 
announced it would not attend the 2009 Durban Review 
Conference (Durban II).  Foreign Affairs Minister Maxime 
Bernier stated that the 2001 UN World Conference Against 
Racism "degenerated into open and divisive expressions of 
intolerance and anti-Semitism that undermined the principles 
of the United Nations and the very goals the conference 
sought to achieve."  He said the Canadian government had 
concluded that the preparatory process for Durban II would 
not "remedy the mistakes of the past."  Bernier emphasized 
that Canada has a "long and proud history of fighting racism, 
discrimination and intolerance in all its forms."  A number 
of media outlets and Jewish groups applauded the 
announcement, while some NGOs and the New Democratic Party 
spoken out against the decision.  The Canadian government's 
sharp criticism of the 2001 conference and early announcement 
that it will not attend Durban II once again show that the 
Harper government is not afraid to take a stand in the 
international arena.  End summary. 
 
GOVERNMENT TAKES A STAND AGAINST DURBAN 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) Minister Bernier issued an official statement on 
January 23 stating that Canada would not participate in 
Durban II, as he and Secretary of State Kenney had determined 
that the preparatory process for the conference would not 
"remedy the mistakes of the past."  Bernier noted that the 
2001 conference "degenerated into open and divisive 
expressions of intolerance and anti-Semitism that undermined 
the principles of the United Nations and the very goals the 
conference sought to achieve."  Secretary of State for 
Multiculturalism and Canadian Identity Jason Kenney 
emphasized that Canada would continue to focus "on genuine 
anti-racism initiatives that make a difference" and noted 
that Canada's commitment to fighting racism is evidenced by 
the fact that it is seeking full membership on the Task Force 
for International Cooperation on Holocaust Education, 
Remembrance, and Research. 
 
¶3. (U) In remarks to the media, Kenney was even stronger in 
his criticism of the Durban conference.  Kenney stated that 
Durban II "has gone completely off the rails," and said that 
"Canada is interested in combating racism, not promoting it." 
 He remarked that the 2001 World Conference Against Racism 
turned into a "circus of intolerance" and said that Canada 
would attend "any conference that is opposed to racism and 
intolerance, not those that actually promote racism and 
intolerance."  Noting that Iran was named to the organizing 
committee, Kenney commented, "This is a country whose 
government has publicly expressed its desire to eliminate the 
only Jewish country in the world." 
 
NEWSPAPERS AND JEWISH GROUPS SUPPORT DECISION... 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶4. (U) Canada's announcement that it was pulling out of 
Durban II received a fair amount of press coverage, with most 
analyses supporting the decision.  An Ottawa Citizen 
editorial said the Canadian government "showed real courage" 
by pulling out of the conference, and commented that this 
decision "demonstrated the kind of clear moral leadership the 
Conservatives promised to show when they were elected in 
2006."  A Toronto Star op-ed expressed a similar opinion, 
commenting that, "If Durban II is going to again bury all 
other racism issues under the debris of the Middle East 
Qother racism issues under the debris of the Middle East 
conflict, then it's better to bury Durban itself."  B'nai 
Brith Canada and the Canadian Jewish Congress also spoke in 
support of the Canadian government's announcement.  B'nai 
Brith Canada's executive vice president stated that Canadians 
have long called on their government to behave honorably, and 
"today, the Government has again answered that call..." 
 
...WHILE SOME NGOS AND ONE POLITICAL PARTY OPPOSE IT 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶5. (U) Some NGOs and one political party, however, have 
criticized the government's decision.  The executive director 
of the National Anti-Racism Council of Canada told PolOff 
that her organization was "shocked" by the announcement since 
the government had not consulted them or other NGOs.  She 
said that walking away from the table was not the answer, and 
noted that she would be sharing this view with media 
representatives in the coming days.  New Democratic Party MP 
Bill Siksay said that Canada should be at the table in Durban 
if only to bring a different perspective. 
 
OTTAWA 00000123  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Canada's conservative government has once again 
shown that Canada is not afraid to take a strong stance on 
moral issues, even if it goes against the international 
community.  As additional evidence of this, we understand 
that Canada was the sole "no" vote on the January 24 UN Human 
Rights Council resolution condemning recent Israeli actions 
in Gaza. 
 
Visit Canada,s Economy and Environment Forum at 
http://www.intelink.gov/communities/state/can ada 
 
WILKINS