08WELLINGTON297
NZ'S EMISSIONS TRADING SCHEME LEGISLATION PASSES
Fri Sep 12 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Wellington
VZCZCXRO1234
RR RUEHDT RUEHPB
DE RUEHWL #0297/01 2560605
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 120605Z SEP 08
FM AMEMBASSY WELLINGTON
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5429
INFO RUEHNZ/AMCONSUL AUCKLAND 1738
RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA 5258
RUEHDN/AMCONSUL SYDNEY 0718
RHHMUNA/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HI
RUCNARF/ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 WELLINGTON 000297 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR STATE FOR EAP/ANP 
PACOM FOR J01E/J2/J233/J5/SJFHQ 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV ENRG SENV NZ
SUBJECT: NZ'S EMISSIONS TRADING SCHEME LEGISLATION PASSES 
PARLIAMENT 
 
WELLINGTON 00000297  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
Reftel:  07 Wellington 695 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Summary.  With the support of the Green Party and New 
Zealand First, the Labour Party pushed through its controversial 
Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS) bill on September 10 by a vote of 63 
to 57.  National opposed the draft legislation and has promised to 
amend it if elected to lead the government.  New Zealander 
politicians, media analysts and business leaders continue to debate 
how much the ETS will cost average consumers.  The legislation is a 
personal and professional triumph for Prime Minister Helen Clark and 
follows her promise to make New Zealand a carbon neutral country and 
halve emissions by 2040, a commitment that the business community 
(and the opposition National Party) maintains is too ambitious for a 
small country and will cost New Zealand jobs and economic 
competitiveness.  End Summary. 
 
Parliament Passes Much-Debated ETS Bill 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U)  Following several years of study and analysis, the GNZ in 
April 2007 introduced the Climate Change (Emissions Trading and 
Renewable Preference) Bill, popularly known as the Emissions Trading 
Scheme (ETS) bill, to amend the Climate Change Response Act of 2002 
and to introduce a greenhouse gas Emissions Trading Scheme in New 
Zealand.  The ETS will impose a phased-in program of emissions 
limits in the form of tradable carbon units beginning in 2008. 
Forestry would be the first sector to come under the ETS along with 
transport fuel in 2009, electricity generation in 2010, and 
agriculture in 2013 - although all industries can voluntarily begin 
to reduce their emissions before their entry dates.  The draft 
legislation includes a review clause, which dictates that the GNZ 
will compare New Zealand's climate change targets with its major 
trading partners every five years so as not to place New Zealand at 
a disadvantageous position. 
 
The Price Tag for Being Clean and Green 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (U)  The proposed cost of the ETS to consumers and business is 
the topic of continuing controversy.  Minister of Climate Change 
David Parker initially suggested that the cost of an ETS to NZ 
consumers would be relatively modest.  He estimated a loss of 
economic growth to New Zealand at roughly 1% of the expected GDP 
growth over the next five years, or approximately NZD 537 million to 
cover New Zealand's Kyoto commitments.  On a per capita basis, the 
GNZ projected NZD 50 per year, which Parker said was worth the cost 
in order to combat climate change effectively.  Prime Minister Helen 
Clark packaged the proposed ETS as a hallmark of New Zealand's 
commitment to be a world leader in environmental causes. 
 
¶4.  (U)  Critics of the government's plan placed the cost at NZD 1.2 
billion, and Business New Zealand, which represents the interests of 
New Zealand business sector, estimated the price tag as high as NZD 
3.5 billion and accused the government of hiding the true costs from 
voters so as not to ruin Labour's electoral chances.  The Treasury 
Department then adjusted its estimate to NZD 717 million, claiming 
that the Reserve Bank's initial calculations assumed carbon prices 
at NZD 21 per tonne and had not taken into account the rapid price 
rise in fuel in 2008.  More recently, Treasury again adjusted its 
estimate to NZD 1 billion, fueling criticism that the GNZ is hiding 
the true costs. 
 
¶5.  (U) The New Zealand Institute, a leading NZ think tank, argued 
that small farmers and small-to-medium sized businesses would not be 
able to pass on their higher costs to consumers and therefore be 
less competitive.  The Institute stated that New Zealand would be 
better placed to be a "fast follower," rather than a world leader on 
climate change issues and urged that New Zealand change its targets 
and slow its ETS phase-ins.  New Zealand business analysts worry 
that the ETS will force NZ's remaining industrial businesses to move 
to countries unfettered by regulatory constraints on carbon 
emissions, eliminating more jobs in New Zealand.  They say that New 
Zealand will put its economic competitiveness at risk and even by 
meeting its Kyoto obligations, the net impact on world greenhouse 
gas emissions will be negligible. 
 
National Will Amend ETS if Elected 
---------------------------------- 
¶6. (SBU) The opposition National Party strongly opposed the ETS 
legislation from the start and promised to amend the scheme if 
elected to lead the next government.  Despite professing support for 
the concept of an ETS, National's Climate Change Spokesman Dr Nick 
Smith asserted that the ETS legislation was inherently flawed and 
unnecessarily rushed into law.  Said Smith of the bill, "It is 
 
WELLINGTON 00000297  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
riddled with errors that will cost New Zealand households and 
businesses dearly."  Smith believes that more time is needed to 
fully examine the full complexities and economic implications of the 
legislation.  National is worried the ETS will cause job losses and 
force heavy industry overseas.  If it leads the next government, as 
polling suggests it has a good chance of doing, National will seek 
to change the scheme to a target of a 50 per cent reduction in New 
Zealand's emissions by 2050.  Its overall position is to establish 
an ETS that Smith believes will better "balance New Zealand's 
responsibility to reduce greenhouse gas emissions with the need to 
grow the economy."  National also wants to move slower on 
establishing an ETS to ensure that New Zealand's ETS complements 
whatever system Australia settles on due to strong linkages between 
the two economies. 
Where the other Parties Stand on the ETS 
---------------------------------------- 
¶7. (U) The Government relied on the support of two governing 
coalition parties, the Green Party and New Zealand First (NZ First), 
to pass the ETS legislation.  However, this support was not easily 
granted.  At one time, the Greens came close to pulling its support 
for the bill because it believed the Government has backslid on fuel 
and industry emissions.  It also had concerns about the economic 
impact of increased energy costs on lower income households.  After 
canvassing public opinion, the Greens eventually decided to vote in 
favor of the bill, but with reservations.  Although wanting a tough 
regime, the Greens decided it was better to have a scheme in place 
than not have one at all.  In return for its support, the Greens 
managed to secure a NZD 1 billion fund to be spent over several 
years on insulating homes and improving heating for primarily 
low-income families. 
¶8. (U) NZ First also had initial concerns about how the scheme would 
impact lower income households.  These were, however, sufficiently 
allayed by the funding concession secured by the Greens.  Labour was 
particularly relieved to get the support of NZ First given that its 
leader, Winston Peters, was asked by PM Clark on August 29 to stand 
down from his ministerial portfolios pending investigation over 
fraud allegations involving his party.  However, fears that this 
would result in dissolution of the relationship between the parties 
were not realised and the NZ First vote for the bill provided the 
Government with enough parliamentary support to see the ETS bill 
passed into law. 
¶9. (SBU) The Maori Party did not support the ETS bill because it is 
opposed to "paying the polluters and rewarding the corporate 
lobbyists with huge exemptions."  The party also wants Parliament to 
review that impact the ETS will have on Maori assets (particularly 
forests), an issue it believes was not properly addressed during 
debate on the bill.  The right-wing ACT Party asserts that the 
Government's ETS is a waste of time and money and should be 
discarded. 
Views Differ on Australian Model 
-------------------------------- 
¶10. (U) As New Zealand debated implementation of scheme to curb 
emissions, Australia is also going through a similar process.  At a 
political level in New Zealand, views diverge over the treatment and 
relative merits of the Australian government's proposal for its 
Carbon Pollution Reduction scheme.  The New Zealand Government sees 
the proposed Australian scheme as a buttress to its own scheme, 
emphasizing shared implementation timeframes and fundamental 
principles.  It acknowledged that the Australian scheme has some 
different design features from the New Zealand scheme, reflected in 
the different economies and emissions profiles.  However, the 
Government underscored that these differences should not bar the two 
schemes linking up in places, if deemed necessary.  The National 
Party wants to align as closely as possible with the Australian 
scheme, particularly in areas of compliance and tradability.  It 
believes that New Zealand should wait until the Australians have set 
up its scheme to ensure greater compatibility. 
¶11. (SBU)  The Green Party was opposed to New Zealand using the 
Australia's proposed emissions trading scheme as a model as it 
believes Australia does not go far enough to address climate change. 
 It also claimed that the Australian government has been corrupted 
by the influence of industry happy to address climate change as long 
the costs are within acceptable limits. 
The Role of Agriculture in the Scheme 
------------------------------------- 
¶12. (U)  Agriculture is a significant component of the New Zealand 
economy accounting for more than 50 percent of merchandise exports. 
New Zealand exports approximately 80 percent of its agricultural 
production, which makes its greenhouse gas emissions profile unique 
among developed countries.  Agriculture accounts for over half of 
New Zealand's greenhouse gas emissions (primarily in the form of 
methane and nitrous oxide from livestock) compared to an average of 
10 to 15 percent in other developed countries. 
¶13. (SBU)  As New Zealand is 'just one big farm' from an export 
 
WELLINGTON 00000297  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
earnings standpoint, the ETS has been controversial and the proposed 
scheme has received a barrage of criticism from the agricultural 
sector.  Originally slated to be brought into the scheme in 2013, 
agriculture is now expected to be fully incorporated in 2018.  Many 
decisions about the ETS for agriculture have yet to be made, 
including how to measure, what to measure and the point of 
obligation for paying.  However, the costs to be borne by 
agriculture are significant with the sheep, beef and dairy 
industries being the hardest hit and it is questionable whether or 
not consumers will be willing to pay more for carbon friendly food 
form New Zealand. 
¶14. (SBU)  New Zealand is one of the only countries, if not the 
only, to fully include agriculture in its ETS scheme.  Currently, 
very limited technology or strategies are available to significantly 
mitigate greenhouse gas emissions from livestock enterprises. 
Farmers are faced with having to buy an increasing number of carbon 
credits from 2013 unless they have or make a significant investment 
in forestry. Many believe that, unless other countries follow suit, 
implementation of the ETS will result in higher farm costs and put 
New Zealand agriculture at a competitive disadvantage with its 
competitors.  The policy risks are considerable for New Zealand 
agriculture. 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶15. (SBU)  Passage of the ETS bill was both a policy and personal 
imperative for Clark.  It serves as a policy centerpiece for her 
Government's much touted sustainability agenda, which also includes 
making New Zealand a carbon neutral country and halving emissions by 
¶2040.  It is also symbolic of her own emergent image as a leader on 
climate change in New Zealand and abroad.  In January 2008, Clark 
was awarded the United Nations Environment Programme Champions of 
the Earth award in recognition of her government's promotion of 
sustainability initiatives.   Failure to pass the ETS bill would 
have proven embarrassing for her in light on this honor.  Since the 
passage of the ETS bill, Clark has announced that further 
sustainability initiatives will follow.  She will also campaign on 
the successful passage of bill ahead of the November 8 election. 
Clark will likely draw on National's opposition to the ETS 
legislation to say a vote for Labour means a vote for climate change 
leadership and action.  End Comment. 
McCormick