09UNVIEVIENNA31
Breaking the UNGASS Impasse on "Harm Reduction"
Tue Jan 27 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UNVIE
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHUNV #0031/01 0271621
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 271621Z JAN 09
FM USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8938
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 1453
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELSUNCLAS UNVIE VIENNA 000031 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: SNAR KCRM UN PGOV AORC UK CO RS JA CA FR SW GM
EI, IT 
 
SUBJECT:  Breaking the UNGASS Impasse on "Harm Reduction" 
 
REF:  A) UNVIE 00001, B) Tsai-Pala 1/23 email 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action message for INL/PC and IO/T.  Please see 
paragraph 7. 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
¶2. (SBU) Negotiations for the UNGA special session have hit an 
impasse, created by EU insistence on adding the controversial term 
"harm reduction" to various parts of the draft UNGASS action plan 
and political declaration.  While Canada, an opponent of the term's 
inclusion, is considering conceding to EU demands, other opponents 
are standing firm with the U.S. in preventing such a problematic 
element's inclusion.  Mission has engaged counterparts at every 
level, from experts to ambassadors in an attempt to break the 
impasse and find compromise language.  Mission believes there is 
increasing pressure within the EU to resolve this gridlock and avoid 
an embarrassing showdown at the March Commission on Narcotic Drugs 
(CND) but some delegations will be inclined to hold this issue 
hostage up until the opening of the CND, in hopes the US will 
relent.  To facilitate EU compromise, Mission recommends that the 
Department reach out to various capitals and the European Commission 
to help underscore the firmness of U.S. resolve-both to our allies 
and to the EU, before the EU horizontal group meeting in Brussels on 
February 4.  Mission has urged like-minded countries here (Japan, 
Russia, Colombia) to take similar actions.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------------ 
EU Crusade on "Harm Reduction" 
------------------------------ 
¶3.  (SBU) There have been difficult negotiations in Vienna on the 
"harm reduction" issue in the demand reduction chapter of the draft 
UNGASS action plan (Ref A) and political declaration.  The Czech 
Republic reiterated this demand on January 26 on behalf of the 
presidency.  The plan will be annexed to the political declaration 
expected to be issued by ministers attending the high-level segment 
of the UNGASS review meeting in Vienna March 10-12, 2009.  The main 
divide is between EU advocates for including "harm reduction" in the 
plan, and those who oppose such inclusion, namely U.S., Russia, 
Japan, Colombia and possibly Canada.  Although opposed to harm 
reduction, Canada's experts in Ottawa are receptive of a recent 
compromise (including the term in a footnote rather than in the 
text), and we understand that Ottawa will have a discussion on the 
political level to decide how to handle this issue. 
 
----------------------- 
Is it EU Solidarity or 
UK Leading the Crusade? 
----------------------- 
¶4. (SBU) Recent meetings to reach a compromise with EU had been 
inconclusive.  The USG cannot accept including the specific term 
"harm reduction" in any part of the action plan.  The USG also wants 
the section to focus on "prevention, treatment and rehabilitation" 
in the consideration of any demand reduction strategy.  The EU, on 
the other hand, appears less concerned about treatment and 
rehabilitation.  The EU presented a very hard-line position in the 
opening rounds of these negotiations in mid-January.  Subsequently, 
Mission conducted extensive consultations at all levels, including 
between Ambassador and the DCM with their counterparts.  Mission's 
conclusion is that the EU may not have a tightly united front.  The 
UK is the primary and most vocal crusader on this issue, although 
Netherlands does lend occasional support, as do Spain and the EC. 
Importantly, other EU countries, initially implacable, appear to be 
wavering (e.g., Germany).   Still others have expressed varying 
degrees of flexibility, including France, Belgium, Ireland, and 
Italy, as well as Sweden, which is closest to the U.S. position. 
 
---------------------- 
Next Steps for Mission 
---------------------- 
¶5. (SBU) Mission continues to engage with both skeptics and 
proponents of "harm reduction."  To that end, Mission plans to 
offer alternative language, previously sent to INL/PC (Ref B) at the 
next informal consultations.  Mission's language is based on the 
November 2008 UNGA resolution on international drug control 
(A/63/432), which found consensus in New York.  Importantly, that 
language was co-sponsored by 58 countries, including  the U.S. and 
at least 7 EU countries.  Mission will propose inserting "care" into 
the language as a way to address EU concerns.  U.S. proposed 
language for paragraph 9 of the draft Action Plan, therefore, would 
read, 
 
 "Develop, review and strengthen, as appropriate, prevention, 
treatment, care and rehabilitation of drug use disorders and to take 
measures to reduce the social and health consequences of drug abuse 
as governmental health and social priorities, in accordance with 
international drug control treaties, and where appropriate, national 
legislation." 
 
(Note:  The 7 EU co-sponsors of the November 2008 UNGA resolution 
are: Austria, Belgium, Czech Republic, Denmark, Ireland, Italy, and 
Latvia.  End Note.) 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Mission has shared this language with Japan, Russia, and 
Colombia, as well as the CND chair Namibia, who is chairing the 
current negotiations on the political declaration.  Offering this 
language will allow Mission to more constructively engage the EU and 
the chair of the working group (Iran) (who has taken a very active 
role in trying to find consensus).  Although Iran chair had 
originally scheduled another informal meeting for the afternoon of 
January 27, Namibian ambassador told Missionoffs and their Japanese 
and Russian counterparts the morning of January 27 that she would 
announce the cancellation of that meeting until further notice.  She 
said she had heard from many delegations that there should be a 
"cool down" period on this issue.  According to her, many 
delegations are opposed to the EU position, even though they did not 
speak up on the floor. 
 
¶7. (SBU)  Mission has suggested like-minded countries (Russia, 
Japan, Colombia) to intervene at the ambassadorial level in Vienna. 
We have also suggested that their capitals demarche relevant 
countries.  Mission will also ask the G-8 chair in Vienna, the 
Italian ambassador, to convene a meeting of the G-8 members to 
underline the same.  By engaging EU member states in a different 
context, it may help them to reevaluate their dogmatic and 
unproductive approach. 
 
------------------- 
Recommended Actions 
------------------- 
¶8. (SBU)  Action Request:  The EU's horizontal group will have its 
next coordination meeting on drugs in Brussels on February 4.  In 
order to break EU unity on this issue, and thereby create a climate 
in Vienna conducive to compromise, Mission recommends engagement 
both with skeptics and supporters of the issue.  Specifically, 
Mission recommends; 
 
 (i)  Department instruct USEU to contact the European Commission's 
horizontal group on drug control (Carol Edwards at the EC). 
Instructions should note that the potential for embarrassment is 
great for the EU, should the EU hold hostage an entire document 
because of one sub-issue in one section of the action plan.. 
Mission believes that each passing week without compromise will add 
increasing pressure within the EU to resolve this issue and prevent 
embarrassment for national ministers planning to attend the CND. 
Instructions should also note that the March CND will be the first 
foray of the Obama administration into the international drug arena, 
and all sides should be keen to make it a positive one. 
 
(ii)  Department instruct U.S. Embassies Tokyo, Moscow, and Bogota 
to reach out to host governments and emphasize our need to continue 
supporting each other, as well as the firmness of U.S. resolve and 
the continuity of our policy vis-`-vis "harm reduction."  It is 
important that our allies on this issue remember that the burden is 
on the EU, as the proponent of the term, to convince other 
delegations-not the other way around. 
 
(iii)  Department instruct U.S. Embassy Ottawa to persuade Ottawa at 
a political level that it should at least consider remaining silent 
on the EU proposal for the time being, and/or until the EU shows 
more flexibility.  Although there is pressure in Vienna on all 
delegations to commit to the EU proposal, Ottawa should remember 
that there is no need to accede to hard-ball tactics, and that the 
goal is for all sides to find common ground. 
 
(iv)  Department instruct U.S. Embassy London to underscore the need 
to find common ground.  Mission believes that UK's expert in Vienna 
is a driving force behind the current EU approach, and that she may 
find herself isolated within the EU as other delegations begin to 
feel the urgency for compromise. 
 
(v)  Department instruct U.S. Embassy Prague to reaffirm with the EU 
presidency the importance of finding common ground.  Instructions 
should note the importance the USG places on getting US-EU relations 
off on the right foot, and that nothing related to the CND 
jeopardizes that common goal. Instructions should also note that the 
Czech Republic was one of the co-sponsors of the November 2008 UNGA 
resolution on International Drug Control (A/63/432). 
 
(viii)  Finally, that Department instruct U.S. Embassies Berlin, 
Brussels, Paris, Dublin, Rome, and especially Stockholm (as well as 
any other capital who may be more sympathetic to the need for 
compromise) to underline the firmness of our position, and the 
importance of finding common ground for the March ministerial 
meeting.  Instructions should also note that Belgium, Ireland and 
Italy co-sponsored the November 2008 UNGA resolution A/63/432.  In 
particular, it should be noted that the current EU proposal 
effectively eliminates the draft's previous focus on prevention, 
treatment and rehabilitation.  Although there may be some 
disagreement on "harm reduction," Mission believes all delegations 
should be concerned that the elimination of prevention, treatment 
and rehabilitation from their prominent place in the draft may give 
the wrong signal that member states are no longer focusing on the 
critical need to reduce the demand for drugs. 
 
Schulte