07MUNICH325
MUNICH G-8 JUSTICE AND INTERIOR MINISTERS MEETING
Fri May 25 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Munich
VZCZCXRO6997
PP RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHLZ RUEHPOD
DE RUEHMZ #0325/01 1451524
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 251524Z MAY 07
FM AMCONSUL MUNICH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3959
RUEAWJB/DOJ WASHDC
RHEFHLC/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHINGTON DC
INFO RUCNMEU/EU INTEREST COLLECTIVE
RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA 0003
RUEHOT/AMEMBASSY OTTAWA 0447
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO 0423
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 0317
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 0027
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 0008
RUCNFRG/FRG COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 MUNICH 000325 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PTER KCRM KISL GM
SUBJECT:  MUNICH G-8 JUSTICE AND INTERIOR MINISTERS MEETING 
CONCLUDING DECLARATION 
 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  The below text is the concluding declaration from the G-8 
Justice and Interior Ministers Meeting held in Munich May 23-25. 
The U.S. was represented at the meeting by Attorney General Gonzales 
and Deputy Secretary of Homeland Security Jackson. 
 
¶2.  Begin text:  During our meeting in Munich on 23-25 May 2007 at 
the invitation of Federal Minister of Justice Brigitte Zypries and 
Federal Minister of the Interior Dr. Wolfgang Schaeuble, we, the 
Justice and Interior Ministers and Prosecutors General of the G8 
nations, as well as European Commission Vice President Frattini, 
discussed important shared concerns in the field of justice and 
interior affairs.  We focused on current issues of counter terrorism 
and integration policy, as well as issues related to transnational 
organized crime, including effective mechanisms for enforcing 
intellectual property rights. 
 
We also discussed a number of other issues, in particular combating 
drug cultivation and drug trafficking in Afghanistan and combating 
the sexual abuse of children.  In this regard, we have issued two 
separate declarations, entitled "Afghanistan Counter Narcotics" and 
"Reinforcing the International Fight against Child Pornography," to 
which reference is hereby made. 
 
Interpol Secretary-General Ronald Noble took part as a guest at our 
meeting and used this opportunity to report on Interpol's current 
projects. 
 
----------------- 
COUNTER-TERRORISM 
----------------- 
 
Despite concerted efforts to prevent terrorist attacks and dismantle 
individual terrorist networks around the world, international 
terrorism continues to present a global threat. In recent years, the 
attacks in New York, Washington, Madrid, Moscow, Beslan, London and 
many other places have revealed a new dimension of terror and 
demonstrated that open, liberal societies are particularly 
threatened.  We must continue to devote all our energies to our 
joint counter-terrorism efforts, increasing them wherever necessary. 
 Continuing the already comprehensive and rapid sharing of 
information among security and law enforcement authorities will play 
a prominent role; in view of the global nature of terrorist 
networks, such information-sharing is crucial for effectively 
protecting our citizens against attacks. 
 
Because terrorists increasingly take advantage of modern 
communications and information technology, we will further 
strengthen our cooperation specifically in this field. Building on 
current efforts in this area, we have agreed: 
-  to deepen our knowledge and experience concerning terrorist use 
of the Internet; 
- to further intensify the voluntary sharing of information in this 
field and to better exploit the possibilities for international 
cooperation in order to address terrorist use and misuse of the 
Internet; 
- to explore whether and how other institutions could support the 
efforts of security and law enforcement authorities in combating 
terrorist use of the Internet; 
- to explore further cooperation in the matter of terrorist use of 
other communications and information technologies and broadcast 
systems; 
- to continue to expand and strengthen the G8 24/7 Network of High 
Tech Crime Points of Contact and to continue to promote its use in 
our countries; 
- to work towards criminalizing, within national legal frameworks, 
specific forms of misusing the Internet for terrorist purposes. 
Successful security policy must take action as early as possible, 
i.e. before terrorist organizations are formed and concrete attack 
plans are drawn up.  We have therefore agreed to expand our 
knowledge and experience of those processes by which some residents 
of our countries become radical and violent, culminating in what is 
known as "home-grown terrorism."  We agree that lasting success in 
countering processes of radicalization cannot be achieved by the 
security authorities alone, but requires recourse to a broad 
spectrum of measures, including those related to integration policy 
and engaging civil society through outreach to youth and other 
vulnerable groups.  We have also addressed the issue of dialogue 
with relevant communities in our countries and agreed to mandate 
 
MUNICH 00000325  002 OF 005 
 
 
national experts to share experiences in this field. 
 
Domestic legal frameworks which enable the removal of foreign 
nationals who pose a national security threat, including terrorist 
suspects, may in specific cases provide a useful tool for States to 
protect national security and comply with state obligations to 
cooperate in the fight against terrorism, while fully complying with 
all applicable international human rights obligations.  We discussed 
the difficulties faced by states in seeking to devise and implement 
an effective and safe removals policy taking into account the need 
to protect national security and the human rights of those who pose 
a threat.  We promote further sharing of experiences and analysis of 
possible solutions between our countries on the basis of the work 
recently performed by G8 experts in this field. 
 
Furthermore, we must pay special attention to the security of 
critical energy infrastructures which constitute the lifeline of our 
market economy and society and therefore require special protection 
against possible terrorist threat.  The people in our countries 
expect the supply of energy to function reliably and not be impacted 
by terrorist attack.  We have therefore agreed to continue and 
intensify expert assessment of vulnerabilities and potential threats 
to energy infrastructure and sharing of best practices for security. 
 At the same time, we reaffirm our commitment to strengthen the 
protection of all critical infrastructures.  We therefore ask the 
Roma-Lyon Group to intensify the exchange of best practices between 
our countries and to initiate comparable analyses with regard to 
further critical infrastructures. 
 
To deal even more effectively with terrorist threats in and from the 
air, we have further intensified our cooperation in the area of 
aviation security.  For example, to follow up on the successful 
conclusion of the Secure and Facilitated International Travel 
Initiative (SAFTI) action plan, we have discussed further measures 
to improve aviation security and developed recommendations and best 
practices which will be provided to the International Civil Aviation 
Organization (ICAO) as a basis for its further efforts. 
 
With regard to the Interpol Lost and Stolen Travel Documents 
Database we have agreed to provide 24/7 points of contact with 
officials who can access domestic passport data and help resolve 
positive "hits" that occur from real time connection to the Interpol 
data base.  This will make this tool even more effective in stopping 
terrorists and criminals from exploiting lost and stolen documents. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
ENFORCING INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Product piracy and counterfeiting damage the innovative capacity of 
national economies.  They deceive customers acting in good faith and 
can even endanger health and life.  Complex global criminal networks 
are becoming increasingly involved with IP crime.  For these 
reasons, the fight against product piracy and counterfeiting is a 
crucial element of criminal law, regulatory and economic policy as 
well as consumer protection. 
 
We agree that civil law can play a key role in these efforts.  Where 
consistent with national legal systems, states should consider 
establishing legal regimes where right holders are able to pursue 
the civil enforcement of their rights through expedited proceedings. 
 Such proceedings may be designed to ensure that right holders can 
obtain court decisions solely on the basis of substantiated 
submissions and without hearing the opposing party, or at a hearing 
with an abbreviated notice period.   As a rule, such court decisions 
should be enforceable on the day of their issuance.  At the same 
time, opposing parties must be protected against the misuse of such 
expedited proceedings. 
 
Criminal enforcement also plays an important role in the protection 
of intellectual property rights, particularly in the most egregious 
instances of infringement.  Criminal penalties commensurate with the 
offence committed and with the degree of culpability must be both 
imposable and imposed.  Law enforcement authorities should be 
sufficiently trained in issues of intellectual property protection. 
Further, given the global nature of intellectual property crimes, we 
agree that there must be effective methods for law enforcement 
agencies to share information and to develop cooperative 
investigations across borders in order to combat piracy and 
counterfeiting offences.  In this respect our experts have produced 
"Principles and Recommendations for Cooperative Investigation and 
Prosecution of Serious and Organized Intellectual Property Rights 
 
MUNICH 00000325  003 OF 005 
 
 
Crimes" and have identified national points of contact in our 
countries to facilitate international cooperation in these cases. 
We endorse this work and agree to continue and increase the 
targeting of international intellectual property crime. 
 
Given the important roles of civil and criminal enforcement, we 
support the development of a plan to support developing and newly 
industrialized countries that are interested in using civil and 
criminal law to promote the effective enforcement of intellectual 
property rights. 
 
---------------------------------- 
COMBATING SEXUAL ABUSE OF CHILDREN 
---------------------------------- 
 
We discussed together our efforts to combat the sexual abuse of 
children committed by persons traveling from their country, ("home 
country") to another country ("destination country"), to engage in 
sexual activity with children.  Unfortunately, many of the 
destination countries lack adequate legislation or resources to 
vigorously address this problem within their own borders. 
Therefore, action by the home countries, including the G8 States, is 
essential to effectively protecting children around the world. 
 
As child exploitation and child sex tourism have been increasing 
globally, many G8 States have enacted new laws against the sexual 
abuse of children.  As of today, all G8 States have extraterritorial 
jurisdiction over child sexual exploitation committed by their own 
nationals in other countries.  Most G8 States can now prosecute 
their nationals for child sex tourism, even where the conduct is not 
a crime in the destination country. 
 
We discussed the urgent need to promote the use of this authority to 
prosecute child sex tourism.  We agree that, regardless of the 
abuser's nationality, that person must be held accountable, whether 
in the home or destination country.  We are releasing today a paper 
produced by our experts that discusses experiences and lessons 
learned in addressing these odious crimes, as well as tactics and 
strategies designed to ensure that investigations and prosecutions 
in these cases are successful.  The strategies range from 
establishing firm relationships with the authorities in the 
destination countries to the best methods of collecting evidence for 
use in court in the home countries.  Preventive measures, such as 
cooperation with the tourism industry to make sure that travelers to 
common destination countries are aware of the reach of the criminal 
justice systems in their home countries, and having home country 
governments proactively promote public awareness and understanding 
of the illegal nature of engaging in any sexual activity with 
children whether at home or abroad, are also emphasized.  We hope 
that all states that may be countries of origin for traveling sex 
offenders will undertake similar measures, since only with 
widespread and concerted action will the fight against child sexual 
abuse at the international level be effective. 
 
 
The demand of sex tourists drives others to supply child victims. 
Home countries have a critical role to play in preventing such 
sexual abuse by stemming demand and ensuring that effective and 
responsive measures are in place to fully investigate and prosecute 
the commission of these crimes.  When we succeed in stopping people 
who travel for the purpose of having sex with children, we ensure 
that fewer children will be forced into prostitution or other forms 
of commercial sexual exploitation. 
 
We therefore support the efforts recently made within the Council of 
Europe to draft a comprehensive convention on the protection of 
children against sexual exploitation and sexual abuse and we 
encourage the States who participated in the negotiations to 
contribute to the finalization and the adoption of the convention. 
 
In our separate declaration entitled "Reinforcing the International 
Fight against Child Pornography," we have committed ourselves to 
improving our ability to prevent, investigate and prosecute such 
serious crimes.  We request that the Roma-Lyon Group facilitate 
further dialogue among their experts on how to uncover and prevent 
the spread of child pornography, including through cooperation with 
Internet Service Providers 
 
Furthermore, we have noted the concern that children are being 
abducted for the purpose of sexual exploitation.  We request the 
Roma-Lyon Group to also gather expert knowledge regarding the 
discovery and prevention of such crimes and to consider whether 
 
MUNICH 00000325  004 OF 005 
 
 
there are appropriate preventive measures to be taken forward. 
 
-------------- 
ASSET RECOVERY 
-------------- 
 
We welcomed the report of the Roma-Lyon Group on implementation of 
our 2004 initiative on Recovering Proceeds of Corruption.  As we 
have repeatedly reaffirmed, international cooperation is a key 
element of our efforts to combat corruption, and our States are 
committed to support of the United Nations Convention against 
Corruption and to translating its words into effective action.  The 
assistance we have provided through regional asset recovery 
workshops is but one example, and our member States will continue to 
offer assistance, individually or together, to states seeking 
restraint or confiscation of assets illicitly taken from their 
countries by corrupt officials.  Today we also release several 
papers our experts have prepared at our direction, including papers 
outlining principles and procedural mechanisms to facilitate the 
disposition and transfer of confiscated proceeds of grand corruption 
and exploring means to overcome certain obstacles to asset recovery. 
 These papers and the Roma-Lyon Group report identify important 
steps that we have taken, and experience we can offer, to facilitate 
the recovery of corruption proceeds. 
 
Countries with experience in combating corruption and incorporating 
good governance mechanisms into their legal systems aid 
international security by providing technical assistance to 
countries in need of such experience.  The UN Convention against 
Corruption provides mechanisms that should be incorporated in 
technical assistance efforts in combating corruption, and we support 
the work being done by its Conference of States Parties and UNODC in 
facilitating the delivery of such assistance.  Organizations 
operating at a regional level on implementation of UNCAC and other 
governance issues, such as UNDP-POGAR and OECD can also play a 
useful role.  We call upon states to consider contributing to 
intergovernmental initiatives of this nature.  In order to maximize 
the effectiveness of State contributions, we urge both donors and 
the UNODC to take the necessary steps to ensure complementarity with 
technical assistance under the UN Conventions on Transnational 
Organized Crime and its Protocols. 
 
------------------------- 
INTEGRATION OF IMMIGRANTS 
------------------------- 
 
In view of globalization and demographic developments in certain 
parts of the world, the phenomenon of major, sustained migration is 
likely to continue to grow in significance.  Where integration is 
unsuccessful, migration becomes a problem for the cohesiveness and 
internal security of the host societies. 
 
Successful integration depends on the will of migrants to 
participate.  They must make an effort to integrate, to learn the 
language of their host country, preferably prior to their departure, 
and to complete their education.  At the same time, governments, 
communities, the civil society as well as individual citizens of the 
host country all have a role to play to facilitate integration. 
Successful integration requires a will on the side of the host state 
to welcome legal immigrants, to protect them from discrimination and 
facilitate their inclusion in the economic and social fabric of the 
host society. 
 
We agree that managing migration processes can succeed only through 
common efforts and cooperation with countries of origin and transit. 
 Coordinating development and migration policy more closely, for 
example by utilizing the potential advantages offered by circular 
migration, will help reduce irregular migration and limit brain 
drain while contributing to development in immigrants' countries of 
origin. 
 
We are convinced that G8 is a useful forum to exchange information 
on integration developments, to continue discussion on integration 
issues of mutual interest, to explore possibilities and strategies 
of joint efforts against illegal immigration in cooperation with 
third countries, and to discuss different policies and experiences 
of our countries concerning temporary migration.  We have therefore 
agreed to ask our experts to continue to address these issues.  End 
text. 
 
¶3.  This report has been coordinated with Embassy Berlin. 
 
 
MUNICH 00000325  005 OF 005 
 
 
¶4.  Previous reporting from Munich is available on our SIPRNET 
website at www.state.sgov.gov/p/eur/munich/ . 
 
NELSON