09MONTEVIDEO700
UPCOMING MERCOSUR SUMMIT UNLIKELY TO SCORE MUCH PROGRESS
Fri Dec 04 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Montevideo
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMN #0700/01 3381521
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 041520Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY MONTEVIDEO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0066
INFO MERCOSUR COLLECTIVE
RUEHTG/AMEMBASSY TEGUCIGALPA 0001UNCLAS MONTEVIDEO 000700 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECIN ECON ETRD BR AR PA UY
SUBJECT: UPCOMING MERCOSUR SUMMIT UNLIKELY TO SCORE MUCH PROGRESS 
 
------- 
 
SUMMARY 
 
------- 
 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  On December 8, Montevideo will host Mercosur's 
38th Presidential Summit.  The GOU's main targets at the beginning 
of its pro-tempore presidency were on the commercial, external 
relations and institutional fronts.  Achievements seem to have 
fallen short on every front and no major outcome is expected from 
the upcoming Summit.  Key long-term GOU priorities, elimination of 
the double imposition of the bloc's common external tariff and 
agreement on a Customs Code, do not appear to have advanced 
appreciably.  In the absence of concrete progress on economic and 
commercial areas, comments on regional politics (especially 
Honduras) and the initial meeting between Uruguayan President-Elect 
Mujica and Brazilian President Lula da Silva will be closely 
watched.  END SUMMARY 
 
 
 
---------------------- 
 
MERCOSUR'S 38TH SUMMIT 
 
---------------------- 
 
 
 
¶2. (U) On December 8, Montevideo will host the 38th Presidential 
Summit of Mercosur; the Southern Cone Common Market composed of 
Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay that has Chile and Bolivia 
as associate members, and to which Venezuela is in process of 
adhering.  The presidents of Argentina, Brazil and Paraguay will 
attend the Summit.  Canadian Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs 
Leonard Edwards is invited as an observer as will Colombian Vice 
President Santos.  It is still unclear if Hugo Chavez will attend. 
The Summit will be preceded by a Common Market Council ministerial 
and a meeting of Ministers of Economy and Central Bank Presidents, 
both of which will take place on December 7. 
 
 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Upon taking on the bloc's pro-tempore presidency in July 
2009, the GOU defined a Mercosur agenda for the second half of the 
year that aimed to make concrete progress on three areas: 
commercial issues, external relations and institutional aspects, 
many of which Embassy contacts had acknowledged in July would be 
difficult to achieve. 
 
 
 
----------------------------- 
 
ECONOMIC AND COMMERCIAL GOALS 
 
----------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶4. (U) On the economic and commercial front the GOU sought to 
improve the bloc's Customs Union by adopting a program to eliminate 
the double imposition of the bloc's Common External Tariff.  MFA 
contacts admitted in July this was highly unlikely to be achieved 
during Uruguay's presidency, but remained a key long-term goal of 
the GOU. 
 
 
 
¶5. (U) The GOU also looked to reducing asymmetries between large 
and small partners through harmonizing competitiveness-distorting 
public policies, eliminating current non-tariff barriers (NTBs), 
and adopting mechanisms to deal with new NTBs.  The GOU proposed 
projects to improve the coordination of fiscal and macroeconomic 
policies among members, and define a list of strategic projects in 
the areas of energy, productive integration and development of 
regional public goods.  Mercosur officials told Emboffs that no 
substantial progress has been made in these areas. 
 
 
 
------------------ 
 
EXTERNAL RELATIONS 
 
------------------ 
 
¶6. (U) The GOU sought to "create conditions" for a resumption of 
trade negotiations with the European Union, signing an agreement 
with the Gulf Cooperation Council and to resume negotiations with 
the Central American Integration System.  Mercosur and the EU met 
on November 24 (for the first time since 2006) to begin to revive 
stalled negotiations.  They announced another meeting for the first 
half of 2010 when Spain and Argentina will hold the EU's and 
Mercosur's presidencies, respectively.  Mercosur also met with 
Egypt (for the first time since Egypt invited Mercosur to negotiate 
a fixed-preferences agreement in 2004), and with South Korea (for 
the third time since 2005 when they initiated a joint study on the 
possibility of negotiating a free trade agreement), but no 
substantial progress was reported. 
 
¶7. (U) In support of its longstanding objective to conduct trade 
negotiations independently from the bloc, the GOU had stated that 
"in order to achieve such goals, without affecting the commercial 
interest of any partner and allowing all partners to benefit from 
open regionalism" Mercosur would "study the possibility of enabling 
mechanisms that respect the economic and institutional realities of 
each partner".  In practice, the GOU did not push this agenda 
during the semester as it did not undertake any relevant trade 
negotiation independently from its Mercosur partners. 
 
 
 
------------------------ 
 
INSTITUTIONAL PRIORITIES 
 
------------------------ 
 
 
 
¶8.  (U) On the institutional front the GOU had two main goals.  It 
sought to analyze Mercosur's institutional structure and propose 
rightsizing measures to adapt key institutions to ever-increasing 
tasks.  Secondly it planned to examine the strict compliance of 
partners with MERCOSUR's legislation and the strengthening of 
mechanisms such as dispute settlement and effective compliance of 
arbitral decisions. 
 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
COMMENT: LITTLE PROGRESS, BUT POLITICAL POSTURING IS LIKELY 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
 
 
¶9. (SBU) COMMENT:  In the absence of concrete advancement on the 
economic agenda, Mercosur leaders often revert to political 
statements and resolutions.  The situation in Honduras will no 
doubt come up and there may be some positioning on the Colombia 
Defense Cooperation with the U.S.  Post will also be watching the 
anticipated meetings between President-Elect Jose "Pepe" Mujica and 
the Mercosur leaders, expected on the margins of the summit. 
MATTHEWMAN