10CAPETOWN29
SOUTH AFRICAN STATE OF THE NATION ADDRESS
Fri Feb 12 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Cape Town
VZCZCXRO2718
PP RUEHDU RUEHJO
DE RUEHTN #0029/01 0431607
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 121607Z FEB 10
FM AMCONSUL CAPE TOWN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3276
INFO RUEHSA/AMEMBASSY PRETORIA 6576
RUEHJO/AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG 2216
RUEHDU/AMCONSUL DURBAN 3359UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 CAPE TOWN 000029 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV KDEM SF
SUBJECT:  SOUTH AFRICAN STATE OF THE NATION ADDRESS 
 
------------ 
Summary 
------------ 
 
¶1. (SBU) South African President Jacob Zuma, relying heavily on the 
legacy of former President Nelson Mandela (also known here by his 
clan name: "Madiba"), on February 11 gave his second State of the 
Nation address since assuming office last May.  The South African 
leader came into the speech somewhat embattled because of his recent 
confession that he had fathered a child out of wedlock.  Zuma's 
speech was short on specifics but he continued the African National 
Congress's (ANC) themes of addressing issues such as job creation, 
education, health, fighting crime, and rural development and land 
reform.  Zuma did not go into great detail about foreign policy or 
one of the most controversial elements of domestic policy - the 
criminal justice system.  The key theme of Zuma's address was the 
promise that his administration would "work faster, harder and 
smarter."  How these goals would be achieved, however, left most in 
the crowd wondering.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
Zuma "Wraps Himself in the Cloak of Mandela" 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Zuma took great pains to associate himself with the legacy 
of former President Nelson Mandela (who was in the audience) on the 
day marking the 20th anniversary of the former prisoner's release. 
Zuma said, "Inspired by our icon Madiba, it is my honor to dedicate 
this 2010 State of the Nation Address, to all our heroes and 
heroines, sung and unsung, known and unknown."  Zuma quoted 
Mandela's statements at length and made remarks to underscore 
reconciliation in South Africa.  Zuma pushed for all South Africans 
to recommit themselves to reconciliation, national unity, 
non-racialism and building a better future together as South 
Africans. 
 
¶3. (SBU) He praised former President P.W. Botha for taking small 
steps in the process to have Mandela released and acknowledged the 
roles played by the legal team following the infamous "Rivonia 
Trial" in which Mandela was sentenced to prison.  Zuma also paid 
tribute to the roles played by Oliver Tambo and Inkatha Freedom 
Party President Mangosuthu Buthelezi.  He also said, "In November 
this year, we will mark the 150th anniversary of the arrival of 
Indians in South Africa. It provides an opportunity to recognise the 
important contribution of the Indian community in the fields of 
labour, business, science, sports, religion, arts, culture and the 
achievement and consolidation of our democracy." 
 
¶4. (SBU)  The South African leader used his remarks about 
reconciliation to look forward, saying the hosting of the FIFA World 
Cup makes 2010 truly a year of action.  He said, "The 
infrastructure, security and logistics arrangements are in place to 
ensure a successful tournament.  As a nation we owe a debt of 
gratitude to the 2010 Local Organising Committee for their sterling 
effort."  At this point, Zuma named the individuals of the 
committee, including Irvin Khoza, with whose daughter Zuma recently 
acknowledged fathering a daughter.  His reference to Khoza drew 
laughs from the legislative floor.  Zuma tied his remarks on the 
FIFA World Cup back to Mandela by saying, "President Mandela was 
central in assisting the country to win the rights to host this 
great event. We therefore have to make the World Cup a huge success 
in his honor." 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
Zuma Says South Africa's Economy Improving, But Fragile 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) Zuma addressed the state of the South African economy 
Q5. (SBU) Zuma addressed the state of the South African economy 
throughout his remarks.  (Note:  Some commentators and political 
analysts criticized him for not providing more specific details on 
what the government would do to address the economy, but other 
commentators argued that the lack of detail was because Finance 
Minister Pravin Gordhan intends to address specific programs in his 
budget speech next week.  End Note.)  The South African leader said 
economic indicators suggest South Africa is turning the corner on 
recovery.  He added economic activity is rising in South Africa and 
labor statistics show the economy is now creating jobs rather than 
shedding them.  He warned, however, that it is still too soon to be 
certain of the pace of recovery and that the government would not 
withdraw its support measures. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Zuma noted the economy lost 900,000 jobs throughout the 
global recession, with many of the lost positions being filled by 
family breadwinners.  Zuma announced two measures to help ease 
problems from the recession.  First, he called for a "safety 
cushion" for the poor in the form of extended child support grants 
to children more than 14 years of age.  He estimated these grants 
would provide for an additional two million children from poor 
households.  Second, he said the Industrial Development Corporation 
would put aside several million dollars to help companies in 
 
CAPE TOWN 00000029  002 OF 004 
 
 
distress.  He also said the government would help companies by 
introducing a "training lay-off scheme," which would allow workers 
the option of a period of training instead of retrenchment. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Zuma discussed the work being done by the Public Works 
ministry.  He said the government came close to meeting the goals 
set out by the Public Works ministry in the Expanded Public Works 
Program.  The government reportedly created some 480,000 out of a 
target of 500,000 jobs - mainly in the fields of construction, home 
and community based care, and environmental projects.  Zuma 
acknowledged the jobs are not jobs in the mainstream economy.  He 
did note, however, that over the next three years, the government 
would spend millions of dollars on public infrastructure.  He added 
that the government wants to maintain and expand its road network 
and ensure the rail network is reliable, competitive and better 
integrated with seaports.  He said he has established an 
Inter-Ministerial Committee on Energy to develop a 20-year 
integrated resource plan that would ensure reliable power supply. 
The committee is set to look at the participation of independent 
power producers and at protecting the poor from rising electricity 
prices.  Zuma promised the state electricity supplier, Eskom, would 
continue to build additional generation capacity and improve the 
maintenance of its power stations. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Zuma said the government has established the Broad-Based 
Black Economic Empowerment Advisory Council, which will be chaired 
by the President, to ensure the promotion of an inclusive economy 
and to aid growth and development.  He added his administration's 
most urgent focus of policy change is the creation of jobs for young 
people as unemployment rates for young people are substantially 
higher than the average.  He promised that proposals would be tabled 
to subsidise the cost of hiring younger workers and to encourage 
firms to take on inexperienced staff.  (Note:   Democratic Alliance 
leader Helen Zille pointedly told reporters after the address that 
this idea "came straight out of her party's policies."  End Note.) 
The South African leader said the government's newly launched 
National Youth Development Agency would work faster to establish its 
structures throughout the country so it can assist the 
administration to mainstream youth development programs within the 
government. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
Education Remains Critical to South Africa's Goals 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) Zuma said the administration placed education and skills 
development at the center of this government's policies.  He said, 
"In our 2010 program, we want to improve the ability of our children 
to read, write and count in the foundation years.  Unless we do 
this, we will not improve the quality of education."  He said the 
government wants learners and teachers to be in school, in class, on 
time, learning and teaching for seven hours a day.  He added, "We 
will assist teachers by providing detailed daily lesson plans.  To 
students, we will provide easy-to-use workbooks in all 11 languages. 
 From this year onwards, all grade 3, 6 and 9 students will write 
literacy and numeracy tests that are independently moderated."  Zuma 
said his government's goal is to increase the pass rate for these 
tests from the current average of between 35-40 percent to at least 
60 percet^q275,000 a year by 2014." 
 
¶10. (SBU) The South African Government plans to increase the 
training of 16-25 year olds in continuing education programs.  He 
said, "This will enable us to provide a second chance at education, 
for those who do not qualify for university."  He promised that the 
government would work with higher education institutions to ensure 
eligible students obtain financial assistance through the National 
Student Financial Aid Scheme. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
The Push for Better Health for All Will Continue 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶11. (SBU) Zuma said, "Another key outcome is to ensure a long and 
healthy life for all South Africans."  He said his government would 
continue to improve our health care system.  He added that this 
would include building and upgrading hospitals and clinics and 
further improving the working conditions of health care workers.  He 
said, "We have partnered with the Development Bank of Southern 
Africa (DBSA) to improve the functionality of public hospitals and 
their district offices.  We are also collaborating with the DBSA and 
the Industrial Development Corporation, in a Public-Private 
Partnership program to improve hospitals and provide finance for 
projects."  He said the government must confront the fact that life 
expectancy at birth has dropped from 60 years in 1994 to just below 
50 years today.  He promised the government would make interventions 
to lower maternal mortality rates, reduce new HIV infections and 
effectively treat HIV and tuberculosis.  Zuma vowed the government 
 
CAPE TOWN 00000029  003 OF 004 
 
 
would implement all the undertakings made on World Aids Day relating 
to new HIV prevention and treatment measures.  He also stated, "We 
will also continue preparations for the establishment of a national 
health insurance system." 
 
----------------------------------- 
Zuma Mentions Crime, But Barely 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶12. (SBU) Zuma said his government is working hard to ensure that 
everyone in South Africa feels safe, and is safe.  He promised that 
his administration would work to reduce serious and violent crimes 
and ensure the justice system works efficiently.  He said, "We are 
implementing plans to increase the number of police men and women by 
10% over the next three years.  We have identified the fight against 
hijacking, business and house robberies, as well as contact crimes 
such as murder, rape, and assault, as top priorities."  Beyond these 
remarks, however, Zuma did not address his government's plans to 
reduce violent crime.  Business Day political analyst Wyndham 
Hartley said, "There was no mention of the much vaunted criminal 
justice system and no indication of progress made or possible 
changes." 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
Improved Service Delivery Remains a Priority 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶13. (SBU)  After a year of numerous violent service delivery 
protests, Zuma did not shy away from the fact the government must to 
do more to meet people's needs.  He said, "Local government must 
work."  He ordered that municipalities must improve the provision of 
housing, water, sanitation, electricity, waste management and roads. 
 He added that across the country a number of issues have already 
received attention (in part, he claimed, because of his newly 
launched presidential hotline).  However, he warned, "There are no 
grievances that can justify violence and the destruction of 
property.  We have directed law enforcement agencies to take a 
tougher stance on lawlessness in Balfour and other areas."  He 
pointed out that in December 2009 the Cabinet approved a turnaround 
strategy for local government.  He said, "This will ensure that 
local government has the correct management, administrative and 
technical skills."  He promised the government is working to upgrade 
well-located informal settlements and provide proper service and 
land tenure to at least 500,000 households by 2014 and said his 
administration plans to set aside over 6 000 hectares of 
well-located public land for low income and affordable housing. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
Zuma Promises a New Way of Monitoring Progress 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶14. (SBU) The South African President said the administration is 
building a performance-oriented state by improving planning as well 
as performance monitoring and evaluation.  (Note:  When Zuma made 
this remark, the cameras in the National Assembly flashed to 
Minister in the Presidency for Planning Trevor Manuel and Minister 
in the Presidency for Performance Monitoring and Evaluation Collins 
Chabane.  End Note.)  Zuma said the work of departments would be 
measured by outcomes developed by the Cabinet and through the newly 
established performance monitoring and evaluation system.  He said 
the system "will outline what is to be done, how, by whom, within 
what time period and using what measurements and resources." 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Other Areas Receive Only Brief References 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶15. (SBU) Zuma did not touch at length on other South African 
Q15. (SBU) Zuma did not touch at length on other South African 
domestic and foreign priorities.  He said more houses would be built 
to encourage rural development and agricultural development.  He 
said South Africa would continue to pursue programs that would lead 
to a reduction in water wastage and would push for greater 
individual food production.  He promised a decrease in 
communications costs - including reductions for broadband, cell 
phone, landline and public phone rates.  He also said the government 
would continue to curb corruption.  (Note:  His lack of great 
attention to corruption in the speech is somewhat surprising as many 
commentators and political analysts expected it to be a main focus 
of his address.  End Note.) 
 
¶16. (SBU)  On foreign policy, Zuma vowed to work with international 
partners - including the United States - toward a legally binding 
treaty on climate change.  He said, "As South Africa we have 
voluntarily committed ourselves to specific emission reduction 
targets, and will continue working on our long term climate change 
mitigation strategy."  He also said the government would intensify 
efforts to promote the interests of South Africa globally, support 
efforts to speed up the political and economic integration of the 
Southern Africa Development Community and promote intra-regional 
trade and investment.  He noted that South Africa continues to play 
a leading role in continental efforts to strengthen the African 
 
CAPE TOWN 00000029  004 OF 004 
 
 
Union and its organs and to work for unity and promised that 
Pretoria would focus energy on revitalising the New Partnership for 
Africa's Development as a strategy for economic development on the 
continent. 
 
------------- 
Comment 
------------- 
 
¶17. (SBU) Zuma's address relied heavily on the legacy of Mandela to 
give a speech that was short on specifics but carried forward the 
ANC's themes of addressing issues such as job creation, education, 
health, fighting crime, and rural development and land reform.  In 
the short term, the speech deflected some of the negative attention 
Zuma has been receiving for his extra-marital affairs and reminded 
South Africans about their history of liberation.  Over the longer 
term, it remains to be seen whether the government makes progress - 
or reveals details - on its domestic agenda or whether foreign 
policy will ever be as important under Zuma as it was under former 
President Thabo Mbeki. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
1