10DUBLIN65
IRELAND - TENTH ANNUAL TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS (TIP) REPORT
Wed Feb 24 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Dublin
VZCZCXRO1814
RR RUEHIK
DE RUEHDL #0065/01 0551047
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 241047Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY DUBLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0468
INFO RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDC
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RUEHUJA/AMEMBASSY ABUJA 0001
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 0236
RUEHBL/AMCONSUL BELFAST 1151
RUEHOS/AMCONSUL LAGOS 0001UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 26 DUBLIN 000065 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR G/TIP, G-Laura Pena, INL, DRL, PRM 
STATE FOR EUR/PGI, EUR/WE 
STATE FOR USAID 
 
E.O.  12958: N/A 
TAGS: KTIP ELAB KMCA KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD ASEC PREF
EI 
SUBJECT: IRELAND - TENTH ANNUAL TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS (TIP) REPORT 
 
REF: STATE 2094 
 
DUBLIN 00000065  001.3 OF 026 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) The Government of Ireland fully complies with the minimum 
standards for the elimination of trafficking.  The government 
enacted legislation criminalizing human trafficking in 2008, 
increased trafficking awareness efforts, and in 2009, investigated 
nearly 70 cases of potential trafficking.  Ireland has made 
significant strides, prosecuting five individuals in Ireland and 
providing all case evidence for a further three individuals in 
Romania and three in Wales.  An additional case is awaiting trial 
before the Dublin Circuit Criminal Court.  Ireland continues to 
partner with NGOs and other nations in awareness raising and 
prevention activities. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) The following items are keyed off reftel. 
 
Overview of a country's activities to eliminate trafficking in 
persons: 
 
-- A. What is (are) the source(s) of available information on human 
trafficking?  What plans are in place (if any) to undertake further 
documentation of human trafficking?  How reliable are these 
sources? 
 
Information is obtained through the Department of Justice Anti-Human 
Trafficking Unit (AHTU), Garda Siochana (police), various Government 
agencies, NGOs, Interpol, Europol and Frontex.  Other trans-national 
lines of communication and bi-lateral co-operation with other law 
enforcement agencies provide the Garda with data relating to 
international trends/patterns in the area of human trafficking. 
Ireland also participates at various levels (policy, prevention, 
investigations, support) in relevant national and international fora 
in the area of human trafficking.  The Anti-Human Trafficking Unit 
(AHTU) has implemented, with effect from January 1, 2009, a data 
collection strategy which is closely modelled on data collection 
systems being developed at the EU level.  The goal of this strategy 
is to collect information on cases of possible/suspected trafficking 
by means of a standardised template from a variety of different 
sources (including NGOs, Government Agencies, Garda, etc). 
Reporting agencies are asked to report any cases of potential 
trafficking they encounter to the AHTU.  Sources are very reliable 
and have undertaken extensive efforts in past year to document 
activities. 
 
-- B. Is the country a country of origin, transit, and/or 
destination for men, women, or children subjected to conditions of 
commercial sexual exploitation, forced or bonded labor, or other 
slave-like conditions?  Are citizens or residents of the country 
subjected to such trafficking conditions within the country?  If so, 
does this internal trafficking occur in territory outside of the 
government's control (e.g. in a civil war situation)?  From where 
are people recruited or from where do they migrate prior to being 
subjected to these exploitative conditions?  To what other countries 
are people trafficked and for what purposes?  Provide, where 
possible, numbers or estimates for each group of trafficking 
victims.  Have there been any changes in the TIP situation since the 
last TIP Report (e.g. changes in destinations)? 
 
Ireland is, on a limited scale, a destination and transit country 
for international trafficking victims.  There is no accurate 
estimate on the number of victims.  Many NGOs make referrals among 
themselves and with the police.  Most victims are ultimately 
referred to Ruhama, an NGO that aids prostitutes.  A Ruhama 
representative said that they encountered 30 new cases in the past 
year, with victims almost entirely comprised of young women from 
Nigeria Multiple NGOs have mentioned the increasing role of the 
internet in creating virtual brothels. 
 
-- C. To what kind of conditions are the trafficking victims 
subjected? 
 
NGO and Government contacts agreed that the majority of suspected 
trafficking cases involved women who were brought into Ireland for 
the sex industry.  Garda believe that organized criminal gangs of 
foreign nationals facilitated much of the suspected sex trade 
trafficking and that these gangs also arranged for the victims' 
employment and accommodation in brothels. 
 
DUBLIN 00000065  002.3 OF 026 
 
 
 
The HSE have advised that some children who go missing and have been 
retraced are found in brothels, restaurants and private households 
where they may have been used as domestic slaves.  Of the 47 
children who went missing from care in 2009, nine were recovered. 
Authorities determined that the possibility of trafficking exists in 
one of these cases and it is currently under investigation. 
 
-- D. Vulnerability to TIP: Are certain groups of persons more at 
risk of human trafficking (e.g. women and children, boys versus 
girls, certain ethnic groups, refugees, IDPs, etc.)?  If so, please 
specify the type of exploitation for which these groups are most at 
risk 
 
Most cases of sex trafficking involved Nigerian women. 
 
-- E. Traffickers and Their Methods: Who are the 
traffickers/exploiters?  Are they independent business people? 
Small or family-based crime groups?  Large international organized 
crime syndicates?  What methods are used to gain direct access to 
victims?  For example, are the traffickers recruiting victims 
through lucrative job offers?  Are victims sold by their families, 
or approached by friends of friends?  Are victims "self-presenting" 
(approaching the exploiter without the involvement of a recruiter or 
transporter)?  If recruitment or transportation is involved, what 
methods are used to recruit or transport victims (e.g., are false 
documents being used)?  Are employment, travel, and tourism agencies 
or marriage brokers involved with or fronting for traffickers or 
crime groups to traffic individuals? 
 
NGOs and Garda indicate that traffickers run the range from 
organized crime to small operations.  Intelligence available to the 
Garda indicates that the bulk of the traffickers are a small group 
of individuals, some of whom are also involved in other forms 
criminality.  Experience of interaction with suspected victims would 
indicate that people/family known to them or their extended or 
adoptive family offer better jobs or an improved standard of living 
in Ireland or Western Europe.  Many of the cases under investigation 
in Ireland have involved the use of forged documents.  However, this 
is not always the case, as people travel on their own documents and 
only realize what type of situation they will be in once they arrive 
in Ireland.  For example, it has been established in some instances 
that women who believed they were coming to Ireland to work in 
legitimate professions ended up working in exploitative situations, 
including prostitution. 
 
In terms of children, it is the experience of the HSE that alleged 
traffickers are likely to be non-nationals and some are compatriots 
of their victims. 
 
 
SETTING THE SCENE FOR THE GOVERNMENT'S ANTI-TIP EFFORTS: 
 
-- A. Does the government acknowledge that human trafficking is a 
problem in the country?  If not, why not? 
 
The Irish Government acknowledges that Ireland is a destination 
country for trafficking and that trafficking victims have been 
identified.  It actively investigates all credible allegations of 
trafficking. 
 
-- B. Which government agencies are involved in efforts to combat 
sex and labor trafficking - including forced labor - and, which 
agency, if any, has the lead in these efforts? 
 
The Anti-Human Trafficking Unit in the Department of Justice has 
overall administrative responsibility for policy development and 
coordination of the Government's response to trafficking in persons. 
 In order to carry out that role effectively and to implement and 
facilitate a multidisciplinary approach, the AHTU works in close 
cooperation with a wide variety of relevant Government Agencies and 
Departments, in addition to NGOs and International Organizations 
(IOs) working in the anti-trafficking field.  This inter-party 
cooperation is chiefly conducted through a series of groups 
consisting of a High Level Interdepartmental Group, which is 
comprised of high level management from different Government 
Departments and Agencies, a Roundtable Group consisting of members 
of Government Departments and Agencies and members of NGOs and IOs, 
 
DUBLIN 00000065  003.3 OF 026 
 
 
and a series of Working Groups made up of NGOs, IOs, Government 
Agencies and Departments. 
 
Furthermore, the Department of Justice has a significant role in 
anti-trafficking efforts as it has the lead responsibility for 
policy in relation to criminal law and law enforcement, 
immigration/border control and gender equality.  However, other 
Government Departments and agencies also have an important role to 
play reflecting their particular policy and/or operational 
responsibilities. 
 
The Garda, as the national police force, is responsible for the 
prevention and investigation of criminal offences including human 
trafficking.  Within the Garda, the Garda National Immigration 
Bureau (GNIB) and the Garda National Bureau of Criminal 
Investigation (NBCI) have been assigned particular responsibilities 
in this regard.  The assets of all suspects are investigated and 
where there is a possibility to seize assets, which are believed to 
be the proceeds of crime, this is vigorously pursued by the Criminal 
Assets Bureau. 
 
The Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment, the Department 
of Foreign Affairs, the Department of Health and Children, the 
Office for the Minister for Children and the Health Service 
Executive all have statutory responsibilities in this area.  The 
Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment exercises vigilance 
to ensure work permits are not issued to persons who are likely to 
traffic persons.  The Department of Foreign Affairs exercises 
vigilance to ensure visas are not issued where trafficking may 
occur.  Finally the Department of Health and Children have statutory 
obligations in relation to child protection and welfare. 
 
-- C. What are the limitations on the government's ability to 
address these problems in practice?  For example, is funding for 
police or other institutions inadequate?  Is overall corruption a 
problem?  Does the government lack the resources to aid victims? 
 
Until 2008, the Irish Government enjoyed a budget surplus, and there 
are no unique limitations on resources to address trafficking.  The 
global recession has led to broad cuts in public spending, but 
anti-trafficking efforts do not appear to be adversely impacted at 
this time.  Irish police and border authorities are competent and 
well-run.  On June 7, 2008 a new Criminal Law (Human Trafficking) 
entered into force.  This brings Ireland into conformity with UN, EU 
and CoE anti-trafficking regulations and gives police more precise 
legal tools.  A limitation on the Government's ability to address 
trafficking would be lack of experience, particularly in the 
judiciary, with TIP issues. 
 
In terms of children, funding has historically been a challenge. 
There are considerable additional costs associated with bringing 
accommodation and care provision to the required standards. 
However, due to historical reasons and funding issues hostel 
accommodation has been used to house a large cohort of unaccompanied 
minors between 16 and 18 within the state.  H.S.E. management 
(responsible for the unaccompanied minors service) has been 
increasingly concerned at the inappropriateness of this form of 
placement for minors and also its potential contribution to the risk 
of minors going missing. 
 
However, considerable progress has been achieved in this area in the 
last year.  Three children's homes for unaccompanied minors under 16 
were opened in 2009 and bring the total number of such homes to 
four.  There were originally six hostels and one mother and baby 
home operating for unaccompanied minors.  H.S.E. management decided 
to close the hostels in early 2009 but waited until the autumn of 
that year to begin in order to facilitate children completing the 
academic year.  Two hostels have already been closed.  One closed in 
early September 2009 and the other in October 2009.  Three hostels 
remain open and a mother and baby home accommodating in total 70 
minors and 6 babies (with mothers).  The H.S.E. intends to close all 
remaining hostels in 2010, and to place children in a range of 
appropriate placements based on their assessed need. 
 
-- D. To what extent does the government systematically monitor its 
anti-trafficking efforts (on all fronts -- prosecution, victim 
protection, and prevention) and periodically make available, 
publicly or privately and directly or through regional/international 
 
DUBLIN 00000065  004.3 OF 026 
 
 
organizations, its assessments of these anti-trafficking efforts? 
 
The Interdepartmental High Level Group is responsible for 
development and monitoring of policy in this area.  The Roundtable 
Group and its five working groups are given updates of developments 
at each meeting and have the opportunity to make recommendations and 
input into policy formulation and development. 
 
The AHTU, in conjunction with stakeholders, assesses the number of 
possible cases of trafficking which are not subsequently deemed to 
be suspected cases.  The data gathered through this system is used 
to establish the nature and extent of trafficking, any trends which 
emerge in this regard, the impact of anti-trafficking activities and 
service provided to victims and to direct policy in this regard. 
 
All of the information is provided to the AHTU in an anonymous form 
with the suspected person's details retained by the reporting 
agency.  Victims are given a unique ID code, which is used for 
tracking purposes.  This is to ensure that data protection 
legislation is not violated.  The database is also routinely 
examined to ensure that any possible duplication is kept to a 
minimum. 
 
In relation to monitoring of prosecutions, arrangements are being 
developed for GNIB to record relevant details in relation to 
suspected traffickers' demographic characteristics, whether any 
involvement with organized crime is suspected, the role of the 
trafficker in the trafficking process and traffickers' relationship 
with their victims.  Suspected trafficker interaction with the 
criminal justice system is also closely monitored. 
 
The AHTU provides an analysis of the data collected by Government 
agencies and NGOs on a regular basis throughout the year.  These 
results provide statistics regarding the number of possible victims 
encountered, the number of victims formally identified and given 
recovery and reflection periods and temporary residence permits, 
information about services accessed by the victim and the number of 
convictions and prosecutions. 
 
Ireland is also part of a European G6 Initiative against human 
trafficking.  This initiative involves six European countries (UK, 
Poland, Italy, Netherlands, Spain and Ireland) and includes sharing 
best practices of anti-trafficking efforts.  The GNIB works under 
the Irish National Police but carries out its immigration functions 
on behalf of the Minister of Justice.  This system ensures a sharing 
of information among immigration policy-makers, immigration 
officers, and national police.  A GNIB official represents Ireland 
at the EU Border Agency in Warsaw. 
 
-- E. What measures has the government taken to establish the 
identity of local populations, including birth registration, 
citizenship, and nationality? 
 
N/A 
 
--F. To what extent is the government capable of gathering the data 
required for an in-depth assessment of law enforcement efforts? 
Where are the gaps?  Are there any ways to work around these gaps? 
 
The police routinely provide relevant information to the AHTU and 
are part of the round table meetings with government and NGOs. 
 
 
INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION OF TRAFFICKERS 
 
-- A. Existing Laws against TIP: Does the country have a law or laws 
specifically prohibiting trafficking in persons- both for sexual 
exploitation and labor?  If so, please specifically cite the name of 
the law(s) and its date of enactment and provide the exact language 
[actual copies preferable] of the TIP provisions.  Please provide a 
full inventory of trafficking laws, including non-criminal statutes 
that allow for civil penalties against alleged trafficking crimes 
(e.g., civil forfeiture laws and laws against illegal debt).  Does 
the law(s) cover both internal and transnational forms of 
trafficking?  If not, under what other laws can traffickers be 
prosecuted?  For example, are there laws against slavery or the 
exploitation of prostitution by means of force, fraud, or coercion? 
Are these other laws being used in trafficking cases? 
 
DUBLIN 00000065  005.3 OF 026 
 
 
 
The Criminal Law (Human Trafficking) Act, 2008, became operational 
on 7 June 2008 and creates offences of trafficking in children and 
adults for the purposes of their sexual or labor exploitation or the 
removal of their organs.  It also makes it an offence to sell or 
offer for sale or to purchase or offer to purchase any person for 
any purpose.  Penalties of up to life imprisonment apply in respect 
of these offences.  It is not a defense for the trafficker to argue 
that the person consented to the commission of any of the acts. 
Furthermore, under section 5 of the Act, any person who knowingly 
solicits or importunes a trafficking victim for the purposes of 
sexual exploitation shall be guilty of an offence and liable on 
conviction on indictment to an unlimited fine or a term of 
imprisonment not exceeding 5 years or both.  On summary conviction a 
fine not exceeding 5,000 or a term of imprisonment not exceeding 12 
months or both apply. 
 
Section 7 of the Criminal Law (Human Trafficking) 2008 Act provides 
for extra territorial jurisdiction where an Irish citizen or 
resident conspires, incites or commits acts which would be offences 
under this Act if they were committed in Ireland and also where the 
victim of such acts committed outside Ireland is an Irish citizen. 
Penalties of up to life imprisonment and an unlimited fine apply in 
respect of these offences. 
 
As with other offences contained in the Act, the maximum penalty for 
committing or attempting to commit any of the above offences is an 
unlimited fine and/or life imprisonment. 
 
The Act covers both internal and transnational forms of trafficking 
and also provides for the prosecution of bodies corporate. 
 
Prior to the enactment of the 2008 Act, the Garda utilized the 
provisions of Illegal Immigrants (Trafficking) Act, 2000 in cases 
where human trafficking was suspected.  Of particular relevance is 
section 2 of the Act, which relates to the facilitation and 
organization of the illegal entry of persons into the State for 
gain.  Penalties include: 
-- On summary conviction, a fine not exceeding Euro 1,500 (USD 1950) 
or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12 months or both. 
 
 -- On conviction on indictment, to a fine or to imprisonment for a 
term not exceeding 10 years or both. 
 
Section 3 of the Child Trafficking and Pornography Act 1998, as 
amended by Section 3 of the Criminal Law (Human Trafficking) Act 
2008 which increased the age by which a person can be regarded in 
law as a child from 17 to 18 years old, created the offence of 
Trafficking of Children for the Purpose of Sexual Exploitation. 
Section 3 (1) makes it an offence to organize or knowingly 
facilitate child trafficking - that is, the entry into, transit 
through or exit from the State of a child for the purpose of his or 
her sexual exploitation.  It is also an offence to provide 
accommodation to a child for this purpose.  The offence is 
punishable on conviction by up to life imprisonment.  Under Section 
3(2) any person who detains or restricts the personal liberty of a 
child for the purpose of the child's sexual exploitation is liable 
on conviction to up to 14 years imprisonment.  The same penalty 
applies to persons who organize or knowingly facilitate such taking, 
detaining or restricting of children's liberty for that purpose. 
 
The Criminal Assets Bureau Act 1996 established the Criminal Assets 
Bureau (CAB).  The functions of CAB under section 4 of the Act are: 
 
 
 -- the identification of the assets, wherever situated, of persons 
which derive or are suspected to derive, directly or indirectly, 
from criminal activity, 
 
 -- the taking of appropriate action under the law to deprive or to 
deny those persons of the assets or the benefit of such assets, in 
whole or in part, as may be appropriate, and 
 
 -- the pursuit of any investigation or the doing of any other 
preparatory work in relation to any proceedings arising from the 
objectives mentioned in paragraphs (a) and (b). 
 
In addition, the Proceeds of Crime (Amendment) Act 2005 allows CAB 
 
DUBLIN 00000065  006.3 OF 026 
 
 
to seize assets that were generated in foreign jurisdictions.  The 
Act allows CAB to cooperate fully with other international assets 
recovery agencies. 
 
False imprisonment is an offence under section 15 of the Non-Fatal 
Offences against the Person Act 1998 and is punishable by up to life 
imprisonment. 
 
The Slave Trade Act 1824 renders all operations in connection with 
the slave trade illegal and slavery or servitude is prohibited under 
the Irish Constitution (Article 40). 
 
-- B. Punishment of Sex Trafficking Offenses:  What are the 
prescribed and imposed penalties for the trafficking of persons for 
commercial sexual exploitation, including for the forced 
prostitution of adults and the prostitution of children? 
 
Under the Human Trafficking Act, penalties of up to life 
imprisonment apply in respect of these offences.  It is also an 
offence for a person to solicit for prostitution a person who he/she 
knows or has reasonable grounds for believing is a trafficked 
person.  A person (other than the trafficked person) who accepts or 
agrees to accept a payment, right, interest or other benefit from a 
person for this purpose also commits an offence.  The penalty is up 
to five years imprisonment or an unlimited fine or both on 
conviction on indictment. 
 
Under the Illegal Immigrants (Trafficking) Act 2000, the penalty can 
include up to a Euro 1,500 (1,950 USD) fine and 12 months in jail. 
If a case is appealed to the district court, then the penalty is a 
maximum of ten years imprisonment.  There is no cap on the fine. 
 
Under the Child Trafficking and Pornography Act 1998 the penalty is 
up to life imprisonment. 
 
-- C. Punishment of Labor Trafficking Offenses:  What are the 
prescribed and imposed penalties for trafficking for labor 
exploitation, including all forms of forced labor?  If your country 
is a source country for labor migrants, do the government's laws 
provide for criminal punishment -- i.e. jail time -- for labor 
recruiters who engage in recruitment of workers using knowingly 
fraudulent or deceptive offers with the purpose of subjecting 
workers to compelled service in the destination country?  If your 
country is a destination for labor migrants (legal/regular or 
illegal/irregular), are there laws punishing employers or labor 
agents who confiscate workers' passports or travel documents for the 
purpose of labor trafficking, switch contracts without the worker's 
consent as a means to keep the worker in a state of compelled 
service, or withhold payment of salaries as means of keeping the 
worker in a state of compelled service? 
 
The Criminal Law (Human Trafficking) Act 2008 creates the offence of 
trafficking for the purpose of labor exploitation:  Section 1 
defines labour exploitation as: 
"labour exploitation" means, in relation to a person (including a 
child): 
 
(a) subjecting the person to forced labour, 
 
(b) forcing him or her to render services to another, or 
 
(c) enslavement of the person or subjecting him or her to servitude 
or a similar condition or state. 
 
Section 4, inter alia, creates the offence of trafficking in persons 
other than children for the purpose of labor exploitation.  (Section 
2 deals with child trafficking.) 
 
Section 4: (1)Trafficking of persons other than children: 
(1) A person (in this section referred to as the "trafficker") who 
trafficks another person (in this Act referred to as the "trafficked 
person"), other than a child or a person to whom subsection (3) 
applies, for the purposes of the exploitation of the trafficked 
person shall be guilty of an offence if, in or for the purpose of 
trafficking the trafficked person, the trafficker - 
 
(a) coerced, threatened, abducted or otherwise used force against 
the trafficked person, 
 
DUBLIN 00000065  007.3 OF 026 
 
 
 
(b) deceived or committed a fraud against the trafficked person, 
 
(c) abused his or her authority or took advantage of the 
vulnerability of the trafficked person to such extent as to cause 
the trafficked person to have had no real and  acceptable 
alternative but to submit to being trafficked, 
 
(d) coerced, threatened or otherwise used force against any person 
in whose care or charge, or under whose control, the trafficked 
person was for the time being, in order to compel that person to 
permit the trafficker to traffick the trafficked person, or 
 
(e) made any payment to, or conferred any right, interest or other 
benefit on, any person in whose care or charge, or under whose 
control, the trafficked person was for the time being, in exchange 
for that person permitting the trafficker to traffick the trafficked 
person. 
 
(2) In proceedings for an offence under this section it shall not be 
a defense for the defendant to show that the person in respect of 
whom the offence was committed consented to the commission of any of 
the acts of which the offence consists. 
 
(3) A person who traffics a person who is mentally impaired for the 
purposes of the exploitation of the person shall be guilty of an 
offence. 
 
(4)  A person who - 
 
 (a) sells another person, offers or exposes another person for sale 
or invites the making of an offer to purchase another person, or 
 
 (b) purchases or makes an offer to purchase another person, shall 
be guilty of an offence. 
 
(5) A person who causes an offence under subsection (1), (3) or (4) 
to be committed shall be guilty of an offence. 
 
(6) A person who attempts to commit an offence under subsection (1), 
(3), (4) or (5) shall be guilty of an offence. 
 
(7) A person guilty of an offence under this section shall be liable 
upon conviction on indictment - 
 
(a) to imprisonment for life or a lesser term, and 
(b) at the discretion of the court, to a fine. 
 
(8) In this section "mentally impaired" has the same meaning as it 
has in the Criminal Law (Sexual Offences) Act 1993. 
 
In addition to the Criminal Law (Human Trafficking Act) 2008, the 
entire range of statutory employment rights and protections 
available in Ireland are applicable equally to foreign nationals and 
Irish workers.  Persons who have been trafficked for the purposes of 
labor exploitation can seek legal redress and compensation through a 
number of State bodies that deal specifically with work related 
rights and entitlements.  These include the Employment Appeals 
Tribunal (EAT), the Labour Relations Commission (LRC), the Labour 
Court and the Equality Tribunal.  There are no fees charged for 
claims taken to these employment rights bodies nor is it necessary 
to be legally represented at hearings. 
 
Legislation of relevance to victims trafficked for the purposes of 
forced labor include the following: 
 
The Organisation and Working Time Act 1997 states that the maximum 
average working week for many employees cannot exceed 48 hours. 
This does not mean that a working week can never exceed 48 hours; it 
is the average that is important.  Disputes in relation to the Act 
can be referred to a Rights Commissioner. 
 
The National Minimum Wage Act 2000 provides that the minimum wage 
rate for an experienced adult employee from July 1, 2007 is euro 
8.65 (USD 11) an hour.  An experienced adult employee for the 
purposes of the National Minimum Wage Act is an employee over the 
age of 18 who has an employment of any kind in any 2 years. 
Disputes in relation to the Act can be referred to either an 
 
DUBLIN 00000065  008.3 OF 026 
 
 
inspector from the National Employment Rights Authority to 
investigate or to a Rights Commissioner, but not to both. 
 
Under the Unfair Dismissals Acts 1977 to 2001 circumstances in which 
unfair dismissal can occur are where: 
 
-- An employer terminates an employee's contract of employment, with 
or without notice, or 
 
-- An employee terminates his/her contract of employment, with or 
without notice, due to the conduct of his/her employer.  This is 
known as constructive dismissal. 
 
If an employee is dismissed from his/her employment, he or she may, 
under certain conditions, bring a claim for unfair dismissal against 
the employer.  The Unfair Dismissals legislation in Ireland does not 
actually protect an employee from dismissal; rather it provides a 
system of appeal whereby employees can question the fairness of 
their dismissal after it has occurred.  Disputes in relation to the 
Act can be referred to a Rights Commissioner or to the Employment 
Appeals Tribunal. 
 
There are two distinct pieces of legislation in place in Ireland 
which set out important rights for citizens and specifically outlaw 
discrimination when it occurs.  The Employment Equality Act 1998 and 
the Equal Status Act 2000 as amended by the Equality Act 2004 outlaw 
discrimination in employment, vocational training, advertising, 
collective agreements, the provision of goods and services and other 
opportunities to which the public generally have access. 
Specifically, service providers, agencies and anyone providing 
opportunities to which the public have access, cannot discriminate 
against citizens on nine distinct grounds, as follows: 
 
-- gender 
-- marital status 
-- family status 
-- sexual orientation 
-- religion 
-- age (does not apply to a person under 16) 
-- disability 
-- race 
-- membership of the Traveller community. 
 
All claims must be referred to the Equality Tribunal with the 
exception of claims about gender discrimination in employment which 
can be referred to either the Circuit Court or the Equality 
Tribunal, but not both. 
 
The Employment Permits Act, 2003 introduced a revised legislative 
basis for work permits, including penalties for employers for 
illegal employment of non-nationals.  This Act provides legislative 
protection against the labour exploitation of non-nationals. 
 
The Terms of Employment (Information) Acts, 1994 and 2001 require 
employers to provide employees with a written statement of certain 
particulars of their employees' terms of employment.  The employer 
must provide the written statement of particulars within 2 months of 
the date of commencement of employment.  The written statement must 
include particulars of the terms of employment relating to the name 
and address of the employer, the place of work, job title/nature of 
the work, date of commencement of the employment, the expected 
duration of contract, rate or method of calculation of pay, hours of 
work, rest periods, paid leave, pensions and notice entitlements. 
An employer is required to notify an employee of any changes to the 
particulars contained in the statement within one month after the 
change takes effect.  Employees may make a complaint to a Rights 
Commissioner where he/she believes that his/her employer has failed 
to provide a written statement or to notify the employee of changes 
to the particulars contained in the statement. 
 
The Payment of Wages Act, 1991 provides a right of complaint to a 
Rights Commissioner for any employee who has had an unlawful 
deduction made from wages.  Under this Act employers are obliged to 
provide a statement of pay with every wage payment.  A pay slip must 
show gross wages and itemize all deductions.  If the Rights 
Commissioner decides that a complaint is well founded, he/she shall 
order the employer to pay compensation to the employee. 
Alternatively, the employee may sue for wages in the ordinary 
 
DUBLIN 00000065  009.3 OF 026 
 
 
courts.  Where the employee's wages are governed by an Employment 
Regulation Order or Registered Employment Agreement, the employer 
will be guilty of an offence under the Industrial Relations Acts if 
they fail to pay wages or if they pay less than the statutory 
prescribed rate.  The Labour Inspectorate will seek to recover pay 
arrears in any such instances and will, if necessary, initiate legal 
proceedings. 
 
Ireland's comprehensive body of employment rights legislation, which 
protects employees against arbitrary behavior by employers, applies 
to all workers employed on an employer-employee basis in Ireland. 
The Protection of Employee's (Part-Time) Work Act, 2001 also 
provides that all employee protection legislation applies to a 
person, irrespective of his or her nationality or place of 
residence, who has entered into a contract of employment that 
provides for his or her being employed in the State or who works in 
the State under a contract of employment. 
 
Under this legislation, a person, irrespective of nationality or 
place of residence, who works in the State under a contract of 
employment, has the same rights under Irish employment rights 
legislation as Irish employees. 
 
Labour Inspectors pursue allegations of worker mistreatment and when 
evidence of non-compliance with the relevant employment rights 
legislation is found, the Inspectorate seeks redress for the 
individual/s concerned and, if appropriate, a prosecution is 
initiated.  Employers are required to maintain records in respect of 
such employees and these records, together with other substantiating 
evidence, for example, a statement from an employee, provide the 
essentials of a basis for legal proceedings.  Failure to maintain 
adequate records by an employer is an offence. 
 
The Social Partnership Agreement "Towards 2016" sets out a number of 
commitments with regard to employment standards and compliance, 
including: 
 
-- a trebling in the number of Labour Inspectors, 
 
-- greater coordination among organizations concerned with 
compliance, 
 
-- provision for joint investigations between the Labour 
Inspectorate, the Revenue Commissioners and the Department of Social 
and Family Affairs, 
 
-- new requirements in respect of record keeping by employers, 
 
-- enhanced employment rights awareness activity, 
 
-- the introduction of a new and more user-friendly system of 
employment rights compliance, and 
 
-- increased resourcing of the system and higher penalties for 
non-compliance with employment law. 
 
"Towards 2016" provides that the number of Labour Inspectors will be 
progressively increased from 31 to 90 beyond 2007 as part of the 
initiative to increase the staffing resources of the Employment 
Rights Bodies generally. 
 
"Towards 2016" is an active social partnership agreement with clear 
deliverables agreed between the Government, employers bodies, trade 
unions and the community and voluntary sector.  Such agreements have 
been part of economic and social policy in Ireland since the 
"Programme for National Recovery" was agreed in 1987. 
 
-- D. What are the prescribed penalties for rape or forcible sexual 
assault? 
 
Under Irish Law, the maximum sentence possible for rape is life 
imprisonment (eight years is the average sentence), and the maximum 
possible sentence for aggravated sexual assault is life 
imprisonment. 
 
-- E. Law Enforcement Statistics: Did the government take legal 
action against human trafficking offenders during the reporting 
period?  If so, provide numbers of investigations, prosecutions, 
 
DUBLIN 00000065  010.3 OF 026 
 
 
convictions, and sentences imposed, including details on plea 
bargains and fines, if relevant and available.  Please note the 
number of convicted trafficking offenders who received suspended 
sentences and the number who received only a fine as punishment. 
Please indicate which laws were used to investigate, prosecute, 
convict, and sentence traffickers.  Also, if possible, please 
disaggregate numbers of cases by type of TIP (labor vs. commercial 
sexual exploitation) and victims (children under 18 years of age vs. 
adults).  What were the actual punishments imposed on convicted 
trafficking offenders? Are they serving the time sentenced?  If not, 
why not? 
 
In 2009, the government initiated 68 investigations into alleged 
human trafficking offenses.  The government reported ten 
prosecutions in 2009, including three in Romania and three in Wales. 
One individual was convicted for three counts under the Child 
Trafficking and Pornography Act 1998 to a total of 6 years.  Another 
defendant was convicted and sentenced to six years' imprisonment in 
2009 for crimes under the Child Trafficking and Pornography Act 
¶1998.  A third individual believed to be bringing a woman into 
Ireland for the purpose of sexual exploitation was charged under the 
Illegal Immigrants (Trafficking) Act 2000 and sentenced under the 
Probation Act (offense proved but no penalty applied).  In November, 
2009, police encountered a victim who alleged that one of her 
traffickers was a member of the police force who at the time was on 
long term suspension for another matter.  This individual has been 
arrested under the Human Trafficking Act and the investigation is 
ongoing. 
 
A further case is awaiting trial.  The initial complaint was made in 
July 2008 when the injured party was 15 years.  Following an 
investigation it was discovered that a female Nigerian national had 
put the injured party into prostitution and was sexually exploiting 
her.  The case is currently before the Dublin Circuit Criminal Court 
where the accused (female Nigerian National) is charged contrary to 
Section 3 of the Child Trafficking and Pornography Act 1998 for 
child trafficking and taking, etc. child for sexual exploitation (2 
counts) and contrary to Section 3 of the Criminal Law (Human 
Trafficking) Act 2008 for child trafficking and taking, etc. child 
for sexual exploitation (1 count).  The child has been rescued from 
her trafficker and is State care. 
 
-- F. Does the government provide any specialized training for 
government officials in how to recognize, investigate, and prosecute 
instances of trafficking? Or training on investigating and 
prosecuting human trafficking crimes?  Specify whether NGOs, 
international organizations, and/or the USG provide specialized 
training for host government officials. 
 
The following occurred in 2009: 
 
-Specialized training course in September, 2009 for staff of the 
Legal Aid Board who are providing legal aid and advice to potential 
and suspected victims of trafficking in human beings. 
 
-Executive Director of the Anti-Human Trafficking Unit addressed a 
Seminar on Strategies for Tackling Forced Labor on 1 October 2009 
organized by the Migrants Rights Council of Ireland (MRCI) and the 
International Labour Organisation. 
 
-Training courses entitled 'Tackling Trafficking in Human Beings: 
Prevention, Protection and Prosecution' delivered to 100 members of 
the Garda Sochna in November and December 2009. 
 
-250 probationer members of the Garda Sochna received awareness 
raising/victim identification training on human trafficking. 
 
-3 members of the Garda Sochna from the Garda National Immigration 
Bureau attended CEPOL Trafficking courses in Brussels, Vilnius and 
Madrid. 
 
-Attendance and participation in a Cross-Border Crime Conference 
between the Garda Sochna, the Police Service of Northern Ireland 
(PSNI) and other law enforcement agencies in both jurisdictions in 
October 2009.  Trafficking of human beings featured in a number of 
presentations and was the subject of a specific workshop. 
 
-Development, design and delivery of a 'Train the Trainer' course 
 
DUBLIN 00000065  011.3 OF 026 
 
 
for staff of Government and Public Sector organizations to enable 
training on human trafficking to be rolled out to all staff in these 
organizations.  Courses took place in November and December, 2009. 
A total of 23 people were trained from 9 different organizations - 
Department of Agriculture, RIA, Prison Service, Department of 
Enterprise, Trade & Employment, Legal Aid Board, FAS, Department of 
Social & Family Affairs, NERA and the HSE.  A third course will take 
place in 2010.  Presentations were made by the Anti-Human 
Trafficking Unit, the Garda National Immigration Bureau and the 
Health Service Executive. 
 
--G. Does the government cooperate with other governments in the 
investigation and prosecution of trafficking cases? If possible, 
provide the number of cooperative international investigations on 
trafficking during the reporting period? 
 
Yes.  Examples of international police cooperation include: 
 
-- Exchange of liaison officers between GNIB and United Kingdom 
Border Agency (UKBA). 
 
-- Sharing immigration related information between the GNIB and the 
UKBA. 
 
-- Continuous liaison with the UK trafficking initiative Operation 
'Pentameter I' and 'Pentameter II' - a GNIB Liaison Officer was 
appointed to ensure full coordination. 
 
-- Appointment of a GNIB Liaison Officer to deal with Europol and 
Interpol to specifically deal with requests from both organizations. 
 
 
-- Appointment of GNIB personnel as Airline Liaison officers who are 
intermittently based at hub-airports in other EU Member States. 
 
-- Provision of access to Interpol's I-24/7 global police 
communications system at all Ports of Entry in the State thereby 
enabling immediate access to information held by Interpol relating 
to immigration matters. 
 
-- Participation by representatives of the Garda in the Interpol 
Working Group on trafficking in human beings. 
 
-- Regular liaison between the Irish and French immigration 
personnel. 
 
-- The secondment of a UK Immigration Service Officer to the British 
Embassy in Dublin to liaise with GNIB. 
 
-- Appointment of GNIB officers to liaise with the UK Immigration 
Service and the Police Service of Northern Ireland (in relation to 
the land border between Ireland and Northern Ireland). 
 
-- International Investigations with other States on an ongoing 
basis. 
 
-- Frontex sharing of information and regular attendance at 
meetings. 
 
-- OSCE (Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Central 
Europe), attendance at meetings on Trafficking in Human Beings. 
 
-- Council of Europe. 
 
-- UN and UNGIFT. 
 
The government reported that it cooperated with other countries on 
international anti-trafficking investigations.  In December 2009, 
three persons were sentenced in Romania for a range of offences, 
which included trafficking of persons to Ireland for the purposes of 
labor exploitation, largely on the basis of evidence gathered by the 
Irish police.  One was sentenced to seven years imprisonment and his 
two co-accused were each sentenced to five years imprisonment.  As a 
result of a joint operation between the police forces in Ireland and 
the UK, three persons have pleaded guilty to offences of 
prostitution and money laundering, but not to human trafficking.  In 
February, Cardiff Crown Court senenced one individual to a total of 
seven years imprisonment (five years for controlling prostitution 
 
DUBLIN 00000065  012.3 OF 026 
 
 
and two for money laundering), another to  three years and six 
months (two years and six months for prostitution and one year for 
money laundering), and a third to two years. 
 
-- H. Does the government extradite persons who are charged with 
trafficking in other countries?  If so, please provide the number of 
traffickers extradited during the reporting period, and the number 
of trafficking extraditions pending. In particular, please report on 
any pending or concluded extraditions of trafficking offenders to 
the United States. 
 
Ireland extradites persons in certain circumstances with those 
countries with which it has extradition agreements in place. 
However, Irish courts take a very exacting approach toward such 
requests.  Requests that do not fully comply with the standards set 
by the courts are often delayed or denied, as the legal presumption 
is against extradition.  In addition, Irish courts will deny an 
extradition request if they feel that the defendant will not be 
given the same guarantees available under the Irish constitution in 
the requesting jurisdiction. 
 
As of February 2008, the Irish Parliament had enacted four 
agreements - the U.S.-EU Extradition Agreement, the U.S.-Ireland 
Extradition Agreement, the U.S.-EU Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty, 
and the U.S.-Ireland Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty.  The Department 
of Foreign Affairs had drawn up a diplomatic note to be exchanged 
with the U.S. stating that Ireland has completed its internal 
procedures for the entry into force of the U.S./Ireland Extradition 
and Mutual Legal Assistance Agreements.  The Department of State was 
prepared to exchange instruments of ratification and was developing 
a draft protocol of exchange to be exchanged with the Irish 
bilaterally. 
 
Within the European Union, persons can also be returned to their own 
jurisdiction under the provisions of the European Arrest Warrant Act 
¶2004.  Extradition in Ireland is governed by the Extradition Act 
1965 as amended and the European Arrest Warrant Act 2003 as amended. 
 Part II of the Extradition Act 1965 applies to non EU countries 
including the U.S. and the European Arrest Warrant (EAW) Act 2003 
governs extradition arrangements with Member States of the EU. 
 
In 2008 there were no requests under Part II of the Extradition Act 
1965 as amended in relation to trafficking offenders. 
 
There is currently one European Arrest Warrant Requests which 
relates to a Polish national who is currently in custody pending his 
extradition to Poland.  Further, in March 2009, a male was 
extradited to Germany and in July 2009, a Moldovan male was 
extradited to France. 
 
-- I. Is there evidence of government involvement in or tolerance of 
trafficking, on a local or institutional level?  If so, please 
explain in detail. 
 
There is no evidence of Government involvement in or tolerance of 
trafficking, on a local or institutional level. 
 
-- J. If government officials are involved in trafficking, what 
steps has the government taken to end such participation?  Please 
indicate the number of government officials investigated and 
prosecuted for involvement in trafficking or trafficking-related 
corruption during the reporting period.  Have any been convicted? 
What sentence(s) was imposed?  Please specify if officials received 
suspended sentences, or were given a fine, fired, or reassigned to 
another position within the government as punishment.  Please 
indicate the number of convicted officials that received suspended 
sentences or received only a fine as punishment. 
 
There is no evidence of Government involvement in or tolerance of 
trafficking, on a local or institutional level.  However, following 
a November raid, a female alleged that she was a victim of human 
trafficking for the purpose of sexual exploitation and she nominated 
a number of persons as having an active role in the commission of 
this offence.  One of the persons nominated was a serving member of 
the Garda Sochna, currently on long term suspension from duty for 
other matters.  This individual has been arrested on suspicion of 
offences under the Criminal Law (Human Trafficking) Act 2008.  The 
case is currently under investigation. 
 
DUBLIN 00000065  013.3 OF 026 
 
 
 
-- K. For countries that contribute troops to international 
peacekeeping efforts, please indicate whether the government 
vigorously investigated, prosecuted, convicted and sentenced 
nationals of the country deployed abroad as part of a peacekeeping 
or other similar mission who engage in or facilitate severe forms of 
trafficking or who exploit victims of such trafficking. 
 
Ireland's military is small.  Nonetheless, ten percent of the force 
- about 800 troops - is dedicated to peacekeeping duties, most 
prominently in Chad and Kosovo.  The Department of Defence ensures 
that commanding officers and military police personnel on 
international peacekeeping missions abroad are constantly vigilant 
in the area of Human Trafficking.  In the past, one reported case 
involving as Irish soldier on an overseas mission was fully 
investigated by military police but turned out not to constitute 
human trafficking. 
 
Pursuant to section 169 of the Defence Act 1954 it is possible to 
prosecute offences under the Criminal Law (Human Trafficking) Act 
2008, where an investigation discloses evidence to support such 
offences.  No offenses have been detected and no prosecutions 
against a member of the Permanent Defence Force have taken place to 
date. 
 
-- L. If the country has an identified problem of child sex tourists 
coming to the country, what are the countries of origin for sex 
tourists?  How many foreign pedophiles did the government prosecute 
or deport/extradite to their country of origin?  If your host 
country's nationals are perpetrators of child sex tourism, do the 
country's child sexual abuse laws have extraterritorial coverage 
(similar to the U.S. PROTECT Act) to allow the prosecution of 
suspected sex tourists for crimes committed abroad?  If so, how many 
of the country's nationals were prosecuted and/or convicted during 
the reporting period under the extraterritorial provision(s) for 
traveling to other countries to engage in child sex tourism? 
 
Ireland does not have an identified child sex tourism problem.  The 
Government has authority to deport non-national pedophiles according 
to the strictures of its extradition treaty with the country of 
origin of the arrested individual.  In addition, the Child 
Trafficking and Pornography Act has extraterritorial coverage. 
 
 
PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS 
 
-- A.  What kind of protection is the government able under existing 
law to provide for victims and witnesses?  Does it provide these 
protections in practice? 
 
Witness protection for victims of trafficking:  Under the Criminal 
Justice (Human Trafficking) Act 2008, specific measures are 
legislated in order to provide greater protection to those 
participating in court proceedings involving cases of human 
trafficking. 
 
Section 10 (1) provides: 
 
-- In proceedings for an offence under section 2 or 4, or section 3 
(other than subsections (2A) and (2B)) of the Act of 1998, or 
incitement or conspiracy to commit any such offence, all persons, 
other than officers of the court, persons directly concerned in the 
proceedings and such other persons (if any) as the judge of the 
court may determine, shall be excluded from the court during the 
proceedings. 
 
Provisions are also contained within the Act to protect the identity 
of the victim from being publicized in the media.  Section 11 (1) 
provides: 
 
-- "Where a person is charged with an offence under section 2 or 4, 
or section 3 (other than subsections (2A) and (2B)) of the Act of 
1998, any person who publishes or broadcasts any information, 
including- 
 
(a)  any photograph of, or that includes a depiction of, the alleged 
victim of the offence, or 
 
 
DUBLIN 00000065  014.3 OF 026 
 
 
(b)  any other representation of the physical likeness, or any 
representation that includes a depiction of the physical likeness, 
of the alleged victim of the offence, that is likely to enable the 
identification of the alleged victim of the offence, shall, subject 
to any direction under subsection (2), be guilty of an offence and 
shall be liable upon conviction on indictment to a fine, or 
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 10 years, or both." 
 
The Criminal Evidence Act 1992, is amended under section 12 Criminal 
Law (Human Trafficking) Act 2008 to include reference to trafficking 
in human beings in terms of section 2, 4 and 7.  This means that it 
will be possible for an alleged victim of trafficking to give 
evidence through a live television link, with the leave of the court 
in the case of adults, from either within the State or abroad. 
 
-- B.  Does the country have victim care facilities (shelters or 
drop-in centers) which are accessible to trafficking victims?  Do 
foreign victims have the same access to care as domestic trafficking 
victims?  Where are child victims placed (e.g., in shelters, foster 
care, or juvenile justice detention centers)?  Does the country have 
specialized care for adults in addition to children? 
Does the country have specialized care for male victims as well as 
female?   Does the country have specialized facilities dedicated to 
helping victims of trafficking? 
Are these facilities operated by the government or by NGOs?  What is 
the funding source of these facilities?  Please estimate the amount 
the government spent (in U.S. dollar equivalent) on these 
specialized facilities dedicated to helping trafficking victims 
during the reporting period. 
 
The Reception and Integration Agency (RIA), a Government Agency, 
provides accommodation, as an interim measure, to all potential or 
suspected adult victims of trafficking referred to RIA by the Garda 
National Immigration Bureau (GNIB).  This arrangement has operated 
satisfactorily to date. 
 
Potential and suspected victims of trafficking are given the same 
accommodation as that provided to any newly arrived asylum seekers 
in direct provision, i.e., accommodation in a reception centre.  The 
reception centers at which victims are accommodated include a 
medical center on-site, managed by the Health Service Executive 
(HSE). 
 
Accommodation for suspected victims of sexual exploitation is also 
provided by the NGO Ruhama.  This accommodation is provided for the 
duration of a period of recovery and reflection and for the duration 
of the temporary residence permit. 
 
The Health Service Executive (HSE) has responsibility for children 
under legislation as set out in Section 5 of the Child Care Act 
¶1991.  Section 5 provides: "Where it appears to a health board that 
a child in its area is homeless, the board shall enquire into the 
child's circumstances, and if the board is satisfied that there is 
no accommodation available to him which he can reasonably occupy, 
then, unless the child is received into the care of the board under 
the provisions of this Act, the board shall take such steps as are 
reasonable to make available suitable accommodation for him." 
 
There is no specific funding set aside for support services provided 
to victims of trafficking as this in not the norm in the Irish 
context.  Instead funding for victims of trafficking is provided 
from overall Departmental/Organizational budgets.  Similarly, 
funding to organizations is not specifically for the provision of 
assistance to suspected victims of trafficking.  Rather, it is a 
matter for such organizations to determine how funding is spent. 
Therefore it is not possible to provide a financial estimate of the 
precise amount of funding allocated to the services to victims of 
trafficking. 
 
Ruhama has been allocated euro 250,000 (USD 340,000) in 2009 from 
the Probation Service from their budget allocation for "Assistance 
to Voluntary Bodies," part of which relates to its work for dealing 
with trafficking in women for the purposes of sexual exploitation. 
This funding amounts to approximately half of Ruhama's budget. 
Ruhama has also been allocated euro 62,000 (USD 84,320) in 2009 from 
the Commission for the Support of Victims of Crime for the purposes 
of accompanying women who appear before a court.  It received a 
further euro 144,000 (USD 197,280) from the Health Service 
 
DUBLIN 00000065  015.3 OF 026 
 
 
Executive. 
 
Victims of Human Trafficking would generally receive the following 
additional financial supports: 
 
-Those granted temporary residency all receive jobseekers allowance 
at a personal rate of euro 196 and an additional euro 29 for each 
additional child. 
 
-Those granted temporary residency also receive rent allowance at a 
minimum rate of euro 390 per month for a single person and up to 
euro 930 per month for a mother and child.  Deposits for securing 
accommodation have also been paid for these individuals that equate 
to a month's rent. 
 
-Most of the victims granted temporary residency who are on low 
incomes are entitled to the General Medical Scheme which entitles 
them to free visits to a General Practitioner (i.e. euro 55 per 
visit) and free medicines on prescription. 
 
-Those who are repatriated receive travel warrants equating to the 
full cost of the airline travel. 
 
-- C.  Does the government provide trafficking victims with access 
to legal, medical and psychological services?  If so, please specify 
the kind of assistance provided. Does the government provide funding 
or other forms of support to foreign or domestic NGOs and/or 
international organizations for providing these services to 
trafficking victims?  Please explain and provide any funding amounts 
in U.S. dollar equivalent.  If assistance provided was in-kind, 
please specify exact assistance.  Please specify if funding for 
assistance comes from a federal budget or from regional or local 
governments. 
 
Legal Services 
 
Arrangements are being finalised for the provision of legal advice 
and legal aid by the Legal Aid Board in civil and criminal cases. 
Legal advice will be provided in the context of civil actions in 
relation to relevant judicial and administrative proceedings.  Legal 
Aid means representation by a solicitor or barrister in civil 
proceedings in the District, Circuit, High and Supreme Courts. 
Legal Aid is available also for representation before the Refugee 
Appeals Tribunal.  Persons who are granted legal advice and/or legal 
aid must pay a contribution to the Board.  However, the intention is 
this will be waived in the case of potential or suspected victims of 
trafficking. 
 
The Legal Aid Board also provides legal advice and legal aid, i.e. 
representation in court, to complainants in certain cases of sexual 
assault in circumstances where the defendant wishes to question a 
witness in relation to their sexual history.  However, in terms of 
its mandate under legislation, the Legal Aid Board cannot provide 
legal aid in criminal cases to victims of trafficking. 
Consequently, approval has been sought to provide legal services of 
this nature on an administrative basis until the necessary 
legislative amendments can be made. 
 
Medical and Psychological Services 
 
These services are provided to all victims of trafficking in health 
centres managed by the HSE at the reception centres of the Reception 
and Integration Agency at which they are accommodated. 
 
Ruhama has been allocated euro 250,000 (USD 340,000) in 2009 from 
the Probation Service from their budget allocation for "Assistance 
to Voluntary Bodies," part of which relates to its work for dealing 
with trafficking in women for the purposes of sexual exploitation. 
This funding amounts to approximately half of Ruhama's budget. 
Ruhama has also been allocated euro 62,000 (USD 84,320) in 2009 from 
the Commission for the Support of Victims of Crime for the purposes 
of accompanying women who appear before a court.  It received a 
further euro 144,000 (USD 197,280) from the Health Service 
Executive. 
 
Victims of Human Trafficking would generally receive the following 
additional financial supports: 
 
 
DUBLIN 00000065  016.3 OF 026 
 
 
-Those granted temporary residency all receive jobseekers allowance 
at a personal rate of euro 196 and an additional euro 29 for each 
additional child. 
 
-Those granted temporary residency also receive rent allowance at a 
minimum rate of euro 390 per month for a single person and up to 
euro 930 per month for a mother and child.  Deposits for securing 
accommodation have also been paid for these individuals that equate 
to a month's rent. 
 
-Most of the victims granted temporary residency who are on low 
incomes are entitled to the General Medical Scheme which entitles 
them to free visits to a General Practitioner (i.e. euro 55 per 
visit) and free medicines on prescription. 
 
-Those who are repatriated receive travel warrants equating to the 
full cost of the airline travel. 
 
-- D. Does the government assist foreign trafficking victims, for 
example, by providing temporary to permanent residency status, or 
other relief from deportation?  If so, please explain. 
 
The Immigration, Residence and Protection Bill, which is currently 
before the Irish Parliament, provides for certain immigration 
protections relating to periods of recovery and reflection and 
temporary residence.  Section 127 of the Bill provides for a 
recovery and reflection period of 45 days and, in circumstances 
where the victim wishes to assist the authorities in any 
investigation or prosecution arising, the possibility of a renewable 
temporary permission of 6 months to enable him or her to do so. 
 
Following the enactment of the Criminal Law (Human Trafficking) Act 
2008 in June 2008, the Minister for Justice, Equality and Law Reform 
put in place an administrative framework providing for periods of 
recovery and reflection and temporary residence.  That framework, 
introduced in accordance with the Minister's executive power to 
manage migration, broadly reflects the provisions in the 
Immigration, Residence and Protection Bill and will operate until 
such time as the Bill comes into effect.  During debate before the 
Irish Parliament, the Minister indicated an intention to increase 
the period of recovery and reflection to be afforded a suspected 
victim from 45 days to 60 days.  A legislative amendment to give 
effect to this proposal is to be brought forward.  In the interim 
period, the current administrative arrangements provide for the 60 
days recovery and reflection period. 
 
These measures are intended to address the immediate and medium term 
concerns of a trafficking victim with regard to their permission to 
remain in the State.  The granting of a period of recovery and 
reflection is not dependent on the suspected victim's cooperation in 
any investigation or prosecution.  The period of temporary residence 
is to allow the victim to assist the Garda or other relevant 
authorities in any investigation or prosecution arising.  These 
provisions are in line with the Council of Europe Convention in 
Action against Trafficking in Human Beings, the United Nations 
Protocol (2000) and the European Union Directive (Directive 
2004/81/EC) on the residence permit issued to victims of 
trafficking. 
 
With regard to any longer term prospect of a victim of human 
trafficking being allowed to remain in the State, it may be possible 
for a victim to seek to regularize his or her residence in the State 
through the making of an application for permission to remain in 
accordance with existing immigration schemes.  Also, where there are 
compelling circumstances of a humanitarian nature the Minister for 
Justice, Equality and Law Reform may, at his or her discretion, 
grant permission to remain.  While it is rcognized that victims of 
human trafficking often seek to return to their home country, it is 
open to victims to seek to resolve their longer term status in this 
way. 
 
-- E. Does the government provide longer-term shelter or housing 
benefits to victims or other resources to aid the victims in 
rebuilding their lives? 
 
Victims of trafficking have the same rights as any Irish citizen in 
relation to access to social services, which includes access to 
health care, accommodation, education and material assistance. 
 
DUBLIN 00000065  017.3 OF 026 
 
 
 
In terms of access to the labor market, Ireland also provides 
victims of trafficking with an immigration stamp 3 during the course 
of the 60 day recovery and reflection period.  An immigration stamp 
3 does not provide access to the labor market and is normally 
provided to visitors to Ireland or to dependent spouses. 
 
Should a temporary residence permit be granted to a victim of 
trafficking, an immigration stamp 4 can be issued.  An immigration 
stamp 4 entitles victims to unrestricted access to the labor 
market. 
 
-- F. Does the government have a referral process to transfer 
victims detained, arrested or placed in protective custody by law 
enforcement authorities to institutions that provide short- or 
long-term care (either government or NGO-run)? 
 
In the event that a Superintendent of GNIB deems that a person who 
has been placed in custody for other offences is a potential 
suspected victim of trafficking, then he/she can refer that person 
to the appropriate accommodation which is provided by RIA or to an 
NGO.  The 2009 National Action Plan provides a detailed procedure 
for all victims assistance processes. 
 
-- G. What is the total number of trafficking victims identified 
during the reporting period?  Of these, how many victims were 
referred to care facilities for assistance by law enforcement 
authorities during the reporting period?  By social services 
officials?  What is the number of victims assisted by 
government-funded assistance programs and those not funded by the 
government during the reporting period? 
 
During 2009, NGOs encountered 30 new victims of trafficking.  All 
received accommodation and additional services provided by the 
State.  Ten individuals were granted a 60-day recovery and 
reflection period.  A further person - an EU national - chose to 
co-operate with the authorities from the outset and was granted a 
certificate of registration.  Six month temporary residence permits 
were given to ten persons of whom four are in their second period of 
six months temporary residency. 
 
-- H. Do the government's law enforcement, immigration, and social 
services personnel have a formal system of proactively identifying 
victims of trafficking among high-risk persons with whom they come 
in contact (e.g., foreign persons arrested for prostitution or 
immigration violations)?  For countries with legalized prostitution, 
does the government have a mechanism for screening for trafficking 
victims among persons involved in the legal/regulated commercial sex 
trade? 
 
Through the provision of training, designed to assist in identifying 
such criminal activity where it is taking place, members of the 
Garda are empowered to efficiently and effectively investigate 
criminal acts involved in human trafficking, while treating victims 
with the utmost sensitivity.  GNIB has developed appropriate 
communications channels with the Health Service Executive and RIA to 
ensure the welfare of suspected victims of human trafficking is 
provided for while an investigation into the alleged criminality is 
completed. 
 
Staff in child detention schools all receive extensive child 
protection training which includes training in identifying and 
dealing with children who are suspected of having been trafficked. 
There are standard procedures in place to respond to suspicions of 
any child protection issues, including trafficking, which involve 
reporting the matter to both the Garda and the Health Service 
Executive. 
 
The Garda, in particular GNIB, has built up links/relationships with 
all recognized State agencies, NGOs and other voluntary 
organizations operating in this area.  The various Working Groups 
established by the AHTU provide a forum to further develop Ireland's 
responses to all of the issues of human trafficking.  The Garda 
plays an active part in each of the Working Groups and is 
represented at a senior level on each group. 
 
Insofar as child victims of trafficking are concerned the HSE 
assesses each child's case independently and places them in 
 
DUBLIN 00000065  018.3 OF 026 
 
 
accommodation that it deems would provide the safest and most 
appropriate placement.  The option considered to be safest to date 
in the majority of cases has been foster placement.  However, the 
HSE recognizes that as tracking and monitoring processes are refined 
and improved, the number of identified victims may increase and in 
preparation for this eventuality a policy and operational plan is 
currently being completed by the HSE.  The Dublin based Service for 
Separated Children Seeking Asylum (S.C.S.A.) will take 
responsibility for providing the full range of supports including 
placement/accommodation to child victims of trafficking. 
 
-- I. Are the rights of victims respected?  Are trafficking victims 
detained or jailed?  If so, for how long?  Are victims fined?  Are 
victims prosecuted for violations of other laws, such as those 
governing immigration or prostitution? 
 
The rights of victims are respected and it is not the State's policy 
to detain or imprison persons whom are known to be victims of 
trafficking.  NGOs confirm that in 2009 no victims of trafficking 
were imprisoned at any point.  Victims are not prosecuted for 
breaches of immigration or other laws in circumstances where they 
are suspected to be victims of human trafficking.  If a prosecution 
has commenced or is being considered, the facts of each case are 
relayed to the Director of Public Prosecutions, who has the 
discretion to terminate a prosecution or not commence a prosecution 
if the person is a suspected victim of human trafficking. 
 
-- J. Does the government encourage victims to assist in the 
investigation and prosecution of trafficking?  How many victims 
assisted in the investigation and prosecution of traffickers during 
the reporting period?  May victims file civil suits or seek legal 
action against traffickers?  Does anyone impede victim access to 
such legal redress?  If a victim is a material witness in a court 
case against a former employer, is the victim permitted to obtain 
other employment or to leave the country pending trial proceedings? 
Are there means by which a victim may obtain restitution? 
 
The Government encourages victims of trafficking to assist the Garda 
with investigations and prosecutions by offering them a temporary 
residence permit.  The temporary residence permit is granted 
following the expiry of a recovery and reflection period on the 
condition that the victim cooperates with the Garda with 
investigation and prosecutions.  The permit lasts for a period of 
six months and can be renewed thereafter for as long as an 
investigation or prosecution is on-going. 
 
During this time, victims have access to legal aid and advice which 
is to be provided by the Legal Aid Board.  These arrangements are 
currently being finalized.  Victims are entitled to the same access 
to legal redress as Irish citizens and are not impeded in any way in 
this regard.  If victims wish to take a civil case against a 
trafficker for the purposes of obtaining compensation, they can be 
assisted in taking such a case by the Legal Aid Board.  Victims may 
also receive compensation in a criminal case under the Criminal 
Justice Act 1993 on the basis of personal injury or loss resulting 
from the offence or through applying to the Criminal Injuries 
Compensation Tribunal which compensates victims of crime for out of 
pocket expenses. 
 
If a victim is a material witness in a court case against a former 
employer and has been working in the State for more than 12 months, 
there is no restriction on him/her changing employment.  Situations 
where a person has been in the State for less than 12 months are 
dealt with on a case by case basis and proof would be required that 
they are taking a case against a former employer.  Decisions as to 
whether a person can enter, remain or leave the State are made by 
the Department of Justice, Equality and Law Reform.  It should also 
be noted, that on being granted a temporary residence permit, a 
victim is issued with a stamp 4 which allows him/her unrestricted 
access to the labor market. 
 
Several victims in Ireland actively assisted police and prosecutors 
with the Wales case and a number of others continue to assist with 
investigations. 
 
-- K. Does the government provide any specialized training for 
government officials in identifying trafficking victims and in the 
provision of assistance to trafficked victims, including the special 
 
DUBLIN 00000065  019.3 OF 026 
 
 
needs of trafficked children?  Does the government provide training 
on protections and assistance to its embassies and consulates in 
foreign countries that are destination or transit countries?  What 
is the number of trafficking victims assisted by the host country's 
embassies or consulates abroad during the reporting period?  Please 
explain the type of assistance provided (travel documents, referrals 
to assistance, payment for transportation home). 
 
The Garda has placed particular importance on ensuring that its 
members receive training which will equip them to tackle the 
phenomenon of human trafficking.  A continuous professional 
development training course entitled 'Tackling Trafficking in Human 
Beings: Prevent, Protection and Prosecution' has been designed by 
the Garda, assisted by the International Organisation for Migration 
(IOM) and the UK Human Trafficking Centre.  The aim of the course is 
to alert operational personnel within the Garda to the existence of 
the phenomenon of trafficking and to empower them to identify 
victims so as to provide for their wellbeing and to ensure 
initiation of criminal investigations, where appropriate.  Members 
of the PSNI have also attended this training.  In 2009, 350 members 
of the Garda have participated in training and all Probationer Garda 
officers have received awareness training as part of their final 
phase of training. 
 
Awareness Raising Training has been provided, since July 2008, as an 
introduction to human trafficking and setting out the indicators of 
human trafficking.  The training has been provided by the 
International Organisation for Migration (IOM) with input from NGOs, 
the HSE, the Garda National Immigration Bureau and the Anti-Human 
Trafficking Unit.  Among those provided with the training include 
staff from the following organisations: 
 
-- Labour Inspectors from the National Employment Rights Authority 
-- Health Services Executive 
-- Irish Naturalisation and Immigration Service (INIS) 
-- Office of the Refugee Applications Commissioner (ORAC) 
-- the Victim's Support Helpline 
-- the Victim of Crime Office 
-- the Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment 
-- Youth Detention Schools 
-- the Probation Service 
-- the Anti-Human Trafficking Unit 
-- Inspectors from the Private Security Authority 
-- Social Welfare Inspectors from the Department of Social and 
Family Affairs 
 
The Department of Education and Science has agreed to involve 
teachers and students in raising awareness of trafficking in human 
beings.  Sample case studies supplied by the International 
Organisation for Migration (IOM), UNHCR and the Migrants Rights 
Centre of Ireland have been made available to the Coordinator of the 
Civil, Social and Political Education (CSPE) course in Secondary 
schools.  These materials will be distributed to teachers in 
selected schools on a trial basis with a view to having the topic of 
human trafficking addressed as part of the 'Human Rights' module of 
the CSPE program. 
 
Staff of public service organizations participated in a 'Train the 
Trainer' course to enable training on human trafficking to be rolled 
out to relevant staff in these organizations. 
 
-- L. Does the government provide assistance, such as medical aid, 
shelter, or financial help, to its nationals who are repatriated as 
victims of trafficking? 
 
There is no evidence to date that an Irish national has been 
trafficked abroad. 
 
-- M. Which international organizations or NGOs, if any, work with 
trafficking victims?  What type of services do they provide?  What 
sort of cooperation do they receive from local authorities? 
 
Established in 1989, Ruhama is a Dublin-based NGO that works with 
women involved in prostitution.  As part of its overall work, Ruhama 
also provides assistance to women who have been trafficked into 
Ireland for the purposes of sexual exploitation.  Ruhama regards 
prostitution and commercial sexual exploitation as violence against 
women and violations of women's human rights.  Services offered by 
 
DUBLIN 00000065  020.3 OF 026 
 
 
Ruhama include accommodation, outreach, advocacy, befriending, 
counseling and development. 
 
The Sexual Violence Centre in Cork provides counseling and support 
to teenagers, women and men who have been raped or are survivors of 
child sexual abuse.  The organization is recognized as a center of 
expertise in this area and provides training and education for a 
range of organizations and agencies.  The Centre is also involved in 
research, is on a number of committees and aims to influence social 
policy and improve legislation for victims of sexual violence.  In 
addition, the Centre is also involved in developing awareness 
raising through its work with high school students in the tenth 
grade. 
 
The Migrant Rights Centre of Ireland (MRCI) is a national 
organization concerned with the rights of migrant workers and their 
families.  The organization was set up in 2001 to bridge a gap in 
support structures and information provision for migrant workers and 
their families.  Since then MRCI has evolved to become a national 
organization.  Its primary aims are the provision of supports to 
migrant workers and their families, empowering migrant workers 
through community work practice and achieving policy change. 
 
The Immigrant Council of Ireland (ICI) is a national, independent 
non-governmental organization that promotes the rights of migrants 
through information, legal advice, advocacy, lobbying, research and 
training work.  The ICI is also an Independent Law Centre. 
 
Established in 1951, the International Oraganisation for Migration 
(IOM) in Ireland is the leading inter-governmental organization in 
the field of migration and works closely with governmental, 
intergovernmental and non-governmental partners.  Ireland has been 
an IOM Member State since 2002.  Since then, it has become actively 
engaged in a number of thematic areas which all seek to positively 
contribute to facilitating and managing migration.  IOM Dublin 
currently runs assisted voluntary return and reintegration programs 
funded by the Department of Justice, Equality and Law Reform that 
are open to asylum seekers and irregular migrants from non-EEA 
(European Economic Area) countries who wish to return home 
voluntarily but do not have the means, including the necessary 
documentation, to do so. 
 
In Ireland, the Representation of the United Nations High 
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) works with government as well as 
civil society partners to support the building of the asylum system. 
 The organization carries out the mandate of UNHCR to safeguard the 
rights and well-being of refugees in cooperation with the 
authorities.  UNHCR activities aim to ensure that everyone can 
exercise the right to seek asylum in Ireland and find safety if they 
are in need of protection.  In terms of involvement in 
anti-trafficking activities the UNHCR are represented on a number of 
the working groups who are responsible for examining various 
trafficking issues. 
 
 
PREVENTION 
 
-- A. Did the government conduct anti-trafficking information or 
education campaigns during the reporting period?  If so, briefly 
describe the campaign(s), including their objectives and 
effectiveness.  Please provide the number of people reached by such 
awareness efforts, if available.  Do these campaigns target 
potential trafficking victims and/or the demand for trafficking 
(e.g. "clients" of prostitutes or beneficiaries of forced labor)? 
(Note: This can be an especially noteworthy effort where 
prostitution is legal. End Note.) 
 
Ireland undertook the following prevention activities in 2009: 
 
-Published the National Action Plan to Prevent and Combat 
Trafficking of Human Beings in Ireland 2009-2012 in June 2009.  The 
Plan sets out the structures as well as measures already undertaken 
and to be undertaken to bring Ireland in line with its international 
obligations. 
 
-Development, design and delivery of a 'Train the Trainer' course 
for staff of Government and Public Sector organizations to enable 
training on human trafficking to be rolled out to all staff in these 
 
DUBLIN 00000065  021.3 OF 026 
 
 
organizations.  Courses took place in November and December, 2009. 
A total of 23 people were trained from 9 different organizations - 
Department of Agriculture, RIA, Prison Service, Department of 
Enterprise, Trade & Employment, Legal Aid Board, FAS, Department of 
Social & Family Affairs, NERA and the HSE. A third course will take 
place in 2010.  Presentations were made by the Anti-Human 
Trafficking Unit, the Garda National Immigration Bureau and the 
Health Service Executive. 
 
-Advertisement in national newspapers to increase awareness of the 
3rd EU Anti-Trafficking Day in October, 2009. 
 
-Specialized training course in September, 2009 for staff of the 
Legal Aid Board who are providing legal aid and advice to potential 
and suspected victims of trafficking in human beings. 
 
-Executive Director of the Anti-Human Trafficking Unit addressed a 
Seminar on Strategies for Tackling Forced Labour on 1 October 2009 
organized by the Migrants Rights Council of Ireland (MRCI) and the 
International Labour Organisation. 
 
-Training courses entitled 'Tackling Trafficking in Human Beings: 
Prevention, Protection and Prosecution' delivered to 100 members of 
the Garda Sochna in November and December 2009. 
 
 
-250 probationer members of the Garda Sochna received awareness 
raising/victim identification training on human trafficking. 
 
-Publication of an Article on Human Trafficking in the Judicial 
Studies Journal in October, 2009.  The target audience for this 
publication is the judiciary. 
 
-Publication of an Article on Human Trafficking in a number of 
editions of a Romanian newsletter entitled 'Informatia' - the 
article was published in both Romanian and English. 
 
-A meeting was held with representatives from the Irish College of 
General Practitioners in December 2009 with a view to creating 
awareness of human trafficking in this sector. 
 
-Blue blindfold images used by the United Nations Interregional 
Crime and Justice Research Institute (UNICRI) in an on-line gallery 
exhibition entitled 'Art to Fight Crime'. 
 
-Blue blindfold images were used by 'Doras Luimni' a Limerick based 
NGO for an awareness raising campaign on human trafficking during 
the global campaign '16 days of Action against Violence against 
Women' from 25 November to 10 December, 2009. 
 
-There has been a total of 4,846 visits (as at 27 January 2010) to 
the blue blindfold website since its establishment in October, 
¶2008. 
 
-An AHTU page on the social networking site 'Facebook' has been 
established with an increasing number of persons joining the group. 
 
-Attendance at a conference on Human Trafficking entitled 'Human 
Trafficking: Psychologically shattered and caught in a legal 
quagmire' organized by a non-government organization. 
 
-On-going design and development of a module on human trafficking as 
part of the Civil, Social and Political Education program for the 
junior cycle in post primary schools throughout the country. 
 
-An editorial on the issue of Human Trafficking and Poster 
advertisement was placed in the magazine of Emergency Services 
Ireland.  This is a bi-monthly publication which issues to Local 
Authorities and Emergency Services in both the Republic and Northern 
Ireland. 
 
-A full page advertisement was placed in the 2010 Official Yearbook 
of the Irish Road Haulage Association.  The yearbook is sent to all 
members of the association, to key management persons in the top 
1,000 transport companies in Ireland and the UK, to the management 
of the Road Haulage Associations across Europe, to the top 2,000 
European Transport Companies Source (Kompass), to truck distributors 
and manufacturers in Europe, to freight forwarders and fleet 
 
DUBLIN 00000065  022.3 OF 026 
 
 
managers and to Insurance and Legal consultants associated with the 
Transport Industry. 
 
-A full page advertisement was placed in the Irish Taxi Drivers 
Federation Yearbook 2010.  This will ensure Taxi Drivers nationwide 
are aware of the Human Trafficking problem and can immediately 
contact the appropriate authorities should they become suspicious of 
any activity they witness.  Taxi News Yearbook is distributed to all 
22,000 taxi drivers throughout Ireland and to 12,500 in the greater 
Dublin area. 
 
-A notice on human trafficking has been made available to Marine 
Services Personnel (covering areas from merchant to fishing and 
leisure, ports, harbors, offshore energy, marine engineering 
companies, etc).  The notice issued electronically via email and was 
posted on the Department of Transport's website. 
 
-- B. Does the government monitor immigration and emigration 
patterns for evidence of trafficking? 
 
Prior to 2001, information recorded by the Garda relating to 
non-nationals was held by use of a paper based system which, as the 
numbers of immigrants increase, quickly became inadequate.  In 2001 
a computer-based Garda National Immigration Bureau Information 
System (GNIB IS) was designed, developed and implemented by the 
Garda in order to: 
 
-- Streamline the registration and renewal of registrations of 
non-nationals. 
 
-- Strengthen security at the frontiers of the State. 
 
-- Effectively manage and monitor the execution of deportation 
orders. 
 
-- Facilitate the availability of immigration related information to 
those tasked with implementing immigration related legislation. 
 
The information held on the GNIB-IS, is utilized for the following 
purposes: 
 
-- Preventing entry into the state of persons who possess an adverse 
immigration history. 
 
-- Establishing if non-nationals have fulfilled their obligation to 
register. 
 
-- Ensuring non-nationals do not remain in the State beyond the 
period allowed. 
 
-- Locating persons avoiding deportation. 
 
-- Processing applications for naturalization. 
 
-- Establishing if non-nationals are complying with their conditions 
for entry into the State. 
 
-- Providing information to immigration/police authorities in other 
states. 
 
-- Preventing the illegal movement of persons within the UK/Ireland 
Common Travel Area. 
 
Through a range of management reports, immigration-related issues 
are monitored on a daily basis enabling identification of patterns, 
trends, and modus operandi with regard to a wide range of 
immigration related criminal activity.  Detection and investigation 
of potential incidents of human trafficking is facilitated by the 
GNIB IS. 
 
-- C. Is there a mechanism for coordination and communication 
between various agencies, internal, international, and multilateral 
on trafficking-related matters, such as a multi-agency working group 
or a task force? 
 
The Anti-Human Trafficking Unit has overall administrative 
responsibility for coordinating the Government's response to 
trafficking in persons.  In order to carry out that role effectively 
 
DUBLIN 00000065  023.3 OF 026 
 
 
and to implement and facilitate a multidisciplinary approach, the 
AHTU works in close cooperation with a wide variety of relevant 
Government Agencies and Departments in addition to NGOs and 
International Organizations (IOs) working in the anti-trafficking 
field. 
 
The Garda has, over a number of years, established key strategic 
relationships and alliances with all relevant stakeholders and 
partners involved in the immigration process.  There are regular 
exchange fora to ensure information sharing and a holistic 
Governmental approach to the phenomenon of trafficking in human 
beings. 
 
-- D. Does the government have a national plan of action to address 
trafficking in persons?  If the plan was developed during the 
reporting period, which agencies were involved in developing it? 
Were NGOs consulted in the process?  What steps has the government 
taken to implement the action plan? 
 
The National Action Plan (NAP) to Prevent and Combat Trafficking in 
Human Beings was released on June 10, 2009.  The NAP has a strong 
focus on preventing trafficking in human beings becoming a major 
issue in Ireland.  The NAP is includes four main headings: 
 
-- Prevention and Awareness Raising, 
-- Prosecution of Traffickers, 
-- Protection of Victims, and 
-- Child Trafficking. 
 
The Plan sets out the structures to facilitate Ireland's compliance 
with all of the relevant international instruments and will 
therefore allow for ratification of the Council of Europe Convention 
on "Action Against Trafficking in Human Beings and the UN Protocol 
to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially 
Women and Children" when the structures have been put in place. 
 
The National Action Plan was developed by the Anti-Human Trafficking 
Unit with input provided from a number of other Government 
Departments and State agencies as necessary.  Those asked to provide 
input include: 
 
-- Irish Naturalisation and Immigration Service 
-- Garda 
-- Health Service Executive 
-- Department of Foreign Affairs 
-- Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment 
-- Department of Education & Science 
-- Office of the Minister for Children 
-- Director of Public Prosecutions 
-- National Employment Rights Authority 
 
A public consultation was held at the formulation of the National 
Action Plan.  Interested groups or individuals were asked to make 
submissions under four different headings, which included Prevention 
and Awareness Raising, Prosecution of Traffickers, Protection of 
Victims and Child Trafficking. 
 
This allowed for the views of the public and relevant governmental 
and non-governmental stakeholders engaged in the fight against human 
trafficking to be taken into account.  Those organizations that 
provided input via the consultation process included: 
 
-- The Immigrant Council of Ireland 
-- The Human Rights Committee of the Law Society 
-- Daughters of Charity - Vincentian Refugee Centre 
-- HSE - Balseskin Refugee Health Screening Team 
-- Irish Human Rights Commission 
-- Dept. of Political Science and Sociology, NUIG & Irish School of 
Ecumenics, TCD 
-- Barnardos 
-- Amnesty International - Irish Section 
-- Ruhama 
-- United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 
-- Irish Women Lawyers Association 
-- MRCI - Migrant Rights Centre Ireland 
-- Irish Refugee Council 
-- IOM - International Organisation for Migration 
-- Integrating Ireland 
 
DUBLIN 00000065  024.3 OF 026 
 
 
-- Dominican Justice Office 
-- One in Four 
-- Irish Federation of University of Women 
-- Stop Sex Trafficking 
-- International Human Rights Network 
-- APT - Act to Prevent Trafficking 
-- UNICEF 
-- Curam. 
 
The Interdepartmental High Level Group will be responsible for 
monitoring the implementation of the National Action Plan.  The High 
Level Group will be complemented by the Non-Governmental and 
Governmental Roundtable Forum on Combating Human Trafficking and the 
working groups will also be involved in the implementation of the 
Plan. 
 
In addition, a consultation will be held mid-way through the 
implementation of the Plan to take into account the views of 
relevant governmental and non-governmental stakeholders engaged in 
the fight against human trafficking having regard to the 
developments in the period following the publication of the plan. 
Views will be collated centrally by the Anti-Human Trafficking Unit 
and circulated to the High Level Group, Roundtable Forum, and other 
relevant stakeholders. 
 
-- E: What measures has the government taken during the reporting 
period to reduce the demand for commercial sex acts?  (see ref B, 
para. 9(3) for examples) 
 
Television Advertisements Targeted at Purchasers of Sexual Services 
 
The Anti-Human Trafficking Unit arranged funding, under the National 
Women's Strategy, for Ruhama (an NGO which provides support services 
to women involved in prostitution and other forms of commercial 
sexual exploitation) for the making of a short three-minute film and 
a 50-second advertisement designed to educate both purchasers and 
potential purchasers of sexual services to the exploitation 
underpinning the commercial sex industry and to address the demand 
side of sex trafficking.  The 50-second advertisement was launched 
on November 10, 2008 and has since been aired regularly on the 
national television station, RTE, and the sports television station, 
Setanta. 
 
-A full page advertisement was placed in the 2010 Official Yearbook 
of the Irish Road Haulage Association.  The yearbook is sent to all 
members of the association, to key management persons in the top 
1,000 transport companies in Ireland and the UK, to the management 
of the Road Haulage Associations across Europe, to the top 2,000 
European Transport Companies Source (Kompass), to truck distributors 
and manufacturers in Europe, to freight forwarders and fleet 
managers and to Insurance and Legal consultants associated with the 
Transport Industry. 
 
-A full page advertisement was placed in the Irish Taxi Drivers 
Federation Yearbook 2010.  This will ensure Taxi Drivers nationwide 
are aware of the Human Trafficking problem and can immediately 
contact the appropriate authorities should they become suspicious of 
any activity they witness.  Taxi News Yearbook is distributed to all 
22,000 taxi drivers throughout Ireland and to 12,500 in the greater 
Dublin area. 
 
-A notice on human trafficking has been made available to Marine 
Services Personnel (covering areas from merchant to fishing and 
leisure, ports, harbors, offshore energy, marine engineering 
companies, etc).  The notice issued electronically via e-mail and 
was posted on the Department of Transport's website. 
 
-- F. Required of all Posts:  What measures has the government taken 
during the reporting period to reduce the participation in 
international child sex tourism by nationals of the country? 
 
Section 7 of the Criminal Law (Human Trafficking) 2008 Act provides 
for extra territorial jurisdiction where an Irish citizen or 
resident conspires, incites or commits acts which would be offences 
under this Act if they were committed in Ireland and also where the 
victim of such acts committed outside Ireland is an Irish citizen. 
Penalties of up to life imprisonment and an unlimited fine apply in 
respect of these offences. 
 
DUBLIN 00000065  025.3 OF 026 
 
 
 
Blue blindfold literature has been distributed to travel agents in 
the hope of raising awareness amongst travelers. 
 
--G. What measures has the government adopted to ensure that its 
nationals who are deployed abroad as part of a peacekeeping or other 
similar mission do not engage in or facilitate severe forms of 
trafficking or exploit victims of such trafficking? 
 
The Department of Defence ensures that commanding officers and 
military police personnel on international peacekeeping missions 
abroad are constantly vigilant in the area of Human Trafficking.  In 
the past, one reported case involving as Irish soldier on an 
overseas mission was fully investigated by military police but 
turned out not to constitute human trafficking. 
 
Pursuant to section 169 of the Defence Act 1954 it is possible to 
prosecute offences under the Criminal Law (Human Trafficking) Act 
2008, where an investigation discloses evidence to support such 
offences.  No offenses have been detected and no prosecutions 
against a member of the Permanent Defence Force have taken place to 
date. 
 
 
PARTNERSHIPS 
 
-- A.  Does the government engage with other governments, civil 
society, and/or multilateral organizations to focus attention and 
devote resources to addressing human trafficking?  If so, please 
provide details. 
 
Ireland is also part of a European G6 Initiative against human 
trafficking.  This initiative involves six European countries (UK, 
Poland, Italy, Netherlands, Spain and Ireland) and includes sharing 
best practices of anti-trafficking efforts.  The GNIB works under 
the Irish National Police but carries out its immigration functions 
on behalf of the Minister of Justice.  This system ensures a sharing 
of information among immigration policy-makers, immigration 
officers, and national police.  A GNIB official represents Ireland 
at the EU Border Agency in Warsaw. 
 
Examples of international police cooperation include: 
 
-- Exchange of liaison officers between GNIB and United Kingdom 
Border Agency (UKBA). 
 
-- Sharing immigration related information between the GNIB and the 
UKBA. 
 
-- Continuous liaison with the UK trafficking initiative Operation 
'Pentameter I' and 'Pentameter II' - a GNIB Liaison Officer was 
appointed to ensure full coordination. 
 
-- Appointment of a GNIB Liaison Officer to deal with Europol and 
Interpol to specifically deal with requests from both organizations. 
 
 
-- Appointment of GNIB personnel as Airline Liaison officers who are 
intermittently based at hub-airports in other EU Member States. 
 
-- Provision of access to Interpol's I-24/7 global police 
communications system at all Ports of Entry in the State thereby 
enabling immediate access to information held by Interpol relating 
to immigration matters. 
 
-- Participation by representatives of the Garda in the Interpol 
Working Group on trafficking in human beings. 
 
-- Regular liaison between the Irish and French immigration 
personnel. 
 
-- The secondment of a UK Immigration Service Officer to the British 
Embassy in Dublin to liaise with GNIB. 
 
-- Appointment of GNIB officers to liaise with the UK Immigration 
Service and the Police Service of Northern Ireland (in relation to 
the land border between Ireland and Northern Ireland). 
 
 
DUBLIN 00000065  026.3 OF 026 
 
 
-- International Investigations with other States on an ongoing 
basis. 
 
-- Frontex sharing of information and regular attendance at 
meetings. 
 
-- OSCE (Organization for Security and Co-operation in Central 
Europe), attendance at meetings on Trafficking in Human Beings. 
 
-- Council of Europe. 
 
-- UN and UNGIFT. 
 
The government reported that it cooperated with other countries on 
international anti-trafficking investigations.  In December 2009, 
three persons were sentenced in Romania for a range of offences, 
which included trafficking of persons to Ireland for the purposes of 
labor exploitation, largely on the basis of evidence gathered by the 
Irish police.  One was sentenced to seven years imprisonment and his 
two co-accused were each sentenced to five years imprisonment.  As a 
result of a joint operation between the police forces in Ireland and 
the UK, three persons have pleaded guilty to offences of 
prostitution and money laundering, but not to human trafficking.  In 
February, Cardiff Crown Court sentenced one individual to a total of 
seven years imprisonment (five years for controlling prostitution 
and two for money laundering),  another  to  three years and six 
months (two years and six months for prostitution and one year for 
money laundering), and a third to two years. 
 
The Anti-Human Trafficking Unit in the Department of Justice has 
overall administrative responsibility for policy development and 
coordination of the Government's response to trafficking in persons. 
 In order to carry out that role effectively and to implement and 
facilitate a multidisciplinary approach, the AHTU works in close 
cooperation with a wide variety of relevant Government Agencies and 
Departments, in addition to NGOs and International Organizations 
(IOs) working in the anti-trafficking field.  This inter-party 
cooperation is chiefly conducted through a series of groups 
consisting of a High Level Interdepartmental Group, which is 
comprised of high level management from different Government 
Departments and Agencies, a Roundtable Group consisting of members 
of Government Departments and Agencies and members of NGOs and IOs, 
and a series of Working Groups made up of NGOs, IOs, Government 
Agencies and Departments. 
 
-- B.  What sort of international assistance does the government 
provide to other countries to address TIP? 
 
The government reported that it cooperated with other countries on 
international anti-trafficking investigations.  In December 2009, 
three persons were sentenced in Romania for a range of offences, 
which included trafficking of persons to Ireland for the purposes of 
labor exploitation, largely on the basis of evidence gathered by the 
Irish police.  One was sentenced to seven years imprisonment and his 
two co-accused were each sentenced to five years imprisonment.  As a 
result of a joint operation between the police forces in Ireland and 
the UK, three persons have pleaded guilty to offences of 
prostitution and money laundering, but not to human trafficking.  In 
February, Cardiff Crown Court sentenced one individual to a total of 
seven years imprisonment (five years for controlling prostitution 
and two for money laundering),  another  to  three years and six 
months (two years and six months for prostitution and one year for 
money laundering), and a third to two years. 
 
¶3.  (U) Point of Contact for this report is Political Officer Jami 
Papa, Office Tel: 353-1-630-6275, Fax: 353-1-667-0056, E-mail: 
PapaJL@state.gov. 
 
ROONEY