10OTTAWA208
Canada 2010 TIP Report
Fri Feb 26 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ottawa
VZCZCXRO4801
OO RUEHSK
DE RUEHOT #0208/01 0572334
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O R 262332Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY OTTAWA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0402
INFO ALL CANADIAN POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHINGTON DC
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 0010
RUEHBK/AMEMBASSY BANGKOK 0002
RUEHBM/AMEMBASSY BUCHAREST 0001
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHINGTON DC
RUEHC/USAID WASHDC 0001
RUEHCH/AMEMBASSY CHISINAU 0003
RUEHDS/AMEMBASSY ADDIS ABABA 0002
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0001
RUEHIN/AIT TAIPEI TW 0001
RUEHKL/AMEMBASSY KUALA LUMPUR 0003
RUEHKV/AMEMBASSY KYIV 0004
RUEHME/AMEMBASSY MEXICO
RUEHNE/AMEMBASSY NEW DELHI 0008
RUEHPF/AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH 0001
RUEHPG/AMEMBASSY PRAGUE 0003
RUEHRL/AMEMBASSY BERLIN 0011
RUEHSK/AMEMBASSY MINSK 0001
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 0001
RUEHUL/AMEMBASSY SEOUL 0008
RUEHVN/AMEMBASSY VIENTIANE 0001
RUEHWR/AMEMBASSY WARSAW 0002UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 31 OTTAWA 000208 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM KTIP ELAB KCRM SMIG KFRD KWMN ASEC PGOV PREF
KMCA, CA 
SUBJECT: Canada 2010 TIP Report 
 
¶1. (SBU) CANADA'S TIP SITUATION 
 
 
 
¶A.  The Government of Canada collects trafficking in persons (TIP) 
information within Canada through a number of sources, including 
police and court-reported data, reported case law, and the Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) Human Trafficking National 
Coordination Centre (HTNCC). The 2009 Annual Criminal Intelligence 
Service Canada Report on Organized Crime provides a general 
assessment of human trafficking in Canada and is available online. 
The Department of Citizenship and Immigration (CIC) collects data 
on the issuance of Temporary Resident Permits to foreign nationals 
who are suspected victims of trafficking; not all of these cases go 
through the police or court system.  Canada is finalizing a study 
on the feasibility of developing a national data collection 
framework, and expects to release the results in 2010.  The study 
assessed data and information needs, examined the current capacity 
to track TIP data and information that is currently available and 
any subsequent data gaps, identified potential direct and indirect 
indicators, and highlighted the challenges that will need to be 
addressed regarding data collection and data sharing.  During the 
reporting period, the National Missing Children's Services (NMCS) 
of the RCMP Canadian Police Centre for Missing and Exploited 
Children interviewed 175 police and service agencies in 20 Canadian 
cities and towns to determine the nature and scope of domestic 
trafficking of children under age 18.  NMCS also trains police and 
recognized searching agencies in the investigation of missing, 
abducted, and runaway children.  NMCS plans to expand this training 
to include information on the potential risks that such children 
face of being trafficked. 
 
 
 
¶B.  Canada is primarily a destination country for TIP.  According 
to the government, Asia, in particular South Korea, China, Hong 
Kong (SAR), Taiwan, and Malaysia as well as Eastern European 
countries such as Romania, Ukraine, and Moldova are the primary 
sources for TIP victims for sexual exploitation in Canada.  NGOs 
allege human trafficking for forced labor occurs across the 
country, with a higher number of cases in Alberta and Ontario 
provinces; however, they acknowledge the difficulty in gauging 
labor exploitation versus trafficking.  According to the 
government, the majority of the human trafficking for forced labor 
investigations in Canada has been linked to foreign workers 
staffing industries for food processing, energy resources, 
technology as well as the service industry, including food retail 
chains and restaurants.  Labor-related investigations also involve 
migrants from the Philippines, India, Poland, China, Ethiopia, and 
Mexico, with employers illegally transporting migrants and 
subsequently exploiting them as domestic helpers.  None of the 
government investigations, however, determined that the level of 
exploitation rose to forced labor trafficking. 
 
 
 
Both NGOs and the government report that trafficking for sexual 
exploitation is more prevalent than forced labor, specifically in 
the cities of Vancouver, Montreal, and Toronto.  The government 
identifies migrant women, new immigrants, at-risk youth, and those 
who are socially or economically challenged as vulnerable 
populations at risk of trafficking.  While the government believes 
 
OTTAWA 00000208  002 OF 031 
 
 
that organized crime is involved in human trafficking for sexual 
exploitation, it has not determined the extent of transnational 
criminal involvement. 
 
NGOs rarely attempt to quantify independently the number of 
trafficking victims in Canada, although most quote an estimate of 
2,000 people subject to trafficking into Canada annually.  In 2004, 
the RCMP had estimated that traffickers brought approximately 600 - 
800 persons into Canada annually and that they sent an additional 
1,500 - 2,200 persons from Canada into the United States.  The 
government no longer uses the 2004 estimates and the RCMP is 
conducting a national threat assessment to gauge the level of TIP 
activity across Canada.  The RCMP plans to release the results of 
the assessment in early 2010.  Trafficking victims have been 
foreign nationals, permanent residents, and Canadian citizens. 
 
¶C.  Reported case law confirms that victims face sexual 
exploitation within Canada in various venues.  The majority of the 
victims believe that they will be working as waitresses, models, 
caregivers, or other legitimate occupations, only to find 
themselves in the sex trade under coercion.  Control tactics to 
retain victims in exploitative situations include isolation from 
their social network, forcible confinement, withholding 
identification documents, imposing strict rules to control 
behavior, limitation of movement, as well as threats and violence. 
Complaints by foreign workers have commonly cited elements of 
deception, financial exploitation, harassment, and threats of 
deportation by their employer or by a third party agency. 
 
¶D.  The federal government identifies migrant women, new 
immigrants, at-risk youth, and those who are socially or 
economically disadvantaged as the most vulnerable TIP populations. 
All cases of TIP for sexual exploitation that law enforcement 
agencies across Canada have investigated, including those that did 
not result in TIP-specific charges, involved women or teenage girls 
or both. The majority of these cases included socially and 
economically disadvantaged women and girls.  Cases of trafficking 
for forced labor under investigation by law enforcement agencies 
across Canada involve both adult male and female foreign workers. 
 
 
NGOs and advocacy groups have drawn attention to the plight of 
aboriginal women and their vulnerability to trafficking.  The 
Native Women's Association of Canada'(NWAC) has created education 
and awareness programs aimed at improving access to the judicial 
system for victims, while identifying the challenge of encouraging 
prosecutors to lay trafficking charges and secure convictions. 
NWAC is seeking to expand the definition of trafficking beyond 
prostitution to other forms of exploitation, including the use of 
aboriginal women as involuntary drug couriers.  The government 
awarded C$5 million (US$4.7 million) to NWAC in 2005 for five 
years, but has not as yet renewed its funding commitment beyond 
¶2010.  NGOs further identify agricultural workers and domestic 
caregivers as highly vulnerable to trafficking. 
 
 
 
¶E.  According to the government, human trafficking for sexual 
exploitation is primarily associated with organized prostitution. 
Specifically, human trafficking occurs behind prostitution fronts, 
such as escort agencies and residential brothels.  Suspects in 
human trafficking activities mostly operate with associates of 
 
OTTAWA 00000208  003 OF 031 
 
 
similar ethnicity and have ethnic ties to the source countries of 
their migrant workers. 
 
 
 
Government investigations show that organized crime networks with 
Eastern European links transported women from former Soviet states 
into Canada for employment in escort services in the Greater 
Toronto Area and possibly in massage and escort services in the 
Montreal area.  These groups have demonstrated transnational 
capabilities and significant associations with convicted human 
traffickers in the Czech Republic, Germany, Belarus, and Israel. 
Government investigations indicate that criminal networks use 
agents in Eastern European source countries to facilitate the 
recruitment and transport of illegal sex workers into Canada. 
These individuals arrange local employment advertisements, initiate 
contact, facilitate travel documents, and coach potential victims 
to deceive Canadian immigration officials.  Criminal networks 
trafficking Eastern European nationals to Canada for the sex 
industry likely have access to high quality fraudulent 
identification and travel documents, allowing migrants to travel 
undetected across multiple borders.   Investigations have found 
that some Eastern European women who had been recruited to come to 
Canada to work illegally in the sex trade were exploited by 
traffickers.  Major cities with Asian organized crime networks are 
also destinations for migrant sex workers from Asia.  Some Asian 
women have come to Canada with legitimate employment offers, only 
to enter the sex trade under coercion by organized crime groups 
once in Canada. 
 
 
 
Reported case law shows that some of the individuals convicted of 
trafficking offenses were affiliated with street gangs that are 
known to law enforcement for their "pimping" culture.  Domestic 
human trafficking victims have mostly been recruited through the 
Internet, by an acquaintance, or directly by traffickers, who then 
coerced the victim to enter the sex trade.  Victims of domestic 
human trafficking included underage girls who were exploited 
through prostitution in exotic dance clubs or escort services. 
Some traffickers provided fraudulent identification for their 
victims to feign legal age. With the exception of one case, all 
traffickers involved with Canadian girls and women within Canada 
were males.  RCMP investigations have uncovered individuals or 
family units who control, threaten, and underpay foreign national 
domestic helpers, whose employers often smuggle them into Canada. 
The RCMP has not identified organized crime involvement in human 
trafficking for forced labor. 
 
 
 
¶2.  (SBU) SETTING THE SCENE FOR THE GOVERNMENT'S ANTI-TIP EFFORTS 
 
 
 
¶A.  Canada recognizes the serious nature of human trafficking, 
which disproportionately harms the most vulnerable members of 
societies, predominantly women and children.  Canada remains 
committed to combating human trafficking domestically and abroad, 
and will continue to work closely with domestic and international 
partners to this end. 
 
OTTAWA 00000208  004 OF 031 
 
 
¶B.  The Interdepartmental Working Group on Trafficking in Persons 
(IWGTIP) coordinates federal anti-trafficking efforts.  Chaired by 
the federal Departments of Justice and of Public Safety, IWGTIP 
brings together 17 federal departments and agencies and serves as a 
central repository of federal expertise.  The province of British 
Columbia maintains offices dedicated solely to human trafficking; 
however, most provinces rely on a network of law enforcement 
agencies, court records, social service agencies, and NGOs to 
combat sex and labor trafficking.  For example, the province of 
Alberta supports the Action Coalition on Human Trafficking (ACT 
Alberta), a TIP advocacy group and service provider to TIP victims. 
 
 
 
 
The IWGTIP has representatives from the following federal 
departments/agencies: 
 
 
 
A         Canada Border Services Agency (CBSA) 
 
A         The Department of Canadian Heritage (CH) 
 
A         Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA) 
 
A         Criminal Intelligence Service Canada (CISC) 
 
A         Department of Citizenship and Immigration (CIC) 
 
A         Department of Justice (Justice Canada) 
 
A         Department of National Defence (DND) 
 
A         Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade 
(DFAIT) 
 
A         Department of Health (Health Canada) / Public Health 
Agency of Canada (PHAC) 
 
A         Department of Human Resources and Skills Development 
(HRSDC) 
 
A         Department of Indian and Northern Affairs (INAC) 
 
A         Passport Agency (under DFAIT) 
 
A         Public Prosecution Service of Canada (PPSC) 
 
A         Department Public Safety (Public Safety Canada) 
 
A         Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) 
 
A         Statistics Agency (Statistics Canada) 
 
A         Status of Women Agency (SWC) 
 
 
 
¶C.  No systemic limitations hinder the government's ability to 
 
OTTAWA 00000208  005 OF 031 
 
 
address TIP, and no evidence suggests any corrupt involvement by 
Canadian officials in TIP-related matters.  Jurisdictional issues 
between federal and provincial or territorial governments hamper 
the ability of the federal government to have a detailed picture of 
the national scope of trafficking cases, investigations, and 
anti-TIP efforts.  The government investigates and prosecutes any 
allegations of corruption in accordance with Canadian law. 
 
¶D.  The IWGTIP monitors all federal anti-trafficking efforts.  The 
Minister of Citizenship, Immigration, and Multiculturalism presents 
an annual report to Parliament on the immigration activities and 
initiatives of CIC.  CIC reports on the issuances of Temporary 
Resident Permits for victims of human trafficking in this report, 
which is available online.  Justice Canada monitors TIP case law, 
and the HTNCC coordinates anti-trafficking law enforcement 
prevention and investigation efforts.  The RCMP maintains 
statistics on TIP training/awareness for law enforcement agencies, 
government and non-government organizations as well as the public, 
and shares them with the IWGTIP, various government officials, and 
media outlets, as requested.  NGOs, advocacy groups, and provincial 
offices also share law enforcements strategies, best practices, and 
successful cases studies with the law enforcement community and 
NGOs during conferences, RCMP human trafficking workshops, and 
regular meetings with the HTACs. 
 
 
Internationally, Canada is an active participant at the Conference 
of the Parties to the United Nations Convention against 
Transnational Organized Crime.  Canada participated in two 
open-ended intergovernmental working groups of the Conference of 
Parties, the implementation of the United Nations Convention 
against Transnational Organized Crime, and the Protocol to Prevent, 
Suppress, and Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and 
Children. 
 
 
 
¶E.  Statistics Canada conducts a census every five years to count 
the population, including Canadian citizens (by birth and by 
naturalization), landed immigrants, and non-permanent residents 
together with family members living with them.  The census 
questionnaires are in English, French, and 62 non-official 
languages, including aboriginal languages and Braille as well as on 
audio cassette.  The census collects detailed information from all 
residents including population counts and demographic data, 
language, place of birth, place of birth of parents, generation 
status, citizenship, landed immigrant status, year of immigration, 
ethnic origin, aboriginal identity, visible minority population, 
population group (i.e. White, Chinese, South Asian, Black, 
Filipino, Latin American, Southeast Asian, Arab, West Asian, 
Korean, Japanese, Other - Specify), education, unpaid work, labor 
market activities, mobility, journey to work, income, families and 
households, housing, shelter costs, and disability. The census also 
collects the place of birth, place of birth of father, place of 
birth of mother, generation status, citizenship, landed immigrant 
status, and period of immigration of Canada's population. 
 
 
 
Registration of births is a legal requirement in each province and 
territory. Provincial and territorial Vital Statistics Acts (or 
equivalent legislation) require the registration of all live 
 
OTTAWA 00000208  006 OF 031 
 
 
births, stillbirths, deaths, and marriages within their 
jurisdictions. All provinces and territories maintain reports on 
the date and place of birth, child's sex, birth weight, and 
gestational age, parents' age, marital status and birthplace, 
mother's place of residence, and type of birth (single or 
multiple).  Parents complete the registration of a live birth and 
file it with the local registrar. Most provinces also require 
physicians (or other birth attendants) to report all births. 
 
 
 
¶F.  The Canadian Centre for Justice Statistics (CCJS), in 
co-operation with the policing community, collects annual 
police-reported crime statistics through the Uniform Crime 
Reporting (UCR2) Survey. The UCR2 survey data represent the number 
of criminal incidents of TIP that were detected or recorded by 
police within a calendar year.  The Adult Criminal Court Survey 
(ACCS) is a national database of statistical information on the 
number of appearances, charges, and cases in adult criminal courts. 
The survey is intended to be a census of federal statute charges 
heard in provincial and superior criminal courts in Canada.  These 
data are collected by the CCJS in collaboration with provincial and 
territorial government agencies responsible for adult criminal 
courts.   Justice Canada also monitors TIP-related case law.  Any 
issues that arise are explored in relevant Federal/ 
Provincial/Territorial fora.  It is difficult to make linkages 
between police and court data.  There is no single unit of count 
(e.g., incidents, offenses, charges, cases or persons) that is 
consistent across the major sectors of the justice system.  In 
addition, the number and type of charges may change at the 
pre-court stage or during the court process.  Time lags between the 
various stages of the justice process also make 
comparisons/linkages difficult. 
 
 
 
Provinces and territories face several problems that limit local 
groups' abilities to combat human trafficking, including difficulty 
in maintaining collaboration between NGOs and local government, the 
lack of a lead TIP governmental office in many provinces, and the 
drain on police resources to support TIP victims to ensure a strong 
trafficking case.  Few NGOs are able to assume such a large role. 
In Ontario province, the Peel Regional Police Service now refers 
many of its trafficking victims to an Ontario NGO that provides 
services, ranging from basic hygiene kits to job search and 
resettlement assistance. 
 
 
 
NGOs cited lack of coordination between federal programs that admit 
temporary foreign workers to Canada and provincial government 
responsibility for regulating labor standards, arguing this creates 
conditions in which labor exploitation and potential labor 
trafficking can flourish.  Provincial labor standards legislation 
regulates the employment of temporary foreign workers, but the 
rules of the temporary foreign worker programs are set by the 
federal government and are not coordinated with the provinces. 
 
 
 
¶3.  (SBU) INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION OF TRAFFICKERS 
 
OTTAWA 00000208  007 OF 031 
 
 
¶A.  Canada's criminal laws prohibit trafficking in persons for any 
exploitative purpose, regardless of whether the trafficking occurs 
wholly within Canada or whether it involves the bringing of persons 
into Canada.  Criminal laws apply across Canada and therefore 
provide a uniform approach to address TIP and related conduct. 
 
 
 
There have been no legislative changes to Canada's laws against 
trafficking since last year's report.  Three TIP-related bills died 
upon the prorogation (temporary suspension) of Parliament in 
December 2009: Bill C-268, An Act to amend the Criminal Code 
(minimum sentence for offenses involving trafficking of persons 
under the age of eighteen years); Bill S-223, An Act to amend the 
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act and to enact certain other 
measures in order to provide assistance and protection to victims 
of human trafficking; and, Bill C-45, An Act to amend the 
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act 
 
 
 
The Criminal Code of Canada contains three specific indictable 
offenses to address trafficking in persons: 
 
 
 
Section 279.01 criminalizes trafficking in persons by prohibiting 
anyone from engaging in specified acts for the purpose of 
exploiting or facilitating the exploitation of a person.  This 
offense carries a maximum penalty of life imprisonment where it 
involves kidnapping, aggravated assault or aggravated sexual 
assault, or death.  A maximum penalty of 14 years applies in all 
other cases. 
 
 
 
Section 279.04 specifies that a person exploits another person if 
s/he causes that person to provide, or offer to provide, labor or a 
service by engaging in conduct that, in all the circumstances, 
could reasonably be expected to cause the other person to believe 
that his/her safety or the safety of a person known to him/her 
would be threatened if s/he failed to provide, or offer to provide, 
the labor or service.  Exploitation is also defined to mean causing 
a person, by means of deception or the use or threat of force or of 
any other form of coercion, to have an organ or tissue removed. 
 
 
 
The second offense, section 279.02, prohibits anyone from receiving 
a financial or other material benefit resulting from the commission 
of a TIP offence.  This offense is punishable by a maximum of ten 
years imprisonment. 
 
 
 
Finally, section 279.03 prohibits the withholding or destroying of 
documents, such as identification or travel documents, for the 
purpose of committing or facilitating the commission of a TIP 
offence, and carries a maximum penalty of five years' imprisonment. 
 
OTTAWA 00000208  008 OF 031 
 
 
These three offenses were enacted in 2005 (Bill C-49, An Act to 
amend the Criminal Code (trafficking in persons) S.C. 2005, c. 43). 
They supplement previously existing Criminal Code offenses that 
also are applicable to TIP cases, including kidnapping, forcible 
confinement, uttering threats, extortion, assault, sexual assault, 
prostitution-related offenses, and criminal organization offenses. 
 
 
 
 
The Immigration and Refugee Protection Act (IRPA) also includes a 
TIP offense that applies to cases involving trafficking of persons 
into Canada (s.118).  The offense carries a maximum penalty of life 
imprisonment and a fine of up to C$1 million (US$ 950,000). 
 
 
 
In addition, the Criminal Code contains numerous provisions 
targeting those who sexually exploit children or who seek to profit 
from such exploitation.  Section 212(2) prohibits living on the 
avails of the prostitution of a person under the age of 18 
(punishment: a maximum of 14 years and a mandatory minimum of 2 
years).  Section 212(2.1) is an aggravated offense prohibiting the 
procuring of a young person into prostitution for profit and the 
use of threats or violence (punishment: a maximum of 14 years and a 
mandatory minimum of 5 years).  Section 212(4) makes it an offense 
to obtain or communicate for the purpose of obtaining for 
consideration the sexual services of a person who is under 18 years 
of age (punishment: a maximum of 5 years and a mandatory minimum of 
6 months). 
 
 
 
¶B.  The maximum penalty for a person convicted of a trafficking in 
persons offense, including trafficking for the purpose of sexual 
exploitation under the Criminal Code is life imprisonment, where it 
involves kidnapping, aggravated assault or sexual assault, or 
death, and a maximum penalty of 14 years in all other cases.   The 
maximum penalty for a conviction of trafficking in persons under 
IRPA is life imprisonment and/or a fine not exceeding C$1 million 
(US$950,000). 
 
 
 
¶C.  The provisions outlined above apply equally to trafficking for 
the purposes of forced labor. The penalties are the same as above. 
Provinces and territories have primary responsibility for 
enforcement of labor standards, which apply equally to Temporary 
Foreign Workers and Canadian workers.  Some provinces have, or are 
developing, measures to regulate the activities of third party 
recruiters. 
 
 
 
In Ontario province, the law enforcement system for provincial 
labor standards places the onus on workers to report violations. 
NGOs claim that the provincial Ministry of Labor is 
under-resourced.  Currently in Ontario, NGOs estimate processing 
backlogs for labor standards violations from six to twelve months 
 
OTTAWA 00000208  009 OF 031 
 
 
to open an investigation, and an average of eighteen months to 
conclude an investigation, often longer than a temporary foreign 
worker remains in Canada. 
 
 
 
In December 2009, Ontario enacted the Employment Protection for 
Foreign Nationals Act.  The main provisions of the law prohibit 
recruiters from charging live-in caregivers fees and employers or 
recruiters from taking possession of a caregiver's property, 
including passports and work permits.  The law requires recruiters 
and employers to distribute information sheets to caregivers 
setting out their rights under Ontario law.  Employers or 
recruiters who violate the law are subject to fines up to C$50,000 
(US$ 47,000) and a year in jail. 
 
 
 
¶D.  The penalties for sexual assault offenses are: sexual assault: 
a maximum of ten years; sexual assault with a weapon: a maximum of 
14 years imprisonment and a mandatory minimum penalty of 4 years 
where a firearm is used; and, aggravated sexual assault: a maximum 
of life imprisonment and a mandatory minimum penalty of 4 years 
where a firearm is used. There are also several child-specific 
sexual assault offences, which carry a maximum penalty of 10 years. 
 
 
 
¶E.  The CCJS collects annual information on the number of criminal 
incidents reported to police, as well as on cases processed through 
the courts. The most recent reporting period for police reported 
data is 2008, while the most recent court data available is 
2006/2007.  The CCJS, in co-operation with the policing community, 
collects annual police-reported crime statistics through the 
Uniform Crime Reporting Survey (UCR2). The UCR2 data includes the 
number of criminal incidents of TIP that were detected or recorded 
by police within a calendar year.  In 2008, the UCR2 survey 
indicated that a total of 12 incidents of trafficking in persons 
were reported by police across Canada, which includes two victims 
under the age of 18. 
 
 
 
The IWGTIP reports that there are a number of on-going 
investigations with potential international or domestic TIP 
elements across Canada.  In addition to these on-going 
investigations, 29 cases, involving 35 accused, are currently 
before the courts with human trafficking charges under section 
279.01 and/or 279.03 of the Criminal Code and/or section 118 of 
IRPA. All of these, with the exception of one case, involve 
allegations of trafficking for sexually exploitation.  These cases 
involve 36 adult and child victims.  Available information further 
indicates that the majority of the victims originated from within 
Canada. 
 
 
 
In the current reporting period, provincial courts convicted two 
individuals of trafficking in persons charges (i.e. section 279.01 
of the Criminal Code). In Regina (the Crown) v. Emerson in 
Gatineau, QuAbec, Laura Emerson pled guilty on April 9, 2009 to 
exploiting and living off the proceeds of two women, one of whom 
 
OTTAWA 00000208  010 OF 031 
 
 
was underage; she received two concurrent sentences of seven years. 
With double credit for time already served, she will serve  five 
years in prison after conviction.  In Regina v. Vilutis in Toronto, 
Ontario, Vytautas Vilutis pled guilty on April 16, 2009 to human 
trafficking and material benefit from human trafficking; he 
received three concurrent two year sentences.  With double credit 
for time already served, he will serving 13 months in prison after 
conviction. 
 
 
In December 2009, police in Calgary, Alberta made the first arrests 
in western Canada under the Canadian federal Protection of Sexually 
Exploited Children Act.  In one case, police arrested a man who 
recruited and trafficked women from inside Canada.  In another 
case, police allege that the suspect agreed to sell two women to 
undercover officers for a total of C$8,000 (US$7,600). One of the 
exploited women taken into custody was ordered deported to Hong 
Kong for violation of her visa use. 
 
 
 
The government recognizes that these statistics do not represent 
all trafficking cases in the criminal justice system due to the 
challenge of identifying data reported by the police and by the 
courts as "trafficking" cases.  For example, charges and/or 
convictions in human trafficking cases may be laid and/or 
prosecuted under trafficking-specific or other non-trafficking 
specific offenses, such as kidnapping or aggravated sexual assault. 
In addition, the number and type(s) of charges laid and reported by 
police may subsequently change (either at the pre-court stage or 
during the court process) by the time of conviction. 
 
 
Provincial and municipal law enforcement agencies may choose not to 
file human trafficking charges if another related charge (e.g., 
living off the proceeds of prostitution, sexual assault) could 
guarantee a longer period of incarceration. 
 
 
 
¶F.  The RCMP provides law enforcement training on trafficking in 
persons bi-annually at the RCMP Immigration and Passport 
Investigators Course to RCMP personnel as well as officials of 
agencies outside of the RCMP, including the U.S. Department of 
Homeland Security, CBSA, and foreign and municipal police forces. 
This week-long training session includes a full day dedicated to 
human trafficking and includes in-depth informative training and 
discussion on relevant sections of the Immigration and Refugee 
Protection Act and the Criminal Code, training on current 
investigative techniques, and identification of potential victims. 
 
 
 
In 2009, the RCMP organized a series of human trafficking workshops 
involving an integrated training approach for frontline, 
investigative, and intelligence officers, border and immigration 
officials, and prosecutors.  These events include presentations by 
the RCMP, Justice Canada, SWC, CBSA, CIC, and PPSC, along with 
presentations of TIP case studies from various police services 
across Canada and a testimony from a human trafficking survivor. 
The training focuses on both domestic and international cases of 
human trafficking.  Over the reporting period, workshops took place 
 
OTTAWA 00000208  011 OF 031 
 
 
in British Columbia, Ontario, Alberta, Saskatchewan, and Quebec 
provinces.  Approximately 1,200 law enforcement officers, border 
services officers, and prosecutors participated in these human 
trafficking workshops.  In addition, two human trafficking 
workshops took place in Quebec province for provincial prosecutors. 
Approximately 140 prosecutors attended the workshops and received 
information on TIP, including on aboriginal issues to raise 
awareness of the victimization of aboriginal women and girls and 
the possible link between such vulnerable populations and human 
trafficking.  In July 2009, the IWGTIP co-chairs and HTNCC made a 
presentation to the Assembly of Manitoba Chiefs at the Prevent 
Human Trafficking: Stop the Sexual Exploitation of First Nations 
Women and Children Forum. 
 
 
 
The HTNCC also provides TIP awareness to some RCMP recruits before 
they enter the field.  During the reporting period, HTNCC members 
delivered TIP awareness presentations to: recruits at the RCMP 
national academy in Regina, Saskatchewan; law enforcement officers 
attending the Canadian Police College Organized Crime course; the 
CISC courses and the aboriginal gang course; and, to all law 
enforcement officers participating in international peacekeeping 
missions in Haiti and Cote d'Ivoire, according to DFAIT. 
 
 
 
At the federal level, the HTNCC and HRSDC Labor Program developed 
training for HRSDC personnel.  At the provincial/territorial level, 
the HTNCC and HRSDC developed training for provincial labor 
inspectors and other officials, including information about 
indicators of human trafficking, industries at risk, and possible 
areas of cooperation between federal, provincial, territorial labor 
officials, law enforcement, and other implicated parties. 
 
 
 
IWGTIP co-chairs presented on trafficking for forced labor to the 
federal/ provincial/territorial Labor Ministers to raise awareness 
among front line labor inspectors to mitigate the risk for labor 
exploitation by migrant workers.  There were similar presentations 
to federal/ provincial/ territorial labor officials in 2008 and 
¶2009. 
 
 
 
The RCMP has six regional Human Trafficking Awareness Coordinators 
(HTAC) in strategic locations across the country.  Key 
responsibilities of the HTACs include developing and maintaining 
strong relationships and raising awareness about human trafficking 
among various law enforcement agencies, government agencies, NGOs, 
youth, and the public in all the provinces and territories.  The 
HTNCC and the HTACs delivered TIP awareness sessions to 
approximately 5,500 law enforcement officers, prosecutors, and 
government employees, as well as 4,500 members of civil society. 
Since 2008, a total of approximately 26,300 law enforcement, 
government and non-governments organizations received training from 
either HTNCC members or the HTACs.  In addition, the British 
Columbia provincial  HTAC has provided awareness sessions to 350 
firefighters, including indicators of human trafficking to assist 
them in recognizing human trafficking when responding to emergency 
calls. 
 
OTTAWA 00000208  012 OF 031 
 
 
The RCMP developed a human trafficking tool kit that includes 
victim assistance guidelines for international and domestic cases 
on how to treat victims after identification. The tool kit also 
contains anti-trafficking posters in six languages, pamphlets, a 
police officer handbook, pocket cards with contact information to 
report cases to law enforcement, and a training video.  The 
training video includes information on domestic and international 
TIP for sexual exploitation as well as trafficking for forced 
labor, and is for NGOs, law enforcement agencies, and the public. 
The material in the tool kits include an anonymous toll-free 
tip-line that is administered by the Canadian Crime Stoppers 
Association.  In early 2009, these tool kits went to approximately 
3,000 police services across Canada and are received wide 
distribution during workshops and awareness sessions.  In addition, 
the HTNCC is in the process of developing an investigator's 
guidebook for Canadian law enforcement to include additional 
information, such as the identification and protection of victims 
and useful tips for interviewing TIP victims. 
 
RCMP policy provides guidelines and procedures to follow when 
officers are investigating suspected cases of human trafficking. 
Immigration officers working in Canada and abroad receive training 
on the global problem of TIP, including how to recognize and 
interact with a potential TIP victim as well as potential referral 
services, in addition to receiving specific training on new 
immigration guidelines.  To supplement this training, CIC developed 
an interactive computer-based training package for electronic 
distribution to officers already in the field. 
 
 
CBSA Migration Integrity Officers (MIOs) also receive specialized 
immigration training, including the detection of migrant smuggling 
and trafficking in persons, passport and document fraud, 
intelligence collection and reporting, identification of 
inadmissible persons, and threats to national security. All CBSA 
Border Services Officers, through their 13 week Port of Entry 
Recruit Training program, receive general TIP-awareness training. 
In 2009, CBSA developed a policies and procedures manual on how 
officers can detect instances of human trafficking, assist in the 
safety and security of victims of human trafficking by referring 
them to appropriate government services, and support the 
investigation and prosecution of trafficking offenders.  CBSA also 
published Trafficking in Persons Information Sheets for the public, 
CBSA, and RCMP officers. 
 
 
 
CBSA officers receive training on the special needs of children who 
may have been smuggled or trafficked. CBSA officers at Ports of 
Entry receive specialized training under the "Our Missing Children" 
program on identifying and assisting missing and abducted children, 
including sensitivity training and special procedures in the 
conduct of interviews with children. 
 
 
 
NGOs report that they are aware of TIP training, and have 
encountered TIP public education and awareness materials, but judge 
them to be of limited use.  NGOs providing support to the 
 
OTTAWA 00000208  013 OF 031 
 
 
aboriginal community in particular note that the materials appear 
to target care providers and outreach/intake workers only, are not 
aboriginal-specific, do not resonate with individuals with poor 
reading or literacy skills, and often use culturally insensitive or 
culturally irrelevant terminology. 
 
 
 
¶G.  Canada has ratified the Convention against Transnational 
Organized Crime and its Protocols on migrant smuggling and TIP 
(which provide a basis for international cooperation in the absence 
of a specific bilateral treaty) and has bilateral and multilateral 
treaties dealing wholly or partially with mutual legal assistance. 
Canada's Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters Act is the 
legislation that enables Canadian authorities to give effect to 
treaty requests to obtain search warrants, evidence gathering 
orders, and other warrants available under the Criminal Code on 
behalf of a requesting state assuming the legal and evidential 
basis for the order exists. 
 
The RCMP participates in a Canada/China working group that provides 
ongoing discussions of law enforcement issues, including human 
trafficking investigations, between both countries.  RCMP 
International Liaison Officers are stationed throughout the world 
and are responsible for developing and maintaining liaison as well 
as exchanging information with foreign officials and international 
partners, often in source countries in Asia and Eastern Europe. 
The liaison officers share any intelligence gathered abroad with 
the HTNCC. 
 
 
The RCMP is a member of the Interpol Working Group on Trafficking 
in Human Beings and attends numerous working group meetings. 
During the course of international investigations, law enforcement 
agencies cooperate with officials from other countries, either 
through the RCMP liaison officers or through international 
contacts. 
 
 
 
¶H.  The Extradition Act, along with the relevant extradition 
agreement, provides the legal framework to extradite persons from 
Canada on the request of an extradition partner for the purposes of 
prosecuting those persons, imposing a sentence upon them, or 
enforcing a sentence imposed on them.  Generally, the offense in 
respect of which the extradition is requested must be punishable by 
imprisonment of at least two years.  Canada cooperates with other 
countries to extradite individuals in appropriate cases, including 
its own nationals, when trafficking offenses are committed abroad. 
 
 
 
¶I. There is no evidence of any government involvement or tolerance 
of TIP at any level. 
 
 
 
¶J.  There is no evidence of any government involvement or tolerance 
of TIP at any level. 
 
OTTAWA 00000208  014 OF 031 
 
 
¶K.  There are no known cases of Canadian officials deployed abroad 
engaging in or facilitating the trafficking of persons.  The 
Canadian Forces (CF) employ a zero tolerance policy with respect to 
exploitation and abuse while deployed on operations.  CF expect 
members to address issues they may witness in the field, whether it 
is to intervene or report.  Soldiers found to be party to such 
actions themselves would be held to account accordingly.  Canada 
would investigate and, if necessary, prosecute any such allegation 
under Canada's laws. 
 
 
 
The Canadian military justice system has jurisdiction to address 
disciplinary issues involving CF members who are participating in 
operations outside of Canada, even while members of the CF are 
involved in a UN or other international operation.  In particular, 
Part III of the National Defence Act (NDA) -- known as the Code of 
Service Discipline (CSD) -- details who is subject to the CSD, and 
who is liable to be charged, dealt with, and/or tried for an 
alleged service offense, whether the offense takes place in or 
outside Canada.  The term 'service offence' is defined in the NDA 
to include all offenses provided for under the NDA, the Criminal 
Code of Canada, and any other Act of Parliament. 
 
 
 
In addition to the jurisdiction that exists to deal with service 
offenses that are based on the laws of Canada, disciplinary action 
under the CSD can address an alleged act or omission committed by 
someone subject to the CSD while outside Canada when that act or 
omission is an offense under the law in the country where it 
occurs.  As a consequence, the CF maintains full disciplinary 
jurisdiction over CF members who are participating in international 
operations to deal not only with alleged service offenses but also 
offenses under the law of the country where the operation takes 
place. 
 
 
 
DND is committed to comprehensive implementation of the North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Policy on Combating Trafficking 
in Human Beings.  This policy represents a political commitment to 
prohibit forces and civilian personnel under NATO command from 
engaging in human trafficking activities or facilitating them.  It 
also prescribes that personnel under NATO command will, within 
their competence and mandate, support the efforts of responsible 
authorities within the host country to combat trafficking in human 
beings. 
 
 
 
¶L.  Canadian criminal law prohibits all child sexual exploitation, 
including Canadians or permanent residents of Canada engaging in 
such criminal conduct while abroad ("child sex tourism"). 
Canadian criminal law treats child sex tourism and trafficking in 
persons as distinct offenses. 
 
 
 
The Criminal Code of Canada  permits the Canadian prosecution of 
Canadian citizens or permanent residents who engage in prohibited 
sexual activity with children while abroad under Subsection 7 
 
OTTAWA 00000208  015 OF 031 
 
 
(4.1), including seeking/obtaining the sexual services of any 
person under 18 years (juvenile prostitution).  Accordingly, when a 
Canadian or permanent resident of Canada is alleged to have engaged 
in child sex tourism while abroad is not charged/convicted by the 
country in which the offense is alleged to have been committed, 
Canada can undertake the prosecution. 
 
 
 
To date, there have been three Canadian child sex tourism 
convictions:  an Ontario provincial court convicted Donald Bakker 
in June 2005 and sentenced him to 10 years imprisonment; and, 
Armand Huard and Denis Rochefort, both of whom were charged in 
February 2008 and pled guilty in November 2008 (Huard was sentenced 
to 3 years in jail; Rochefort was sentenced to 2 years in prison 
and 3 years probation).  In addition, between 1997 and 2009 
Canadians have been charged with/prosecuted in at least 136 cases 
by destination countries for engaging in child molestation. 
 
 
 
¶4.  (SBU) PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS 
 
 
 
¶A.  Victim services and assistance is primarily the responsibility 
of provincial/territorial governments.  Each of the provinces and 
territories has victim services to address the needs of victims. 
They may be court-based, police-based, or system-based.  The 
specific services offered to victims, including those offered in 
shelters, vary depending on the location but usually include: the 
provision of information; support and referral; short-term 
counseling; court preparation and accompaniment; assistance in the 
completion of victim impact statements; and, corrections 
information.  Services are provided to all victims of crime, 
although some provinces provide specialized services including 
specific child victim witness programs, assistance under provincial 
family violence legislation, sexual assault/rape crisis centres, 
violence awareness programs for women, partner assault response 
programs, services to women and children, and initiatives for 
aboriginal victims. 
 
 
Although law enforcement and shelter personnel are becoming more of 
aware of the issue, NGOs complain that there is limited information 
available to trafficking victims about their rights under Canadian 
anti-trafficking laws.  NGOs have difficulty tracking the numbers 
of foreign victims, as foreign victims may apply for refugee status 
instead of the Temporary Resident Permit. 
 
 
 
The provinces and territories are primarily responsible for the 
administration and enforcement of laws relating to children and 
youth, as well as the provision of socio-legal services geared 
towards children.  All provinces and territories have child 
protection laws and agencies responsible for assisting children in 
need focussed on the principle of the best interest of the child. 
Where a child is found to be in need of protection - including 
against sexual abuse and exploitation - an array of services to 
meet the needs of the child may come into play.  Where appropriate, 
each jurisdiction works collaboratively to assist the other in 
 
OTTAWA 00000208  016 OF 031 
 
 
meeting and enhancing their policies and programs relating to 
children. 
 
At the federal level, CIC and CBSA have programs and policies in 
place to assist vulnerable children within their respective 
mandates.  New guidelines ensure that child victims of trafficking 
remain safe, are separated from the control and custody of any 
possible trafficker(s), and receive police protection.  Children 
believed to be victims of trafficking, like adults, can also 
receive Temporary Resident Permits and referral to appropriate 
provincial and territorial child welfare authorities; they are also 
eligible for health care under the Interim Federal Health Program 
(IFHP). 
 
 
Witness protection is provided by both the federal government under 
the Witness Protection Program Act (WPPA), as well as by some 
provinces that operate legislated (Manitoba and Saskatchewan), 
policy-based (Ontario and QuAbec), or operationally structured 
(British Columbia) programs.  A victim of human trafficking could 
be eligible under the terms of either the federal or provincial 
programs to receive protection to assist law enforcement and 
prosecution. 
 
 
 
The federal WPPA program provides the legal framework to protect 
persons who are involved in providing assistance to law enforcement 
in various matters.  This can include persons who are assisting the 
RCMP in law enforcement matters or those who are assisting another 
law enforcement agency, provided an agreement has been entered into 
between the RCMP and that agency.  While services for witnesses are 
on a case by case basis, protection can include relocation, 
accommodation, and change of identity, as well as counseling, 
training, and finite financial support necessary to ensure the 
security of the person and to facilitate his/her re-establishment 
and self-sufficiency.  The RCMP administers the Witness Protection 
Program.  As of January 2010, no victims of human trafficking had 
applied for protection under this program. 
 
 
 
¶B.  The protection of victims of crime is a shared responsibility 
between the federal and provincial/territorial governments. 
Numerous programs and services are available to victims of crime in 
Canada, including trafficking victims, ranging from health care to 
emergency housing and social and legal assistance.  Legal aid 
programs are administered separately by each province and 
territory, and eligibility is based primarily upon financial need. 
Similarly, social services such as emergency financial assistance, 
including food allowances, and housing are at the provincial and 
territorial levels and are available to those in need. 
 
 
 
In the province of British Columbia, emergency shelters and other 
forms of social housing operate under licenses from the provincial 
government.  Trafficking victims, regardless of their status in the 
country, may have access to such shelters.  These facilities are 
operated by non-government organizations.  For example, on December 
1, 2009, the Salvation Army, a non-government organization, opened 
a 10-bed facility in Vancouver, British Columbia to provide shelter 
 
OTTAWA 00000208  017 OF 031 
 
 
to victims of sex trafficking.  Women will also receive immediate 
medical care, help with addictions, legal issues, refugees services 
as well as 24/7 care from staff. 
 
 
 
¶C.  The government allocated an additional C$52 million (US$ 49 
million) in 2007 to be used through 2011 for programs, services, 
and funding to support federal efforts, as well as the provinces 
and territories in meeting the needs of victims of crime across the 
continuum of the justice system and federal corrections. 
 
 
 
Under the Victims Fund, which was established in 2000 at Justice 
Canada to encourage the development of new approaches to meet the 
needs of crime victims, C$7.75 million (US$ 7.3 million) per year 
supports initiatives to increase the confidence of victims of crime 
in the criminal justice system, to raise awareness of the needs of 
victims of crime, and to facilitate the provision of available 
services and assistance among victims and their families. 
Provincial and territorial governments and NGOs may apply to the 
Victims Fund to develop programs to fill gaps in the delivery of 
services to victims.  Other forms of support come from the Policy 
Centre for Victims Issues at Justice Canada, which commissions 
research on victim-related issues, creates and disseminates fact 
sheets and other forms of public legal education on victim issues, 
and undertakes consultations with NGOs and victims. 
 
 
 
 The mandate of Canada's Federal Ombudsman for Victims of Crime 
(established in April 2007) includes promoting access to existing 
federal government programs and services available to victims of 
crime, addressing complaints about compliance with the provisions 
for victims of crime in the Corrections and Conditional Release 
Act, and identifying systemic and emerging issues that impact 
negatively on victims.  The Ombudsman has identified the sexual 
abuse of children and the distribution of child sexual abuse images 
as a priority issue. 
 
Foreign nationals who are suspected victims of trafficking may 
receive a Temporary Resident Permit (TRP).  TRP holders have access 
to Canada's Interim Federal Health Program (IFHP), thus ensuring 
that they receive immediate medical attention, as required. The 
IFHP covers essential and emergency health services for the 
treatment and prevention of serious medical conditions and the 
treatment of emergency dental conditions.  In the case of 
trafficking victims, trauma counselling is also included. 
Provincial or territorial health coverage becomes available to 
persons who have been resident in that jurisdiction.  The period of 
required residency usually varies from three to six months, 
depending on the jurisdiction. 
 
 
 
¶D.  In May 2006, Canada strengthened guidelines for immigration 
officers to issue short-term, fee-exempt TRPs to trafficking 
victims for a period of reflection.  This period is designed to 
help victims of trafficking escape the influence of their 
traffickers, recover from their ordeal, and evaluate their 
immigration options.  Permit-holders have access to the IFHP, thus 
 
OTTAWA 00000208  018 OF 031 
 
 
ensuring that they receive the immediate medical attention 
required. The IFHP covers essential and emergency health services 
for the treatment and prevention of serious medical conditions and 
the treatment of emergency dental conditions.  In the case of 
trafficking victims, trauma counselling is also included.  CIC may 
renew TRPs. 
 
 
 
In 2007, the extension period grew from 120 days to 180 days to 
provide further protection to victims of trafficking.  Under the 
180-day permits, victims are eligible to apply for a fee-exempt 
work permit, an option previously unavailable under the 120-day 
permit.  Long-term TRPs may be up to three years in cases where 
circumstances warrant.  TRP holders may qualify to remain in Canada 
under the permit holder class after three or five years, depending 
on individual circumstances. 
 
 
 
Victims of trafficking are not required to testify against their 
traffickers in order to gain temporary or permanent immigration 
status.  Canada has undertaken numerous efforts, including through 
amendments to criminal laws, to encourage the participation of 
victims in supporting the prosecution of alleged offenders 
including through the provision of victim support and assistance 
and the use of testimonial aids. 
 
 
 
In addition to TRP, there are alternate avenues available for 
individuals to remain in Canada temporarily or permanently, such as 
provisions for humanitarian and compassionate consideration. 
Should persons feel that they are at risk of persecution, torture 
or cruel and unusual treatment, or punishment upon return to the 
country of nationality, they may also make an in-Canada refugee 
claim.  Individual circumstances differ, and victims' needs receive 
evaluation on a case-by-case basis. 
 
 
 
¶E.  See response to question B in this section. 
 
 
 
¶F.  See response to question H in this section. 
 
 
 
¶G.  Given Canada's federal structure, there is no single mechanism 
for collecting statistics on the total number of identified TIP 
victims.  CCJS collects information on incidents reported to 
police, charges, and their outcomes. In addition, CIC collects data 
on the number of TRP issued to TIP victims. During the reporting 
period, 15 foreign nationals received TRPs as victims of 
trafficking.  The RCMP collects data on TIP cases before the 
courts. Twenty-nine victims were identified by law enforcement in 
cases in which human trafficking charges were laid during the 
reporting period.  This number does not include the victims that 
were identified during on-going investigations.  British Columbia 
province has provided 13 trafficked foreign victims with assistance 
through government-funded shelters, interpretation, legal, support 
 
OTTAWA 00000208  019 OF 031 
 
 
and counseling services during the reporting period. 
 
 
 
¶H.  Law enforcement agencies train officers in victim 
identification and sensitization to the special needs of trafficked 
victims.  The CBSA policy and procedures manual assists officers 
who come into contact with potential victims of human trafficking 
by providing detailed information on the identification of victims, 
their special needs, and proper referral protocols. When, in the 
judgment of the officer, an adequate number of indicators are 
present, the officer has the option of referring the possible TIP 
victim to CIC for consideration for a TRPt.  The guidelines 
instruct both CIC and CBSA officers to take action to ensure the 
safety of the possible victim and ensure the possible victim is 
separated from the control and custody of any possible trafficker, 
and to coordinate with partners to ensure the victim will be taken 
to a shelter or receive police protection, as appropriate. The 
guidelines also include special provision for dealing with child 
victims of trafficking. 
 
 
¶I.  Legislation at the federal and provincial/territorial levels 
affirms the rights of all victims of crime receive respectful 
treatment and that their views and concerns are an important 
consideration in the criminal justice system.  The Canadian 
Statement of Basic Principles of Justice for Victims of Crime, 
endorsed by the federal, provincial and territorial ministers 
responsible for criminal justice, outlines the basic principles 
that guide the development of policy, programs, and legislation 
pertaining to all victims of crime in Canada.  The Canadian Charter 
of Rights and Freedoms also guarantees the right against arbitrary 
detainment, the right to counsel, the right to be informed of the 
reasons for arrest or detention, and the presumption of innocence. 
Canadian criminal law and charging practices provide flexibility 
for dealing with situations involving persons forced to commit 
criminal acts as a direct result of trafficking.  Canada recognizes 
that international best practices indicate that, where possible, 
persons should not be charged for criminal acts they were forced to 
commit as a direct result of trafficking. 
 
 
 
¶J.  Victims are not required to assist with the investigation or 
prosecution of alleged traffickers nor are victim access to support 
and assistance dependent upon their cooperation or support of an 
investigation/prosecution. Nonetheless, the provision of services 
and assistance to victims throughout the criminal justice process 
enhances victim support for criminal prosecution.  Canada's 
Criminal Code contains numerous provisions to facilitate a 
victim's/witness' participation in a criminal proceeding including 
 
 
 
A         Section 486.1(1) authorizes the presence of a support 
person for a child witness or person with a mental or physical 
disability when that person testifies in any proceeding unless the 
support person's presence would interfere with the proper 
administration of justice; 
 
OTTAWA 00000208  020 OF 031 
 
 
A         Section 486.1(2) authorizes the presence of a support 
person for all other witnesses where doing so would be necessary to 
obtain a full and candid account from the witness.  In determining 
whether to permit a support person in this case, the judge/justice 
must take into consideration the age of the witness, whether the 
witness has a physical/mental disability, the nature of the 
offense, the nature of any relationship between the witness and the 
accused, and any other circumstances that are considered relevant 
by the judge/justice; 
 
 
 
A         Section 486.2(1) authorizes the giving of testimony 
outside of the court room (via closed-circuit television) or behind 
a screen or other device by a child witness or a witness who has 
difficulty communicating evidence by reason of a mental or physical 
disability.  Such measures must not interfere with the proper 
administration of justice; 
 
 
 
A         Section 486.2(2) authorizes the giving of testimony 
outside the court room (via closed-circuit television) or behind a 
screen or other device for all other witnesses if the judge/justice 
is of the opinion that it is necessary to obtain a full and candid 
account from the witness of the acts complained of.  In determining 
whether to permit such measures, the judge/justice must take into 
consideration the age of the witness, whether the witness has a 
physical/mental disability, the nature of the offense, the nature 
of any relationship between the witness and the accused, and any 
other relevant circumstances; and, 
 
 
 
A         Sections 714.1-714.4 authorizes a witness to provide 
evidence by means of audio or video technology, where deemed 
appropriate by the court, from either within Canada or outside 
Canada. 
 
 
 
Foreign national victims of trafficking who are issued a TRP may 
receive a subsequent longer term TRP to allow them to escape the 
influence of traffickers, to provide time to decide if they wish to 
return home, to assist in the investigation or prosecution of the 
trafficker(s), or to allow them to recover from physical or mental 
trauma. 
 
 
While a victim is not required to testify or cooperate in an 
investigation to receive a TRP, the issuance of these documents can 
facilitate a victim's ability to stay in Canada for purposes of 
cooperating with an investigation or prosecution.  During the 
reporting period, victims assisted in at least 22 TIP cases that 
are before the courts. This number does not include victims who are 
currently assisting law enforcement during on-going TIP 
investigations. 
 
Victims may prepare a victim impact statement describing the harm 
done to them and, more generally, the impact the crime has had on 
their lives.  The statement must be taken into account by the court 
when considering the sentence the offender will receive.  At the 
 
OTTAWA 00000208  021 OF 031 
 
 
federal level, the Criminal Code requires the imposition of a 
victim fine surcharge in addition to any other sentence ordered for 
an offender convicted or discharged of an offense, except in cases 
of undue hardship. 
 
 
 
In addition, offenders sentenced for trafficking offenses under the 
Criminal Code may receive restitution order as part of their 
sentences.  A judge may order restitution in three instances: to 
cover the cost of damage to, the loss of or destruction of the 
property of any person as a result of the commission of an offence; 
to cover all pecuniary damages, including loss of income or 
support, to any person who has suffered bodily or psychological 
harm as the result of the commission of an offense; and, to cover 
the cost of all actual and reasonable expenses incurred by a member 
of the offender's household associated with a person having to move 
out of that household to cover temporary housing, food, childcare, 
and transportation. Restitution orders require the offender to pay 
an amount directly to the victim of the offense to cover the 
victim's monetary losses or damage to property caused by the crime. 
 
 
 
Civil redress by victims against the perpetrators of crime is a 
matter of provincial/territorial responsibility.  Provinces and 
territories have enacted legislation in their respective 
jurisdictions which outline numerous rights for victims of crime 
including, in most cases, the right to seek compensation. 
 
 
 
¶K.  Canada's embassies and high commissions develop relationships 
with civil society and participate in international conferences. 
They have drafted consular guidelines for Canadian officers at 
missions abroad on the issue of sexual exploitation of children by 
Canadians abroad.  These guidelines discuss the law concerning 
child sex tourism and recommend that the complainant be referred to 
the local law enforcement/local Interpol office/RCMP liaison 
officer or delegate.  Information outlining labor standards and 
workers' basic rights in Canada is available in five languages at 
Canadian overseas missions and Ports of Entry. 
 
 
 
The federal government provided funding to the province of British 
Columbia's Office to Combat Trafficking in Person for the 
development of curriculum and toolkits for First Responders (those 
most likely to be a position to encounter trafficked persons) in 
both government and community agencies.  This project will be 
completed in the fall of 2010. 
 
 
 
¶L.  Social programs such as universal health care, emergency 
housing, legal aid, or emergency financial assistance are primarily 
at the provincial/territorial levels in Canada.  Canadian citizens 
are entitled to apply for these services as a right, though the 
exact eligibility requirements for those services based on 
financial need (such as legal aid or social assistance) will vary 
from jurisdiction to jurisdiction.  None of these services are 
linked to the fact that the individual has the status of victim of 
 
OTTAWA 00000208  022 OF 031 
 
 
crime. 
 
 
 
¶M.  Canada has worked with international organizations and civil 
society to prevent TIP and promote awareness of the risks 
associated with human trafficking, to protect trafficked victims, 
and to prosecute traffickers.  See Questions 3 (F) and 4 (C) for 
services and programs provided domestically and Questions 6 (A) and 
6 (B) for international work with other countries, civil society, 
and multilateral organizations to address trafficking in persons. 
 
 
 
¶5.  (SBU) PREVENTION 
 
 
 
¶A.  In January 2008, the government provided new and ongoing 
funding of C$6 million (US$5.7 million) per year, in part to fund 
the CCSA's national awareness campaign on human trafficking to help 
raise public awareness of the potential dangers of human 
trafficking and to help the public identify occurrences and to 
provide information on where to report suspected cases.  The 
existing national tip-line is used as a central point for reporting 
suspected cases of human trafficking and for obtaining general 
information about TIP.  Another portion of this money is funding 
the RCMP Human Trafficking Regional Coordinators. 
 
SWC supports community and collaborative projects to advance the 
equality of women. 
 
In 2009, the HTNCC and regional HTACs conducted awareness sessions 
to approximately 4,500 members of civil society across Canada.  The 
RCMP developed an "I'm not for sale" campaign and the awareness 
material relating to this campaign is included in a tool kit.  As 
part of the campaign, these tool kits have been distributed to 
thousands of law enforcement and NGOs.  Included in the tool kits 
are two type of TIP posters, one for the public and one for 
victims. The posters come in six languages, including languages 
from source countries, and have been posted in public areas across 
the country. The HTNCC is planning to promote the "I'm not for 
sale" campaign among the public and youth in 2010. 
 
CIC, in collaboration with HRSDC, distributes information to 
temporary foreign workers that indicates where they can seek 
assistance on issues related to employment and health and safety 
standards.  Live-in caregivers also receive information prior to 
their arrival in Canada, such as a sample contract and contact 
information for provincial/territorial labor standards offices and 
live-in caregiver associations.  In addition, the government funds 
group orientation sessions in Manila to further prepare live-in 
caregivers for work in Canada. 
 
 
 
Provinces and territories have primary responsibility for 
enforcement of labor standards, which apply equally to temporary 
foreign workers, Canadian citizens, and permanent residents of 
Canada.  Alberta has set up two special advisory offices for 
temporary foreign workers and established a team of inspectors to 
ensure they receive fair treatment in their workplaces. Manitoba 
 
OTTAWA 00000208  023 OF 031 
 
 
has introduced legislation to protect temporary foreign workers 
from abusive practices by third party recruiters.  Ontario has 
introduced legislation to protect live-in caregivers from abusive 
practices by third party recruiters.  British Columbia's Office to 
Combat Trafficking in Persons trained over 2,000 individuals in 
government, community agencies, universities, and schools in TIP 
awareness and information sessions.  In June 2009, the Senate 
Standing Committee on Human Rights began an examination of child 
sexual exploitation in Canada.  In 2009, CIC launched a public 
awareness campaign to warn about fraudulent activities and 
unscrupulous third party recruiters and consultants.  CIC is 
examining additional ways of combating fraud, and has been 
consulting with stakeholders and recent immigrants to gain a better 
understanding of the role of third parties, such as consultants and 
labor recruiters. 
 
 
 
The National Crime Prevention Centre (NCPC) supports prevention of 
trafficking in persons from a programming and a policy perspective. 
The NCPC funded the development and broad dissemination of a 
practical assessment tool entitled "Guidance on Local Safety 
Audits: A Compendium of International Practice."  This tool 
promotes integrated action by relevant stakeholders, identifies the 
means to gather a clear picture of crime and victimization in a 
given city, specifies key populations and issues that should be 
examined, including human trafficking, and guides the development 
of an effective prevention strategy.  Available in English, French, 
Spanish, and German (with three other languages forthcoming), this 
tool is included in the United Nations (UN) Global Initiative to 
Fight Human Trafficking (GIFT) toolkit.  The NCPC has also funded a 
number of initiatives for vulnerable populations: street youth, 
youth at risk of or involved in gangs, and youth involved with 
drugs.  They have also developed aboriginal-specific initiatives. 
 
 
 
See Question 6 (B) for additional information on Canada's technical 
assistance international projects that include prevention and 
awareness-raising. 
 
 
¶B.  Integrated Border Enforcement Teams (IBETs) are designed to 
enhance border integrity and security along the shared Canada/U.S. 
border by identifying, investigating, and interdicting persons and 
organizations that pose a threat to national security or are 
engaged in other border-related criminal activity.  There are 15 
IBET regions with 24 locations along the Canada/U.S. border.  The 
core IBET agencies are the RCMP, CBSA, the U.S. Bureau of Customs 
and Border Protection, the U.S. Bureau of Immigration and Customs 
Enforcement, and the U.S. Coast Guard.  In addition to these five 
core agencies, there are also federal, provincial, territorial, 
state, and municipal agencies within IBETs.    Co-located 
intelligence teams support IBETs and partner agencies by 
collecting, analyzing, and disseminating tactical and strategic 
intelligence pertaining to cross border crime between Canada and 
the U.S.  This intelligence is shared with participating agencies 
to target international/national/criminal organizations. 
 
 
The Criminal Visa Screening Unit, as well as the National Security 
Screening Unit within the CBSA, gathers intelligence on potential 
 
OTTAWA 00000208  024 OF 031 
 
 
travelers to Canada from foreign countries for the purpose of 
targeting organized crime and human trafficking.  The enhanced 
criminal screening process along with location visits and on-site 
interviews in Canada by the RCMP and CBSA determine the validity of 
the travel request, the accuracy of information presented by the 
visitor, and any potential organized crime links.  Information 
gathered is returned to CIC visa officers for determination of visa 
issuance. 
 
The RCMP and CBSA completed a regional intelligence probe in 2008 
to monitor visa applicants from selected countries to identify 
potential organizations involved in TIP.  CBSA monitors irregular 
migration to Canada and publishes regular intelligence analyses 
which identify trends and patterns in irregular migration and 
migration-related crime, including trafficking in persons. 
 
 
 
CBSA employs a multiple borders strategy and performs a number of 
functions to help prevent victims from entering Canada, to deter 
trafficking organizations from using Canada as a destination 
country or a transit country, and to investigate and support the 
prosecution of trafficking offenders. This strategy provides the 
opportunity for border officers to identify and intercept high risk 
travelers, including potential trafficking victims at each point 
along their journey to Canada: 
 
 
 
A         Migration Integrity Officers (MIOs) work with airline 
security and local authorities in 45 countries around the world to 
prevent irregular migration, including migrant smuggling, by 
interdicting individuals before they arrive in Canada; 
 
 
 
A         MIOs provide advice and training to airlines regarding 
persons who may be attempting to travel without proper 
documentation, and assist visa officers in combating visa fraud; 
 
 
 
A         MIOs work with international law enforcement partners to 
detect trends and patterns in irregular migration and collect and 
report intelligence information on irregular migration, organized 
migration crime rings and the routes and methods they use; 
 
 
 
A         CIC's visa officers posted abroad also receive training 
to be vigilant in identifying possible victims of trafficking when 
examining both permanent and temporary applications submitted 
abroad; 
 
 
 
A         CBSA maintains Border Services Officers at 245 Ports of 
Entry (highway crossings, airports, and harbors) who examine 
foreign nationals seeking entry to Canada to ensure they have 
genuine, properly-obtained travel documents, and are entering 
Canada for a genuine and lawful purpose; and, 
 
OTTAWA 00000208  025 OF 031 
 
 
A         Enforcement officers receive training to identify 
possible victims of trafficking and to refer them to CIC officials. 
 
 
 
 
Canadian immigration visa officers and MIOs at Canadian embassies 
and high commissions abroad collaborate in anti-fraud activities to 
ensure the integrity of the Canadian migration program. Canada 
cooperates with host country police, as well as the immigration and 
law enforcement officers of relevant Canadian embassies and high 
commissions, in identifying, investigating, and disrupting criminal 
organizations involved in document forgery and TIP.   Canadian 
immigration officers also provide technical assistance to support 
anti-TIP collaboration efforts between Canadian embassies/high 
commissions and host countries. 
 
 
 
¶C.  Canadian federal efforts are under the coordination of the 
IWGTIP (see Question 2 (B).) 
 
 
The National Missing Children Services, as part of the Canadian 
Police Centre for Missing and Exploited Children, analyzes all 
abduction and runaway missing requests for assistance from Canadian 
police to determine if there are any potential linkages to the 
trafficking of children.  If linkages exist or are suspected, these 
files are forwarded to the RCMP HTNCC for further investigation. 
The RCMP is a member of the INTERPOL Working Group on Trafficking 
in Human Beings.  Regular meetings among participating countries 
afford an opportunity to share and gather intelligence on new human 
trafficking trends globally and share best practices for combating 
TIP.   RCMP International Liaison Officers are responsible for 
developing and maintaining liaison as well as exchanging 
information with foreign officials and international partners, 
often in Asia and Eastern Europe.  The liaison officers are 
responsible for sharing foreign intelligence with the HTNCC.  The 
HTNCC is in the process of completing MOUs with the United 
Kingdom's Human Trafficking Coordination Centre and the USG's Human 
Smuggling and Trafficking Center to facilitate the exchange of 
information. 
 
 
 
The HTNCC coordinates anti-trafficking law enforcement efforts as 
well as intelligence relating to TIP with a priority to develop 
international partnerships to assist Canadian law enforcement with 
the international component of TIP investigations. British 
Columbia's Office to Combat Trafficking in Persons plays a 
coordinating role between and among all federal, provincial, 
municipal, and community partners involved in providing protection 
to trafficked persons, and prevention of further trafficking of 
individuals. 
 
 
 
¶D.  Canada does not have a national plan of action to address TIP. 
The government focuses on four broad areas -- the 4 "Ps" -- to 
combat TIP: prevention; protection of victims; prosecution of 
 
OTTAWA 00000208  026 OF 031 
 
 
offenders; and, domestic and international partnerships. 
 
 
 
¶E.  Canada's primary measure to reduce the prevalence of incidents 
involving the sexual exploitation of women and girls, including 
through the sex trade,  is continued awareness and victim 
identification training of law enforcement officials and 
prosecution of offenders.  Police services across Canada regularly 
conduct investigations into and raids at establishments, such as 
brothels, massage parlors, and adult entertainment establishments 
where prostitution and/or human trafficking is suspected.  Law 
enforcement agencies make use of the legislative tools available to 
lay charges related to human trafficking or prostitution, where 
appropriate.  Canada supports a broad range of prevention, 
awareness and research to address factors that can contribute to 
the demand leading to exploitation of persons. See responses to 
Section 3 (L) for a description of the legislative measures 
addressing child sex tourism. 
 
 
 
¶F.  DFAIT's tourist publication "Bon Voyage, But..." advises 
Canadian travellers of the Canadian child sex tourism offense and 
that child sexual exploitation is prohibited in the destination 
country.  DFAIT also provides related information, as appropriate 
in its Country Reports, designed for travellers to consult prior to 
departure.  See Question 4 (K) for description of the Guidelines 
for Consular Officers posted abroad.  See Question 3 (L) for 
information on how Canada's criminal laws address the issue of 
child sex tourism and numerous programs and policies that are in 
place directly to combat exploitation.  These measures are 
monitored and enhanced, as appropriate, better to protect children 
and others from harm. 
 
 
 
The RCMP is the international contact point for investigation and 
assignment of files involving Canadian suspects and victims of 
Internet-facilitated child sexual exploitation. The RCMP's National 
Child Exploitation Coordination Center (NCECC) receives information 
through national and international partnerships, Interpol, and 
domestic law enforcement agencies, including on individuals 
believed to be engaged in sex tourism  due to their use of the 
Internet in organizing and communicating travel activities as well 
as posting/distributing sex abuse images.  The NCECC coordinates 
intelligence, provides investigational support, and expertise to 
enable Canadian law enforcement to investigate these offenses. 
 
 
 
¶G.  See response to Section 3 (K) for measures adopted to ensure 
that Canadian nationals deployed abroad as part of peacekeeping or 
other missions do not engage in or facilitate severe forms of 
trafficking or exploit victims. 
 
 
 
¶6.  PARTNERSHIPS 
 
OTTAWA 00000208  027 OF 031 
 
 
¶A.  See Question 6 (B) outlining international projects with other 
governments, civil society and/or multilateral organizations and 5 
(A) for more information about the government's partnerships with 
the CCSA.  See Questions 3 (F) and 4 (C) for initiatives involving 
other governments, civil society, and/or multilateral organizations 
and Question 6 (B) of other international assistance provided to 
other countries, civil society, and multilateral organizations to 
address trafficking in persons. 
 
 
 
Canada engages bilaterally on the issue of trafficking in persons 
with other governments in the context of its security 
consultations.  TIP was a separate agenda item in bilateral 
security consultations with Mexico and Colombia in February and May 
2009, respectively.  Canada shares best practices and strategies to 
combat human trafficking through regional and multilateral 
processes such as the United Nations, the Organization of American 
States (OAS), the Organization for Security and Co-operation in 
Europe, the G8, and the Regional Conference on Migration (RCM). 
Canada funded an OAS TIP-related meeting on March 3-4, 2009, with 
civil society throughout the Americas to exchange experiences, 
ideas, and recommendations on different aspects of human 
trafficking. 
 
 
 
Within the RCM, Canada participates in its Liaison Officer Network 
to Combat Trafficking in Persons and Migrant Smuggling.  To combat 
TIP, the United States, Mexico, and Canada deliver, at the request 
of interested RCM member countries, a course on the detection of 
fraudulent travel documentation to immigration and consular 
officials.  Canada provides an annual update to the RCM's 
"Comparative Matrix of Legislation against Trafficking in Persons 
and Smuggling of Migrants in RCM Member Countries."  Canada is 
considering funding a TIP seminar this year in El Salvador through 
RCM. 
 
 
 
In December 2009, Canada participated in the International 
Organization for Migration's Caribbean Regional Seminar: 
"Responding to Needs of Trafficked Victims, Migrant Children and 
other Vulnerable Groups."  CIC delivered a presentation regarding 
the protection of TIP victims in Canada and Canada's plans to 
combat TIP at the 2010 Olympic and Paralympic Winter Games. 
 
 
 
In preparation for the 2010 Winter Games, Justice Canada funded 
Vancouver's Information Services  for its project "Enhanced 
Interpretation Services for Victims of Crime and Human Trafficking 
during the 2010 Olympics and Paralympics in Vancouver," which will 
help ensure that visitors to British Columbia have access to 
information and support.  Justice Canada also provided funding for 
the Canadian Council for Refugees' National Forum in December 2009 
on "Improving Services and Protections for Victims of Trafficking." 
Justice Canada and Public Safety Canada are funding British 
Columbia's Office to Combat Trafficking in Persons on the project 
"Human Trafficking Training Curriculum and Tools for Effective 
Response," which entails the development, pilot testing, and 
initial delivery of a training curriculum and tool kit on human 
 
OTTAWA 00000208  028 OF 031 
 
 
trafficking for first responders in British Columbia. 
 
 
 
In 2009, Public Safety Canada established the Contribution Program 
to Combat Child Sexual Exploitation and Human Trafficking 
(CPCCSEHT) to support projects and initiatives specifically aimed 
at combating child sexual exploitation on the Internet and human 
trafficking. 
 
 
 
SWC funded the Assembly of Manitoba Chiefs to develop an Action 
Plan to promote national awareness and prevention strategies to 
eliminate the sexual exploitation of First Nations women and 
children in Canada. 
 
 
 
¶B.  DFAIT provides program support to combat TIP internationally 
through the new Anti-Crime Capacity Building Program (ACCBP). 
Supporting efforts to combat human trafficking is a specific 
priority of the ACCBP, which provides assistance to prevent 
trafficking in persons, protect victims, prosecute offenders, and 
promote partnerships.  ACCBP programming will consist of an annual 
contribution of C$8.5 million (US$8 million) in 2009-10 and C$15 
million (US$ 14 million) thereafter.    Eligible recipients include 
foreign states and entities, international organizations, 
non-governmental organizations, professional organizations, private 
sector representatives, or organizations, including academic and 
research institutions, and other implementing bodies such as 
Canadian federal entities.  Funded activities include promoting 
public awareness of trafficking in persons, especially among 
vulnerable populations. 
 
 
 
The Human Security Program at DFAIT is funding a human trafficking 
project with C$257,778 (US$ 244,000) from 2007 to 2010 to 
strengthen capacity of Latin American and Caribbean peacekeeping 
forces to recognize the crime of trafficking in persons and to 
contribute to its prevention on UN peacekeeping missions.  The 
project addresses the prevention element of anti-trafficking in 
persons in the following OAS member states, all of which are 
currently contributing to UN peacekeeping missions around the 
world:  Argentina; Bolivia; Brazil; Chile; Colombia; Dominican 
Republic; Ecuador; El Salvador; Guatemala; Honduras; Paraguay; 
Peru; and, Uruguay. 
 
 
 
The Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA) funded 
anti-trafficking projects and programs in China, West Africa, 
Central and Eastern Europe, and Southeast Asia, with a core focus 
on prevention, protection, and rehabilitation. At the multilateral 
level, CIDA provides core funding to UNICEF, UNIFEM, UNDP, UNHCR, 
ILO, and the IOM to address issues such as trafficking in persons, 
commercial sexual exploitation of women and children, human rights, 
gender equality, children's rights and protection, and migration 
issues. 
 
OTTAWA 00000208  029 OF 031 
 
 
CIDA also supports the Child Protection Partnership in conjunction 
with the International Institute for Child Rights and Development 
(C$2.85 million - US$2.7 million -- 2008-2011) to improve the 
capacity of law enforcement agencies and supporting services to 
combat online child exploitation and abuse in developing countries. 
In developing countries, online child exploitation is a new and 
growing problem that is frequently intertwined with child 
trafficking as child vulnerability grows in the context of emerging 
economies and increased economic migration. 
 
 
 
In East Asia, CIDA supports the Labor Rights: Prevention of Labor 
Trafficking Project in partnership with the International Labor 
Organization (ILO) (C$4 million - US$3.8 million -- 2009-2012) in 
order to contribute to the improvement of labor rights in China 
with the goal to reduce trafficking in women and children migrant 
workers.  The project strengthens provincial action plans against 
trafficking, and develops and implements inter-provincial 
arrangements for safe migration. 
 
 
 
In Eastern Europe, in partnership with the Organization for 
Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), CIDA supports the Human 
Dimension of Security Project (C$5.1 million - US$ 4.8 million -- 
2004-2010).  Through OSCE programming in the human dimension of 
security, it seeks to achieve results in the following key areas: 
gender equality; combating trafficking in human beings; 
migration/freedom of movement; and human rights. 
 
 
 
CIDA also supports a European regional program to combat the 
trafficking of human beings, an initiative of the Office for 
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR) of the OSCE 
(C$2.46 million - US$2.3 million -- 2007-2011), including its 
Anti-Trafficking Program across the former Soviet Union and 
Southeast Europe.  Activities include: supporting the development 
of multi-agency anti-trafficking structures through the promotion 
of National Referral Mechanisms (NRMs); improving strategies to 
identify, protect, and assist trafficked persons, including victims 
of sexual and labor exploitation and Roma victims; raising 
awareness of and addressing gaps in identification models; 
strengthening access to alternative protections available to other 
at-risk groups, such as migrant workers; and, strengthening the 
access of trafficked persons to justice and rights by monitoring 
and raising awareness of rights. 
 
 
 
In Southeast Asia, CIDA supports Southeast Asia Regional 
Cooperation in Human Development (SEARCH) (C$9.25 million - US$ 8.7 
million-- 2004-2010).  SEARCH is working with the United Nations 
Interagency Program to address the issue of trafficking in the 
Greater Mekong Sub-region. 
 
 
 
HRSDC supported the International Labor Organization in a technical 
assistance project to strengthen government enforcement capacity to 
 
OTTAWA 00000208  030 OF 031 
 
 
identify, investigate, and prosecute offences for forced labor and 
human trafficking and to support the establishment of an efficient 
and regulated recruitment mechanism in Jordan. 
 
 
 
The RCMP provided TIP training to local police officers as well as 
customs and immigration officers from twelve countries in West 
Africa in September and December 2009 in coordination with 
INTERPOL, the Netherlands, Denmark, and the United States. In 
October 2009, the RCMP provided TIP training to approximately 250 
middle managers from the newly created police service in Mexico. 
 
The HTNCC developed TIP training for law enforcement in Asia, 
Africa, and Mexico for basic awareness, investigative techniques, 
intelligence-led policing, victim management and risk assessment, 
partnerships, and international cooperation.  In March and November 
2009, the RCMP provided TIP and child exploitation training 
including combating sex tourism to 80 officers from the Cambodian 
National Police attached to the Anti-Trafficking and Juvenile 
Protection Unit in coordination with the Canadian Police Chiefs 
International Training Agency, the Vancouver Police Department, and 
the Toronto Police Service.  Following the training, officers in 
Siem Riep, Cambodia uncovered two cases of sex tourism/child 
exploitation using several techniques learned from the Canadian 
police instructors. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) NOMINATION OF HEROES 
 
 
Joy Smith is one of Canada's leading anti-trafficking activists and 
has used her role as an elected federal Member of Parliament since 
2004 to raise awareness of human trafficking at the national level. 
Mrs. Smith's achievements include passage of a unanimous 
(non-binding) private member's motion in Parliament in 2007 
condemning trafficking in persons for sexual exploitation and 
calling on Canada to adopt a comprehensive national strategy to 
combat human trafficking.  She continues tirelessly to lobby 
federal ministers and fellow legislators to develop, fund, and 
enact this national strategy.  As Vice-Chair of the House of 
Commons Status of Women Committee in 2004, she prompted the 
Committee to study and issue a highly regarded report on human 
trafficking.  She has led the national discussion on trafficking, 
resulting in important changes to the Immigration and Refugee 
Protection Act to extend temporary resident permits to trafficking 
victims.  Mrs. Smith currently has a private member's bill (Bill 
C-268) in Parliament that would, if passed, impose a five-year 
mandatory minimum prison sentence for the trafficking of a minor 
under the age of 18 years.  Mrs. Smith is an impassioned public 
speaker, advocate, and facilitator in the struggle against human 
trafficking, frequently appearing as keynote speaker at conferences 
and bringing together law enforcement, educators, international 
trafficking experts, activists, non-governmental organizations, 
aboriginal organizations, and students.   She works directly to 
support street-level outreach to trafficked women and minors as 
well as to mobilize resources to protect women and children from 
sexual exploitation.  Colleagues throughout the political spectrum 
have recognized her central role as a catalyst in raising awareness 
of human trafficking at the federal level and in promoting all 
party cooperation to combat this crime. 
 
OTTAWA 00000208  031 OF 031 
 
 
¶8.  (U) POINT OF CONTACT 
 
 
 
The point of contact for the TIP report is Emily S. Fertik at 
FertikES@state.gov and (613) 688-5240.  Completion of the TIP 
report entailed: 
 
n  FS-04:  approximately 100 hours 
 
n  LES-11:  50 hours 
 
n  FS-02:  two hours 
 
n  FE-OC: three hours 
JACOBSON