10PARIS130
VISIT OF CODEL TANNER TO PARIS, FEBRUARY 16 - 19
Wed Feb 03 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Paris
VZCZCXYZ0018
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHFR #0130/01 0341738
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 031738Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 8249UNCLAS PARIS 000130 
 
FROM USOECD PARIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OREP AMGT ASEC AFIN OVIP FR
SUBJECT: VISIT OF CODEL TANNER TO PARIS, FEBRUARY 16 - 19 
 
REF: SECSTATE 10759 
 
¶1. (SBU) The U.S. Mission to the Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development (OECD) welcomes CODEL Tanner travel to 
Paris from February 16 to 19, 2010 to attend several official events 
and meetings. 
 
¶2. (U) The control Officer for the visit is Secretary of Delegation, 
¶J. Palmer Roseli, who can be reached by e-mail at 
RoseliJP@state.gov, by phone at 33-1-45-24-74-15, by mobile at 
33-6-20-43-72-45 or by fax at 33-1-45-24-74-07.  He can also be 
reached at home at 33-1 73-64-77-30. 
 
¶3. (U) The administrative point of contact for the visit is Kim 
Walterthum.  She can be reached by e-mail at walterthumka@state.gov, 
by phone at 33-1-45-24-74-31, by mobile at 33-6-30-09-00-73 or by 
fax at 33-1-45-24-74-68. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Mr. Roseli will meet and assist at Le Bourget Airport.  All 
hotel accommodation and transportation have been arranged.  Hotel 
accommodations have been made at the Westin Paris Hotel; 3, rue de 
Castiglione, Paris 75001; Tel: +33-(0)-1-44-77-11-11; Fax: 
+33-(0)-1-44-77-14-60. 
 
¶5. (U) In the event of a crisis or serious international incident 
involving the United States, you should immediately contact your 
control officer. Check the Embassy website for the latest Warden 
Message: 
http://france.usembassy.gov. 
 
¶6. (U) Mission Media Policy: 
 
In accordance with Embassy Paris media policy, visitors from all 
agencies should coordinate all media events, including press 
interviews or statements, with the Embassy press officer. 
 
¶7.  (U) Embassy wishes to remind visitors that visas are required 
for holders of U.S. diplomatic or official passports on official 
business in France. 
 
¶8.  (U) Following is current security information for France: 
 
(A) Terrorism:  The current security situation remains fluid, and 
American citizens should be aware of the potential risks and to take 
these into consideration when making travel plans.  Visitors should 
maintain a low profile, vary routes and times for all required 
travel, and treat mail and packages from unfamiliar sources with 
suspicion.  Additionally, in response to acts of terrorism within 
France, the French Government has continued its terrorism awareness 
posture, the "Plan Vigipirate."   This plan calls for increased 
vigilance on the part of the general public, particularly in crowded 
public places which could be attractive targets for terrorists. 
French security services are also continuing to conduct identity 
checks and vehicular searches of the general public.  All visitors 
to France are encouraged to assess their security posture, exercise 
prudent security practices, and report any suspicious incidents to 
the regional Security Office, Embassy Extension 2132. 
 
(B) Crime:  As with many large metropolitan cities, street crime in 
a problem.  The two major problems in this regard are pick pocketing 
and thefts of opportunity.  Tourist attractions, the public 
transportation system (both metro and RER), and some of the 
better-known hotels are considered to be main target areas.  Robbers 
have been known to use tear gas-type spray either prior to the 
robbery or to divert the victim's attention or following the attack 
to prevent pursuit.  A good strategy is to secure valuables in hotel 
facilities and carry only a minimal amount of money/credit cards on 
the street.  Criminals have been known to enter hotel rooms to steal 
money, credit cards, etc.  They have also been known to approach a 
room even if the occupant is present; visitors are urged to exercise 
caution when admitting unknown persons into hotel rooms.  Hotel 
occupants should directly hand room keys to hotel personnel when 
departing because thieves are known to pick up unattended keys from 
hotel counter tops.  While the threat of criminal activity is 
somewhat reduced in outlying cities, caution is still recommended. 
All crimes or untoward incidents should be reported to the Regional 
Security Office. 
 
(C) Electronic devices: Privately-owned laptops and personal 
computers are prohibited in controlled access areas (CAAs) of the 
Mission and consulates.  Travelers with USG unclassified and 
classified laptop or notebook computers should review '95 State 
244394 (classified machines) and '95 State 243825 (unclassified 
machines) and notify the Information Management Office (IMO) before 
bringing these machines into a CAA.  Cellular telephones are also 
prohibited in the CAA and must be left outside this area. Questions 
concerning other types of electronic devices may be directed to the 
Information Management Office or Regional Security Office. 
 
(D) Travelers planning to stay longer than 30 days are required to 
 
schedule a security briefing with the RSO.  For additional threat 
assessment information regarding France and/or Europe, you may 
contact DS/ITA in the State Department at (202) 663-0787. 
 
¶9. (U) Health Concerns:  For up-to-date information on 
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), Mad Cow Disease and other 
health precautions for France, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention (CDC) website contains a detailed analysis of risks 
involved at: http://www.cdc.gov/travel/diseases.htm. 
 
KORNBLUH