10SANAA236
DEMARCHE DELIVERED: DISTRACTED DRIVING
Mon Feb 08 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Sanaa
VZCZCXYZ0015
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHYN #0236 0390854
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 080854Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY SANAA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3726
INFO RUEHZM/GULF COOPERATION COUNCIL COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SANAA 000236 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NEA/ARP ANDREW MACDONALD AND OES/S NANCY 
CARTER-FOSTER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON SOCI UNDP UNGA EU YM
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE DELIVERED: DISTRACTED DRIVING 
 
REF: STATE 6703 
 
¶1.  On February 6, EconOff delivered REFTEL demarche to Yahya 
Mohammed Zahir, General Manager of Traffic in the Ministry of 
Interior's (MOI) Traffic Authority.  He accepted the 
demarche, promised to convey the points to ROYG officials in 
the Ministries of Interior and Information, and told EconOff 
about the progress the ROYG has made in banning the use of 
cell phones while driving. 
 
¶2.  In November 2009, the ROYG amended the existing driving 
law, making it illegal to drive while using a cell phone or 
without wearing a seatbelt.  The updated regulation, Law 285 
of 2009, replaced Law 46 of 1991, which did not include a ban 
on the use of cell phones.  As witnessed by EmbOffs, Sana'a 
police officers are already enforcing the ban on cell phone 
use.  For a minor offense, the driver is given an oral 
warning, and for a major offense, the driver is issued a 
traffic violation that ranges from YR 2,000-4,000 
(approximately USD 10-20).  Acknowledging the prevalence of 
the problem, Zahir said that in 2009, 3,071 deaths resulted 
from traffic accidents in Yemen.  He did not have data 
available regarding fatalities caused specifically by 
distracted driving.  He told EconOff that the ROYG has a 
modest public awareness campaign in place, showing a poster 
that cautions against the dangers of using a cell phone while 
driving.  Zahir said that the Traffic Authority lacks the 
necessary support, both financial and political, from the MOI 
and Ministry of Information for a more extensive awareness 
campaign. 
 
¶3.  Zahir told EconOff that the Traffic Authority is drafting 
a new law to regulate driving, bringing Yemen up to 
international standards of driving regulation and making the 
fine for violating the law YR 25,000 (approximately USD 125). 
 He expressed concern about the general lack of traffic 
safety and estimated the total cost of lack of regulation at 
YR 6 billion (approximately USD 30 million), financially and 
in terms of personnel.  Zahir asked for U.S. assistance for 
the Traffic Authority and specifically highlighted the need 
for training and technical assistance. 
 
¶4.  Comment.  Although the new policy is a step towards 
developing a culture of traffic safety in Yemen, the ROYG has 
its work cut out for it.  Yemen remains a country where 
"anything goes" when it comes to traffic rules and 
regulations.  Few people receive driver's training courses, 
and it common to see children behind the wheel.  While Sana'a 
police are enforcing the new amendment of the existing 
traffic law, according to post LE Staff members who travel 
weekly outside of the capital, enforcement is relegated to 
urban areas, where traffic police are focused, leaving 
countryside driving generally unregulated.  End Comment. 
SECHE