08CAIRO1126
EGYPT: COUNTRY TEAM ASSESSMENT FOR THE PROCUREMENT OF TWO
Wed Jun 04 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Cairo
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHEG #1126/01 1560709
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 040709Z JUN 08
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9434
RHMFIUU/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL
RHMFISS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS CAIRO 001126 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/ELA AND PM/RSAT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL MASS MARR EG
SUBJECT: EGYPT: COUNTRY TEAM ASSESSMENT FOR THE PROCUREMENT OF TWO 
(2) UH-60M BLACK HAWK HELICOPTERS TO SUPPORT THE GOVERNMENT OF EGYPT 
(GOE) SEARCH AND RESCUE (SAR) MISSION. 
 
REF: A. EGYPTIAN MINISTRY OF DEFENSE LETTER OF REQUEST (07-150) FOR 
PRICING AND AVAILABLITY (P&A), DATED 02 SEPT 07. 
     ¶B. EGYPTIAN MINISTRY OF DEFENSE LETTER OF REQUEST (08-075) FOR 
LETTER OF OFFER AND ACCEPTANCE (LOA), DATED 29 MAR 08. 
¶C. MEMORANDUM FOR EGYPTIAN ARMAMENT AUTHORITY; SUBJECT: REQUIREMENTS 
FOR LOR SUBMISSION, DATED 7 APR 08. 
 
Sensitive But Unclassified (SBU).  Please protect accordingly. 
 
¶1. (SBU) Description.  In REF B, the GOE submitted a request to 
procure two UH-60M Black Hawk Helicopters to augment the Egyptian 
Air Force (EAF) Search and Rescue capability.  This capability will 
directly support the GOE National Crisis Response Plan.  The primary 
role of these designated SAR aircraft is to perform time critical 
tasks associated with civil/military accidents, natural disasters, 
and humanitarian relief efforts.  These helicopters will augment a 
dedicated military reaction force that will ultimately be part of a 
National Crisis Response Network, consisting of both civilian and 
military assets.  These aircraft will be utilized and perform 
missions in conjunction with the Egyptian Search and Rescue Center 
(ESARC).  These missions will be in compliance with the standards 
and regulations outlined within the International Civil Aviation 
Organization (ICAO) and International Maritime Organization (IMO). 
Additional information is available at www.mmc.gov.eg.  The GOE 
desired end-state of its SAR capabilities and ultimate Crisis 
Response Network, is to replicate the U.S. Department of Defense 
(DOD) and the Federal Government's Emergency Operations Centers, but 
at a much smaller scale. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Reason and justification for customer's request.  The EAF 
recently established a military Search and Rescue (SAR) Operations 
Center located at Al Maza Air Base.  The primary function of this 
operations center is to coordinate with the various Division and 
Wing Commanders for aircraft support.  The SAR Headquarters can 
coordinate for limited rotary (MI-17, SH-2G) and fixed wing (C-130) 
assets to support this mission.  The Area of Responsibility (AOR) is 
currently too large for organic assets assigned to the SAR mission 
to cover without additional aircraft.  No organic capability exists 
for over-water and night SAR missions.  This urgent procurement has 
GOE Presidential visibility and has been discussed in detail at the 
recent Financial Management Review (FMR) and Military Cooperation 
Conference (MCC).  The UH-60M (Black Hawk) helicopter with SAR 
package was identified by the U.S. Army and Blackhawk Program 
Manager as a suitable rotary-wing platform to support the GOE 
specific Mission Requirements.  This action will assist in the 
modernization of the EAF to ensure safe flight operations, 
individual aviator proficiency and the overall readiness of the EAF 
SAR Operations Center.  The UH-60M (Black Hawk) helicopter will 
improve the EAF capability to potentially operate with U.S. and 
Coalition Forces in Regional Crisis Response and Humanitarian Relief 
efforts.  These aircraft are currently in the U.S. Army inventory 
and will be more easily sustainable through the U.S. supply system. 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) System description and Impact to Force Structure. 
The primary mission of the UH-60 Black Hawk helicopter is as a troop 
carrier and logistical support aircraft.  However, the helicopter 
can be configured to carry out Medical Evacuation, 
Command-and-Control, Search-and-Rescue, Armed Escort, Electronic 
Warfare and Executive Transport Missions.  The UH-60M features new 
wide chord composite spar main rotor blades (500lb more lift), 
strengthened fuselage and advanced infrared suppression.  The 
fly-by-wire glass cockpit has a digitized 1553 bus-based avionics 
suite with four multi-function displays, four-axis fully coupled 
autopilot, two electronic flight management systems, digital moving 
map and Integrated Vehicle Health Management System (IHVMS).  The 
new T700-GE-701D engine is more powerful and provides additional 
lift during sling load operations.  Recent enhancements to this 
helicopter will significantly increase the EAF day/night SAR 
capability and will only add two additional airframes to their 
current force structure. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Will the procurement of UH-60M SAR aircraft contribute to 
both U.S. and Egyptian defense/security goals?  Aircraft sales are 
consistent with DOD's Security Cooperation Guidance as it enhances 
the territorial security and crisis response capabilities of 
regional states.  It assists the U.S. in enabling allies and 
partners and protecting U.S. and partner interests.  It also 
supports the modernization and transformation of allies or partners 
to reduce their vulnerability to external military sales.  Finally, 
it improves their ability to operate independently over-water or at 
night without significant reliance on U.S. or coalition Forces. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Justification for type/quantity of aircraft requested. 
A detailed analysis and review of several suitable airframes was 
completed by EAF with input from the Utility Cargo Helicopter Office 
 
 
(UPHO) and Cargo Helicopter Program Manager.  Their findings 
revealed that the UH-60M Black Hawk with SAR package would be an 
excellent airframe to support the SAR mission.  The procurement of 
these two aircraft is the first step, since the original initiative 
in 1983, in standing up a Joint Rescue Coordination Center (JRCC) 
with permanently assigned personnel and equipment.  The 
establishment of the GOE National Crisis Response Network will 
inevitably demand additional procurements of fixed and rotary-wing 
aircraft in future years. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Combatant Commander's concurrence to the introduction of a 
new Humanitarian and Disaster Relief capability to the nation or 
region.  Combatant Commander's concurrence will be provided 
separately. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Anticipated reactions of the neighboring nations. 
The procurement of these additional SAR aircraft should not 
influence the regional balance of power or cause negative reactions 
from any of Egypt's neighbors.  This procurement introduces a 
limited increase of technology to Egypt, but does not introduce new 
technology to the region.  Several regional allies have recently 
purchased identical airframes through the Foreign Military Sales 
(FMS) or Direct Commercial Sales (DCS) programs with U.S. 
concurrence.  These assets will greatly enhance Egypt's ability to 
participate in combined Regional Humanitarian or Disaster Relief 
efforts.  This procurement will not impact Israel's qualitative 
military edge. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Assessment of the nation's ability to ensure proper 
funding, accountability, sustainability and security of assets.  The 
GOE has demonstrated the intent and ability to protect sensitive, 
classified military technology over an extended period.  Egypt 
signed a General Security of Information Agreement with the U.S. and 
as a customer, has purchased and protected the sensitive technology 
of other U.S. weapons systems.  Egypt has procured similar 
rotary-wing aircraft in the past to include eight (8) UH-60L 
Blackhawk helicopters that currently provide VIP support to the GOE 
President.  The EAF has met all previous security and End Use 
monitoring (EUM) requirements. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Training required either in country or in the U.S. and 
anticipated reactions resulting from the presence of U.S. trainer's 
in country.  The EAF already maintains a squadron of eight (8) 
UH-60L Helicopters and maintains sufficient numbers of trained 
aircrews.  The EAF pilots currently complete all UH-60 Black Hawk 
Aviator Qualification Courses (AQC) in the U.S.  The only exception 
would be specialized SAR training for the aircrews, taught by a 
Mobile Training Team (MTT).  The presence of this additional MTT 
would have little anticipated reaction because of the permanent 
Security Assistance Teams (SATs) already assigned in country. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Source of financing and the economic impact of the 
proposed acquisition.  Egypt plans to procure these two aircraft 
utilizing Foreign Military Financing and has already allocated 
sufficient funds within their FY08/09 budget.  This acquisition is 
essential for the National SAR capability and is on the Egyptian 
Armament Authority (EAA) Priority List. 
 
¶11. (SBU) Human rights considerations relevant to the proposed 
acquisition.  None. 
 
¶12. (SBU) Plan for end-use monitoring and plan for compliance 
verification.  The Office of Military Cooperation (OMC) Egypt has a 
robust Golden Sentry Program.  The Golden Sentry Program 
representative and Security Assistance Officer (SAO) responsible for 
the program, will coordinate for the review and maintenance of 
required documentation.  All parties will maintain serial number 
lists of all components within the inventory or transferred, and 
will conduct the mandated inspections as required.  This 
coordination will ensure that historical copies of all EUM 
Inspection results and customers' physical security and 
accountability control plans remain on file.  The Egyptian military 
currently has over 100 helicopters (FMS) of various configurations 
in country.  Egypt has maintained accountability and security of 
these aircraft without unauthorized loss, theft, or access to date. 
The GOE has indicated a willingness to meet U.S. guidelines for 
accountability and security of these advanced aircraft, and the 
Office of Military Cooperation will conduct End Use Monitoring (EUM) 
of all required components if this request is approved. 
 
¶13. (SBU) Operational Plan and specific end-users. The operational 
plan for these aircraft is to augment a dedicated military reaction 
force that will ultimately be part of a National Crisis Response 
Network, consisting of both civilian and military assets.  The GOE 
has already established a Search and Rescue Committee consisting of 
the representatives from the following Ministries: Foreign Affairs, 
 
 
Health, Transportation, Communications, Civil Affairs and Social 
Affairs.  This action will assist in the modernization of the EAF to 
ensure safe flight operations, individual aviator proficiency and 
the overall readiness of the EAF SAR Operations Center.  Finally, it 
improves their ability to perform SAR mission essential tasks at 
night without significant reliance on U.S. or coalition Forces. 
 
¶14. (SBU) Recommendation whether the USG should approve the request 
to procure additional rotary-wing aircraft.  The country team 
recommends USG approval for the GOE procurement of two (2) UH-60M 
Black Hawk SAR helicopters.  This is a coordinated mission 
position. 
SCOBEY 
 
1 of 5