08SANJOSE479
COSTA RICA: PROPOSALS FOR 2008 AMBASSADOR'S FUND FOR
Thu Jun 05 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy San Jose
VZCZCXYZ0001
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHSJ #0479 1572039
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 052039Z JUN 08
FM AMEMBASSY SAN JOSE
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9813UNCLAS SAN JOSE 000479 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN RBEAL AND PRM/ECA KPONGONIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREF PREL ELAB EAID CS
SUBJECT: COSTA RICA: PROPOSALS FOR 2008 AMBASSADOR'S FUND FOR 
REFUGEES 
 
REF: STATE 6779 
 
¶1. Please find below Embassy San Jose's submission two projects for 
the 2008 Ambassador's Fund for Refugees. Post provided full texts of 
the proposals to Kate Pongonis, PRM/ECA, in April. 
 
¶2. PROJECT 1 DESCRIPTION:  USD 14,992 to local NGO "International 
Advisors and Consultants Association" (ACAI) to establish a computer 
training lab for refugees which will improve the participants' 
preparation for effective labor insertion. The center will be 
located at the Desamparados "House of Rights," which provides legal 
and development services to the local refugee population. According 
to UNHCR statistics and the National Direction of Migration, at the 
end of the year 2007, Costa Rica had 17,710 asylum applicants plus 
UNHCR "people of interest" who could benefit from this training. A 
majority of them live in the Desamparados neighborhood. 
 
Their main challenge in successfully integrating in the community is 
job placement. Many of the refugees lack appropriate skills for the 
Costa Rican job market, which extends their dependence on 
governmental aid programs and exacerbates their resettlement 
challenges. ACAI's computer training seeks to enhance their skills 
and thereby improve their opportunities for employment. ACAI will 
use the Ambassadors Fund grant to purchase: 
 
 -- 6 computers 
 -- network printer 
 -- wireless installation 
 -- computer licenses 
 -- instructor time at $4 per hour 
 -- miscellaneous supplies such as paper, ink, photocopies 
 -- computer chairs and tables 
 
¶3. PROJECT 2 DESCRIPTION:  USD 5000 to establish a micro-credit 
program to help refugees purchase basic supplies to start small 
enterprises. This is intended primarily for graduates of ACAI's 
"Rapid Impact" training program, but others could apply for the 
loans if they already have business skills. The Rapid Impact program 
teaches vocational skills such as baking and pastry making, 
cosmetology (including make-up artistry and manicures/pedicures), 
jewelry making, flower arranging, etc. The program helps students 
develop basic work skills while they are receiving other, more 
extensive job training or awaiting an Immigration decision on their 
status. 
 
The micro-credit program is designed to provide small loans of no 
more than USD 200, at 10% interest, to help these refugees purchase 
basic supplies needed to start their own businesses (i.e. 
manicure/pedicure equipment). The project includes an evaluation of 
each applicant's abilities, business proposal, and start-up costs 
required. ACAI plans to reach 30 refugees with the Ambassadors Fund 
grant. 
 
¶4.  JUSTIFICATION FOR THIS REQUEST:  Project 1 is designed to be 
part of the comprehensive strategy envisioned by UNHCR and ACAI to 
integrate new refugees into Costa Rica society as rapidly and 
successfully as possible. The "House of Rights" facility is integral 
to this process. Refugees without marketable skills can receive 
computer training at the center to increase their employment 
opportunities. Project 2 offers the refugees small loans to enable 
them to start a new business with their existing or newly-learned 
skills. Both projects are aimed at increasing refugees' chances of 
successful entry into the work force and lessening their dependency 
on aid programs. 
 
¶5. AGENCY RESPONSIBLE FOR IMPLEMENTATION/MANAGEMENT OF THE PROJECT 
FUNDS:  UNHCR's local NGO implementing partner ACAI will manage the 
projects. UNHCR representative in Costa Rica Jozef Merkx is 
supportive of this initiative and Post has worked with ACAI 
previously in refugee assistance projects. Post has on file ACAI's 
signed Code of Conduct consistent with the six core principals from 
the Inter-Agency Standing Co