08STATE68633
CORRECTED COPY: REQUEST TO ENGAGE JAPAN ON
Thu Jun 26 00:00:00 +0200 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Secretary of State
O 261310Z JUN 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO PAGE 02        STATE   068633  261308Z 
USMISSION USNATO IMMEDIATEC O N F I D E N T I A L STATE 068633 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/19/2018 
TAGS: PREL SMIL MARR MOPS NATO AF AS CA GM IT FR JA
SUBJECT: CORRECTED COPY: REQUEST TO ENGAGE JAPAN ON 
CONTRIBUTIONS TO AFGHANISTAN SECURITY 
 
REF: A. TOKYO 1464 B. TOKYO 1593 C. SECDEF DTG 031932Z JUN 08 D. TOKYO 1623 E. TOKYO 1657 
 
Classified By: EAP Acting A/S Glyn Davies for Reason 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
¶1.  (U)  This is an Action Request, please see paragraph 3. 
 
 
---------- 
Background 
---------- 
 
¶2.  (C)  The Government of Japan (GOJ) is actively 
considering possible contributions to support NATO-led 
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) security 
operations in Afghanistan (REFS A-E).  A GOJ survey team 
traveled to NATO SHAPE on 30 May, and to Afghanistan and 
neighboring countries from 9-16 June, to collect facts on 
ISAF needs.  COMISAF and ISAF Regional Commanders told the 
survey team that the most critical ISAF requirements that 
Japan could address were airlift (especially CH-47s for 
medium/heavy lift or medevac missions) and leading a 
Provincial Reconstruction Team in the Daykundi or Nimruz 
provinces.  Other possible contributions include fixed-wing 
(C-130) or intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance 
(ISR) assets.  The GOJ is divided over how to proceed, with 
some factions interested in minimum and limited 
contributions.  As the GOJ considers the findings from the 
survey team, it will be important for the U.S. and other 
international stakeholders in the Afghanistan mission to 
maintain a common front in urging substantive - not token - 
Japanese contributions.  The upcoming G8 Foreign Ministerial 
Meeting and Summit in Japan provide the best opportunities to 
highlight the importance of Japanese participation in 
Afghanistan at the most senior levels and influence Japanese 
decision-making.  The action request below provides points 
for G8 members and other international stakeholders to engage 
their GOJ counterparts on this important issue. 
 
 
-------------- 
Talking Points 
-------------- 
 
 
¶3.  (C)  ACTION REQUEST:  Posts are requested to convey the 
following points and report reaction back to the Department 
by June 25. 
 
 
FOR OTTAWA, PARIS, BERLIN, ROME, AND LONDON:  Embassies are 
requested to convey the below points to their host-country 
foreign ministries at the highest appropriate level. 
 
--  The Government of Japan (GOJ) is actively considering 
possible contributions to support NATO-led International 
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) security operations in 
Afghanistan. 
 
--  A Japanese survey team visited NATO SHAPE on 30 May, and 
Afghanistan and neighboring countries from 9-16 June, to 
collect facts on ISAF needs. 
 
--  Japanese CH-47 rotary-wing assets could help fill a 
critical ISAF shortfall for medium/heavy-lift and medevac 
operations.  Japan could also lead a Provincial 
Reconstruction Team (PRT) in Daykundi or Nimruz provinces, 
where there is currently no ISAF presence. 
 
--  The U.S. has urged the GOJ to consider substantive - not 
token - security contributions, commensurate with its status 
as a G8 nation. 
 
--  Japan doing more in Afghanistan is in the best interest 
of both your government and ours.  However, Japan's political 
environment will make it difficult for the GOJ to commit to a 
substantive contribution.  It will therefore be important for 
international stakeholders in the Afghanistan mission to 
maintain a common front in urging a substantive Japanese 
contribution. 
 
--  The upcoming G8 Summit in Japan provides an opportunity 
for us to highlight the positive impact a substantive 
Japanese contribution would bring to the security environment 
in Afghanistan. 
 
--  At the June 26-27 G8 Foreign Ministers, meeting in 
Kyoto, please consider emphasizing to Japan Foreign Minister 
Koumura the importance of substantive Japanese security 
contributions to ISAF and Afghanistan. 
 
--  Please also consider conveying to the Ambassador of Japan 
the importance of substantive Japanese security contributions 
to ISAF and Afghanistan, and reinforcing the message through 
your Embassy in Tokyo. 
 
 
 
FOR KABUL:  Request Embassy convey points below to Afghan 
Foreign and Defense Ministries at the highest appropriate 
level, and to National Security Adviser Rassoul. 
 
-- The Government of Japan (GOJ) is actively considering 
possible contributions to support NATO-led International 
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) security operations in 
Afghanistan. 
 
-- A Japanese survey team visited NATO SHAPE on 30 May, and 
Afghanistan and neighboring countries from 9-16 June, to 
collect facts on ISAF needs. 
 
-- Japanese CH-47 rotary-wing assets could help fill a 
critical ISAF shortfall for medium/heavy-lift and medevac 
operations.  Japan could also lead a Provincial 
Reconstruction Team (PRT) in Daykundi or Nimruz provinces, 
where there is currently no ISAF presence. 
 
-- The U.S. has urged the GOJ to consider substantive - not 
token - security contributions, commensurate with its status 
as a G8 nation. 
 
-- Japan doing more in Afghanistan is in the best interest of 
both your government and ours.  However, Japan's political 
environment will make it difficult for the GOJ to commit to a 
substantive contribution.  It will therefore be important for 
international stakeholders in the Afghanistan mission to 
maintain a common front in urging a substantive Japanese 
contribution. 
 
-- Please consider conveying to the Ambassador of Japan the 
importance of substantive Japanese security contributions to 
ISAF and Afghanistan, and reinforcing these messages with 
partner ambassadors in Kabul. 
 
 
 
FOR CANBERRA:  Request Embassy convey points below to Foreign 
and Defense Ministries at the highest appropriate level: 
 
-- The Government of Japan (GOJ) is actively considering 
possible contributions to support NATO-led International 
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) security operations in 
Afghanistan. 
 
-- A Japanese survey team visited NATO SHAPE on 30 May, and 
Afghanistan and neighboring countries from 9-16 June, to 
collect facts on ISAF needs. 
 
-- Japanese CH-47 rotary-wing assets could help fill a 
critical ISAF shortfall for medium/heavy-lift and medevac 
operations.  Japan could also lead a Provincial 
Reconstruction Team (PRT) in Daykundi or Nimruz provinces, 
where there is currently no ISAF presence. 
 
-- The U.S. has urged the GOJ to consider substantive - not 
token - security contributions, commensurate with its status 
as a G8 nation. 
 
-- Japan doing more in Afghanistan is in the best interest of 
both your government and ours.  However, Japan,s political 
environment will make it difficult for the GOJ to commit to a 
substantive contribution.  It will therefore be important for 
international stakeholders in the Afghanistan mission to 
maintain a common front in urging a substantive Japanese 
contribution. 
 
-- Please consider conveying to the Ambassador of Japan the 
importance of substantive Japanese security contributions to 
ISAF and Afghanistan, and reinforcing the message through 
your Embassy in Tokyo. 
 
 
 
FOR USNATO (POINTS REL NATO) :  Request Chief of Mission 
convey points below to NATO Secretary General (SYG): 
 
-- The Government of Japan (GOJ) is actively considering 
possible contributions to support ISAF security operations in 
Afghanistan. 
 
-- A Japanese survey team visited NATO SHAPE on 30 May, and 
Afghanistan and neighboring countries from 9-16 June, to 
collect facts on ISAF needs.  In Afghanistan, the team met 
with COMISAF, COM RC-SOUTH, COM RC-NORTH, and officials from 
RC-EAST. 
 
-- Japanese CH-47 rotary-wing assets could help fill a 
critical ISAF shortfall for medium/heavy-lift and medevac 
operations.  Japan could also lead a Provincial 
Reconstruction Team (PRT) in Daykundi or Nimruz provinces, 
where there is currently no ISAF presence. 
 
-- The U.S. has urged the GOJ to consider substantive - not 
token - security contributions, commensurate with its desire 
to strengthen its relationship with NATO. 
 
-- Japan doing more in Afghanistan is in the best interest of 
all coalition partners.  However, Japan,s political 
environment will make it difficult for the GOJ to commit to a 
substantive contribution.  It will therefore be important for 
international stakeholders in the Afghanistan mission to 
maintain a common front in urging a substantive Japanese 
contribution. 
 
 
 
FOR TOKYO:  Request Embassy convey points below to Ambassador 
of Afghanistan to Japan: 
 
-- The Government of Japan (GOJ) is actively considering 
possible contributions to support NATO-led International 
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) security operations in 
Afghanistan. 
 
-- A Japanese survey team visited NATO SHAPE on 30 May, and 
Afghanistan and neighboring countries from 9-16 June, to 
collect facts on ISAF needs. 
 
-- Japanese CH-47 rotary-wing assets could help fill a 
critical ISAF shortfall for medium/heavy-lift and medevac 
operations.  Japan could also lead a Provincial 
Reconstruction Team (PRT) in Daykundi or Nimruz provinces, 
where there is currently no ISAF presence. 
 
-- The U.S. has urged the GOJ to consider substantive - not 
token - security contributions, commensurate with its status 
as a G8 nation. 
 
-- As you know, Japan,s political environment will make it 
difficult for the GOJ to commit to a substantive 
contribution.  It will therefore be important for 
international stakeholders in the Afghanistan mission to 
maintain a common front in urging a substantive Japanese 
contribution. 
 
-- Please consider conveying to the Government of Japan the 
importance of substantive Japanese security contributions to 
ISAF and Afghanistan, and reinforcing the message with 
partner ambassdors in Tokyo. 
 
¶4.  (U)  This message has been coordinated with DOD. 
Questions concerning this action request can be directed to 
Dr. Jason Hamm, OSD Country Director for Japan, at 
Jason.hamm@osd.smil.mil, (703) 614-2897; and to Mr. David 
Schlaefer, State Political-Military Affairs for Japan, at 
SchlaeferDA@state.sgov.gov, (202) 647-2914. 
 
RICE