07LONDON780
HILTON HOTELS CAUGHT BETWEEN US CUBA SANCTIONS AND
Wed Feb 28 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy London
VZCZCXRO0718
RR RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHHM RUEHIK RUEHJO RUEHLZ RUEHROV
DE RUEHLO #0780/01 0591800
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 281800Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY LONDON
TO RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2070
INFO RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVE
RUEHXI/LABOR COLLECTIVE
RUEHNY/AMEMBASSY OSLO 0690
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDC
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 LONDON 000780 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
TRESAURY FOR OFAC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC ELAB CU UK
SUBJECT: HILTON HOTELS CAUGHT BETWEEN US CUBA SANCTIONS AND 
UK NON-DISCRIMINATION LAW 
 
REF: LONDON 525 
 
¶1.  Summary and action request: Hilton Hotels International, 
faced with a conflict between US sanctions on Cuba and UK law 
banning discrimination, has instructed its employees not to 
violate local UK law, putting them on a potential collision 
course with US law.  Post would welcome any guidance 
Washington agencies could provide for discussions with Hilton 
and press guidance in response to inquiries post has received 
from the press. End Summary and action request. 
 
¶2.  As reported reftel, UK labor unions have threatened to 
boycott Hilton in the United Kingdom because a Hilton-owned 
hotel in Oslo, in compliance with the Cuban Assets Control 
Regulations, refused to accept a reservation from a Cuban 
delegation in December 2006.  The unions contend that a 
similar action by Hilton in the UK would violate the British 
1976 Race Relations Act, which bans discrimination by 
national origin.  The penalties under the UK are comparable 
to those under US Cuba sanctions, according to Linda Bain, 
director of communications for Hilton International. 
 
¶3.  A representative complaint to Hilton is the following 
letter, addressed to Bain, and cc'ed to Ambassador Tuttle, 
from Joni McDougall, International Solidarity Officer at the 
union GMB. 
 
Begin Text: 
 
We have received recent reports that the Hilton Group 
proposes to ban Cuban delegations from all their hotels 
around the world.  We understand that this step has been 
taken to protect the company from criminal liability under 
the United States' Cuban Liberty and the Solidarity Act of 
¶1996.  However, discriminating on legal grounds, which 
includes nationalities, in the provision of good, facilities 
or services is unlawful under the 1976 Race Relations Act. 
 
Our union has used the services of the Hilton Group for 
delegations at numerous events both in the UK and abroad but 
we will have to reconsider our position in light of the 
above.  Could you therefore provide clarification on your 
policy please? 
 
On moral and legal grounds we would be unable to do business 
with any company which pursued racist policies. 
 
We look forward to hearing from you. 
 
End text. 
 
¶4.  Bain told LabCouns February 23 that Hilton conferred with 
its legal staff for three weeks before responding. In the 
end, they determined that their critics' legal argument was 
valid.   Hilton International has instructed its staff to 
obey all local law, including the Race Relations Act, even if 
doing so violates US Cuba sanctions.  Bain said Hilton has 
asked the US hotel industry trade association to begin a 
dialogue with the US government on this issue on behalf of 
all US hotels operating abroad. She said she would provide 
Embassy with a copy of Hilton's response. 
 
¶5.  Bain continued that GMB has cancelled 50 rooms from its 
Brighton hotel.  UNISON international affairs officer Nick 
Cook told LabCouns on February 27 that his union had decided 
to maintain its current bookings with Hilton, but would not 
conduct any additional business with them. 
 
¶6.  On February 27, Hilton sent the Embassy a letter, signed 
by Simon Vincent, President, Hilton UK and Ireland, which 
Bain said was sent to a number of political leaders and union 
chiefs: 
 
Begin Text: 
 
Hilton Hotel Corporation's Position on Trade Sanctions with 
Cuba 
 
As you are aware there has been recent media coverage and 
political commentary in the UK regarding Hilton Hotels 
Corporation (footnote 1) (HHC) being prohibited by the US 
embargo of Cuba from hosting Cuban guests in our hotels.   As 
a US based company, we face a legal dilemma - with a strict 
ban on trading with Cuba imposed by the Cuban Assets Control 
 
LONDON 00000780  002 OF 002 
 
 
regulations ("US Sanctions"), and contradictory legislation 
in the UK making it illegal to discriminate on the grounds of 
nationality.   Violations of both the US and UK laws are 
subject to severe civil and criminal penalties. 
 
The U.S. Sanctions, administered by the Office of Foreign 
Assts Control ("OFAC") at the U.S. Treasury Department, 
clearly prohibit US companies and their foreign subsidiaries 
from engaging in any transaction with Cuba, Cuban entities or 
Cuban nationals wherever located.   Aspects of these 
sanctions, particularly as to dealings with Cuban nationals, 
run counter to UK law. The United States has long been at the 
forefront of combating discrimination, including on the basis 
of national origin. Yet as a result of compliance with the US 
sanctions, Hilton is facing allegations of discriminatory 
practices against Cuban nationals on the basis of their 
national origin.  It is particularly difficult for a US based 
company such as Hilton to respond to such recriminations in 
light of the seeming inconsistency between the US 
anti-discrimination ethos as well as Hilton's own 
anti-discrimination policy, and the impacts of the sanctions 
as applied to Cuban national seeking lodging in our UK hotels. 
 
It is Hilton's policy to comply with all laws applicable to 
its operations.  This puts employees of Hilton in the UK in 
the extremely difficult situation of being left to choose 
between compliance with US Sanctions or UK law.  It also 
subjects Hilton to irreparable reputational harm if as a 
result of compliance with US Sanctions, Hilton is seen as a 
company that discriminates against travelers in violation of 
UK law. 
 
Hilton would like to see a reform of the US Sanctions within 
the tourism industry for US hotel companies (last three words 
in bold print) operating outside the United States so that 
this contradiction between US law and the laws of other 
countries, such as UK law, is eliminated.  To that end, we 
have submitted our own formal license application to OFAC for 
a specific license to authorize service to Cuban nationals. 
We are also working with the American Hotel and Lodging 
Association to make representations to the US State 
Department and Treasury to review these laws particularly 
with respect to their discriminatory effect based on 
nationality. 
 
(footnote 1: On 23rd March 2006 Hilton Group plc sold its 
hotel division, Hilton International, to the US based Hilton 
Hotels Corporation.  Hilton UK and Ireland currently operate 
73 hotels with over 14,000 rooms and 15,200 staff.) 
 
End text. 
 
¶7.   Embassy was contacted February 27 by The Guardian 
newspaper asking for comments on a statement it had received 
from Hilton on trade sanctions with Cuba.  The statement 
forwarded by the Guardian differs in some respects from the 
text in para 6.  One key difference is the following in the 
third paragraph of the statement: "However, notwithstanding 
this very serious dilemma, Hilton does not expect, require or 
counsel, its employees to violate their own country's laws. 
Accordingly, when dealing with bookings at our hotels in the 
UK, we do not expect or require that our UK employees do 
anything in violation of UK law." The Guardian statement also 
calls on the UK government to "make representations to the US 
and to bring a resolution to these issues." The text of both 
documents has emailed to EUR/UBI and WHA/CCA desk, L/EB and 
L/WHA. 
 
Visit London's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/eur/london/index. cfm 
Tuttle