07TUNIS180
ARAB INTERIOR MINISTERS DISCUSS CT COOPERATION
Mon Feb 05 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tunis
VZCZCXRO8172
PP RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHKUK RUEHROV
DE RUEHTU #0180 0361526
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 051526Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY TUNIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2670
INFO RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS TUNIS 000180 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/MAG - HOPKINS, HARRIS AND NEA/ARN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PGOV IZ SY SU TS
SUBJECT: ARAB INTERIOR MINISTERS DISCUSS CT COOPERATION 
 
REF: TUNIS 154 AND PREVIOUS (NOTAL) 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY: The January 30-31 Arab League Interior 
Ministers meeting in Tunis was focused on counter-terrorism 
cooperation.  Voicing support for Lebanon and Iraq, the 
Council of Arab Interior Ministers also discussed narcotics 
trafficking, civil protection and road safety.  President Ben 
Ali's opening remarks, delivered by the Tunisian Minister of 
Interior, did not refer to recent security incidents in 
Tunisia (reftels) although he did suggest political asylum is 
exploited by terrorists.  The local press also carried 
interviews with Sudanese and Syrian Interior Ministers.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (U) On January 30 and 31, 16 of the 22 Arab League 
countries sent delegates to the 24th annual Council of Arab 
Interior Ministers meeting in Tunis.  Discussions focused on 
counter-terrorism cooperation, including combating 
transnational organized crime, terrorist financing and money 
laundering, and preventing terrorist organizations from 
obtaining chemical weapons.  However, the final declaration 
contained no specific recommendations.  The group called on 
member states to support police in Lebanon and Iraq and 
expressed its continued support for the Naif Arab Academy for 
Security Sciences.  According to press reports, the following 
countries did not participate: Bahrain, the Comoros Islands, 
Djibouti, Lebanon, Palestine (due to travel restrictions 
imposed by Israel), and the United Arab Emirates.  Somali 
Vice Prime Minister for Security Hussein Aideed attended, 
along with Arab Maghreb Union Secretary General Habib Ben 
Yahia, and UN Deputy Secretary General for Safety and 
Security David Veness. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Tunisian Minister of Interior Rafik Belhaj Kacem 
delivered opening remarks attributed to Tunisian President 
Zine El Abidine Ben Ali.  The speech did not mention recent 
domestic security events (reftels).  Rather, Ben Ali 
obliquely criticized Western nations, saying international 
counter-terrorism cooperation should include "revising the 
provisions pertaining to the granting of political asylum." 
Ben Ali also called for a United Nations conference to adopt 
"an international anti-terrorism code of conduct." 
 
¶4. (U) On the margins of the meeting, several Arab ministers 
gave interviews to the Tunisian press.  On January 31, 
privately owned Arabic daily as-Sabah published an interview 
with Syrian Minister of Interior General Bassam Abdul Majid 
in which he stated that he had signed a memorandum of 
understanding related to counter-terrorism with his Iraqi 
counterpart Jawad al-Bulani.  Abdul Majid said Syria is 
committed to "exerting all efforts" to achieve security and 
stability in Iraq, voicing support for the National Interest 
process, protecting the unity or Iraq and "solving" the 
militias.  Abdul Majid said that Iraqi President Talabani's 
visit to Damascus had renewed cooperation between the two 
countries.  The Syrian Minister added that Syria has always 
supported the unity of Iraq's land and people, and its 
freedom and independence, and that he had confirmed to 
al-Bulani Syria's condemnation of all forms of terrorism that 
touch Iraqi citizens, establishments and infrastructure. 
Abdul Majid said cooperation did not require a written 
agreement.  Rather, the memorandum of understanding, good 
intentions and joint work is the basis for cooperation, 
particularly as Syria ordered the closing of its borders to 
combat all those who try to infiltrate its borders toward 
Iraq for "hidden terrorist intentions." 
 
¶5. (U) Sudanese Minister of Interior Zubeir Bashir Taha told 
local Arabic dailies as-Sabah and ash-Shourouq that Sudan 
"rejects the intervention of international forces and we have 
not changed our position."  Regarding the African Union's 
refusal to elect Sudan president of the union in 2007, Taha 
said, "In January 2006 we hosted the AU Summit...and leaders 
agreed to support Sudan's presidency in 2007...but they 
didn't respect this agreement...which doesn't surprise us." 
On Darfur, Taha said, "The goal of colonialists is hegemony 
over the region and finding justifications to control the 
Darfur region since vast natural resources, including oil and 
gas, were discovered there."  The Darfur problem, said Taha, 
can only be solved two ways: 1) Preventing the entrance of 
foreign weapons and munitions and 2) Strengthening economic 
resources, including water, so residents can benefit from 
this wealth. 
GODEC