04BRASILIA2245
ZERO SATISFACTION FROM GOB ON SODA-ASH TAX ISSUE
Fri Sep 03 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Brasilia
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

032004Z Sep 04UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 BRASILIA 002245 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USTR FOR CRONIN 
NSC FOR DEMPSEY 
USDOC FOR 3134/USFCS/OIO/WH/EOLSON 
USDOC ALSO FOR 4332/ITA/MAC/WH/OLAC/MWARD 
USDOC ALSO FOR 4110/ITA/TRADE AND COMPLIANCE/LRIGOLI/NBOLIN 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD EFIN EINV ETRD PREL PGOV BR
SUBJECT:  ZERO SATISFACTION FROM GOB ON SODA-ASH TAX ISSUE 
 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
¶1. (SBU) On August 18, Itamaraty officials presented us 
their official finding that the Rio state tax policy with 
regard to soda ash produced by local enterprise ALCALIS does 
not illegally discriminate against U.S. soda ash 
producers/exporters.  Our own scrutiny of the text of the 
2001 Rio State decree cited by the Brazilians as the base of 
their `finding' makes their argument transparently 
inaccurate.  From our own tentative computations, it would 
seem the volume of potential U.S. soda-ash export sales 
affected may have been of the order of USD 20 million in 
2003, when U.S. sales to Rio were approximately eight 
million dollars out of gross U.S. export sales to Brazil of 
over forty million dollars (the rest being to states other 
than Rio).  Having regularly re-addressed the GoB on this 
concern in the more than two years since it first arose, 
only to arrive at such a GoB assertion now, Embassy has no 
expectation of achieving results via further approaches to 
Itamaraty.  Text of the Rio State decree in the original 
Portuguese and rough Embassy translation included in Paras 
10-11 below.  Para 9 contains data about the current status 
of Brazil's soda-ash market, including U.S. market share. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (U) On August 18, EconCouns, Trade Officer and DSCO met 
with Director-General of the Economic Department Minister 
Piragibe Tarrago and other Itamaraty (Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs) specialists again to discuss the soda-ash issue, 
among other subjects.  This was the fourth meeting Emboffs 
have held with senior-level Itamaraty interlocutors over the 
last year to request an official response to the USG concern 
that the Rio state ICMS tax treatment of domestic and 
imported soda ash involves a national-treatment breach under 
GATT Article III, in addition to occasions on which the 
issue has been raised by, e.g., visiting USDOC A/S Lash and 
D/USTR Allgeier. 
 
¶3.  (U) Minister Tarrago informed Emboffs that the MFA had 
definitively clarified the Rio ICMS issue in meetings with 
CAMEX and the Rio State Finance Ministry.  He asserted 
categorically that Rio state taxes both domestically- 
produced and imported soda ash at the same ICMS rate, 
currently 19%.  Tarrago proceeded to note that under the 
ICMS tax regime purchasers of a product may request a rebate 
or credit of the ICMS paid on the input (e.g., soda ash), 
from the state tax authority upon sale of their final 
product; this credit/rebate is likewise available regardless 
of whether the soda ash is imported or domestic.  Pressed on 
how it might be documented that ALCALIS in fact is subject 
to, and pays, the same 19% ICMS on its production as U.S. 
soda-ash exporters on their sales, he noted that ALCALIS is 
entitled to consider its financial-transaction data 
proprietary and not divulge it, but he remarked that the 
fact could likely be verified by contacting local soda-ash 
customers. 
 
¶4.  (U) Tarrago went on to suggest that confusion over the 
soda-ash ICMS status might have arisen because of the fact 
that Rio state allows ALCALIS the option of paying a flat 2% 
tax rate on its gross revenue.  This is totally separate 
from ICMS tax-regime considerations, he told us.  The basis 
for Rio allowing this option is that ALCALIS produces salt, 
an item within the Brazilian "cesta basica (basic basket)" 
of fundamental food items.  Under Rio state rules, 
allegedly, companies that produce any such items, as whole 
or part of their production, may choose either to have their 
gross revenue taxed at a flat 2% rate, or submit themselves 
to a normal state corporate tax regime, which, depending on 
various credits or rebates may or may not result in a higher 
taxation rate. 
 
¶5. (U) Thus, the soda-ash tax issue essentially is a 
domestic-tax-regime matter, concluded Tarrago.  The 
specifics are outlined in Rio State Decree 28104 of April 
13, 2001, articles 36-38, and 40.  Tarrago also singled out 
Article 40 of this decree as containing, in his words 
(seconded by one of the Itamaraty specialists also present) 
a general statement that it shall not affect the general 
application of the tax regime, guaranteeing equal 
application of the ICMS tax for domestic producers and 
importers. 
 
¶6. (SBU) The Brazilians did not have the text of the 2001 
Rio decree at hand; we thus could not go over it jointly at 
the August 18 meeting.  We ourselves have since re- 
scrutinized the same elements of the decree's text cited by 
the Brazilians as the basis of their finding.  That text 
does not in reality give any basis for the latter.  Totally 
the contrary, and unambiguously so, we judge:  the evidence 
prima facie does point to a national-treatment issue.  In 
particular: 
 
-- The decree does deal directly with the ICMS regime; the 
2% tax rate is not at all an unrelated, separate tax issue. 
 
-- The 2% tax rate on gross revenue ("receita bruta 
auferida") for all operations is indeed offered as an 
alternative to paying the regular 19% ICMS; and this 
alternative is made available to companies which refine salt 
for consumption and, very specifically, producers of soda 
ash that also market salt (Article 38), but not to the 
importer of U.S. soda ash. 
 
-- Article 40, which the Brazilians cited as proving that 
the regular application of the ICMS is not affected, 
actually seems to require only that the fiscal documents of 
taxpayers under this special regime must continue to conform 
to normal ICMS regulations.  It does not state or mean that 
the 19% ICMS tax rate continues to apply. 
 
-- Indeed, Article 42 appears to assume that covered 
taxpayers will use the 2% of gross revenue tax, not the 19% 
ICMS.  They actually have to request an opt-out from the 
State NOT to do so.  Whether particular companies choose to 
opt-out or not, presumably this different tax regime is at 
times beneficial -- i.e., gives the option to pay less tax 
than under a 19% ICMS. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Embassy Trade Officer subsequently presented these 
considerations over lunch with Tarrago's Market Access 
Division subordinate Maria Elisa Maia and her deputy, Felipe 
Bandeira de Mello.  The latter made three defenses of the 
special tax regime.  First, they argued that since use of 
the 2% tax regime is optional, it does not necessarily 
contravene GATT Article III, and further, it is an open 
question as to whether or not the company has actually used 
the special regime to lower its tax liability.  We counter- 
argued that, whether or not the company has taken advantage 
of the special regime, providing an opportunity to 
preferentially lower the domestic company's tax liability 
could be inconsistent with Article III. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Second, the Brazilians claimed that statistics 
showing stable then increasing U.S. exports of soda ash to 
the State of Rio since 2001 confirms that U.S. exporters 
were not prejudiced.  We argued that this is inconclusive, 
since U.S. exports theoretically could have reached higher 
levels still except for the domestic producer's potentially 
enhanced competitiveness due to the tax break.  Finally, the 
Brazilians opined that, even if the domestic producer 
lowered its tax liability using the special regime, the 
stable market shares for the domestic producer and the 
importer in the sale of soda ash in Brazil since 2001 
illustrates that the importer has not been prejudiced, since 
the domestic producer appears not to have lowered its price 
to gain market share.  We rejoined that what the domestic 
producer chooses to do with the tax windfall - increase 
profit or lower prices - is immaterial. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Mission's research and input from FCS Rio industry 
contacts indicates the following as to the current state of 
Brazil's soda-ash market.  According to ANSAC's Rio-based 
agent, with whom FCS Rio met on May 24, the total Brazilian 
market for soda ash is 650,000 Metric Tons/Year.  ALCALIS, 
the Brazilian producer, produces 165,000 MT/Y or 25%.  The 
balance of Brazil's needs is imported from: 
 
-- ANSAC (U.S.): 300,000 MT/Y. This means ANSAC has 45% of 
the Brazilian market and is responsible for 70% of all 
Brazilian imports of soda ash. 
 
-- SOLVAY (Belgium): 130,000 MT or 20% of Brazil's imports. 
The ANSAC Rio agent noted to us that SOLVAY, although a 
Belgian group, has plants in the U.S. and is a member of 
ANSAC. 
 
-- CHINA: 65,000, or 10% of the Brazilian market. 
 
Preliminary Embassy research of Brazilian government trade 
figures indicates the following with regard to U.S. soda-ash 
sales to Brazil: 
 
-- U.S. exporters' market share has been stable since 1999: 
64%, 64%, 60%, 65% in 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, respectively. 
For the January-July period the figures for 2003 and 2004 
were 67% and 66%. 
 
-- The percentage of Brazil's total soda-ash imports that 
are bought in Rio state has been constant at roughly one- 
fifth since 1998, although for January-June in 2004 the 
ratio dropped to 14%, compared to 16% for the same period in 
¶2003. 
 
-- U.S. exporters' market share in the Rio state local 
market has been 97% to 99% for every year since 1998, but 
the January-June figure for 2004 indicates a drop, to 81.6% 
compared to 96% for the same period in 2003. 
 
COMMENT:  Apparently some two-thirds of Brazil's total soda- 
ash market is outside Rio state, mainly in Sao Paulo.  The 
U.S. exporter has had a long-term monopoly of export sales 
into Rio state, something over 60,000 tons in 2003, 
according to the GoB figures.  This compares to the ALCALIS 
production there of 165,000 tons, with Chinese and Belgian 
competitors evidently not even on the scene.  We do not know 
if ALCALIS's entire production is sold and consumed in Rio 
state itself, as seems logical, or if some is sold to 
customers in other Brazilian states.  In any case, depending 
on the degree of advantage the Rio 2% tax favor gives 
ALCALIS in selling its output, it would seem that sales of 
up to that entire output could theoretically be affected. 
END COMMENT. 
 
ALCALIS (located in Arraial do Cabo municipality about three 
hours east of Rio de Janeiro city that is said to have 
gained independent administrative status solely because of 
the presence of the mega-plant itself), currently has a 
reported 700 employees, down from the two-thousand range in 
the past.  It is said to be facing irredeemable problems, 
including the failure of its buyers when it was privatized 
in the mid-1990s to be current with their payments, and 
environmental issues. 
 
¶10. (U) TEXT OF RIO STATE DECREE 28104 OF APRIL 13, 2001: 
 
DECRETO No. 28.104 DE 10 DE ABRIL DE 2001 
 
Altera o Titulo VI, do Livro V, do Regulamento do ICMS, 
aprovado pelo Decreto n 27.427/2000. 
 
O GOVERNADOR DO ESTADO DO RIO DE JANEIRO, no uso de 
atribuicoes constitucionais, 
 
DECRETA: 
 
Art. 1. O Titulo VI, do Livro V, do Regulamento do ICMS, 
aprovado pelo Decreto no. 27.427, de 17 de novembro de 2000, 
passa a vigorar com a seguinte redacao: 
 
TITULO VI 
 
DAS ATIVIDADES INDUSTRIAIS DE REFINO DE SAL PARA ALIMENTACAO 
E DE PRODUCAO DE CARBONATO DE SODIO 
 
"Art. 36. O contribuinte do ICMS que exerca exclusivamente 
atividade industrial de refino de sal para alimentacao, 
classificada no subgrupamento denominado "refino de sal para 
alimentacao", codigo 4.24.12.05-8, do Catalogo de Atividades 
Economicas, deve calcular o valor do ICMS devido a cada mes 
pela aplicacao direta do percentual de 2% (dois por cento) 
sobre a receita bruta auferida no periodo, acrescida dos 
valores referentes as operacoes de transferencia, excluidos 
os valores referentes as operacoes sujeitas ao regime de 
substituicao tributaria. 
 
Paragrafo unico - Para os efeitos deste artigo, considera-se 
receita bruta o produto da venda de bens e servicos nas 
operacoes de conta propria, o preco dos servicos prestados e 
o resultado auferido nas operacoes por conta alheia, nao 
incluido o Imposto sobre Produtos Industrializados (IPI), as 
vendas canceladas e os descontos incondicionais concedidos. 
 
Art. 37. O imposto incidente sobre o fornecimento de gas 
natural, utilizado no processo produtivo das industrias a 
que se refere o artigo anterior, fica diferido para o 
momento em que ocorrer a saida do produto resultante do 
processo de industrializacao. 
 
Paragraph 1. O imposto diferido nos termos deste artigo 
considera-se incluido na estimativa de que trata o artigo 
anterior. 
 
Paragraph 2. A empresa que efetuar o fornecimento de gas 
para os contribuintes a que se refere o artigo anterior 
devera excluir do valor da operacao a parcela referente ao 
imposto diferido. 
 
Art. 38. As disposicoes dos artigos 36 e 37 tambem se 
aplicam ao contribuinte que, cumulativamente com a atividade 
economica mencionada no caput do artigo 36, seja produtor de 
carbonato de sodio (barrilha) e comercialize sal, salmoura e 
demais mercadorias do genero. 
 
Paragrafo unico - Na hipotese deste artigo, o diferimento de 
que trata o artigo 37 tambem se estendera, nas mesmas 
condicoes nele estabelecidas para o fornecimento de gas 
natural, ao fornecimento de energia eletrica e a saida de 
calcario. 
 
Art. 39. O procedimento nos termos dos artigos 36 a 38 veda 
o aproveitamento de quaisquer creditos do imposto. 
 
Art. 40. Os documentos fiscais referentes as operacoes 
realizadas pelos contribuintes a que se refere este Titulo 
serao emitidos segundo as regras comuns de tributacao, 
inclusive no que se refere ao destaque do imposto, que 
podera ser creditado pelo destinatario, na forma da 
legislacao. 
 
Art. 41. Estara automaticamente excluido do regime de 
tributacao previsto neste Decreto o contribuinte que nao 
estiver em dia com suas obrigacoes tributarias, ressalvadas 
as hipoteses de suspensao da exigibilidade do credito 
tributario, nos termos do artigo 151, do Codigo Tributario 
Nacional. 
 
Paragrafo unico - Na hipotese deste artigo, o contribuinte 
devera apurar a diferenca entre o ICMS calculado nos termos 
deste Decreto e o apurado segundo as regras comuns de 
tributacao, com os acrescimos legais, e, se for o caso, 
recolher a diferenca. 
 
Art. 42. O contribuinte pode optar por permanecer no regime 
normal de apuracao do ICMS, desde que expressamente o 
requeira, na forma que dispuser a Secretaria de Estado de 
Fazenda e Controle Geral." 
 
Art. 2. Este Decreto entra em vigor na data de sua 
publicacao, revogadas as disposicoes em contrario. 
Rio de Janeiro, 10 de abril de 2001 
 
ANTHONY GAROTINHO 
Governador 
 
¶11. (U)  (UNOFFICIAL EMBASSY TRANSLATION) 
 
Decree No. 28.104, April 10, 2001 
 
Alters Title VI of Book V of the Regulation of ICMS, 
approved by Decree No. 27.427/2000 
 
The Governor of the State of Rio de Janeiro, using 
constitutional powers, 
 
Decrees: 
 
Art. 1 of Title VI of Book V of the Regulation of ICMS, 
approved by Decree No. 27.427, November 17, 2000, enters 
into force with the following revisions: 
 
Title VI 
 
ON THE INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITIES OF REFINING SALT FOR 
CONSUMPTION AND OF PRODUCING SODA ASH 
 
"Art. 36. The ICMS taxpayer that exercises exclusively the 
industrial activity of refining salt for consumption, 
classified un the subgroup denominated by "refining of salt 
for consumption," code 4.24.12.05-8, of the Catalog of 
Economic Activities, ought to calculate the ICMS value owed 
each month by applying directly a percentage of 2 % (two per 
cent) to the gross revenues derived in the period, increased 
by the values relating to transfer operations, excluding the 
values relating to operations subject to the tax 
substitution regime. 
 
Sole Paragraph - For the purpose of this article, consider 
gross revenues the product of sales of goods and services in 
these operations, the price of services rendered and the 
result derived in other operations, not including the 
Industrialized Products Tax (IPI), cancelled sales, and 
unconditional discounts provided. 
 
Art. 37. The incident tax for the supply of natural gas, 
utilized in the productive process of industries that are 
the subject of the previous article, are deferred until the 
moment in the relevant product leaves the production 
process. 
 
Paragraph 1. The tax deferred under the terms of this 
article is considered within the estimate that is dealt with 
in the previous article. 
 
Paragraph 2. The company that provides the gas to taxpayers 
that are the subject of the previous article ought to 
exclude, out of the operations value, the installment 
relating to the deferred tax. 
 
Art. 38. The provisions of articles 36 and 37 also apply to 
the taxpayer who, in addition to the economic activity 
mentioned in article 36, produces soda ash and markets salt, 
brine and other commodities of this nature. 
 
Sole Paragraph - In considering this article, the deferment 
that is dealt with in Article 37 also will extend, under the 
same conditions as those established for the supply of 
natural gas, to the supplier of electric energy and to the 
supplier of limestone. 
 
Art. 39.  The procedure in terms of Articles 36 to 38 
prohibits the use of whatever credit of this tax. 
 
Art. 40. The fiscal documents relating to the operations 
performed by taxpayers to which this Title refers are to be 
issued according to common tax rules, including those 
detailing the tax that can be credited by the purchaser, in 
conformance with legislation. 
 
Art. 41. A taxpayer who is delinquent with his tax 
obligations will be automatically excluded from the tax 
regime provided in this decree, except in the case of 
suspension of tax credit requirements, in accordance with 
Article 151 of the National Tax Code. 
 
Sole Paragraph - In interpreting this article, the taxpayer 
ought to calculate the difference between the ICMS 
calculated under the terms of this Decree and that according 
to common tax rules, with legal charges, and as necessary, 
pay the difference. 
 
Art. 42. The taxpayer can opt to continue in the normal 
regime for ICMS collection, making an express request, in 
the form determined by the State Secretary of Finance and 
Comptroller General. 
 
Art. 43. This Decree enters into force on the date of its 
publication, provisions to the contrary hereby being 
revoked. 
 
Rio de Janeiro, 10 April 2001 
 
Anthony Garotinho 
Governor 
 
(End Unofficial Embassy Translation) 
 
DANILOVICH