04QUITO2599
NEW GALAPAGOS PARK DIRECTOR LITERALLY FIGHTS HIS
Fri Sep 24 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Quito
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

241951Z Sep 04UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002599 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS TO USAID 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID EC ECON EFIS ETRD PGOV PREL SENV
SUBJECT: NEW GALAPAGOS PARK DIRECTOR LITERALLY FIGHTS HIS 
WAY INTO OFFICE 
 
REF: QUITO 2502 
 
¶1.  Summary.  On September 22, a group of local fishermen, 
who have long been at odds with the park leadership over 
environmental regulations, stormed the office of the GNP 
headquarters in Santa Cruz and helped Fausto Cepeda, the 
newly appointed director, install himself as park director. 
The violent confrontation has made both U.S. and 
international press. 
 
¶2.  While the fishermen were assailing the GNP headquarters, 
ten GNP strike representatives were in Quito having a series 
of meetings with the Minister of the Environment (MOE) to 
negotiate a resolution to the crisis.  In the end, the MOE 
publicly agreed to nothing, except to resume negotiations 
with the GNP representatives on Monday, September 27.  The 
Embassy received a report that ten fishing boats were spotted 
in a no-take zone in the Galapagos.  The Embassy continues to 
monitor the crisis closely and is pressing for quick 
resolution.  End Summary. 
 
Let's Talk Institutional Stability 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  On September 21, the Ambassador hosted a luncheon for 
four leading Ecuadorian environmentalists intimately involved 
with the Galapagos Islands.  They were: Eliecer Cruz (leads a 
USAID-funded Galapagos Marine Reserve Project); Luis Suarez 
(Executive Director of Conservation International); Roberto 
Troya (Regional Representative of The Nature Conservancy); 
and Deborah Chiriboga (entrepreneur who is very involved in 
the Guayaquil conservation sector).  The group discussed the 
current crisis but focused on long-term institutional 
stability of the GNP. 
 
¶3.  The group concurred that the best approach would be to 
name an interim director for one month, to permit a cooling 
off period.  During this time, an independent commission 
comprised of members from various sectors would evaluate the 
current situation and propose a temporary solution to 
stabilize the park. 
 
¶4.  The broader goal of this commission would be to form a 
permanent body that would choose future park directors. 
That body ideally would include a mix of national and 
international stakeholders, but would clearly not impinge on 
the sovereignty of Ecuador as ultimate steward of the 
islands.  The NGO representatives said they would propose 
these ideas to the MOE and other executive branch members. 
 
Meanwhile Back at the Park... 
----------------------------- 
 
¶5.  On the same morning as the Ambassador's luncheon, Rogelio 
Guaycha, President of four fishing cooperatives and alternate 
congressional deputy, incited fishermen to band together, 
march to the gates of the GNP headquarters in Santa Cruz, and 
throw out the striking GNP employees.  His call for action 
worked.  About 60 fishermen showed up at the gates of the GNP 
and tried to forcibly enter the park grounds.  The local 
police used tear gas and riot shields to turn away the 
fishermen.  Some strikers were injured, but none severely. 
 
¶6.  The following morning, September 22, Guaycha called for 
another assault against the strikers.  This time the 
fishermen successfully pushed through.  They led Fausto 
Cepeda to the GNP headquarters, allowing him to assume his 
position as park director.  At that point, six of the GNP 
employees broke ranks and decided to support Cepeda.  The 
rest of the GNP employees remained on strike pending the 
outcome of scheduled meetings with the MOE. 
 
¶7.  The violent confrontation has received international 
attention.  Numerous articles about it have appeared in U.S. 
and foreign newspapers. 
 
GNP Employees and MOE Meet to Discuss the Crisis 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶8.  The strike representatives, the MOE, and members of the 
President's staff met on the evening of September 22 and the 
following morning to discuss a resolution of the crisis.  The 
MOE declined to comment publicly on the results of the 
meetings. 
 
¶9.  Privately, the MOE and the presidential advisors agree 
that a commission should be established and that the 
employees should be given long-term contracts to further 
stabilize the GNP as an institution (see Reftel for specifics 
on strikers' demands).  The sticking point seems to be 
replacing Cepeda with an interim director. 
 
¶10.  The MOE is meeting with Cepeda on September 24 in 
Guayaquil to discuss the situation.  The MOE is disturbed by 
the fact that Cepeda partook in the violence and some believe 
he may be turning a blind-eye to illegal fishing after only 
one day in office.  The MOE and the GNP employees agreed to 
meet again on Monday, September 27. 
 
The Start of Illegal Fishing? 
----------------------------- 
 
¶11.  The Embassy received notification from WildAid that 
fishing vessels were spotted in no-take zones in the 
Galapagos Islands.  Cepeda was informed about the situation 
but reportedly stated that the vessel used to monitor and 
investigate these activities needed fuel.  The pilot of the 
small airplane that is also used to monitor these activities 
was sick.  WildAid, an environmental NGO, offered to fuel the 
monitoring vessel and charter a plane.  Cepeda accepted the 
offer. 
 
¶12.  WildAid flew over the Canal Bolivar, which is one of the 
most protected areas in the Galapagos.  They confirmed that 
there were at least ten boats in this strict no-take zone. 
WildAid will forward photos of this to Conservation 
International, who will present this to the appropriate 
government authorities. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶13.  It appears that naming Cepeda as park director was meant 
to appease fishing interests in the run-up to local 
elections.  Donor groups are formally expressing their 
concerns to the President over investments and park stability 
and have offered to help resolve the conflict. 
 
¶14.  Instability in park administration is one of the most 
serious problems affecting conservation in the Galapagos. 
Prior to Gutierrez,s administration there was one park 
director for eight years.  Since Gutierrez came into power in 
2003, there have been eight directors.   We continue to 
promote stability and conservation with all our contacts but 
with limited success. 
 
KENNEY