04SANAA2509
AMBASSADOR LAUNCHES MEPI ASSISTANCE TO UNDP PROGRAM
Mon Sep 27 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Sanaa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SANAA 002509 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
PASS TO NEA/PI, NEA/ARP, USAID/ANE/MEA FOR DMCCLOUD AND 
MWOOLFORD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMPI KDEM PGOV DEMOCRATIC REFORM
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR LAUNCHES MEPI ASSISTANCE TO UNDP PROGRAM 
 
¶1. (U) On September 20 Ambassador, AID Rep and United Nations 
Development Program Resident Representative Flavia Pansieri 
signed a 1.59 million USD agreement to support the UNDP 
Decentralization and Local Development Support Project. 
Deputy Prime Minister and Minster of Planning and 
International Cooperation Ahmed Sofan and Minister of Local 
Administration Sadeq Abu Ras witnessed the signing. MEPI is 
contributing 1.2 million and USAID 390,000 USD to this 
program implemented by USAID-Yemen is designed to assist the 
ROYG carry out is stated goal of fiscal and political 
decentralization. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
Decentralization Important For Long Term Development 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶2. (U) In early 2004, the Ministry of Local Administration 
requested US Embassy participation in this program to further 
its goals and encourage other donors to join their effort. 
Fiscal decentralization is a necessary factor in Yemen's 
continued long term democratic and economic development. 
Begun in 2001, local councils in Yemen have achieved limited 
success due to poorly trained members and lack of national 
fiscal and administrative suport.  The Local Councils Grant 
will support decentralization at the national level at the 
Ministry of Local Administration and support pilot activities 
at the pilot level in al-Jawf and Abyan governorates.  At the 
national level, the program will focus on developing laws and 
procedures to institutionalize transparent local tendering 
and citizen participation in decentralized Public Expenditure 
Management.  In Abyan and al-Jawf the program will support 
local councils to implement the tendering process. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
Buttresses Overall USG Development Strategy 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (U) The grant compliments Post's ongoing agricultural, 
health and education projects designed to train ministries to 
move professional planning and budget making to the director 
general offices in the Mission's five target governorates. 
Post's development strategy focuses on al-Jawf, Marib, 
Shabwa, Amran and Sa'ada.  Abyan was added to the local 
council program because it is similarly poor and tribal to 
the other five governorates, but as a legacy from the former 
South Yemen, boasts higher education rates  and several 
active women's groups who could participate in a strong, 
active local council. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Comment: With the signing of the decentralization 
program, Post can more actively advocate for continued ROYG 
decentralization, which while accepted as a national goal 
faces opposition from strong central government bureaucrats 
loath to give up their power.  A fundamental component of 
Post's development strategy is bringing basic government 
services to remote, impoverished tribal areas.  Part of that 
process must be citizen involvement in local decision making. 
 By professionalizing local councils, the joint MEPI/USAID 
program will be providing the tools for disenfranchised 
Yemenis to make smart decisions about resource allocation to 
enable them to participate in the democratic processes.  End 
comment. 
 
KRAJESKI