06JAKARTA10924
INDONESIA STEPS UP EFFORTS TO PASS TIP
Fri Sep 01 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Jakarta
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHJA #0924/01 2441043
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 011043Z SEP 06
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9494
INFO RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDC
RUEAWJB/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDCUNCLAS JAKARTA 010924 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DOJ FOR OPDAT ALEXANDRE, LEHMANN, CRAWFORD, LENTZ 
STATE FOR G/TIP, INL AND EAP/MTS 
 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV PREL EAID ELAB KJUS KCRM ID
SUBJECT:  INDONESIA STEPS UP EFFORTS TO PASS TIP 
LEGISLATION 
 
REFTEL:  JAKARTA 7216 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  Indonesia's Parliament (DPR) has 
completed a new draft of its proposed anti-trafficking 
legislation.  President Yudhoyono has designated the 
Ministry of Women's Empowerment (KNPP) and the Ministry 
of Law & Human Rights to prepare executive branch 
comments on the bill.  The Government must submit its 
views on the bill to the DPR by September 25 in order 
to trigger joint debate on the legislation since its 
passage must be mutually agreed to by both branches of 
government.  Key sources expect the bill to be passed 
by the DPR before the end of November 2006.  However, 
this timeline may not be reliable given the 
unpredictable and slow nature of the Indonesian 
legislative process.  On August 30, Ambassador Pascoe 
pushed Presidential Advisor Dino Djalal for speedy 
passage of the bill.  Post requests that Under 
Secretary Burns and other U.S. officials meeting DPR 
 
SIPDIS 
Speaker Agung Laksono in Washington in two weeks to 
press him for action on the bill.  End Summary. 
 
Status of the new anti-trafficking bill 
 -------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) On June 9, the DPR released a new draft Law on 
the Eradication of Criminal Acts of Human Trafficking 
(PTPPO).  The draft included many comments and 
suggestions from the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ). 
We submitted these comments to Dra. Latifah Iskandar, 
Chair of the DPR Special Committee on the PTPPO through 
a USAID-funded human trafficking legislation advisor to 
the committee and to Laksmie Indrimayah, a member of 
the Legal Bureau of the Attorney General's Office (AGO) 
by the Mission's Resident Legal Advisor (DOJ/OPDAT). 
Significant among the accepted recommendations was 
defining "human trafficking" more clearly to include 
the three essential elements of the crime (act, means, 
purpose).  To address the concern of the GOI's 
Corruption Eradication Commission (KPK) the new draft 
explicitly applies to Government officials, military 
officers, law enforcement and public officials. 
Finally, provisions for victim's rights and 
consideration of electronic evidence in trafficking 
prosecutions have been added. 
 
¶3.  (U) On July 28, President Yudhoyono received the 
new draft of the PTPPO, and on August 14 he designated 
the Ministry of Women's Empowerment (KNPP) and the 
Ministry of Law & Human Rights to coordinate the 
Executive Branch's consideration of the PTPPO.  By 
statute, the Government has until September 25 to 
submit comments on the draft.  That response becomes 
the basis for discussion between the executive and 
legislative branches, which must agree on a common text 
for a draft bill to become law. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Although the DPR has made serious 
improvements to the text of the PTPPO, the new draft of 
the legislation continues to fail to adequately address 
debt bondage.  While debt bondage has been listed as a 
criminal act under the PTPPO, the bill does not include 
debt bondage as one of the forms of exploitation which 
constitutes the crime of human trafficking.  Moreover, 
the term "debt bondage" is not specifically defined in 
the text of the legislation.  While the bill addresses 
the falsification of documents in furtherance of the 
crime of trafficking, it does not address the 
deliberate confiscation of birth certificates, 
immigration documents or other official documents to 
facilitate the crime of trafficking.  DOJ Human 
Trafficking advisor and the Mission are coordinating 
with the GOI's human trafficking legislation advisor to 
advocate for the inclusion of these and other 
improvements to the draft. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The schedule adopted by the Ministry provides 
that public hearings and a meeting of the nine 
executive branch agencies responsible for implementing 
the GOI's anti-trafficking strategy must be completed 
before September 10.  USAID and DOJ are working with 
Deputy Women's Empowerment Minister Sumarni Dawam 
Rahardjo to host the public hearings on September 6-7 
and to push a series of GOI meetings and actions that 
will, hopefully, result in submission of their final 
response for Yudhoyono's consideration by September 18. 
 
Dra. Latifah Iskandar confirms that the proposed 
schedule is designed to ensure that the DPR receives 
the Government's formal response by the September 25 
deadline. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Once the DPR receives the Executive Branch's 
formal response, it will initiate joint debate on the 
PTPPO.  Dra. Sumarni Rahardjo anticipates that joint 
debate will begin in earnest after the end of Ramadan 
(October 26).  Officials at the KPP, AGO and the 
representatives of several NGOs have all expressed 
their confidence and anticipation that the PTPPO will 
be passed by the DPR before the end of November 2006. 
Dra. Latifah Iskandar is also confident that the 
legislation will pass in the near future, but admits 
that the nature of the legislative process makes it 
impossible to guarantee a date certain for passage. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Comment:  The aggressive timeline established 
by the KPP demonstrates the GOI's commitment to 
adopting comprehensive anti-trafficking legislation. 
However, historic delays in the DPR's efforts to pass 
legislation and the GOI's regular inability to meet its 
own stated deadlines warrants caution in anticipating 
that the timeline will actually be met.  We are pushing 
the GOI hard here and request Washington policymakers 
to push GOI visitors as well. 
 
PASCOE