09JAKARTA582
ASEAN BUILDING ON SUCCESS OF ANTHEM
Wed Apr 01 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Jakarta
O 011021Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1999
INFO ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
NSC WASHDCUNCLAS JAKARTA 000582 
 
 
Dept for EAP, EAP/MTS, EAP/MLS, EAP/RSP 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV ECON ASEAN KOMO ID
 
SUBJECT:  ASEAN BUILDING ON SUCCESS OF ANTHEM 
 
REF: 08 JAKARTA 650 
 
¶1.  (U) SUMMARY:  ASEAN's new anthem has been an 
overwhelming success.  The catchy tune has climbed the 
charts in all ten Southeast Asia countries and is a 
favorite selection on karaoke machines throughout the 
region.  To capitalize on this success, the Jakarta-based 
ASEAN Secretariat held a special April 1 meeting to 
identify other ways that ASEAN can play a more central 
role in the region.  Ideas included the official 
designation of an ASEAN costume, snack, sport or animal- 
inspired mascot.  Member states surprisingly failed to 
reach a consensus, but promised to meet again soon to mull 
things over.  END SUMMARY. 
 
ASEAN COSTUME UNRAVELS 
 
¶2.  (U) To capitalize on the success of the ASEAN Way, the 
organization's catchy new anthem, the ASEAN Secretariat 
called a special April 1 meeting to identify other ways 
that ASEAN can play a more central role in the region and 
internationally.  Secretariat officials first suggested an 
official ASEAN costume.  Several delegations seized on the 
idea.  The Singaporeans went first, suggesting grey 
trousers, a striped tie and a blue blazer with the ASEAN 
logo on the pocket.  Burmese officials next suggested 
khaki uniforms--a proposal that went quickly down to 
defeat.  The Filipinos--showing exuberance and great 
emotion--recommended the barong.  The discussion 
completely broke down, however, due to a dispute between 
Indonesia and Malaysia over which country invented batik. 
 
HEARTBURN OVER ASEAN SNACK 
 
¶3.  (U) Next on the agenda was the proposal for an 
official ASEAN snack.  However, a split within the Thai 
delegation prevented any progress on this front.  Most 
Thai officials supported spring rolls as the official 
ASEAN delicacy.  Fierce arguments broke out within the 
Thai delegation, however, on whether the wrapping for the 
snack would be red or yellow.   Regional observers we 
spoke to were surprised that the regional grouping was 
unable to reach a consensus on durian as the official 
ASEAN snack.  Meanwhile, Indonesian and Malaysian 
officials argued over which country invented nasi goreng. 
 
CRYING FOUL OVER AN ASEAN SPORT 
 
¶4.  (U) ASEAN officials then turned to the idea of an 
official ASEAN sport.  Former New York Mets star Sidd 
Finch (see 08 Jakarta 650, dated April 1, 2008, for more 
on Finch) traveled to the Secretariat from his yoga studio 
in Bali to make the pitch for baseball.  Finch explained 
that baseball's leisurely pace was a perfect match for the 
ASEAN way.  Several member states rejected the proposal, 
however, because they feared that Southeast Asian 
countries would be dominated by more powerful Northeast 
Asian baseball powers like Japan and South Korea. 
Discussions of an alternative ASEAN sport soon hit the 
wall thanks to a dispute between Indonesia and Malaysia 
over which country had invented badminton. 
 
GNASHING OF TEETH OVER ASEAN MASCOT 
 
¶5.  (U) There was also discussion about designating an 
animal-inspired mascot for the organization.  The 
Indonesians suggested the Komodo Dragon (a gigantic lizard 
from Indonesia).  This was controversial, however.  The 
vicious attack last year on two British divers by deadly 
Komodo dragons has sparked European human rights groups to 
protest against the giant lizards.  The divers, who 
survived almost nine hours in shark-infested waters only 
to come face to face with several deadly Komodo dragons on 
dry land, have told the press that the savage beasts 
should not be iconized.  The divers reportedly used rocks 
and a weight belt to fight off the giant, venomous, 
fiendish lizards as they repeatedly lunged at them.  Thai 
animal rights activists have asserted that the often 
overlooked (and considerably less cruel) monitor lizard 
should also be a contender for the mascot job. 
 
FINDING A SOLUTION 
 
¶6.  (U) Member states surprisingly failed to reach a 
consensus on any of these topics, but promised to meet 
again soon to mull things over.  Secretariat officials 
decided to try to find a solution to these problems in the 
time-honored ASEAN way--they thought of the idea of 
forming a Special High-Level Eminent Persons Consultative 
Advisory Panel (SHLEPCAP).  However, before the SHLEPCAP 
could meet, a working-level Standing Committee on ASEAN 
Costumes, Snacks, Sports and Mascots (SCACSSM) would have 
to draft Terms of Reference (TOR) for the SHLEPCAP.  Our 
contacts did not think this process would be complete in 
time for the Panel's next scheduled meeting, slated for 
April 1, 2010. 
 
¶7.  (U) Happy April Fool's Day from Jakarta. 
 
HUME