09JAKARTA1022
DRAFT USAID COUNTRY STRATEGY FOR INDONESIA (2009-
Wed Jun 17 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Jakarta
P 170639Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2574UNCLAS JAKARTA 001022 
 
 
AIDAC FOR MARGOT ELLIS, AA/ASIA, A/A/ID, DAA/ASIA, 
ASIA/SPO, ASIA/EAA, GDA, DCHA, EGAT, GH 
DEPARTMENT FOR F, EAP, S/GAC, S/P 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID ID
SUBJECT: DRAFT USAID COUNTRY STRATEGY FOR INDONESIA (2009- 
2014) 
 
¶1. This is an action message. See paragraph five. 
 
¶2. Today the Mission transmitted to USAID Washington its 
proposed Country Strategy for Indonesia: A Partnership for 
Prosperity. 
 
¶3. The draft USAID Country Strategy for Indonesia (2009-14) 
represents 18 months of systematic effort by staff 
throughout the Mission, together with Indonesian and other 
experts.  They have all been engaged in analysis of 
Indonesia's development progress and problems, producing a 
dozen analytic reports.   We have had vigorous debate. 
Ideas have been elicited from visiting teams and through 
workshops with experts who brought wide-ranging views. 
Priorities have been vetted with the Embassy, with donors, 
with civil society and with GOI officials.  There is broad 
and unanimous support for these proposals: 
 
¶A. The well-regarded education portfolio, given high 
priority by the Mission, the Embassy, the GOI and other 
donors, is building on success by addressing the next 
generation of challenges in basic education, improving 
teaching. A new higher education initiative will respond to 
Secretary Clinton's call for more linkages between U.S. and 
Indonesian universities. 
 
¶B. The innovative environment portfolio faces a range of 
development challenges: from ensuring sustainability for 
urban water and sanitation for the poor to developing 
sustainable resource management strategies for forests, 
marine ecosystems and energy.  The Indonesian counterparts 
for environment programs are seeking incentives for 
communities to protect natural resources, including 
agreements for international carbon credits. USAID will 
join with the new GOI Administration in pragmatically 
addressing global climate change. 
 
¶C. Democracy and governance activities are shifting 
emphasis to making democratic governance deliver better for 
all Indonesians. Responsiveness to communities and clients 
is being strengthened for the legislature, the judiciary, 
and service agencies, at national and local levels. 
 
¶D. The health portfolio is carefully targeted, designed in 
concert with our health colleagues in Washington, to 
improve Indonesian health services and control threatening 
communicable diseases. 
 
¶E. The economic growth portfolio is addressing the growing 
need for good jobs and income in the lagging rural 
communities where investment in infrastructure - roads and 
electricity - is long overdue. 
 
The strategy lays out an ambitious cycle of engagement by 
USAID to accelerate IndonesiaQs development. The proposed 
investments build on IndonesiaQs remarkable democratic, 
social and economic transitions in the last ten years. The 
investments focus on consolidating those gains and 
redoubling nascent efforts to address global challenges 
like climate change and infectious disease. 
 
¶4. The strategy is consistent with the Embassy's 2011 MSP 
and endorsed by Ambassador Hume.  USAID priorities conform 
to GOI plans, as confirmed by the National Planning Agency. 
 
¶5. Early Washington consideration and review of this 
strategy is requested.  The Government of Indonesia has 
asked us to confirm that the new USAID strategy is in place 
by the end of July. 
 
North