06WARSAW555
POLAND: DCM MEETING IN MINISTRY OF ECONOMY ON AIG
Fri Mar 24 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Warsaw
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS WARSAW 000555 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/NCE DKOSTELANCIK AND MSESSUMS 
COMMERCE FOR 4232/ITA/MAC/EUR/OECA/MROGERS, JBURGESS, 
JKIMBALL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV ECON PL
SUBJECT: POLAND: DCM MEETING IN MINISTRY OF ECONOMY ON AIG 
LINCOLN/RASZYN PROJECT 
 
REF: WARSAW 482 
 
¶1.  (U)  Sensitive but unclassified - not for internet 
distribution. 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  DCM met with Andrzej Kaczmarek of the Ministry of 
Economy March 23 to follow up  Embassy's March 14 meeting 
(reftel) with Gmina Raszyn Mayor and Vice-Mayor.  AIG Lincoln 
Residential Director Christopher Sweeney also attended. 
Kaczmarek was called away to the Sejm at the last moment, but 
was represented in the meeting by Ministry of Economy staff 
Cezariusz Kwaterski, Director of the Department for 
International Cooperation; Radoslaw Ciechanski, Expert from 
the Foreign Investment and Export Promotion Department; and 
Zofia Schnitzer, Head Specialist, Department of International 
Bilateral Relations.  Adam Janczak, Vice-Director of the 
Polish Foreign Investment Agency also attended. 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  DCM began the meeting by recounting March 14 
discussions with Raszyn Mayor and Vice-Mayor, and stating to 
Kwaterski that the Embassy was encouraged by the Mayor's 
statement that the Gmina is willing work constructively with 
AIG Lincoln and does not oppose the project.  DCM also 
informed Kwaterski that AIG Lincoln sent the letter requested 
by Gmina Raszyn Mayor and Vice-Mayor as a precondition to a 
meeting.  Kwaterski responded that he knew the case well, 
partially from discussions in Washington during his recent 
trip there with U/S Kaczmarek for the U.S.-Polish 
Economic/Commercial Dialogue.  Kwaterski also stated that U/S 
Kaczmarek would like to be briefed on developments, 
indicating that Kaczmarek was prepared to weigh in if 
necessary.  Kwaterski mentioned that the GOP had reviewed the 
case and felt favorably about the project.  Sweeney and DCM 
promised to keep Kwaterski apprised of any further 
developments. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  Comment.  The current GOP established new housing 
construction as one of its domestic policy goals, and the 
sustained inertia of Gmina Raszyn (particularly the Mayor and 
Vice-Mayor) on the AIG Lincoln project has apparently caught 
the attention of high-ranking PIS members.  We were told, for 
example, that Prime Minister Marcinkiewicz knows of the case. 
 Momentum seems to be building within the GOP that could help 
move the AIG Lincoln project toward fruition.  The next step 
is for Gmina Raszyn to respond to AIG Lincoln's letter 
requesting a meeting.  We will continue to follow 
developments and stay involved in the case. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ASHE