09MANAGUA854
NICARAGUA: SCENE SETTER FOR SOUTHCOM COMMANDER
Fri Aug 28 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #0854/01 2402303
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 282303Z AUG 09
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUMIAAA/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL PRIORITY
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW PRIORITY 0197
RUEHSI/AMEMBASSY TBILISI PRIORITY 0017
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4504
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 000854 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FROM AMB CALLAHAN TO GENERAL FRASER 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/25/2019 
TAGS: OVIP PREL MOPS MARR NU
SUBJECT: NICARAGUA: SCENE SETTER FOR SOUTHCOM COMMANDER 
VISIT 
 
REF: A. MANAGUA 629 - H1N1 UPDATE 
     ¶B. MANAGUA 626 - RADIO STATION JAMMING 
     ¶C. MANAGUA 600 - CPC UPDATE 
     ¶D. MANAGUA 599 - MCC REACTION 
     ¶E. MANAGUA 580 - MCC CANCELATION 
     ¶F. MANAGUA 541 - NGO MANUAL 
     ¶G. MANAGUA 534 - NICARAGUAN ECONOMY OUTLOOK 
     ¶H. MANAGUA 524 - TRIPARTITE WAGE AGREEMENT 
     ¶I. MANAGUA 443 - CPC PRAYER CAMPAIGN 
     ¶J. MANAGUA 415 - MISKITO INDEPENDENCE MOVEMENT 
     ¶K. MANAGUA 258 - CAMPAIGN AGAINST OPPOSITION 
     ¶L. 2008 MANAUGA 1392 - MUNICIPAL ELECTION FRAUD 
     ¶M. 2008 MANAGUA 1240 - CONSTITUTIONAL REFORM 
     ¶N. 2007 MANAGUA 1785 - 28TH ANNIVERSARY CELEBRATION 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Robert J. Callahan for reasons 1.4 (b & d) 
 
¶1. (C) General Fraser, your visit to Nicaragua on September 1 
and 2 comes at a moment when we face a challenging political 
environment here with a government that is suspicious and 
critical of the USG, even as the Nicaraguan public remains 
fundamentally pro-US.  Troubling phenomena include: economic 
instability; political consolidation of party control over 
national and local government; and an active party-patronage 
system that rewards loyalty and punishes dissent and 
opposition. Your visit also comes in the midst of 
celebrations marking the 30-year anniversary of the 
Sandinista-led victory over the Somoza dictatorship, and the 
establishment of the Sandinista security organs that have 
become the professional and independent Nicaraguan Army and 
the National Police. 
 
¶2.  (C) Your visit is the first senior-level Executive Branch 
delegation since that of former Health and Human Services 
Secretary Michael Leavitt in MONTH 2008.  NOTE. A visit by 
former Commerce Secretary Carlos Gutierrez was cancelled in 
September 2008 after Nicaragua formally recognized the 
breakaway Georgian "republics" of Abkhazia and South Ossetia. 
 END NOTE.  We expect that your government interlocutors, 
including President Ortega, will give you a friendly 
reception.  This veneer, though, masks underlying pressures 
and tensions that the ruling Sandinista party increasingly 
brings to bear on Nicaragua's civil society, media, democracy 
and even the institution of the military.  Our bilateral 
military cooperation, particularly in the area of 
counternarcotics, is one of the bright spots we enjoy in our 
relationship with Nicaragua.  Your visit demonstrates the 
value we place on military cooperation and the seriousness of 
our continuing commitment to assist the Nicaraguan people. 
These are messages worth repeating in your meetings. 
 
- - - - - - - - - 
POLITICAL CONTEXT 
- - - - - - - - - 
 
¶3. (C) The FSLN once again controls all four branches of 
government.  Beginning with his re-election to the Presidency 
in 2007 -- with only 38% of the vote and via a 
"pacto"/alliance with the Constitutional Liberal Party (PLC) 
-- Daniel Ortega has moved to consolidate political power in 
himself and his family.  Control of all National-level 
entities, combined with the FSLN's local Citizen Power 
Councils (CPCs), has permitted the Sandinista party to 
actively restrict the ability of civil society, NGOs, the 
media and the opposition to exercise their civic rights 
(REFTELS B, C, F, K).  Ortega's stated goal is to further 
consolidate power through constitutional reform that would 
permit him consecutive re-election and to remain in power 
beyond the end of his term in 2011.  Meanwhile, Nicaragua's 
economy is distressed -- two critical concerns being high 
unemployment due to "maquila" closings and biennual minimum 
wage hikes, and to major budget shortfalls cause by 
reductions in donor funds (REF G).  Social services, 
including healthcare and education, are suffering from two -- 
soon to be three -- rounds of budget cuts and a new scandal 
surrounding the GON's "cover-up" of actual statistics about 
H1N1 flu virus. (REF A). 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
MCC, OTHER DONOR CANCELATIONS HURT 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶4. (C) On June 10, the Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC) 
board announced the cancellation of approximately $62 million 
of USG assistance as a consequence of election fraud 
perpetrated by the GON during the November 2008 municipal 
contests (REFTELS D, E, and L).  Government and FSLN party 
leaders, including Ortega himself, claim that the USG is 
interfering with Nicaragua's sovereignty and its internal 
affairs by asking them to account for the electoral fraud. 
The expected cancellation announcement came after six months 
of diplomatic efforts urging the GON to address the electoral 
fraud.  Of the $175 million MCC Compact, over $110 million 
had already been spent or obligated.  The loss of the 
remaining $62 million in aid is a blow economically and 
politically to the Ortega government, particularly since the 
impact will be felt acutely in the FSLN's historical base of 
Leon and Chinandega - areas that were served by the USNS 
COMFORT mission in early July.  Public reaction to the MCC 
decision generally placed the blame on the Ortega 
administration (REFTELS D, E). 
 
¶6. (C) Also as a result of the November election fraud, the 
European Union (EU) and several European nations suspended 
donor assistance in the form of direct budget support. 
Because this assistance accounted for a significant portion 
of Nicaragua's operating budget, this loss of funds has 
caused the GON to implement three rounds of budget austerity 
measures (with successive reductions of up to 20% each time) 
and has placed other financing deals, with the World Bank, 
the IMF and other International Financial Institutions (IFIs) 
in jeopardy.  The government has managed to struggle on thus 
far, but projections for 2010 are increasingly bleak. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
30-YEAR FSLN ANIVERSARY 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶7. (C) On July 19, five days after the COMFORT's departure 
from Nicaragua, the FSLN celebrated the 30-year anniversary 
of the victory over the Somoza dictatorship.  At previous 
celebrations (REF N), Ortega hosted Venezuelan President Hugo 
Chavez and organized large public demonstrations.  To share 
in the festivities, Ortega had reportedly invited recently 
deposed Honduran President Manuel Zelaya and other Bolivarian 
Alliance (ALBA) leaders including Venezuela's Hugo Chavez, 
Ecuador's Rafael Correa, Bolivia's Evo Morales and Cuba's 
Raul Castro.  However, the event was largely overshadowed by 
Zelaya's predicament and, in the end, none of the leaders 
attended although some sent representatives.  This year's 
event was significant in that the party declared Nicaragua 
free of illiteracy and that the FSLN had successfully 
enrolled over 1 million members -- "militantes" -- largely 
through a high-pressure tactic of "strongly encouraging" 
state employees to join or risk becoming unemployed.  (REF C) 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
CONSTANT ATTACKS AGAINST NGOS, MEDIA & OPPOSITION 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶8. (C) Since entering office in 2007, Ortega has consolidated 
power across all levels of government.  Perhaps the only 
remaining independent government institution is the 
professional military.  The FSLN's stated goal is 
constitutional reform that will either allow President Ortega 
to be re-elected or change the government structure into a 
parliamentary system (REF M).  The FSLN already controls the 
four branches of the national government through a "pacto" or 
alliance with the PLC. Ortega announced the creation of 
Citizens Power Councils (CPCs) in 2007 as a form of direct 
democracy independent of political affiliation; however, by 
the end of 2008, CPCs were overwhelmingly FSLN-controlled 
local organizations.  One national poll showed that less than 
5 percent of Nicaraguans participate in CPCs.  The FSLN is 
actively limiting the ability of civil society, NGOs and the 
media to exercise their civic rights.  A new NGO manual 
proposed by the Ministry of Government, not yet in force, 
would restrict Nicaraguans' freedom of association and 
influence on public policy (REF F).  In mid-June the GON 
arbitrarily blocked the signal and confiscated the equipment 
of an opposition radio station (REF B). 
 
¶8. (C) In a February speech, Ortega declared the FSLN in a 
permanent campaign against the political opposition (REF K). 
Opposition leader and National Assembly Deputy Eduardo 
Montealegre refused to appear before a judge on June 22 for 
politically motivated charges regarding the issuance of 
government bonds (CENIS) while he served in the previous 
administration.  The FSLN has now threatened to strip 
Montealegre of his immunity from prosecution in the National 
Assembly (SEPTEL). 
 
- - - - - - - - - - 
ECONOMY LOOKS BLEAK 
- - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶9. (U) With a per capita income of $1,140 and poverty rate of 
46%, Nicaragua is the second-poorest country in the Western 
Hemisphere.  Official unemployment was 4.9% in 2007, but 60% 
of all workers earn a living in the informal sector, where 
underemployment is as high as 90%.  The Central Bank 
forecasts 0.5% economic growth in 2009, but independent 
economists believe the economy may in fact contract by as 
much as 1% this year.  Exports to the United States, which 
account for 59% of Nicaragua,s total exports, increased 45% 
from 2005 to 2008 (in large part due to CAFTA-DR), but they 
are down 14% so far in 2009. 
 
¶10. (U) In the wake of fraudulent municipal elections, the 
government has been unable to secure continued budget support 
provided by European donors, resulting in a significant 
fiscal deficit that led President Ortega to cut spending and 
appeal to assistance from international financial 
institutions and Venezuela.  In 2008, Venezuela provided 
somewhere between $326 million and $436 million in 
assistance, all off-budget through entities controlled by the 
FSLN.  In 2008, Nicaraguans received $818 million in 
remittances from abroad, most of which came from the United 
States. 
 
¶11. (U) President Ortega,s harsh rhetoric against the United 
States, capitalism, and free trade has had a negative effect 
on foreign investor attitudes and perceptions of country 
risk.  Since President Ortega took office, Nicaragua has 
fallen in the World Economic Forum,s Competitive Index 
Ranking from 95th place in 2006 to 120th in 2008. 
Nonetheless, the government reports foreign investment 
inflows of $626 million in 2008, mostly for 
telecommunications infrastructure and electricity generation. 
 However, many companies in the textile/apparel sector, 
including a $100 million U.S.-owned denim mill, have 
shuttered during the past twelve months due to falling demand 
for these goods in the United States. 
 
- - - - 
COMMENT 
- - - - 
 
¶12. (C) Many of the current circumstances Nicaragua faces 
mirror the last time the FSLN was in power in the 1980's: 
economic turmoil; overt efforts to consolidate one-party 
control over both the national and local government; active 
repression of civil society, independent media and the 
opposition; and an active FSLN propaganda machine to claim 
greater public support for the party and its agenda.  Unlike 
the 1980's, however, Nicaragua has made significant economic 
progress since the return of democracy in 1990, and while its 
political institutions are weak and easily manipulated, civil 
society, the Catholic Church, the media, and more serious 
elements of the opposition have in fact pushed back and 
restricted the GON,s ability to pursue its authoritarian 
agenda. 
 
¶13. (C) Ortega and his party need to create the impression 
that they are in control of the bilateral relationship and 
have weathered any "damage" from the November elections 
fiasco.  We fully expect that the GON's propaganda machine 
will work overtime to try to twist your visit to serve FSLN 
purposes. 
 
¶14. (U) General Fraser, it is my pleasure to welcome you to 
Nicaragua.  My Embassy team, especially LTC Regan and the 
MilGroup staff, have worked diligently to ensure the 
successful execution of your visit.  We believe your visit 
will underscore our message of the continuing commitment of 
the U.S. to the Nicaraguan people and counter GON messages of 
hostility. 
CALLAHAN