09MANAGUA1151
NICARAGUA'S TAXMAN COMETH
Mon Dec 21 00:00:00 +0100 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #1151/01 3552252
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O R 212251Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0318
INFO WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 001151 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPT PLEASE PASS MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORPORATION 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 2019/12/21 
TAGS: ECON EFIN EAID PGOV PREL NU
SUBJECT: NICARAGUA'S TAXMAN COMETH 
 
REF: MANAGUA 1141 
 
CLASSIFIED BY: RobertJCallahan, Ambassador, STATE, Embassy Managua; 
REASON: 1.4(B), (D) 
 
Summary 
 
------------ 
 
 
 
¶1.  (C) The Nicaraguan National Assembly passed a sweeping tax 
reform package with the approval of President Ortega on December 3, 
which, according to most observers, will lead to price increases 
and decreased demand during an economic downturn. The GON cited the 
need for increased tax revenues in order to address a projected 
$282 million deficit in 2010. The petroleum and supermarket 
industries appear to be the most at risk as a result of a new tax 
on gross sales, which will negatively affect these 
high-volume/low-margin businesses. Critics have also noted the 
GON's failure to use Venezuela's ALBA (Bolivarian Alliance for the 
Americas) funds to resolve the deficit, along with its reluctance 
to rein in government spending. Several economists here predict 
that the GON's new tax law will only push more Nicaraguan consumers 
into the unregulated informal sector, far from the grip of the tax 
authorities.   At the same time, most businesses acknowledge that 
while any tax hike is unwelcome, it could have been worse.  End 
Summary. 
 
 
 
Higher Taxes and More of Them 
 
------------------------------------------ 
 
 
 
¶2. (U) On December 3, the Nicaraguan National Assembly passed a 
controversial tax reform package designed to address the GON's 
projected fiscal deficit in 2010 of approximately $282 million 
(reftel).   In a speech on November 18, President Ortega stated 
that the GON needed to raise additional revenue to fill the deficit 
because of the effects of "savage capitalism" which had created the 
world economic crisis.   Ortega also blamed the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF) for Nicaragua's current financial predicament, 
referring to the Fund as an "instrument of capitalism."  The 
following measures constitute the major elements of the new law: a 
1% minimum tax on gross sales for businesses, a 10% tax on interest 
income generated by deposit 
accounts, a 10% tax on dividend income, a 1.5% tax on transactions 
in the Nicaraguan commodities exchange market, and a 20% tax on 
income earned in Nicaragua by citizens who reside abroad (rental 
income, for example).   The GON claims that these new taxes will 
raise the equivalent of 0 .7% of GDP, or approximately $45 million. 
 
 
 
¶3. (C) The new law affects employees who earn as little as $3,700 
per year, who will now owe 10% of their wages in taxes.  At the 
other end of the bracket, those who earn over $25,000 per year will 
be taxed at a rate of 30%.  The new law also cracks down on 
tax-exempt abuses prevalent among Nicaraguan NGOs, prohibiting 
tax-free treatment for the following items: 
 
alcoholic beverages, tobacco products, jewelry, perfumes, 
cosmetics, yachts and sport and recreational boats, and airplanes 
for private use.  [Comment: It is common knowledge that many "NGOs" 
in Nicaragua are nothing more than shell companies which exist 
purely for members of the ruling class to import the aforementioned 
products into Nicaragua duty-free. End Comment.]   Jose Adan 
Aguerri, President of the Nicaraguan Federation of Businesses 
(COSEP), represented a wide range of commercial sectors negotiating 
the tax package with the GON.  He told the media that these new 
taxes will negatively impact economic growth, but added that all 
Central American countries are introducing tax reform packages, 
some of which may prove much tougher than the GON's. 
 
 
 
Exxon, WalMart Share Concerns... 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶4. (C) The supermarket and petroleum industries are likely to be 
the hardest hit as a result of the new tax law.  On December 14, 
econoff met with Joaquim De Magalhaes, Country Manager for Exxon in 
Nicaragua, to discuss the effects of the GON's new tax reform law 
on its operations here. Exxon operates the country's only refinery, 
and is the sole supplier of gasoline and diesel to the Nicaraguan 
market. De Magalhaes told econoff that Exxon's primary concern is 
the new 1% tax on gross sales.  While Exxon is analyzing the 
implications of this new tax, the nature of its 
high-volume/small-profit margin business likely means that this new 
tax will result in increased gasoline prices at the pump. 
 
 
 
¶5. (C) Similarly, Eduardo Garcia, Corporate Affairs Manager for 
WalMart/Nicaragua, told econoff on December 10 that the new 1% tax 
on gross sales will strongly affect its grocery business given low 
industry profit margins (1 to 2%).  Garcia claimed that the GON's 
new law means that WalMart will see its tax bill climb by 400%.  He 
recounted to econoff his meetings with various deputies in the 
National Assembly, in which he explained to them how PALI (one of 
the supermarket chains in Nicaragua operated by WalMart) earns 80% 
of its revenue by selling basic food items (rice, beans, for 
instance).  Garcia noted that with the new 1% tax on gross sales, 
WalMart will be compelled to raise prices, and that as a result 
low-income customers will 
purchase basic foodstuffs in unregulated, informal local markets. 
As a result, according to Garcia, the GON will ironically collect 
less tax revenue. 
 
 
 
¶6. (C) Garcia asserted that from a regional perspective, the new 
tax law renders Nicaraguan products less competitive throughout 
Central America.  For example, Garcia said that almost all beef 
sold by WalMart in El Salvador is imported from Nicaragua.  Since 
Nicaraguan beef prices will increase as a result of the new gross 
sales tax, WalMart will turn to more competitive 
suppliers, possibly in Guatemala.  Despite the GON's new tax law, 
Garcia refuted reports in the local media that WalMart plans to 
leave the Nicaraguan market, at least in the short term. He held 
out the possibility, however, that should the new tax burden result 
in consistent losses, ultimately WalMart would be forced to 
discontinue its operations here.  Garcia expressed 
hope that the National Assembly might pass a legislative fix during 
the first quarter of 2010 specifically addressing the grocery 
sector's tax dilemma. 
 
 
 
...While Others Claim It Could Have Been Worse 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------------ 
 
 
 
¶7. (C) Most attendees at the Ambassador's December 4 Economic 
Roundtable acknowledged Aguerri's efforts at heading off a much 
more onerous tax law; originally, the GON sought to raise revenue 
equivalent to 1.5% of GDP, but in the end settled on 0.7%.  Julio 
Cardenas of BANCENTRO, Nicaragua's second-largest bank, observed 
that the tax reform law could have been much worse.  However, he 
said it will still result overall in higher prices throughout the 
economy, leading to a corresponding reduction in demand. Cardenas 
told the Ambassador that banks in Nicaragua will see their tax bill 
rise from 30% - 40%, making them less competitive compared to other 
regional banks.  Cardenas said he believes the GON will review the 
effects of the new tax reform in six months to determine whether or 
not amendments are necessary. Another prominent banker, Gabriel 
Solorzano of BANEX, characterized the tax reform as yet another 
grim development in the context of anemic economic growth in 
Nicaragua, brought on by the recent drought, the lack of 
international credit, and the increasingly authoritarian nature 
of the GON.   Solorzano said that all of these factors are 
contributing to a steady exodus of the country's best and brightest 
out of Nicaragua. 
 
 
 
¶8. (C) During the same event, Erwin Kruger, former head of the 
Nicaraguan Federation of Businesses (COSEP), lamented that 
President Ortega could have easily filled the nation's budget gap 
with Venezuelan ALBA funds. He opined that this would have been a 
far better fiscal solution instead of a new tax law which further 
impedes investment and economic prosperity. Luis Rivas, General 
Manager of BANPRO, Nicaragua's largest bank, said that his bank, 
along with several others, had offered to purchase $60 million in 
GON bonds to fill the budget deficit.  Unfortunately, according to 
Rivas, the IMF did not approve this initiative, arguing that such a 
move was not sustainable and would harm credit availability in 
Nicaragua.   All of the 
participants in the Roundtable agreed that the new tax reform law 
could have been avoided had the FSLN (Sandinista National 
Liberation Front) not engaged in the widespread electoral fraud 
perpetrated in November 2008, which in turn led European donors to 
withdraw crucial budget support funds from the GON.  Others 
commented that the FSLN will suffer political consequences in the 
lead up to the 2011 presidential elections as a result of this 
unpopular new tax. 
 
 
 
¶9.  (C) As described in reftel, the tax reform passed with the 
support of one nominally opposition party (the Nicaraguan Liberal 
Alliance - ALN) and the abstention of another (the Constitutional 
Liberal Party - PLC).  COSEP head Aguerri argued to the DCM on 
December 15 that even those parties that opposed the reform (Vamos 
Con Eduardo - VCE and the Sandinista Renewal Movement - MRS) 
understood perfectly well that this was the best deal that could be 
gotten and their denunciations were pure political posturing.  He 
was particularly angry at Eduardo Montealegre's attack on Carlos 
Pellas, Nicaragua's most powerful businessman, for negotiating the 
reform with Ortega.   Aguerri said that it was absurd for 
Montealegre to attack the same people from whom he is seeking 
funding.  Comment:  Aguerri was clearly unhappy that the business 
community, of which he is the public face, now has to take partial 
ownership for what will inevitably be an unpopular measure. 
 
 
 
Comment Continued 
 
--------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶10.  (C) A widely-held misconception here is that the IMF, under 
its Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF), initiated this 
tax reform in order to increase GON revenues to address the looming 
budget deficit.  In fact, the GON itself proposed these new tax 
measures to the IMF last summer on its own accord, instead of 
utilizing Venezuelan ALBA funds or cutting government spending 
sufficiently to fill the deficit.  While most of these taxes 
primarily affect the wealthiest echelons of Nicaraguan society, it 
is likely that these measures will result in higher prices 
across-the-board, so all segments of the socioeconomic ladder may 
feel a hit, which could result in political costs for the FSLN. 
Collecting these new taxes will prove to be 
challenging for the GON's tax authority, which lacks sufficient 
resources and technology even to collect current taxes on the 
books. 
CALLAHAN