07CAIRO2769
ARAB LEAGUE BRIEFING FOLLOWING SEPTEMBER 5
Wed Sep 12 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
VZCZCXRO5467
PP RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHKUK RUEHROV
DE RUEHEG #2769 2551413
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 121413Z SEP 07
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6859
INFO RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVEUNCLAS CAIRO 002769 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPAL PREF EG SO IS IZ SU XP
SUBJECT: ARAB LEAGUE BRIEFING FOLLOWING SEPTEMBER 5 
MINISTERIAL 
 
REF: CAIRO 2730 
 
¶1. Summary.  In a briefing for foreign diplomats on the Arab 
League's (AL) annual September 5 ministerial, AL Chief of 
Staff Hisham Youssef said that the ministers confirmed their 
support for President Bush's proposed international meeting 
for Middle East peace and noted their strong desire to reach 
a "milestone" before the end of the current U.S. 
administration.  The AL wants to see a "comprehensive 
approach" that does not exclude any "parties, tracks, or 
issues," supports the Abbas government, and stands ready to 
assist in turning over "institutions and premises" under 
Hamas control back to the Palestinian Authority, he said. End 
summary. 
 
Peace Process 
------------- 
 
¶2. AL Chief of Staff Hisham Youssef, in a briefing for 
foreign diplomats on September 11, reiterated that AL foreign 
ministers confirmed their support for President Bush's 
proposed meeting for Middle East peace in their September 5 
annual ministerial (reftel).  Ministers stressed a 
comprehensive approach that does not exclude any "parties, 
tracks, or issues," calling for Syrian participation and 
discussion of the status of Jerusalem and refugees. Youssef 
also called for an Israeli moratorium on settlements and 
separation barrier construction as a show of good faith.  The 
Arab Peace Initiative committee is preparing the Arab 
position regarding the details of what should occur during 
President Bush's proposed international meeting and will meet 
with the Quartet on September 23 in New York.  AL ministers 
also called upon Egypt and Saudi Arabia to continue playing 
an active role in the peace process.  Youssef stressed that 
"we must reach a milestone" before the current U.S. 
administration ends its term. 
 
¶3. On the internal Palestinian issue, Youssef noted the 
legitimacy of the Abbas government and stated that the AL 
supports a return to the pre-June Hamas take-over of Gaza 
"status quo," standing ready to assist in turning over 
institutions under Hamas control back to the Palestinian 
Authority.  However, this does not mean a return to the 
Haniya National Unity Government. 
 
Iraq 
---- 
 
¶4. The AL established a new fund to assist member countries 
to deal with increasing numbers of displaced Iraqis living 
within their borders, said Youssef.  He noted that Syria 
reports a 10 percent increase in its overall population due 
to Iraqis fleeing since the start of the Iraq conflict, and 
that Iraq itself will donate USD 25 million to the fund. 
 
Lebanon 
------- 
 
¶5. The AL called for the Lebanese presidential election to be 
conducted in accordance with the Lebanese constitution, and 
for the formation of a National Unity Government. 
 
Sudan and Somalia 
----------------- 
 
¶6. The AL praised United Nations Security Council Resolution 
(UNSCR) 1769 and the meeting in Arusha, Tanzania, between 
Darfur rebel groups, as positive developments in Sudan, and 
continues to call on all factions to sign the Darfur Peace 
Agreement.  Similarly, the AL ministers called on all 
factions to join the reconciliation process in Somalia. 
Youssef noted that the AL continues to work closely with the 
UN and AU on both these issues. 
 
Expanding Relations Outside the Arab World 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶7. To continue to develop its relationships with non-Arabs, 
the AL will convene several summits with African nations and 
the EU, said Youssef.  With China, the AL expects to hold a 
conference on energy as well as a "dialogue of 
civilizations."  The AL is currently in the process of 
developing a framework for a dialogue with Turkey.  The AL 
noted the importance of the U.S.-AL relationship, and looks 
forward to the third Arab-U.S. forum in May 2008 in New York. 
RICCIARDONE