07KUWAIT1439
COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR STAFFDEL CONATON (SEPTEMBER
Tue Sep 25 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kuwait
VZCZCXYZ0020
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHKU #1439/01 2680856
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 250856Z SEP 07
FM AMEMBASSY KUWAIT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0012
INFO RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD 1015
RUEHRL/AMEMBASSY BERLIN 0289
RUEHFT/AMCONSUL FRANKFURT 2508
RUENAAA/OLA WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS KUWAIT 001439 
 
SIPDIS 
 
CODEL 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OREP AMGT ASEC AFIN KU IZ COUNTRY CLEARANCE
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR STAFFDEL CONATON (SEPTEMBER 
27 - OCTOBER 1, 2007) 
 
REF: STATE 134582 
 
¶1. Embassy Kuwait welcomes and grants country clearance for Staffdel 
Conaton to travel to post on September 27 - October 1, 2007.  Please 
pass security clearances of all travelers iaw para. 6.g. in order to 
allow the Staffdel to receive classified briefings. 
 
¶2. This clearance is not/not valid for entry into Iraq; you must 
apply for Iraq clearance through Embassy Baghdad. 
 
¶3. Visit Officer: An Embassy visit officer and a driver/expeditor 
will meet and assist you at the airport. 
 
Embassy points of contact are: 
 
Jennifer George, ISU Liaison 
Office-(965)259-1203 
Cell-(965)788-0364 
Fax-(965) 259-1190 
Unclass e-mail: GeorgeJR@state.gov 
 
SIPDIS 
 
Agnel Berry, ISU Coordinator 
Office- (965) 259-1416 
Cell- (965)973-9854 
Fax- (965) 259-1190 
Unclass e-mail: BerryAH2@state.gov 
 
SIPDIS 
 
¶4. Lodging: Rooms have been reserved at the Radisson SAS Hotel for 
September 27, 29 and 30, 2007.  The hotel telephone number is (965) 
575-000 and the fax number is (965)565-2999. The single room rate at 
the hotel is approximately USD 271.00 per night, which includes 
breakfast. The hotel accepts major credit cards and is within the 
per diem rate.  The daily per diem rate for Kuwait is USD 291.00 for 
lodging, plus a meal and incidental expense (M&IE) allowance of USD 
105.00 for a total of USD 396.00. 
 
¶5.  Holy Month of Ramadan:  Your visit takes place during the Holy 
Month of Ramadan, which will be observed from approximately 
September 12/13 to October 12/13, 2007.  It is against the law in 
Kuwait for anyone to eat, drink or smoke in public, including inside 
vehicles, between the hours of sunrise and sunset.  Business slows 
down for this month and government offices, as well as many private 
businesses, work shorter hours.  Muslims will work a full day 
without even a sip of water.  This results in people becoming tired, 
tense, and easily irritated during the normal workday, especially 
during the later weeks of Ramadan.  One must be extra alert when 
driving, particularly during the late afternoon, when many will be 
rushing home to break the fast. 
 
¶6. Following is post's standard guidance for visitors to Kuwait: 
 
a. Entry Requirements: Kuwait now issues single-entry visas to 
American citizens on arrival, upon presentation of a valid passport. 
 There is a processing fee of three (3) Kuwaiti Dinar (KD 3.000, or 
USD 12.00) for each visa issued. The fee may be paid either in KD or 
USD. Post strongly advises travelers to carry some documentation on 
the purpose of their visit.  Passengers arriving on other than 
commercial flights should anticipate extra delays, because 
immigration services are not available on the military side of the 
airfield and passports have to be carried to a different location at 
the airport for processing.  Airport visas are valid for 90 days 
after arrival; anyone staying beyond this period must obtain an 
extension, which should be requested 2 weeks prior to visa 
expiration.  Anyone departing Kuwait who has overstayed the visa 
will be charged a fine of KD 10.000 (US 35.00) per day at the 
airport.  All travelers planning to visit Iraq should make sure that 
they obtain the required exit/entry stamps for each transit through 
Kuwait, and be aware that they will need to obtain a new Kuwaiti 
visa upon return, even after a daytrip to Baghdad.  Failure to do so 
can result in heavy fines.  If possible, travelers should try to 
obtain a multiple-entry visa before arriving in Kuwait. 
 
b. Visitors are reminded that the importation of alcohol, pork 
products, personal firearms, and any suggestive/pornographic 
materials (videotapes, magazines or books) is strictly prohibited by 
Kuwaiti law.  Kuwait is still clearing mines and munitions. Visitors 
must remain on major paved roads when traveling in Kuwait. Travel 
north of Jahra toward the Iraqi-Kuwaiti border is not authorized 
without approval from the embassy and an appropriate escort. 
 
c. Embassy Kuwait's normal workweek is Sunday through Thursday, and 
office hours are from 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. The time difference 
with the East Coast of the United States is EDT plus seven hours. 
The embassy switchboard number is (965) 259-1001, and the IVG number 
is 4950000. The after-hours number which rings at Marine Guard Post 
One is (965) 538-2098.  The mission duty officer can be reached 
through the embassy switchboard, Post One or by cell phone at (965) 
967-7265. The embassy pouch address is 6200 Kuwait Place, Dulles, VA 
 
20189-6200. 
 
d. Threat Assessment: Kuwait is a high-threat post and the military 
threatcon is currently Charlie.  We have increased security 
precautions at official U.S. installations in Kuwait and recommend 
that all Americans in Kuwait remain alert to their surroundings and 
review their personal security practices. 
 
e. Health Advisory for Kuwait: April through October is the hot 
season in Kuwait. Temperatures reach 120-140 degrees F in summer. 
Caution should be taken to prevent dehydration and heat exhaustion 
by 1) drinking plenty of fluids and 
2) staying indoors, especially during peak temperature hours of noon 
to 3:00 p.m. (1200-1500). Low humidity coupled with high 
temperatures creates excessive moisture loss from evaporation.  It 
is necessary to drink 2-4 quarts of water daily to prevent 
dehydration. 
 
f. Money:  Credit cards are widely accepted at hotels, restaurants 
and other establishments throughout Kuwait and ATM machines are also 
readily available. For travelers on official orders, the Commercial 
Bank of Kuwait can provide accommodation services (cashing a 
personal check drawn on a U.S. bank into local currency) up to a 
maximum of USD 300.00 per day from noon to 2:00 p.m., Saturday 
through Wednesday. At the current rate of exchange, one Kuwaiti 
Dinar (KD) is equivalent to approximately USD 3.55. 
 
g. CAA Access: Visitors who need unescorted access into secure areas 
of the mission must slug cables to the attention of the RSO, and 
include the level of their clearance.  The cable should include the 
visitor's Social Security Number, and the name of the agency 
granting the clearance.  Cables should include the ASEC tag to 
ensure distribution to the RSO office and the Marine Security guard 
at Post One. 
 
h. Computer and Electronics Usage: Sensitive military information 
has been discovered recently on business center computers at local 
hotels in Kuwait City.  All U.S. Government personnel and 
contractors must remember that it is their responsibility to observe 
good computer and information security practices.  Information 
processed on computers in hotel business centers, through email 
correspondence or document creation, is highly exploitable.  Public 
computers located in hotel business centers, internet cafes, airport 
lounges, etc. should never be used to process, store or disseminate 
sensitive information.  Compromise of sensitive government or 
military information can result in serious damage to national 
security.  Compromises of sensitive personal data can result in 
significant personal and financial hardship.  Random checks are 
conducted by Embassy personnel on public PC's.  Breaches on COMPUSEC 
will result in the violator receiving security infractions and/or 
security violations.  Interagency security standards prohibit the 
introduction or use of non-USG owned computer hardware and software 
at all USG diplomatic facilities. Cell phones, palm pilots, radios 
and other convenience electronics are prohibited in all secure areas 
of the mission. 
 
i. Photography:  Tourist photography is encouraged in Kuwait. 
However, it is strictly forbidden to photograph public buildings, 
economic infrastructure, or military and other security-related 
facilities and personnel.  Confiscation of film and camera and even 
arrest may result from doing so.  A good rule of thumb:  If there is 
any doubt as to whether a photograph should be taken, don't take it. 
 
 
j. Action Request:  Each visitor, regardless of length of stay, must 
bring or forward fiscal data to pay for direct costs of the visit. 
Each agency, organization or visiting delegation will be charged for 
the actual costs attributed to their visit.  Direct charge costs 
include, but are not limited to:  American and LES staff overtime 
(e.g., expeditor, accommodation exchange, representational event 
support), field travel, lodging and meals and incidental expenses 
(M&IE) by embassy employees, vehicle rentals, long-distance 
telephone calls, equipment rentals, office supplies and all other 
costs that are directly attributable to the visit.  If fiscal data 
on a traveler's authorization is to be used for this purpose, this 
information must be spelled out in the travel orders and sufficient 
funding provided to meet these expenses.  In addition, for TDYers 
over thirty (30) days, there will be a charge for ICASS support 
services.  If your sponsoring agency is not signed up for ICASS 
services at post, please be prepared to sign an ICASS Memorandum of 
Understanding (MOU) for ICASS support services upon arrival.  The 
agency should provide post with written communication, generated by 
the traveler's headquarters, that confirms the agency will pay ICASS 
charges for the TDYer, provide the agency ICASS billing code for the 
TDY support to be provided, and authorize the traveler to sign the 
ICASS invoice generated by the TDY module.  When travel is urgent, 
TDYers should bring this document with them to ensure there are no 
interruptions in the provision of services.  Post will not provide 
 
any services to a TDYer staying in excess of 30 days without having 
received this documentation prior to day 31 of the TDY. 
 
¶7. This is revision one to the Embassy's standard country clearance 
cable. 
 
********************************************* ********** 
Visit Kuwait's Classified and Unclassified Websites at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/kuwait/ and http://kuwait.state.gov/ 
 
********************************************* ********** 
 
Misenheimer