07JOHANNESBURG312
SOUTH AFRICA: OCTOBER 2007 LABOR NOTES
Thu Nov 08 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Johannesburg
VZCZCXRO1698
RR RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHJO #0312/01 3121544
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 081544Z NOV 07
FM AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6029
INFO RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHINGTON DC
RUCNSAD/SADC COLLECTIVE
RUEHJO/AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG 2780UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 JOHANNESBURG 000312 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB EMIN ECON SF
SUBJECT: SOUTH AFRICA: OCTOBER 2007 LABOR NOTES 
 
 
JOHANNESBU 00000312  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:    Trade Union Federation COSATU has called ongoing 
food price inflation a "crisis" that threatens workers and 
called for a change in economic and monetary policy.   A 
Constitutional Court decision to reinstate a fired security 
guard who was dismissed for failure to carry out his duties is 
likely to convince employers to continue outsourcing and use of 
labor brokers, with a depressing impact on formal employment. 
Trade union federation CONSAWU has sued to join the National 
Economic Development and Labor Council (NEDLAC).  Continuing 
fatalities in South Africa's mining sector have prompted 
Minister of Minerals and Energy Bulyewa Sonjica to close 10 
mines for unsafe working conditions.  The National Union of 
Mineworkers has applied for permission to conduct a strike over 
this issue; no date has yet been set.   The labor minister has 
put several sectoral training authorities into 
administration/receivership.   End Summary. 
 
COSATU Worries about Food Price Inflation 
--------------------------------------------- -------------------- 
 
¶2.  Describing food price inflation as a "crisis", COSATU called 
for changes in economic policy and no more interest rate 
increases by the Reserve Bank.  In an October 29 statement, 
COSATU noted that food price inflation reached 16 percent in 
September, up from an August level of 15.4 percent. 
Agricultural price increases climbed to 24.4 percent.   COSATU 
said the wage increases demanded by its members were "extremely 
modest" and that even workers who had won such increases were 
now once again experiencing a drop in their living standards. 
COSATU said the situation for the poor and unemployed was 
getting "desperate."    The federation also urged the government 
to confirm whether or not profiteering was taking place and 
called on the Reserve Bank not to raise interest rates. 
 
Constitutional Court Reinstates Dismissed Worker 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
---------------- 
 
¶3.  South Africa's highest court reinstated a security guard 
dismissed from a Rustenberg platinum Mine in an October 5 
verdict.   The security guard, who had been fired for his 
failure to adhere to established search procedures at the 
platinum mine, appealed his dismissal to the Commission on 
Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration, which found that no 
dishonesty was involved and reinstated him with three months 
compensation.   The case then went to court, with the employer's 
right to fire upheld in a verdict issued by the Supreme Court of 
Appeal, which was overturned by the Constitutional Court which 
decided that the CCMA commissioner did not have to defer to the 
employer but had to judge whether the employer reached a fair 
decision. 
 
¶4.  Comment:  The World Bank and business interests have argued 
that labor inflexibility hampers South Africa's competitiveness. 
  Dismissals are an area most employers find enormously 
burdensome, as warnings and formal disciplinary hearings abound. 
  The Constitutional Court decision will make employers even 
more leery about firing, and therefore even more unwilling to 
hire, in a country with a 25.5 percent official unemployment 
rate.  Trade unionists, in private conversations, have described 
the procedural safeguards as needed to deter abuse of workers 
and racism.  One employment consultant put the cost to the South 
African economy of dismissal procedures at R14 billion.  The 
Constitutional Court decision will protect workers but will not 
help South Africa's unemployed.  End Comment. 
 
Trade Union Federation Sues to Join NEDLAC 
--------------------------------------------- -------------------- 
 
¶5. One of South Africa' smaller trade union federations finally 
sued the National Economic Development and Labor Council for 
stalling on recognition and inclusion in its Labor Chamber. 
The Confederation of South African Workers Unions (CONSAWU) 
claims 21 affiliates and is dominated by trade union Solidarity, 
which represents primarily skilled white workers.  Solidarity 
has made headlines by questioning the need for affirmative 
action, and ascribing South Africa's skills shortages to this 
and other government policies.   The government is required to 
submit labor legislation and other legislation impacting 
economic development to NEDLAC, where organized labor, business, 
and civil society can comment on it in a quadripartite forum. 
NEDLAC, which includes federations COSATU, FEDUSA and NACTU 
among its members, has so far not admitted COSAWA.   At issue is 
whether NEDLAC can apply a membership benchmark even though the 
legislation that created NEDLAC does not include this standard. 
 
Viva Bokke Viva 
----------------------- 
¶6.   South Africa's sporting madness was evident when its 
largest trade union federation COSATU issued two press releases 
on its Rugby team, the Springboks.   COSATU not only wished the 
team well on its way to the final showdown with England on 
 
JOHANNESBU 00000312  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
October 20 in Paris, but also issued another press release 
warmly congratulating the team for bringing home the Rugby world 
cup after their win.   A variety of opinion-makers have called 
for racial integration of SA rugby teams; the Springboks have 
two colored members but no black team members.  COSATU's 
membership is predominantly black so their explicit support for 
the Rugby team was a triumph of sporting over racial solidarity. 
 
 
Labor Minister Places SETAs under Administration 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
--------------- 
 
¶7.    South African businesses contribute one percent of payroll 
towards skills training, into one of 24 Sectoral Education and 
Training Authorities (SETAs), which provide training to workers 
and entrants in a particular sector, as part of a broad strategy 
to address South Africa's skills shortage.   The SETAs fall 
under the authority of the Labor Minister, though they are 
administered by a mixture of industry, labor and policy leaders. 
   Labor Minister Membathsi Mdladlana placed the Media 
Advertising Publishing Printing and Packaging SETA under 
administration this month, also suspending its board, for 
financial and other irregularities.   The Transport SETA has 
also been in serious financial difficulties, as its Chairman is 
facing legal charges in connection with alleged kickbacks 
received for investing SETA funds in Fidentia Asset Management's 
funds.   In addition to the transport SETA, the SETAs in the 
energy and local government sectors are also close to 
suspension.   Minister Mdladlana has said the capacity of social 
partners was an issue in implementing the National Skills 
Development Strategy. 
 
Minister closes 10 Mines for Unsafe Working Conditions, NUM 
Threatens Strike 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
¶8.  Minister of Minerals and Energy Bulyewa Sonjica closed ten 
mines in mid-October due to concerns about unsafe working 
conditions.  Gold, platinum and coal mines were affected.  In 
addition to the widely-publicized September 28 accident at 
Harmony Gold's Elandsrand Mine, which trapped 3200 miners about 
2km depth, several miners have died recently due to rock-bursts 
at a variety of mines, including DRD Gold's Blyvooruitzicht mine 
and AngloPlatininum's Rustenburg operations.  The National Union 
of Mineworkers has applied for permission to strike over safety 
issues, but has not yet set a date.    On October 31, two miners 
were killed at Goldfield's Kloof Mine and two were killed at 
Marula Platinum on October 23 in incidents involving explosives. 
 Three more miners died in unrelated accidents in early 
November, including two at Anglo-Gold Ashanti's deep Tautona 
mine and one in Exxaro's coal mines.   The second miner was a 
member of trade union Solidarity, which has so far not joined in 
the safety debate. 
COFFMAN