08JOHANNESBURG195
SOUTH AFRICA: ELECTION EXCITEMENT AMONG VOTERS AND
Fri Dec 05 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Johannesburg
P 051206Z DEC 08
FM AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6344
INFO AMCONSUL CAPE TOWN PRIORITY 
AMCONSUL DURBAN PRIORITY 
AMEMBASSY PRETORIA PRIORITY 
AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURGUNCLAS JOHANNESBURG 000195 
 
 
DEPT FOR CA/ACS/AF FOR ELIZABETH GRACON, CHIEF VOTING ACTION OFFICER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CASC CMGT
SUBJECT: SOUTH AFRICA: ELECTION EXCITEMENT AMONG VOTERS AND 
NON-VOTERS 
 
REF: 7 FAM 1551 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY.  Post observed a high, perhaps even unprecedented, 
level of participation among the American electorate living in 
South Africa during the 2007/2008 election cycle.  Election 
interest extended beyond the American electorate to 
international media, foreign expatriates, and the general South 
African population. Post estimates direct assistance to at least 
1,000 Amcit voters, and we disseminated messages promoting 
election participation to hundreds more through radio 
announcements, warden messages, and announcements on the 
Mission's website.  The Democrats Abroad organization was active 
in South Africa, hosting voter registration drives and featuring 
prominently in South Africa's media.  END SUMMARY. 
 
Post Assists About 1,000 Potential Amcit Voters 
 
¶2.  Post assisted approximately 1,000 Amcits during the 2008 
election cycle. Post helped voters access and return about 200 
Federal Post Card Applications (FPCAs) and about 200 Federal 
Write-in Absentee Ballots.  Assistance to other Amcit voters ran 
the gamut from providing advice on state-by-state regulations to 
explaining options for the return of voted ballots.  During 
Absentee Voting Week, Post set-up a drop box for voted ballots 
at the public entrance of the Consulate and routinely referred 
voters to the special FedEx rate for couriering completed 
ballots to the U.S. if voters were trying to return their 
ballots within two weeks of November 4, 2008. 
 
¶3.  Amcit voters contacted the Consulate for assistance via 
email and phone and by walking into our waiting room during 
regular ACS business hours.  According to Post's two ACS LES, 
this was the busiest election season they had ever observed. 
Both LES have served in the ACS section for more than 12 years 
(at least three presidential election cycles). 
 
 
Outreach: From Voting Drives to Radio Shows 
 
¶4.  To promote voter awareness and participation, post undertook 
a range of outreach activities.  Three of the major highlights 
were: 
-       On Consular Leadership Day in January 2008, the VAO 
provided voting information to the Mission's five USG agencies 
to ensure USG employees had registered overseas and were 
equipped to participate. 
-       On February 22, 2008, the VAO held a voter registration 
drive at the American Society's annual reception.  Approximately 
75 Amcits attended the reception; at least 25 people completed 
FPCAs and more than 40 Amcits obtained voting information. 
-       On July 5, 2008, the VAO set-up a voter registration tent 
at the American community's annual July 4th celebration, which 
more than 200 people attended.  Approximately 50 Amcits 
completed FPCAs during the event and 100 other prospective 
voters took Post's notices on how to register absentee, 
state-by-state deadlines, South Africa's toll-free helpline, etc. 
 
¶5.  To provide the latest voting information to Amcit voters 
registered with the Consulate, post sent warden messages 
regarding key dates and about events such as Absentee Voting 
Week.  Post posted regular announcements on the Mission's 
website, poster displays in the Consulate waiting area, and 
notices published in the American Society's newsletters and 
through a well-known website for expatriates living in South 
Africa (www.xpat.co.za). 
 
¶6.  To reach potential voters not necessarily registered with 
the U.S. Mission, post leveraged Johannesburg's most popular 
talk radio show (FM 702).  Collaborating with our Public Affairs 
Office, consular staff recorded a one minute public announcement 
about Absentee Voting Week and participated in a thirty-minute 
radio interview to inform voters about how to access FWABs, 
where to find state-by-state voting guidance (www.fvap.gov), and 
options for mailing voted ballQs to the U.S.   During Absentee 
Voting Week, the Consul General also participated in an 
interview on one of South Africa's top music stations (Five FM) 
discussing the election and encouraging all Amcits living in 
South Africa to make their voices heard. 
 
FVAP Voting Workshop Via DVC 
 
¶7.  In December 2007, Post hosted a FVAP workshop via DVC with 
the Consulates General in Cape Town and Durban.  Post's ACS 
staff gained valuable information regarding correct registration 
procedures and the wealth of information available through the 
FVAP website.  All those who attended agreed that the DVC proved 
extremely beneficial throughout election season.  Notices from 
Consular Affairs and the Voting Info Newsletters were also very 
helpful to post. 
 
 
Democrats Abroad: An Active Player in South Africa 
 
¶8.  The organization Democrats Abroad played an active role in 
South Africa, especially in the Johannesburg area.  Democrats 
Abroad promoted voter registration, hosting three voter 
registration drives (two in Johannesburg and one in Pretoria) 
and private house parties also known as "rallies."    According 
to the head of Democrats Abroad, Courtney Priester, the 
organization helped approximately 750 potential Amcits register 
to vote absentee.  Of these 750 voters, Priester estimated that 
250 had never voted before, did not know where they were 
registered to vote, or were unsure if they had ever registered 
to vote previously.  Democrats Abroad also estimated that it 
assisted approximately 125 voters with the return of their voted 
ballots to the U.S. 
 
¶9.  Democrats Abroad received significant press.  "There was a 
great deal of interest from South Africa's media in this 
election," Priester said.  He estimated that he participated in 
at least 10 different television interviews prior to the 
election on channels such as SABC International, ENews, and News 
¶24.   While his evidence is anecdotal, Priester remarked that 
interest from the South African media and public could not be 
compared to 2004.  "There was huge interest in the election not 
only among Americans living in South Africa but among South 
Africans generally.  Like trends across America, I think more 
Amcits living in South Africa voted in this election than in 
past elections," he told the VAO on December 3, 2008.  To Post's 
knowledge, there is not an active organization with Republican 
representation in South Africa. 
 
Lessons Learned 
 
¶10.  Numerous voters were under the impression that they needed 
to come to the Consulate in person to complete voter 
registration forms and the voted ballot.  Post needs to 
emphasize in all of its online announcements and warden messages 
that Amcits can access FPCAs and FWABs through www.fvap.gov 
  and do not need to make a special trip into 
the Consulate to obtain these resources. 
 
 
¶11.  Approximately 20-30 Amcits complained to the Consulate that 
they had attempted to register absentee (they had sent in their 
FPCAs) but never received voting materials or confirmation of 
registration.  During the next election cycle, the Consulate 
should tailor messages in its newsletter and online 
announcements to address such issues.  Post needs to emphasize 
that voters should not wait more than 1-2 months for 
confirmation of absentee registration and urge voters to contact 
their local board of elections or a voting assistant with FVAP 
(through the toll free number) to seek specific advice regarding 
their registration. 
 
 
Press Coverage 
 
¶12.  As mentioned above, Post's voter outreach received coverage 
on Johannesburg's "Talk Radio 702" and "Five FM" radio station. 
An article in the Mail & Guardian newspaper and a radio 
interview with Agence France-Presse also covered Post's voting 
promotion efforts. 
 
¶13.  COMMENT:  Post witnessed significant election excitement 
not only among potential Amcit voters but also among non-voters, 
including members of the media and South African residents in 
Johannesburg.  Post received numerous inquiries from first-time 
voters and voters who had not voted in recent elections.  While 
much of the evidence is anecdotal, it appears that the American 
electorate in South Africa was similar to the American 
electorate in America; voters were engaged and enthusiastic and 
turning out in higher numbers than in 2004 and 2000.  END 
COMMENT. 
 
 
PASSEN