07AITTAIPEI1466
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Wed Jun 27 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0017
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1466/01 1780840
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 270840Z JUN 07
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5818
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 6974
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 8228UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001466 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - DAVID FIRESTEIN 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused news 
coverage June 27 on a Taiwan High Court ruling Tuesday, in which 
President Chen Shui-bian's son-in-law was sentenced to seven years 
in prison for insider trading; on a controversial National 
Communications Commission decision to approve the share transfer 
plans of the Broadcasting Corporation of China; and on the 2008 
presidential election.  In terms of editorials and commentaries, an 
op-ed in the pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times," 
written by Randall Schriver, founding partner of Armitage 
International LC, offered suggestions regarding what Washington 
should do in the face of Taiwan's push for a referendum on the 
island's UN bid under the name "Taiwan."  An editorial in the 
pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" criticized 
Washington for its opposition to Taiwan's referendum on the island's 
UN bid.  The article said Washington is "treating the world to the 
regretful and ironic scene of a mature democracy helping an 
authoritarian regime strangle a young democracy."  End summary. 
 
A) "Pro-Taiwan (but Not Anti-China)" 
 
Randall Schriver, a founding partner of Armitage International LC, 
opined in the pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" 
[circulation: 30,000] (6/27): 
 
"... Why does a referendum pose difficult questions for the US 
government?  Why are US government officials unwilling to simply 
endorse any referendum on any subject of Taiwan's choosing?  The 
core challenge faced by US government officials when such matters 
are considered comes from the tension that emanates from asking two 
questions:  How can the US be pro-Taiwan, but not anti-China?  And 
how can the US be pro-democracy, but not pro-independence? ... 
 
"Thus far, the proposal on the table in Taiwan rests firmly in 
category three.  Holding a referendum on whether or not to seek 
membership in the UN under the name 'Taiwan' will be problematic for 
Washington.  It is a topic that seems highly symbolic (no matter the 
results of the vote, there is no chance Taiwan will be admitted to 
the UN under any name as long as China holds a veto) and certainly 
touches on Taiwan's status (by virtue of specifying the application 
should be made under the name 'Taiwan'). ...  So what should the US 
do in response to the desire of many in Taiwan to hold a referendum 
next year?  Rather than oppose Taiwan's efforts outright, officials 
in Washington should encourage Taiwan to take steps that will truly 
strengthen its democracy and improve the quality of governance. 
 
"More specifically, the US can actively encourage Taiwan to employ 
the tool of a national referendum to address issues that will be 
consequential in improving the lives of the people in Taiwan, rather 
than a more symbolic issue such as UN membership.  The US should 
also remind Beijing that Washington supports democracy in Taiwan, 
including support for democratic methods such as conducting 
referendums.  Even if Taiwan ultimately does pursue a referendum on 
seeking UN membership under the name 'Taiwan,' Washington should 
urge Beijing to show restraint (an expression of public sentiment is 
hardly casus belli), and remind China that its overall posture 
toward Taiwan, which is characterized by missile deployments and 
pressure on Taipei's government, is doing more to drive Taiwanese 
away rather than attract them to better relations with China. 
 
"Finally, Washington should encourage leaders in Taiwan to consider 
its broader interests in bettering relations with the US versus 
whatever short term gain might come from holding a symbolic 
referendum.  We can position ourselves for much more robust 
bilateral ties across the full spectrum of activities including 
trade, security, regional democracy promotion, global issues and the 
like -- but not if we are consumed with squabbling over the true 
intent behind a particular referendum." 
 
B) "Blaming the Victim" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" [circulation: 
20,000] editorialized (6/27): 
 
"The open and misguided opposition by United States President George 
Â¶W. Bush to the referendum petition campaign on the question of 
whether Taiwan should apply under the name of 'Taiwan' to enter the 
United Nations initiated by the governing Democratic Progressive 
Party has exposed the existence of an arrogant mentality of 'blaming 
the victim' in Washington.  Besides turning a blind eye to the 
transparent campaign by the People's Republic of China to eliminate 
Taiwan's international space, the U.S. government has placed blame 
primarily on the DPP administration of President Chen Shui-bian for 
'making trouble' and has ignored the structural reasons for the 
development of Taiwan's democracy and the rise to mainstream 
dominance of a Taiwan-centric identity, as displayed by the 70 
percent support for the U.N. bid in opinion polls. 
 
"As noted yesterday, the U.S. thus is now treating the world to the 
regretful and ironic scene of a mature democracy helping an 
 
authoritarian regime strangle a young democracy. ...  The only way 
to ensure Taiwan's autonomy, democracy and prosperity will be to 
continue efforts to secure recognition by the international 
community, including the U.S. and the PRC itself, for the fact of 
Taiwan's independence.  The drive to apply to the United Nations as 
'Taiwan' is one important way to do so." 
 
YOUNG