07HONGKONG1665
EXTRANCHECK: POST SHIPMENT VERIFICATION:
Thu Jun 21 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Hong Kong
VZCZCXYZ0013
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHHK #1665 1720726
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 210726Z JUN 07
FM AMCONSUL HONG KONG
TO RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
INFO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2038
RHMFIUU/HQ BICE WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS HONG KONG 001665 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USDOC FOR 532/OEA/LHINES/DFARROW 
USDOC FOR 3132 FOR FCS/OIO REGIONAL DIRECTOR 
WILLIAM ZARIT 
BICE FOR OFFICE OF STRATEGIC INVESTIGATIONS 
 
BEIJING FOR FCS JEANETTE CHU 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BMGT BEXP HK ETRD ETTC
SUBJECT: EXTRANCHECK: POST SHIPMENT VERIFICATION: 
SHINGING LAND TECHNOLOGY 
 
REF: A) USDOC 03922 
 
1.Unauthorized disclosure of the information 
provided below is prohibited by Section 12C of the 
Export Administration Act. 
 
¶2. As per reftel A request and at the direction of 
the Office of Enforcement Analysis (OEA) of the 
USDOC Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS), 
Export Control Officer Philip Ankel (ECO) 
attempted to conduct a post-shipment verification 
of a shipment bound for Shining Land Technology 
(Hong Kong) Co. Ltd, MSH 3179, Room 1007, 10F, Ho 
King Ctr., No 2-16 Fa Yuen Street, Mongkok, Hong 
Kong (Shining Land). The item in question is one 
gas chromatograph valued at USD 16,311.  On the 
applicable shippers export declaration (SED), the 
item is classified as 3A999.  Items properly 
classified as 3A999 may be exported/reexported to 
virtually all destinations and end-users 
worldwide, license free, except for certain 
designated state sponsors of terrorism (including 
North Korea).  The exporter was Agilent 
Technologies Inc. of New Castle, Delaware. 
 
¶3.  According to the Hong Kong Companies Registry, 
Shining Land has been in existence since June 
¶2006.  It has the equivalent of USD 100 authorized 
capital but no paid-up capital.  Mainland Chinese 
nationals Chuanjian Lu and Xiaochun Qian are 
listed as directors.  No further information about 
the company (including its phone number) could be 
located in the Hong Kong Trade Development Council 
web site, the Yellow Pages or other typical 
places.  The contact number for Shining Land 
referenced in reftel A is a Shanghai number.  An 
Internet check of the phone number reveals that 
this number is apparently also the phone number of 
Shanghai company, Shanghai Hushi Chemical Reagent 
& Analysis Instrument Company Limited 
(www.shhushi.com) and its subsidiary companies 
Shanghai Experimental Equipment Company Limited 
and Tianchang Qianqiu Glass Instrument Company 
Limited.  The address of these companies listed on 
the web site is the same as the address listed for 
the mainland Chinese directors of Shining Land. 
The phone number for Shining Land listed in reftel 
A also corresponds to the phone number listed on 
the web sites for these companies. As part of end- 
use checks in Hong Kong and at the direction of 
BIS headquarters, the ECO's practice is not to 
call or otherwise reach out to mainland Chinese 
companies involved in Hong Kong related checks. 
 
¶4.  The offices of Shining Land are located in a 
low-end shopping area.  Ho King Center is on top 
of a street market and is a run-down office 
building.  On the building directory, Room 1007 is 
listed as "Bright Sun Shipping Company".  However, 
nothing is listed for this office number on the 
10th floor directory nor is there any name listed 
on the Room 1007 office door.  Offices on the 10th 
floor appear to be quite small, perhaps 100-150 
square feet (enough for two desks).  Commercial 
Assistant Florence Tam attempted to visit the 
office on June 11, 2007 but no one was in the 
office.  Mail and other correspondence were left 
stacked at the entrance of the company. 
 
¶5.  Given the facts referenced above, Shining Land 
does not appear to be a suitable recipient of 
controlled U.S. origin items.  Nonetheless, a 
close review of publicly available documentation 
concerning Shining Land and other companies 
suggests that the item most likely ended up in 
mainland China at Shanghai Hushi Chemical Reagent 
& Analysis Instrument Company Limited or one of 
its affiliates.  Given that the item can be 
exported license-free to mainland China (with very 
limited exceptions), the ECO recommends that this 
PSV be classifid as Limited.