07USNATO374
WELCOME FOR EUR/RPM DEPUTY DIRECTOR EVA SHINAGEL
Mon Jun 18 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Mission USNATO
VZCZCXYZ0008
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHNO #0374 1690842
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 180842Z JUN 07
FM USMISSION USNATO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0970
INFO RUEHSW/AMEMBASSY BERN 0410
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6295UNCLAS USNATO 000374 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OTRA NATO GM
SUBJECT: WELCOME FOR EUR/RPM DEPUTY DIRECTOR EVA SHINAGEL 
JUNE 19-21, 2007 
 
REF: STATE 082647 
 
¶1.  U.S. Mission to NATO welcomes the visit of Eva Shinagel, 
EUR/RPM Deputy Director for the purpose of attending 
meetings. The control officer for this visit is Political 
Officer Mr. Peter Chisholm, work:(32-2)724-3384, 
fax:(32-2)724-3421.  He can also be reached through the 
tri-mission switchboard at (32-2)508-2111. 
 
¶2.  Hotel accommodations have been confirmed at the Jolly 
Sablon for arrival June 19 and departure June 21, 
confirmation number is 363926.  Hotel information: 
Bodenbroeck 2, 1000 Brussels.  Tel: 32 2 512 8800, Fax: 32 2 
725 4040. 
 
¶3.  The primary mode of transportation for visitors to 
Brussels is metered taxis, which are plentiful and reliable. 
However, fares, which can be vouchered, are quite expensive. 
The bus, tram and metro system are excellent. 
 
¶4.  NATO visitor passes have been arranged and can be picked 
up at the front gate. Visitors should then proceed directly 
to the U.S. Mission, near the NATO "F-wing" entrance.  For 
security reasons, all visitors, even those with green NATO 
badges, must present two pieces of identification or their 
blue State Department-issued badge to the Marine Guard before 
being admitted into the U.S. Mission. 
 
¶5.  Computer and Electronics Usage:  Inter-agency security 
standards prohibit the introduction or use of non-USG owned 
computer hardware and software at all USG diplomatic 
facilities.  Cell phones, palm pilots, radios and other 
convenience electronics are prohibited in all secure areas of 
the Mission.  Travelers who anticipate having special needs 
in terms of either access or computer usage should contact 
the RSO office before arriving at post. Visitors must leave 
cell phones and other electronic equipment with the Marine 
Guard.  Mission appreciates your cooperation. 
 
¶6.  Threat Assessment:  A worldwide caution regarding the 
threat of transnational terrorism was issued by the 
Department of State.  (Please consult the Department's 
website for text:  HTTP:HTravel.State.Gov.)  In light of this 
caution and the events of September 11, 2001, all visitors 
are encouraged to assess their security posture, and be alert 
to their surroundings.  All visitors should exercise caution 
while traveling abroad as U.S. citizens and facilities are 
often the target of groups demonstrating opposition to the 
U.S. foreign policy. 
 
¶7.  Belgium remains a relatively safe country but as a result 
of the war in Iraq, and sentiments expressed by its citizens 
against the war, American visitors are advised to exercise 
caution and avoid anti-American demonstrations.  Also, it is 
prudent not to wear clothes or carry articles with logos and 
emblems associated with the United States at this time.  By 
taking reasonable precautions, visitors should enjoy an 
uneventful stay. However, purse snatching and pick-pocketing 
are occurring more frequently.  In Brussels, pick-pocketing 
and purse snatching are more prevalent in the metro system 
(subway, bus, tram) and at Brussels' three major train 
stations:  Gare du Nord (North Station), Gare Central 
(Central Station), and especially Gare du Midi (South 
Station).  Extra caution should be used at the Gare Centrale 
Station.  Victims have been asked for assistance by someone 
who appeared lost and anxious to catch their train.  As the 
victim responds to the request, a third person appears and 
steals laptop computers, and other related travel items. 
According to the police, this is a new strategy by criminal 
gangs operating at Central Station.  Apparently they prefer 
platforms 3 and 4, used by trains going to the airport and 
obviously carrying the best category of potential victims. 
Valuables should never be left unattended in vehicles and car 
doors should always be kept locked when driving.  Carry only 
a minimum amount of cash, credit cards and ID.  Expensive 
jewelry, financial records, address books and other personal 
effects should be left at home or stored in a safe place 
during your visit. 
 
¶8. Emergency numbers for the Police and Medical Assistance 
are 101 and 100 respectively, and for cellular phones 
(locally) 112.  Visitors to Belgium requiring additional 
information should contact the Brussels Regional Security 
Office at 32-2-508-2370 (if dialing locally, 02-508-2370). 
 
¶9.  Please advise if further assistance is needed. 
NULAND