07WARSAW1423
POLAND: CORPORATE EXCELLENCE NOMINATION FOR 3M POLAND
Wed Jun 20 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Warsaw
VZCZCXRO0833
RR RUEHAG RUEHAST RUEHDA RUEHDBU RUEHDF RUEHFL RUEHIK RUEHKW RUEHLA
RUEHLN RUEHLZ RUEHPOD RUEHROV RUEHSR RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHWR #1423/01 1711558
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 201558Z JUN 07
FM AMEMBASSY WARSAW
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4604
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RUEHKW/AMCONSUL KRAKOW 1748
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 WARSAW 001423 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/NCE, EEB/EPPD 
EUR/NCE FOR DKOSTELANCIK AND BPUTNEY 
EEB/PPD FOR NSMITH-NISSLEY 
COMMERCE FOR 4232/ITA/MAC/EUR/JBURGESS, JKIMBALL, MRODGERS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BEXP ECON EINV ETRD PL
 
SUBJECT: POLAND: CORPORATE EXCELLENCE NOMINATION FOR 3M POLAND 
 
 
WARSAW 00001423  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1.  Summary.  Embassy Warsaw nominates 3M Poland for the Corporate 
Excellence Award in the U.S. multinational corporation category.  3M 
Poland began operations in Poland in the 1960's and began investing 
in the country in 1991.  Through acquisitions and growth 3M Poland 
now employs 850, with plans for 1,000 employees by year-end, with an 
investment of approximately $100 million.  The company actively 
supports local community efforts, has exemplary employment 
practices, works with local and national government to improve road 
safety practices, and is a model for ethical business practices in 
Poland.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  Good Corporate Citizenship: 3M Poland created the City 
Information System for Warsaw, a system of traffic control signs 
with 3M Scotchlite Diamond Grade film that help move traffic safely 
and efficiently.  Another initiative, "Pay Attention to the Black 
Points" supports local efforts to reduce road accidents by placing 
large black cross signs warning careless drivers that they are 
approaching a dangerous stretch of road.  3M Poland also sponsors an 
Integrative Sports Club which is a wheelchair fencing team, two 
local schools for disabled children in Kostowiec and Wroclaw, the 
Junior Achievement Fund, an environmental NGO, and the Dr. Clown 
Foundation which provides therapy for sick children in the hospital. 
 An innovative program is co-branding products with the local Red 
Cross by placing the 3M logo on consumer health care products.  A 
percentage of the sales revenue is given to the Red Cross for a 
program to support hot meals for poor children and families in the 
poorest regions of Poland.  To date, this program has provided 
150,000 meals. 
 
¶3.  Exemplary Employment Practices: As of May 31, 2007, 3M Poland 
employed 850 workers, and expects to employ 1,000 by year-end. 
Employee turn-over is stable at only 5%.  The company has very good 
cooperation with trade unions and has not been involved in any 
disputes with unions.  Management conducts regular 
employee-management communication meetings at each site.  3M 
acquired the Viscoplast facility in 2001 and the Interchemall 
facility in May, 2007 and has successfully integrated both 
facilities into the operations of 3M Poland. 
 
¶4.  Provision of a Safe and Healthy Workplace:  The company develops 
and implements an annual Environmental Health and Safety (EHS) Plan 
and established a Safety Leader Competition.  3M employees are 
involved in the EHS Plan so that 24 social work inspectors have been 
trained and are active in production areas and 12 Pre-Medical Rescue 
Teams are in place.  3M also reduced the number of high-risk work 
stations to 2% of the total to better protect workers.  The EHS Plan 
is continually reviewed and improved and has enabled 3M to achieve a 
Machine Safety Factor of 90%, implement 7 ergonomics projects.  For 
its efforts, 3M received the Polish National Work Inspection Award 
for implementation of EU EHS directives.  The Pre-Medical Rescue 
Team won 19th place in the National Facility Rescue Team Competition 
called "Safe Company 2006". 
 
¶5.  Responsible Environmental Stewardship and Practices:  Since 
1991, 3M Poland has invested $3.3 million in environmental 
protection at its facilities.  The company was ISO14001:2004 
certified in 2001 and recertified in 2006.  In addition, it has 
completed 8 projects to date in its Pollution Prevention Pays 
Program.  100% of asbestos removal is accomplished under the 
Asbestos Free Facility Program.  Recently, 3M modernized the sewage 
system, water supply system and rain water treatment system. 
 
¶6.  Contribution to the Overall Growth and Development of the Local 
Economy:  3M Poland's 2006 sales reached $118.7 million, of which 
approximately $68.7 million of products were exported.  The 
company's five largest Polish customers are the Ministry of 
Transport, the National Road Authority, TPSA (Polish Telecom), KGHM 
Polska Miedz (Copper Mine), and Warsaw City Road Authorities.  3M 
estimates that it has invested over $100 million in Poland in 2005 
through 2007, significant investments for the towns of Kastowiec and 
Wroclaw. 
 
¶7.  Compatibility, and if appropriate, contribution to local science 
and technology policies:  In 1998 3M Poland opened a Customer Center 
in Kajetany, near Warsaw.  The Center includes presentation rooms 
and facilities where product application is demonstrated, training 
courses are held, and new applications for Polish industry are 
prepared and tested.  3M Poland also actively provides information 
and technology to the government of Poland as well as of neighboring 
countries.  For example, it organized a workshop for the 
International Labor Inspections Association with representatives of 
the Serbian and Ukrainian Ministries of Labor.  3M also organized 
and participated in workshops and initiatives of the Polish National 
Road Safety Council such as Global Road Safety Week.  3M partnered 
with Minister of Transport Polaczek and the Institute of 
 
WARSAW 00001423  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
Transportation on an exhibit "Road Safety is No Accident" in 
Poland's parliament.  The exhibit was designed to make members of 
parliament and local government representatives aware of the 
critical need to ensure safety and security of children.  The 
company also organizes regular seminars for the medical, 
telecommunications, occupational health and safety, electrical 
energy and industrial sectors, on new technology and applications. 
 
 
¶8.  Compliance with U.S., international, and local laws and 
standards, especially in regards to anti-bribery, transparency, and 
human rights and labor:  3M Poland is proud of its reputation as an 
ethical producer and employer.  The company was recently awarded 
Superbrand status in Poland's business-to-business market for 2007 
in a tough competition among 1,400 companies.  In 2005, the American 
Chamber of Commerce named 3M Poland its "Investor of the Year".  In 
2002, the company received the "Fair Play Enterprise" statuette and 
in 2000, 3M was named "Company of the Year" by the Polish Business 
Club.  A testament to the company's image as a good corporate 
citizen is the fact that its CEO and members of the Board of 
Directors met with the President of Poland - an honor reserved for 
company executives whose reputation is considered spotless by the 
ruling Law and Justice party. 
 
ASHE