04TEGUCIGALPA781
MEDIA REACTION ON RESOLUTION AGAINST HUMAN RIGHTS
Fri Apr 02 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tegucigalpa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000781 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/PD, WHA/CEN, AND IIP/G/WHA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL PINR KDEM CU OIIP KPAO HO CHR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON RESOLUTION AGAINST HUMAN RIGHTS 
VIOLATION IN CUBA, APRIL 2, 2004 
 
 
¶1.  Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily "El 
Heraldo" on 3/31 entitled "Let it not be true".  "We hope 
that the claims of the Cuban government that Honduras has 
been designated by the U.S. to table a resolution to condemn 
Cuba for human rights violations isn't true.  We hope the 
Honduran government doesn't do the dirty work that no one 
else wants to do." 
 
"It isn't just about the appreciation of Hondurans for the 
disinterested solidarity we've received from Cuba.  It's 
just not fair that Honduras should be exposed once again to 
the international community as a servant of the U.S.  We've 
already done too much by sending our troops to occupy Iraq 
with our own money, while we're still living in so much 
poverty." 
 
"No Honduran would want to see our Ambassador in Geneva 
acting as an aggressor for hire.  We've already gone through 
so much embarrassment in the past, as a result of the 
submissiveness of our authorities to the great empire." 
 
¶2. Editorial in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily "Tiempo" 
on 4/1 entitled "Rumors".  "There is a rumor that the U.S. 
government has requested that Honduras sponsor a resolution 
condemning Cuba in the upcoming meeting of the U.N. 
Commission for Human Rights.  Up to this moment, the 
Honduran government hasn't said anything on this matter, 
neither has the U.S. Embassy in Tegucigalpa, but we feel 
something will happen shortly." 
 
"We don't think the government of President Maduro and the 
Nationalist Party will be able to undertake such a 
dishonorable task, no matter how valid or legitimate the 
grounds of that resolution might be.  We believe there are 
limits to which a country like Honduras can serve the U.S. 
interests.  We still think Hondurans have the highest sense 
of patriotism, dignity, and honor." 
 
NOTE:  President Maduro's nationally televised press 
conference was broadcasted on March 31 at night after the 
news cycle had ended and the paper had been sent for 
printing and distribution. 
 
Palmer