04VATICAN2764
VATICAN TO DISPATCH AID CHIEF TO DARFUR
Thu Jul 15 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Vatican
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS VATICAN 002764 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT. FOR EUR/WE: LEVIN; AF/E; AF/SPG; AF/RSA; DRL/IRF 
 
E.O. 12958 N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM PREF SU VT
SUBJECT: VATICAN TO DISPATCH AID CHIEF TO DARFUR 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
Ref: SecState 145183; Vatican 788; Vatican 594; Vatican 239 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) Holy See Country Director for Sudan Monsignor 
Lucio Sembrano told us July 8 that the Pope was sending the 
President of the Vatican's aid coordination agency to 
Darfur to assess the situation on the ground.  Sembrano 
praised U.S. leadership on Sudan and took on ref (a) points 
with interest.  He said that with international attention 
to Darfur already high, there were no current plans for the 
Pope to speak publicly on it.  The Holy See will focus its 
attention on Darfur and other African issues at a gathering 
of Papal Nuncios to African states this September.  End 
Summary. 
 
--------------------------------- 
SECRETARY, ANNAN VISITS SPUR POPE 
 
SIPDIS 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU)  Holy See Country Director for Sudan Lucio 
Sembrano said July 8 that the visits of Secretary Powell 
and Secretary-General Annan to Darfur had spurred the Pope 
to dispatch his aid chief to the region.  Archbishop Paul 
Cordes, President of the Vatican's aid coordination agency, 
Cor Unum, is currently deciding on a date to travel to 
Darfur to assess the situation on the ground.  Though 
Cordes' role is to coordinate Catholic aid in the region, 
Cor Unum sources told us he will bring with him a small 
gift of cash assistance from the Pope as well.  Cor Unum 
has been working with the UN High Commissioner for Refugees 
(UNHCR) on the crisis for some time (ref. b). 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
VATICAN SUPPORTIVE; NO PLANS NOW FOR POPE TO SPEAK 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Sembrano took on reftel points with interest and 
praised U.S. leadership on Sudan.  He said that with 
international attention to Darfur already high, there were 
no current plans for the Pope to speak publicly on it.  He 
did note that soft-spoken Papal Nuncio (Ambassador) to 
Sudan Archbishop Dominique Mamberti was continuing to work 
"behind the scenes" on various aspects of the crisis. 
Though heartened by the increased attention to Darfur, 
Sembrano said it was hard to be optimistic given the 
Khartoum government's history of duplicity.  He concluded 
that he hoped that it would be harder for Khartoum to "play 
games" with humanitarian aid and militias now that the 
world was watching closely. 
 
----------------- 
NUNCIO CONFERENCE 
----------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) The Holy See will focus its attention on Darfur 
and other African issues at a Vatican conference this 
September.  Papal Nuncios to African states will meet at 
the Vatican to discuss regional issues and brief Holy See 
Foreign Ministry officials on concerns at their posts.  The 
last such meeting occurred some five years ago. 
 
NICHOLSON 
 
 
NNNN 

 2004VATICA02764 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED