05ANKARA1888
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Apr 01 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 001888 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, APRIL 1, 2005 
 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Iraq's Neighbors to Meet in Turkey - Milliyet 
Gul: Turkey Won't Allow Greek Cypriots to Use Turkish Ports 
- Milliyet 
Zarkawi to Strike in Europe With Chemical Weapons - Aksam 
Wolfowitz Gets World Bank - Hurriyet 
Abbas Launches Operation Against Hamas - Sabah 
Iran Opens Nuclear Facility to Press - Hurriyet 
Schiavo Dies After 13 Days - Aksam 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
FM Gul: Use of Incirlik, Armenian `Genocide' Unrelated 
Issues - Zaman 
Annan to Send Cyprus Envoys After `TRNC' Polls - Cumhuriyet 
Wolfowitz, Architect of Iraq War, To Lead World Bank - Yeni 
Safak 
Hunger-Stricken Iraqi Children Increase Two-Fold - Radikal 
Assad Declares Special Amnesty for Kurds - Yeni Safak 
US Blocks India-Iran Natural Gas Project - Yeni Safak 
Akayev Accuses US of Supporting Insurgents in Kyrgyzstan - 
Radikal 
The Pope's Health Deteriorates - Cumhuriyet 
Americans Weep for Terry Schiavo - Radikal 
 
BRIEFING 
 
PM Erdogan on US Requests About Incirlik:  PM Tayyip 
Erdogan, asked to comment on US requests to use Incirlik 
airbase as a logistics hub for Iraq and Afghanistan, said 
`we are already supporting our allied country on 
humanitarian assistance within the framework of NATo and the 
United Nations.  We will continue to provide that support. 
But it is not possible to meet every request all the time.' 
Erdogan added that the Incirlik issue should not be linked 
to Armenian `genocide' claims, and he called on the US 
Congress not to move ahead with an Armenian `genocide' 
resolution. 
 
FM Gul on Relations With US, Armenia:  Foreign Minister 
Abdullah Gul said in a press conference that he saw no 
direct link between US requests for using Incirlik Airbase 
as a logistical cargo hub and the issue of Armenian 
`genocide' claims that couild be considered by the US 
Congress.  `There are certain request for cooperation at 
Incirlik,' Gul noted, `but they are not reflected properly 
by the media. The FM said the Turkish government is working 
on certain `technical subjects' in order to reach a decision 
soon.  Gul also emphasized that the position of the 
Armenians has been well known by a succession of US 
governments and by President Bush, and he urged the US 
Administration to display sensitivity when the issue is 
raised. 
 
Turkey Grants UK Access to Incirlik Airbase:  A news story 
by the mass-appeal "Vatan" claims that while the Turkish 
government has stalled for nine months in responding to US 
requests regarding Incirlik Airbase, British requests for 
using the airbase for logistical purposes have already been 
approved.  FM Abdullah Gul agreed on the UK use of Incirlik 
with British FM Jack Straw during a visit to London.  The 
agreement will allow UK C-17 military transport planes to 
use Incirlik Airbase as well as airports in Ankara, Konya, 
and Trabzon to support operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. 
The paper links the AKP government's decision to Britain's 
upcoming presidency of the European Union beginning in July. 
 
UN Iraq Envoy Visits Turkey:  United Nations Special Envoy 
to Iraq Ashraf Jehangir Gazi met Turkish Foreign Ministry 
Undersecretary Ali Tuygan on Thursday in Ankara.  Gazi urged 
all relevant parties to consider the issue of Kirkuk through 
peaceful means, Turkey's official "Anatolian Agency" 
reported.  Gazi said the next meeting of Iraq's neighbors 
would take place in Istanbul later this month.  The meeting 
will provide an opportunity for Iraq's neighbors to assess 
recent developments in Iraq, he stressed.  Gazi later 
departed for New York to submit his report on Iraq to the UN 
Security Council. 
 
Iraqi Turkmen Want More Support from Turkey:  Kirkuk Turkmen 
Assembly chairman Sadettin Ergec believes it is unfair for 
Turkey to hold the Turkmen responsible for the political 
situation that has emerged in Iraq after the January 30 
elections, "Zaman" reports from Kirkuk.  `Thus far, we have 
received no significant support from Turkey,' Ergec said, 
and urged more effective backing from Ankara.  `Kirkuk is a 
miniature of the Iraqi mosaic,' Ergec stressed, and warned 
that instability in the oil-rich Iraqi area would 
destabilize the entire country.  The Iraqi Turkmen Front 
(ITF) received 93,000 votes in the Iraqi general elections, 
and is represented by 3 lawmakers in the new assembly. 
 
Force Commander Says Turkey Needs Strong, Deterrent Army: 
Turkish Land Forces Commander General Yasar Buyukanit said 
at a graduation ceremony at the Land Forces Academy in 
Ankara that Turkey, located in the center of an area full of 
risks and threats, needs a very strong army with deterrent 
capability.  Gen. Buyukanit pointed out to terrorism, 
racism, fundamentalism, organized crime, and drug 
trafficking as growing threats around Turkey. 
 
Parliament Postpones Implementation of New Penal Code:  The 
AKP government decided to delay implementation of the new 
penal code that had been scheduled to take effect on April 
Â¶1.  The delay will give the Government time to consider 
changes in the face of domestic and international criticism 
from press and human rights groups.  Revisions to the penal 
code demanded by the European Union aim to bring Turkey's 
criminal justice system into line with recent political 
reforms passed to fulfill EU criteria.  The Turkish 
Parliament on Thursday approved a request from the ruling AK 
Party to postpone implementation of the revamped penal code 
until June 1.  Journalists and rights groups have staged 
several protests against the new law in recent weeks, saying 
it would curb freedom of expression and press.  The European 
Union expects the law to be in effect before Turkey begins 
EU entry talks in early October. 
 
President Vetoes Law Allowing Sale of Media Outlets to 
Foreigners:  President Ahmet Necdet Sezer on Thursday vetoed 
a law that would have allowed foreign investors to purchase 
majority stakes in Turkish media outlets.  Sezer argued that 
the provision threatened Turkey's national interests.  The 
law, passed by parliament in March, lifted restrictions on 
foreign ownership, but maintained limits on the number of 
television and radio stations that foreigners could own. 
 
Turkey Sets Record Growth Rate:  Turkey's economic growth 
reach in 2004 reached 9.9 percent, the highest in the world. 
Per capita income in dollar terms increased to $4,172 from 
$3,383 in 2003, according to statistics released Thursday by 
the State Institute of Statistics (DIE).  The Turkish 
economy produced a net increase of 644,000 jobs, and 
unemployment dropped from 10.5 to 10.3 percent in 2004. 
 
Lawmaker Quits Opposition CHP:  Muhsin Kocyigit, a deputy 
from Diyarbakir, resigned from the main opposition 
Republican People's Party (CHP). Kocyigit's resignation 
reduced the number of CHP seats in parliament to 162. 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: Kyrgyzstan; US-Turkish Relations; Turkish 
Nationalism 
 
"Who's Next?" 
Kamuran Ozbir wrote in the nationalist "Ortadogu" (4/1): 
"The dictatorial regimes of the former Soviet republics are 
changing one by one.  The poverty and corruption in these 
countries is the major reason, but the contribution of 
President Bush's policy to spread democracy and freedom is 
also obvious.  There is significant influence by NGOs as 
well.  This is an ongoing process.  The focus now seems to 
be to try to predict who will be next. . Russian leader 
Putin has managed to rehabilitate his country's ailing 
economy, yet this has not been reflected in the lives of 
ordinary Russians.  Moreover Russia is still trying to cope 
with issues in its neighborhood, including Chechnya.  It is 
certain that the Washington-led winds of democracy and 
freedom will eventually blow toward Russia." 
 
"Keeping a Balance Between the EU and the US Has Turned Into 
a Trap" 
Erhan Basyurt wrote in the Islamist-intellectual "Zaman" 
(4/1): "Turkey has been intensifying efforts to establish a 
balance between the US and the EU in its international 
relations.  But this approach is turning into a self-made 
trap for Turkey.  Ankara had high hopes regarding the EU 
membership process, and hoped to use the process as a way to 
get out from US and Israeli pressure.  But the result is 
that Turkey now faces pressure coming from both the US and 
the EU. . The US has intensified pressure on the ruling 
party through accusations of anti-Americanism and the 
manipulation of the American media.  Even the possibility of 
a Congressional resolution on the Armenian issue is now 
being used as a trump card against Ankara.  . The growing 
pressure seems to focus on a specific goal: to get Turkey's 
permission for requests on Incirlik airbase.  Incirlik is 
part of a larger plan that is described in the `American 
Century Project," a report written by the neo-cons of the 
Bush administration.  This report clearly advocates more 
extensive use of Incirlik and suggests that a back-up base 
be found in Turkey as well. . Brussels is looking for 
`Cyprus concessions' while Washington is going after 
`Incirlik concessions.'  Turkey should abandon its efforts 
to achieve `balance' and revise its foreign policy 
priorities in accordance with current conditions." 
 
"Improvements in the Turkish-American Relationship" 
Hasan Mesut Hazar observed in the conservative-mass appeal 
"Turkiye" (4/1):  "I am sure some people will be annoyed 
even by the title of my column.  But the fact is that 
Turkish-American relations are not as bad as has been 
reflected in the media.  There are some emotional tensions, 
anger, and reaction, but these are nothing more than a 
reflection of politicians using foreign policy issues to 
gain points in domestic politics.  As a matter of fact, 
there is a comprehensive coordination in Turkish-American 
relations.  Moreover, this close coordination is not limited 
to Iraq, Afghanistan, and NATO.  It also covers Turkey's EU 
accession process, the Cyprus issue, counterterrorism, and 
trade.  It is shown in US support for Turkey's foreign 
policy and close coordination in Eurasia.  There will be 
intense official visitor traffic to the US from Turkey 
during April, May, and June.  These visits will allow the 
media to reflect on the truths about Turkish-American 
relations. . Meanwhile, if agreement is reached on the 
Incirlik issue, cooperation between the two countries will 
only intensify.  There are no doubt steps the US could take 
in Cyprus and in Northern Iraq in line with Turkey's 
expectations that would help ease the emotional tensions in 
the relationship.  Diplomatic sources also say that PM 
Erdogan's visit to Israel at the beginning of May will have 
a positive effect on Turkey-US relations.  Improvement in 
Turkish-US relations will not only be in the interest of 
both countries, but would contribute to the establishment of 
peace and stability in a broad area from the Middle East to 
Eurasia." 
 
"Copenhagen and Sutculer" 
Erdal Guven wrote in the liberal-intellectual "Radikal" 
(4/01):  "There is an inscription in the wall of the 
Holocaust Museum in Washington from the German poet Heinrich 
Heine: `In a country that burns books, the burning of people 
will not be far behind.'  The recent decision of the 
subgovernor in Sutculer to collect and destroy all works by 
Orhan Pamuk in his district reminded me of this observation. 
The frightening part about the subgovernor's decree is the 
fact that state institutions only learned about it only 45 
days after it was issued when it was reported on NTV and in 
"Radikal."  What's even worse than this is that the 
subgovernor remains in his position.  When things are like 
this, doesn't the logic behind the EU's insistence on 
`implementation, implemtation, implementation' become more 
understandable?  Laws, regulations, and decisions have been 
passed in connection with the Copenhagen Criteria.  But none 
of these changes prevented the subgovernor in Sutculer from 
issuing this order.  This shows that passing laws is not 
enough to achieve `harmonization' with the EU.  The laws 
have to be taken as our own and internalized.  We could, for 
example, remove this subgovernor from his position without 
delay, then turn to the European Union and say: `you wanted 
implementation, well here it is.'  Of course the Sutculer 
subgovernor isn't really the issue.  There is at the same 
time a rise in nationalism that has now reached the point of 
being a subject for sociological theory in Turkey.  The 
subgovernor's response is reflective of this trend.  It is a 
rage against `the other,' not only against Americans or 
Europeans, that is being fanned at the official and 
political level, and in public opinion.  Nonsensical 
conspiracy theories are circulating, books based on such 
theories are becoming bestsellers, nightsticks are being 
used to beat women, politicians are criticizing the media 
for reporting on it, laws are being passed that tie the 
hands of Christian minorities, sanctions are being meted out 
against cartoonists.The worst part is that there doesn't 
seem to be any solution.  If there is, I don't know what it 
would be.  As far as I can tell, there has been only one 
side-effect: it has caused people to become blind.  We 
bemoan the fact that the US hasn't done anything in northern 
Iraq about the PKK, but we never think of what we have done 
to improve the lives of Kurds in east and southeast Turkey. 
We have mobilized ourselves to explain to the world the 
rightness of our arguments against claims of Armenian 
`genocide,' but we don't see that our embargo against 
Armenia has achieved nothing and brought no benefit to us or 
to the region.  We accuse people of `having pushed the 
button' or believe that `games are being played' in Turkey, 
but we don't even feel that we are constantly shooting 
ourselves in the foot." 
 
EDELMAN