05ANKARA2331
ASSAILANTS FIREBOMB PROTESTANT CHURCH, CAUSING MINOR DAMAGE
Mon Apr 25 00:00:00 +0200 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 002331 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/SE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/25/2015 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PHUM TU OSCE
SUBJECT: ASSAILANTS FIREBOMB PROTESTANT CHURCH, CAUSING MINOR DAMAGE 
 
REF: A. ANKARA 1511 
     ¶B. ANKARA 2313 
     ¶C. ANKARA 1935 
 
Classified by Polcouns John Kunstadter; reasons 1.4 b and d. 
 
¶1. (U) Summary: Unknown actors firebombed a Protestant church 
in Ankara in the early-morning hours April 21, causing minor 
damage.  The attack followed an email threat to the church 
from a violent organization responsible for the attempted 
murder of a human rights activist in 1998.  The organization 
has also recently threatened to kill members of the Human 
Rights Association.  The Ambassador has invited the State 
Minister responsible for religious affairs to join him in 
visiting the church and condemning the attack.  End Summary. 
 
 
-------------------------- 
Assailants Firebomb Church 
-------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) Two unknown actors firebombed the International 
Protestant Church of Ankara at approximately 1 a.m. April 21. 
 The assailants smashed a hole in the church's thick-plated 
glass windows and threw two Molotov cocktails into the 
building, which was empty at the time.  The attack caused 
limited damage; fire burned through the carpet in a few spots 
and smoke discolored the walls and ceiling. 
 
¶3. (U) Church members Andy Hoard and Joseph McClintock, both 
Americans who own businesses in Ankara, told us the guard at 
a nearby apartment complex heard the attack and saw two adult 
males fleeing the scene.  The guard called police, who 
immediately came to the church and contacted church members. 
Hoard and McClintock said police appear to be taking the 
attack seriously; they have interviewed the guard and church 
members and collected evidence from the site.  Police 
authorities told us they would increase patrols in the area 
of the church. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Attack Follows "Revenge Brigade" Threats 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (U) The attack came a month after the church received an 
email threat from the "Turkish Revenge Brigade" (reftel A), 
which stated, "You who are wandering in this country under 
the identity of missionaries are dogs trying to divide the 
nation.  Therefore, your murder is seen as an Islamic duty by 
those of us who own and protect this country.  You will all 
be killed at the places you have called churches." 
 
¶5. (U) Members of the Revenge Brigade were convicted for the 
attempted murder of Human Rights Association (HRA) President 
Akin Birdal in 1998.  Assailants broke into Birdal's office 
and shot him several times at close range, but he survived 
the attack.  The group is not known to have conducted any 
attacks since.  However, three HRA officials -- Istanbul 
Branch President Eren Keskin, Marmara Region representative 
Dogan Genc, and Istanbul Executive Committee member Saban 
Dayanan -- announced publicly that they had received 
threatening letters on April 19 purportedly sent by the 
Revenge Brigade.  The identical letters begin with the 
heading "Last Warning" and state that the HRA members will be 
killed if they continue their human rights activities. 
 
¶6. (U) Police have not confirmed a link between the email 
threat and the attack on the church, nor have they 
established whether the email to the church or letters to HRA 
officials were sent by known Revenge Brigade members. 
 
¶7. (U) Nevertheless, HRA President Yusuf Alatas told us he 
has been concerned about the possible re-emergence of the 
Revenge Brigade since before the threats were issued.  Alatas 
said Brigade leader Semih Tufan Gunaltay, who was convicted 
of ordering the Birdal shooting, established the National 
Independence Party and became its chairman in December 2004, 
shortly after his release from prison.  The HRA in February 
filed a case with the prosecutor's office seeking the closure 
of the party, on the grounds that it is an armed 
organization.  Prosecutors have taken no action to date. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
Ambassador Invites GOT Minister to Visit Church 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶8. (C) The church attack came on the same day that the 
Ambassador raised with State Minister Aydin the possibility 
that the GOT's anti-missionary rhetoric could lead to 
violence against Christians (reftel B); Aydin dismissed the 
possibility of violence.  We learned of the church attack 
shortly after the meeting, at which point the Ambassador sent 
Aydin a letter inviting him to join him in visiting the 
church and condemning the attack.  Aydin has not yet 
responded. 
-------------- 
Text of Letter 
-------------- 
 
¶9. (U) The text of the Ambassador's letter to Aydin follows: 
 
Dear Mr. Minister: 
 
Thank you for taking the time to meet with me April 21 to 
discuss religious freedom in Turkey. 
 
You will recall that during our discussion I expressed my 
concern that anti-Christian rhetoric by Turkish authorities, 
combined with a general rise in nationalist sentiment, could 
lead to violence against Christians.  Shortly after our 
meeting, I learned that two assailants firebombed the 
International Protestant Church of Ankara in the early 
morning hours of April 21.  Fortunately, the building was 
empty at the time.  The attackers smashed windows and caused 
interior fire and smoke damage. 
 
Last month, a group called the Turkish Revenge Brigade sent 
an email to the International Protestant Church threatening 
to kill church members.  We understand this organization has 
also recently threatened representatives of the Human Rights 
Association.  Members of the Turkish Revenge Brigade were 
convicted for the attempted murder of Human Rights 
Association President Akin Birdal in 1998.  Most, if not all, 
have served their sentences and are now at large. 
 
The church attack is under investigation, and we do not yet 
know for certain whether the incident is linked to the email 
threat.  In any case, however, this is just the type of act 
that we agreed governments should make every effort to 
prevent. 
 
In that spirit, I would like to invite you to join me in a 
visit to the church, located in Cigdem, some time next week 
at your convenience.  I propose that we speak to the pastor 
and church members, to demonstrate our shared commitment to 
tolerance and religious pluralism. 
 
I look forward to hearing from you. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Eric S. Edelman. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶10. (C) We do not yet know whether the church attack was 
inspired by the GOT's anti-missionary campaign (reftels).  In 
any case, however, the GOT's anti-Christian rhetoric is 
creating tensions in a time of rising nationalism and 
xenophobia.  With thousands of mosque-goers being told in a 
government-drafted sermon that missionaries are part of an 
international plot to divide Turkey, it would not be 
surprising if a few interpreted the message as a call to 
attack Christians. 
 
 
ED