05BRASILIA1120
BRAZIL PUSHES FOR TIMELY CONCLUSION OF TALKS ON
Wed Apr 27 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Brasilia
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRASILIA 001120 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO NASA FOR DKRIEGER 
 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO SMITHSONIAN FOR LHIRSCH 
 
STATE FOR OES/PCI/LPOULTON, WHA/ESPC/LALLEN, L/OES/MSIMONOFF 
AND L/OES/SMALLORY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TSPA SENV TBIO KSCA BR
SUBJECT: BRAZIL PUSHES FOR TIMELY CONCLUSION OF TALKS ON 
NASA/LBA AND SMITHSONIAN ARRANGEMENTS 
 
 
SENSITIVE BUT NOT CLASSIFIED 
 
---------- 
SUMMARY 
---------- 
 
¶1.  The GOB is pushing for the conclusion of the LBA/NASA 
and Smithsonian Institution  "arrangements" prior to the 
September 2005 U.S.-Brazil Common Agenda for the Environment 
(CAE) meeting.  Missing that target may result in a 
Brazilian suggestion to postpone the CAE.  Successful 
conclusion of these negotiations could pave the way for the 
many bilateral science and technology activities that may 
follow. 
 
---------- 
GOB Message Consistent 
---------- 
 
¶2.  Recent post communications with the Brazilian Foreign 
Ministry and Ministry for Science and Technology have all 
highlighted the GOB desire to conclude negotiations on the 
implementing arrangements for the Cooperation on 
Environmental Scientific Research in the Large Scale 
Biosphere-Atmosphere Experiment in Amazonia (LBA) covering 
NASA activities, and the Cooperation on Amazonian Ecosystem 
Research which covers Smithsonian Institution activities in 
Brazil.  The unmistakable message was that these two 
negotiations should be concluded prior to the CAE,  which is 
now scheduled for September 29-30, 2005, in Washington D.C. 
From the U.S. side, that would necessitate a timeline where 
the final texts of both arrangements would have to be 
finalized by June 2005, to allow time for the legal scrub 
and C-175 consultation process that follows. 
 
¶3.  There are several likely motives for the GOB push. 
First, these arrangements are now required by Brazilian law. 
In 2003, the GOB announced a new policy requiring that the 
Brazilian Congress review and accept all implementing 
arrangements under the 1984 U.S.-Brazil Agreement Relating 
to Cooperation in Science and Technology (umbrella 
agreement).  In addition, the GOB can fend off criticism of 
those who are suspicious of a foreign governments operation 
in the Amazon - always a sensitive subject - by saying that 
U.S. activities are covered by an agreement. Finally, 
Brazilian environmental entities and universities have 
benefited immensely from the exchange of technology and 
knowledge gained from partnering with NASA and the 
Smithsonian.  The previous "arrangements" under which 
NASA/LBA and the Smithsonian Institution operated in Brazil 
expired in 2004.  Without new "arrangements" these agencies 
may have difficulty initiating projects in the future. 
 
---------- 
"Arrangements" May Serve As Model 
---------- 
 
¶4.  This post believes the U.S. has more riding on the 
successful conclusion of these negotiations than the 
possible postponement of the CAE.  The language agreed upon 
may provide a model for other arrangements. This embassy has 
long-range plans to expand bilateral cooperation in science 
and technology, environment and health that could be more 
successfully implemented if the LBA/NASA and SI arrangements 
were signed.   For example, there is fertile ground to 
expand the science and technology relationship. According to 
National Science Foundation figures, Brazil is a powerhouse 
in science and technology compared to other developing 
nations.  Brazil ranks among the top twenty countries in 
terms of scientific articles published in international 
journals, ahead of countries such as Austria, Poland, Korea 
or Taiwan.  The area of health is no exception.  The HHS 
agencies' accomplishments in Brazil are impressive.  The CDC 
operation within the Brazilian Ministry of Health has been 
extraordinarily successful, and NIH has nearly USDOL 15 
million in grants in the pipeline for the next two years to 
partner with Brazilian institutions in medical research 
(more than any other country in South America).  The 
environmental partnership has recently expanded into areas 
such as cooperation with law enforcement to stop illegal 
trafficking in wildlife and is examining the possibility of 
a bilateral effort to reduce toxic gas emissions into the 
air through the development of alternative energy sources. 
 
¶5.  Post appreciates efforts by State, NASA and SI to 
conclude subject arrangements and renews its offer of 
support to help them both reach a successful, and timely, 
conclusion. 
 
DANILOVICH