05PARIS2297
FRANCE: BLUE LANTERN LEVEL 3: PRE-LICENSE END USE
Wed Apr 06 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS PARIS 002297 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR PM/DTCC - BLUE LANTERN COORDINATOR 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: ETTC KOMC FR
SUBJECT:  FRANCE: BLUE LANTERN LEVEL 3: PRE-LICENSE END USE 
CHECK ON APPLICATIONS 05-947780 AND 05-947779 
 
REF: 04 STATE 273668 
 
¶1.  As requested reftel, Post reached out to the two end users 
indicated in the applications in question.  Our initial letters 
went unanswered for several weeks.  No telephone numbers or 
email addresses were provided or were readily available. 
However, by the entity names and addresses, we quickly surmised 
that both "Base Aeronavale Lanveoc-Poulmic" and "E.P.A.N Lan 
Bihoue Entrepot Principal Aeronaval" were French military 
entities, i.e. not private companies.  We have attempted to gain 
information directly from the headquarters of the French 
military procurement office, Delegation Generale d'Armament or 
DGA, but have not yet received a response. 
 
¶2.  In early April, our regional office (American Presence Post) 
in Rennes was able to further research the matter as well as 
identify and speak to Mr. Collet of the Poulmic Naval Air Base 
in Lanveoc.  APP Rennes confirmed that E.P.A.N, which stands for 
Entrepot Principal Aeronaval or central aeronaval warehouse, in 
Lann Bihoue near Lorient only deals with fixed wing aircraft and 
does not work at all with helicopter maintenance and so would 
have no need for helicopter spare parts.  Mr. Collet was 
identified as the head of the regional maintenance unit in 
Brittany.  He said that the Poulmic Naval Air Base does work 
with Super Frelon helicopters, but he knew of only one order for 
one "set of bearings."  Collet said that perhaps Eurocopter had 
ordered additional the spare parts, but he was unaware of it. 
 
¶3.  Until we get a response from DGA, we will be unable to 
verify that the end user is aware of the order or verify there 
is a valid need for these spare parts. 
 
Leach