05TAIPEI1898
MEDIA REACTION: CROSS-STRAIT RELATIONS
Sat Apr 23 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TAIPEI 001898 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/RSP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - 
ROBERT PALLADINO 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: CROSS-STRAIT RELATIONS 
 
¶1. Summary: As newspapers in Taiwan continued their 
coverage April 22 of the upcoming China trips by KMT 
Chairman Lien Chan and PFP Chairman James Soong, the 
focus shifted to the U.S. attitude toward the trips. 
The centrist "China Times" ran a banner headline on its 
front page that read: "Secret meetings prior to [Lien's 
and Soong's] departure; Lien and Soong talked to the 
United States about their trips to China." The sub- 
headline added: "Lien Chan met with [AIT Taipei 
Director] Doug Paal Wednesday; James Soong also met 
with a U.S. official Monday."  A page-two news story of 
the "China Times" also headlined: "From hinting to 
supporting; United States welcomes and looks favorably 
on Lien's visit to mainland China," and the sub- 
headline said: "[Washington] clearly indicates `China 
trip is a positive step' and believes dialogue is the 
route to resolve cross-Strait tensions.  The United 
States will not get involved should the meeting between 
Lien and [Chinese President] Hu Jintao trigger inner 
disputes inside Taiwan."  The pro-independence "Liberty 
Times," Taiwan's biggest daily, and the pro-unification 
"United Daily News," both carried U.S. Deputy 
Department of State Spokesman Adam Ereli's remarks that 
the recent travel to China by Taiwan individuals are 
positive steps.  A front-page news story in the pro- 
independence "Taiwan Daily" and a page-two news story 
in the pro-independence "Liberty Times," on the other 
hand, reported on a press conference held by former 
President Lee Teng-hui in which he lashed out at the 
upcoming visits to China by Lien and Soong, calling the 
trips "collusion with the Chinese Communist Party and a 
sell-out of Taiwan."  Lee also emphasized that cross- 
Strait tension is an international issue that should be 
tackled by Washington, Tokyo, Taipei and Beijing in a 
conference held in the United States. 
 
¶2.  A "China Times" news analysis said the cross-Strait 
situation, if as manageable as it appears to be now, is 
the most favorable status for the United States; any 
attempt to sabotage the status quo, either via 
unification or Taiwan independence, is not an option 
for the United States.  A "United Daily News" editorial 
views the China trips by Lien and Soong as turning 
points following more than ten years of a `trial-and- 
error process' regarding cross-Strait relations.  The 
editorial said it would be a "win-win" situation for 
both sides if the talks succeed, and neither side will 
win if they fail.  End summary. 
 
A) "One China Is Not the Major Issue, `Free 
Interpretation' [of the One China] by Both Sides of the 
Taiwan Strait Is the [Real] Bottom Line" 
 
Journalist Luo Ju-lan noted in a news analysis of the 
centrist, pro-status quo "China Times" [circulation: 
600,000] (4/22): 
 
". For cross-Strait relations, `tensions' across the 
Taiwan Strait, if as manageable as they appear to be 
now, [create] the most favorable status for the United 
States.  Both sides of the Taiwan Strait anticipate the 
intervention of the United States - one side has its 
[potential market for] economics and trade as a 
bargaining chip while the other side has the need to 
buy weapons [from the United States], and of course no 
one will reject the situation when it is welcomed by 
both sides.  Therefore, any attempt to sabotage the 
status quo, either by unification or [Taiwan] 
independence, is not an option for the United States. 
 
"Both the Pan-Blue and Pan-Green Camps are clearly 
aware of such an `international reality,' so they are 
vying to stick labels on each other.  The Green Camp 
claims that the Blue is moving toward unification, 
while the Blue Camp says the Green is pursuing Taiwan 
independence; both sides are competing for support from 
the United States.  Washington's attitude is also like 
a scale with weights that tries to strike a balance; it 
shows support for the China trips by [KMT Chairman] 
Lien Chan and [PFP Chairman] James Soong, but in the 
meantime, it also calls on Beijing to start a dialogue 
with the Taiwan administration. . 
 
"The United States has many times expressed its support 
for the `1992 consensus' and has urged President Chen 
Shui-bian to say something about the consensus in his 
inaugural speeches.  `One China with both sides free to 
interpret what it means' is Washington's `bottom line,' 
but it cannot say it directly to the KMT, and the focus 
[of the bottom line] lies really in `the free 
interpretation by both sides' rather than the `one 
China.'  Even though Washington's position made known 
to the international community is that it adheres to 
the `one China' [policy], the ruling and opposition 
parties in Taiwan still need to keep their differences 
regarding the one China, otherwise if the interaction 
across the Taiwan Strait leans toward `unification,' 
the cross-Strait situation may become more difficult to 
control. 
 
"If [we] are to judge Lien's trip of peace based on 
this [assumption], under the interactive constraints of 
the triangular relationship between Washington, Taipei 
and Beijing, it will be difficult for Lien to achieve 
any breakthroughs with regard to Taiwan's sovereignty 
issue.  At most, both sides can return to the ambiguity 
of `free interpretation' [of the one China] whereas 
Beijing acknowledges the fact that both sides of the 
Taiwan Strait are ruled separately and tacitly 
recognizes the existence of the Republic of China. 
There is of course a long distance from such a 
development to the final `unification,' but since 
tension will be alleviated and status quo maintained, 
Lien's trip will be a result that both Washington and 
Beijing are happy to see." 
 
B) "If Both Lien and Soong Could Visit Mainland China 
with Chen Shui-bian's Blessing" 
 
The pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 
600,000] editorialized (4/22): 
 
". Lien's and Soong's visits to mainland China this 
time are the first major personal meetings between 
senior political leaders of both sides of the Taiwan 
Strait over the past 56 years.  The visits are also the 
first-ever turning point following the more than ten 
years of `try-and-error process' of the cross-Strait 
relations.  Not only the thoughts of the people on both 
sides of the Taiwan Strait but also the whole world's 
attention will focus on these visits.  As a result, it 
should not be regarded as an exaggeration if we say the 
visits by Lien and Soong `must be successful.'  If Lien 
and Soong have successful separate trips to China, it 
will be a win-win situation for both sides.  If they 
fail, neither side of the Taiwan Strait wins. . 
 
"For Taiwan in particular, it should not view these 
trips simply as programs for Lien or Soong or for the 
KMT or the PFP.  Taiwan should see the visits as a 
development commonly yearned by both the ruling and 
opposition parties of Taiwan. ." 
 
PAAL