05TELAVIV2698
WB/G SITREP: 28 PALESTINIANS, INCLUDING AN
Fri Apr 29 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEL AVIV 002698 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FRONT OFFICE; NEA/SA/EX FOR RICHIE; DEPT FOR 
DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN; USAID 
FOR DCHA, DCHA/FPP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG PHUM PREL PTER ASEC CASC GZ IS
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: 28 PALESTINIANS, INCLUDING AN 
ARAB-ISRAELI MK, INJURED IN WEST BANK BARRIER PROTESTS -- 
APRIL 29, 2005 (1300 HOURS LOCAL) 
 
 
This is a joint ConGen Jerusalem/Embassy Tel Aviv cable. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: Some 28 Palestinians were lightly to 
moderately injured in the village of Bil,in, west of 
Ramallah, during clashes with the IDF that erupted April 28 
during protests against the construction of the separation 
barrier on lands belonging to village residents.  Among those 
injured was Israeli Arab MK Mohamad Barakeh, who was 
reportedly lightly injured in the leg by an IDF stun grenade. 
 During the course of search operations in al-Dahariya 
village, near Hebron, at least two commercial stores were 
badly damaged, after Israeli border policemen reportedly blew 
up the doors of two stores, causing the fire.  In Gaza, PA 
preventive security officers arrested two members of the 
al-Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades April 28 on suspicion of firing 
rockets into Israel.  The two men reportedly remain in 
custody, despite a protest outside the Gaza residence of PA 
President Abbas by a group of al-Aqsa members.  End Summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) ATTACKS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injuries: According to Palestinian sources, 28 
Palestinians were lightly to moderately injured in the 
village of Bil,in, west of Ramallah, during clashes with the 
IDF that erupted April 28 during protests against the 
construction of the separation barrier on lands belonging to 
village residents.  Among those injured was the Israeli Arab 
MK Mohamad Barakeh, who was reportedly lightly wounded in the 
leg by an IDF stun grenade.  Palestinian sources said that 
undercover units of the police, disguised as Palestinians, 
were among the demonstrators.  The undercover police 
reportedly started throwing stun grenades into the crowd as 
the demonstrators approached the construction site. 
 
-- Arrests: According to Palestinian media, the IDF arrested 
two Fatah members in the village of Dar Salah, near 
Bethlehem, April 28. 
 
-- Arrests: According to Palestinian reports, the IDF 
arrested two Palestinian members of Hamas in the village of 
Arab Ramadin, near Hebron, April 28. 
 
-- Attacks: According to Palestinian reports, three 
Palestinians were attacked and beaten by settlers in Hebron's 
Old city, April 28. 
 
-- Attacks: According to Palestinian sources, IDF forces 
encountered gunfire near Nablus roadblock of Bayt Iba, April 
¶28.  No injuries were reported. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) SECURITY INCIDENTS: 
 
-- According to Palestinian sources, IDF forces entered 
al-Dahariya village, near Hebron, and conductive searches in 
the village, April 28.  During the course of the operation, 
at least two commercial stores were badly damaged after 
catching fire.  Border police reportedly blew up the doors of 
two stores, which caused the fire. 
 
-- According to Israeli Arab sources, about 50 Jewish 
extremists made their way into the al-Aqsa compound on April 
28, increasing tension on the compound.  A statement released 
by the Israeli Arab al-Aqsa Sponsorship Society warned 
against the consequences of such actions, and said that the 
Jewish extremist group Revava has already stated that on May 
9 they will enter the compound. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- According to Israeli media reports April 29, the IDF is 
proposing construction of a separation barrier to divide 
Hebron into two parts, the Israeli-controlled Old City, and a 
PA-administered part.  According to unnamed security 
officials quoted in the press, the IDF has already presented 
a construction plan to the Israeli Attorney-General for a 
ruling.  The construction of such a barrier could effectively 
cut off some 30,000 Palestinians living in the Old City from 
the rest of Hebron.  The Israeli army has confirmed the media 
reports in principle. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injuries: Nil. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: The IDF reported that Palestinian 
militants fired two mortar shells at IDF outposts near Neve 
Dekalim overnight April 28-29. 
 
-- Shootings: The IDF reported that Palestinian militants 
launched two shooting attacks against IDF and Israeli settler 
targets in southern Gaza April 28. 
 
-- Explosions: The IDF reported that IDF soldiers found and 
safely disposed of an IED south of the Kissufim Crossing 
April 28. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) ARRESTS: 
 
-- Israeli media reported that PA Preventive Security 
Officers in Gaza arrested two members of the al-Aqsa Martyrs' 
Brigades April 28 on suspicion of firing rockets into Israel. 
 The two men reportedly remain in custody, despite a protest 
outside the Gaza residence of PA President Abbas by a group 
of al-Aqsa members. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS: 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was open April 29, with a major detour at Netzarim 
Junction.  Abu Khouli Junction re-opened April 29. 
 
-- Erez Crossing was open for internationals, but closed for 
Palestinians laborers April 29. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone was closed April 29. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers April 
29, but was open for the import of aggregates used in 
construction. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was open, but operating slowly April 29. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open for arrivals and departures April 
¶29. 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan checkpoint was closed April 29.  Toufah 
checkpoint was open for residents of al-Mowassi, except males 
aged 16-30. 
 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
KURTZER