05LIMA4163
BENEFIT PACKAGE DEFUSES TALK OF POLICE STRIKE, BUT
Fri Sep 23 00:00:00 +0200 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Lima
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 LIMA 004163 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/23/2015 
TAGS: PGOV PINS ASEC PE
SUBJECT: BENEFIT PACKAGE DEFUSES TALK OF POLICE STRIKE, BUT 
UNREST REMAINS 
 
REF: A. LIMA 3735 
     ¶B. LIMA 3337 
 
Classified By: Polcouns Alexander Margulies.  Reason:  1.4(d). 
 
¶1.  (C)  SUMMARY:  President Alejandro Toledo, on 9/19, 
defused growing talk of a nationwide police strike by 
announcing a 284 million Soles (USD 86 million) package of 
back-pay, salary increases, benefits and operational funding. 
 Police sources tell us that, while the immediate crisis has 
passed, unrest continues in the ranks and additional 
attention needs to be paid to police needs to ensure 
stability and address the country's "security deficit." 
Finance Minister Fernando Zavala has warned that other 
agencies will have to tighten their belts over the coming 
year as the GOP will raid their coffers to pay for the police 
increases.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (U)  Presidential political advisor Juan de la Puente 
first raised concern over a possible strike by the National 
Police (PNP) during an 8/31 meeting with Polcouns.  Over the 
following two weeks talk of a PNP nationwide work stoppage 
increased, spurred by threats from representatives of 
organizations of active-duty and retired officers' spouses 
and warnings from the National Federation of NCOs, 
Specialists and Civilian Employees of the PNP that it would 
support a strike starting on 9/30.  The opposition APRA party 
added fuel to the fire when its Political Director (and 
Congresswoman) Mercedes Cabanillas met with police family 
members and expressed sympathy for their demands, although 
party leader Alan Garcia quickly declared that APRA opposed a 
police strike. 
 
¶3.  (C)  National Security Advisor Gen.(R) Luis Arias 
Graziani, in a 9/14 conversation with Emboffs, acknowledged 
widespread unrest in police ranks, which he said was being 
exacerbated by extreme left-wing militants linked to one 
Celso Pastrana.  Pastrana is a former police sergeant who led 
a three-day police strike in 1987, escaped from prison in 
1992, obtained political asylum in Sweden, and returned to 
Peru in 2004 after passing through Cuba and Venezuela (though 
no/no direct link to either Fidel Castro or Hugo Chavez has 
been uncovered to date).  He is the founder/leader of the 
Nationalist Patriotic Front, a group reportedly made up 
chiefly of other veterans of the 1987 strike and their 
families. 
 
¶4.  (U)  There is general agreement that PNP members have 
legitimate grievances.  According to the weekly "Caretas," 
the GOP owes police personnel over 100 million Soles in 
unpaid vacation benefits (dating from as far back as 1998), 
41 million Soles for TDY and moving expenses, and 207 million 
Soles for uniforms.  In addition, the Military-Police Pension 
Fund is technically bankrupt due to massive embezzlement 
during the Fujimori regime and 1.1 billion Soles in unpaid 
GOP contributions.  The take-home pay for an NCO is 690 
Soles/month (USD 212). 
 
¶5.  (U)  Prime Minister Pedro Pablo Kuczynski (PPK) postponed 
a planned trip to Washington for a week to work up an 
assistance package sufficient to head off the strike.  This 
package was announced by President Toledo on 9/19, following 
the latter's return from the UNGA.  It totals 284 million 
Soles (104 million Soles in 2005 and 180 million in 2006), 
which will include: 
 
--  37 million Soles in back-vacation pay; 
--  a one-time 150 Soles bonus for each PNP member; 
--  a 110 Soles (USD 34) monthly pay increase in 2006 (60 
Soles/month in January, another 50 Soles/month starting in 
July); and 
--  47 million Soles for operational expenses (gasoline, TDY 
pay, lunch costs). 
 
¶6.  (U)  Toledo's announcement effectively defused the threat 
of an immediate strike.  Oscar Pedraza, head of the National 
Federation of NCOs, Specialists and Civilian Employees of the 
PNP, issued a communique on 9/22, which characterized the 
GOP's offer as inadequate, but nonetheless concluded that the 
organization had decided to "suspend the police strike and 
hope that the authorities honor their public commitment." 
 
¶7.  (C)  NAS police contacts tell us that, while a PNP strike 
has been averted for the moment, serious unrest continues in 
the ranks.  They point to dissatisfaction with the GOP's new 
program to enhance citizen security, a central point in both 
President Toledo's 7/28 State of the Nation speech (Ref B) 
and Prime Minister Kuczynski's presentation to Congress (Ref 
A).  They explained that the rank-and-file are upset with 
limits that new Police Commander Gen. Luis Montoya has placed 
on police moonlighting after-hours, which significantly 
supplements officer's meager salaries, and rent-a-cop 
schemes, under which high-level officials pocket considerable 
sums for providing off-duty police to private companies. 
 
¶8.  (C)  Vice Minister of the Interior Jose Luis Avilez, in a 
9/23 meeting with DCM, stated that the danger of a strike had 
passed, and the GOP was now concentrating on finalizing and 
implementing its citizen security initiative.  MinInt 
Intelligence Directorate (DIGIMIN) Chief Gen. Jorge Cardenas, 
in a 9/23 meeting with Deputy Polcouns, said that he did not 
see any possibility of a strike at this point.  Active-duty 
officers on the whole are pleased with the salary increase, 
and most of the discontent has been coming from retired 
officers, through their wives' organization, who are 
concerned that their pensions will not increase in line with 
salary raises.  Cardenas did not/not agree that officers are 
concerned that their outside employment will be done away 
with; everyone recognizes that this is a necessary evil, 
although there is agreement that it must be kept within 
reasonable bounds so that officers do not arrive for their 
shifts exhausted.  Cardenas added that a lot of high-level 
consultation has gone into improving the PNP's lot.  He has 
personally briefed Toledo and the PM and met with Finance 
Ministry representatives to find new ways to loosen up more 
money for the police.  Cardenas believes that Toledo has 
bought into the premise that new training academies should be 
opened (mentioning Cajamarca and Huancavelica) to graduate 
5000-6000 new officers annually so as to keep up with 
attrition and address the country's "security deficit."  He 
concluded that the GOP also intends to address PNP social 
welfare issues, such as health and housing. 
 
¶9.  (SBU)  COMMENT:  Improving citizen security is the GOP's 
top domestic initiative for the remainder of Toledo's term. 
Prime Minister Kuczynski and new Interior Minister Romulo 
Pizarro have publicly laid their jobs on the line over this 
issue, vowing to demonstrate improvement over the next few 
months or accept the political responsibility for failure. 
The GOP's stance left it open to the counter from PNP 
proponents demanding back-pay, salary increases and other 
benefits.  The Government has managed to cobble together a 
substantial package for the police, but, as Finance Minister 
Zavala has noted, the result will be felt by other government 
agencies, which will see their budgets cut to pay for the PNP 
increases.  There is now a growing focus on the Armed Forces, 
whose defenders are already starting to ask when 
servicemembers will receive similar treatment.  END COMMENT. 
 
POWERS