05PARIS5936
FRENCH EONOMIC GROWTH SLUGGISH
Thu Sep 01 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

011117Z Sep 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PARIS 005936 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PASS FEDERAL RESERVE 
PASS CEA 
STATE FOR EB and EUR/WE 
TREASURY FOR DO/IM 
TREASURY ALSO FOR DO/IMB AND DO/E WDINKELACKER 
USDOC FOR 4212/MAC/EUR/OEURA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN ECON PGOV FR
SUBJECT:  FRENCH EONOMIC GROWTH SLUGGISH 
 
Ref: Paris 5694 
 
¶1. SUMMARY.  French GDP increased a low 0.4% (annualized) in 
the second quarter.  The rise in oil prices and the euro in 
the third quarter caused fears that 2005 economic growth 
could be lower than government forecast of 2.0%. 
Eventually, the government reduced its GDP growth forecast 
to 1.5-2.0%.  On September 1, just before the end of the 100- 
day period to restore confidence, the Government is expected 
to introduce new measures to spur economic growth (septel). 
These are likely to increase the central government budget 
spending, and thus the already-bloated budget deficit.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------- 
GDP Growth Low in Q-2 
--------------------- 
 
¶2.  On August 19, the National Institute for Statistical and 
Economic Studies (INSEE) confirmed its August 12 flash 
estimate of a 0.4% (annualized) increase in Q-2.  GDP growth 
weakened in Q-2 compared with 1.6% (annualized) in Q-1 
(revised upward from 1.2%).  The Q-2 GDP growth is lower 
than private-sector economists' forecasts of 0.8% 
(annualized) and fell well below the 2.0% (annualized) Bank 
of France's forecast.  In 2004, GDP had increased 2.1%, 
notably due to the 2.8% (annualized) Q-4 rebound. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
Consumption and Corporate Investment Decreased in Q-2 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶3.  The poor Q-2 performance was mainly due to a 1.2% 
(annualized) drop in household consumption in Q-2, the 
biggest decrease since 1996.  Consumption was undermined by 
worries about oil prices and unemployment.  The unemployment 
rate remained at a five-year high of 10.2% in April and May, 
edging down to 10.1% in June. (Macro-economic analysis of 
the labor situation will be provided in a separate cable.) 
 
¶4.  Corporate investment decreased 1.6% (annualized) as non- 
financial firms significantly reduced their investment 
(minus 4.8% annualized).  Surveyed industrialists said that 
rising oil prices and the decrease in the euro in the first 
half did not encourage industrialists to invest.  The 
capacity utilization rate remained low (82.6% in June). 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
Q-2 GDP Growth was led by Inventories and Real Estate 
Investment ... 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶5.  Inventories had a significant 0.4% contribution to GDP 
in Q-2, notably because of durable increases in raw 
materials prices.  GDP growth excluding inventories would 
have been negative, minus 1.2% (annualized).  Real estate 
investment increased 2.8%, amplifying the real-estate 
bubble. 
 
----------------- 
. . . and Exports 
----------------- 
 
¶6.  Exports rebounded in Q-2, increasing 4.0% (annualized) 
after decreasing in Q-1, while imports continued to 
increase, up 5.3% (annualized). Based on Customs data, 
exports hit a record of 175.8 billion euros in the first 
half as exports surged 30 billion euros in April and May, 
partially due to the sales of 107 Airbuses (6.5 billion 
euros) and capital goods.  The French foreign trade posted a 
high 11.2 billion euros deficit in the first half due to an 
increase in imports, notably imports of energy (17.2 billion 
euros).  The energy deficit was responsible for around 50% 
of the increase in the energy deficit in the first half. 
 
¶7.  Foreign Trade Minister Christine Lagarde stressed that 
"continued bearish economic export growth in the euro zone 
was harmful to French foreign trade."  Weak exports to 
France's two main trading partners, Germany and Italy, 
dragged down the overall gains.  Lagarde blamed the increase 
in the euro in 2003 and 2004 for harming French export- 
orientated companies.  Commentators stressed that Germany 
(unlike France) benefited from strong demand for its hefty 
industrial products. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
Government Revised Downward GDP Growth Forecast to 1.5-2.0% 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
¶8.  INSEE's chief economist Michel Devilliers said "we are 
in a phase of a not so great quarter, but it will be 
followed by a progressive recovery."  His comment echoed 
that of the European Commission, which forecast on August 11 
an acceleration in the euro zone growth to the fastest pace 
in almost two years at the end of 2005.  It said that the 
European central bank, which held its benchmark interest 
rate at a six-decade low of 2%, would help underpin a 
recovery in the euro zone. 
¶9.  Finance Minister Thierry Breton said "we clearly sense, 
for example with recent business confidence data, industrial 
production and company creation, that indicators are 
beginning to return to green.  We are confident for the 
second half."  Nonetheless, on August 31, he admitted that 
2005 economic growth was below 2%.  He said the government 
revised its GDP growth forecast to 1.5-2.0% from 2.0%, 
reiterating that "the worse was behind us" as the 
unemployment rate dropped below 10% mark, to 9.9% in July, 
hitting the lowest level in two years. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
IMF Revised Downward 2005 Forecast to 1.75% 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶10.  In July, IMF revised its forecast of the 2005 French 
economic growth to 1.75% from 2%, and forecast GDP to 
increase slightly above 2% in 2006 due to improved business 
climate and increased domestic demand benefiting from an 
increase in the euro.  That said, IMF warned "important 
uncertainties" related to oil prices and possible 
sluggishness of foreign demand if France's European partners 
subsisted.  On their part, private-sector economists warned 
about rising oil prices, weak job market and strong euro, 
which would limit economic recovery in the second half and 
restrict 2005 GDP growth to 1.5%. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
Main Downside Risks: Increasing Euro, High Oil Prices, Lack 
of Competitiveness 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
¶11.  Some economists deemed exports would benefit from the 
delayed effects of the weakness of the euro, which declined 
9% in the first half.  Nonetheless, the recent rise in the 
euro (up to USD 1.2468 on August 11) and in France's foreign 
trade deficit renewed fears about a negative impact of a 
strong euro on export growth. 
 
¶13.  The continuous rise in high oil prices above 65 USD a 
barrel has been causing concerns about the fragility of 
economic recovery through its impact on prices consumption, 
investment, and imports.  Lagarde estimated that the energy 
trade deficit could increase to 40 billion in 2005 from USD 
29 in 2004.  Regarding the preparation of the 2006 budget, 
Breton said the government set average oil price of USD 50 
per barrel (versus USD 36 in the 2005 budget).  Although 
energy prices for consumers are surging (up 12.5% in July 
compared with July 2004), inflation remained under control 
since consumer prices increased 1.7% in July compared with 
July 2004. 
 
¶14.  Economists, notably well-respected Head of the 
Government Economic Analysis Council ("Conseil d'Analyse 
Economique") Christian De Boissieu blamed France's weak 
trade performance on a lack of competitiveness.  He 
highlighted that the French industry was unable to benefit 
as its competitors from increased demand from emerging 
economies.  The Government commissioned a report to the 
Council in December 2004.  The report will be delivered by 
the end of the year. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
Rise in Oil Prices Cause Reactions from Politicians, Unions 
And Professionals 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
¶15.  Because of the surge in oil prices, the socialist 
party, the center-right UDF, some ruling-majority UMP 
members, and unions of transport professionals called for 
fuel price concessions.  Socialists called for the 
reactivation of the variable tax on petroleum products (Taxe 
Interieure sur les Produits Petroliers Flottante -"TIPP 
flottante") to limit the impact on consumers of high oil 
prices.  Fuel levies (74% tax on gas and 67% tax on diesel 
paid by motorists) are split between value-added tax of 
19.6% and a volume-based TIPP, which is forecast to raise E 
20 billion in 2005.  The variable tax had been introduced by 
the former socialist government, but was abolished by former 
Prime Minister Jean-Pierre Raffarin in 2002.  Socialists 
advocated that not reactivating the variable tax was harmful 
to consumers, and therefore to economic growth.  At the 
other end, the Greens and the National Federation of 
Associations of Transport Users were opposed to a decrease 
in the TIPP, arguing that drivers must be made aware of 
their responsibilities, and were favorable to a decrease in 
consumption of oil products. 
 
¶16.  Rising oil prices may give unions new arguments to 
protest unless the government takes action to boost jobs and 
real incomes.  Left unions FO and CGT leaders had already 
planned to demonstrate against the new type of hiring 
contract that allows companies of up to 20 employees to lay 
off workers anytime during the first two years of employment 
(Paris 5694). 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
Government Will Not Reactivate Floating Tax on Oil Products 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
¶17.  In an August 16 press conference, Prime Minister 
Dominique de Villepin ruled out a reactivation of the 
floating TIPP, arguing it was "extremely expensive" for the 
GOF and "for a relatively limited impact for the consumer." 
He said he preferred measures to encourage job growth as 
opposed to increased consumption of gasoline and other 
"polluting products" since the government made the fight 
against the global warming one of its priorities.  Villepin 
said he would be careful that measures would help sectors 
deal with higher oil prices, and promised that excess 
revenues from tax on oil products will be returned to low- 
income workers, and to sectors the most exposed to the 
recent surge in oil prices, notably transport professionals. 
An independent commission will assess the amount of excess 
revenues from tax on oil products at fall. Finance, 
Transport, Ecology and Industry ministers will participate 
in a round table to evaluate the situation.  Villepin urged 
oil companies including Total to increase refinery capacity, 
saying supply shortage caused price increases.  He also 
asked French motorists "to show a spirit of responsibility" 
by reducing their average speed by 10 km per hour, which, he 
said, would save money. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
Government Prepares a New Set of Measures to Spur Growth 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
¶18.  Villepin, who promised after taking office in June to 
restore confidence to the French within 100 days (by 
September 8), said that the government was preparing a set 
of new measures to boost economic growth.  He will unveil 
his program on September 1.  According to the press, the 
government could encourage employees' stock holding, wage 
negotiations by sector, job creation through tax incentives, 
and would finance measures with future privatization 
proceeds. 
 
-------- 
Comments 
-------- 
 
¶19.  The Q-2 low GDP growth and rising oil prices are 
contributing to doubts about the Government's ability to 
spur economic growth in 2005.  The government has already 
accounted for this situation since Villepin warned about a 
new program to be announced September 1, just a week before 
the end of the 110-day period, and eventually admitted that 
GDP growth was more in the 1.5%-2.0% range than close to 
2.0%. 
 
¶20.  The government is taking measures although its room for 
maneuver is limited by a bloated government deficit and 
debt.  Measures are likely to swell central government 
budget spending since the bulk of 2005 proceeds are used to 
cut public debt. 
STAPELTON