05QUITO2100
GALAPAGOS PARK MANAGEMENT:  ONE STEP FORWARD; TWO
Fri Sep 09 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Quito
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002100 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PLEASE TO USAID 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV EAID ECON EFIS ETRD PGOV PREL AORC EC
SUBJECT:  GALAPAGOS PARK MANAGEMENT:  ONE STEP FORWARD; TWO 
STEPS BACK 
 
¶1.  Summary.  In a move that strengthens the directorship of 
the Galapagos National Park (GNP), the GOE has established a 
transparent and independent selection process for park 
directors.  But this positive move is undermined by a 
parallel resolution by SENRES -- the national technical 
secretariat in charge of public sector wages -- that ends a 
 
SIPDIS 
favorable salary program used to attract well-qualified 
personnel to the Galapagos.  The SENRES decision has caused 
uproar among both the affected government workers and NGOs 
operating in the Galapagos.  More importantly, in 
conjunction with last year's 30% reduction in park staff, 
the resolution may undermine the GOE's ability to 
effectively manage the park.  End Summary. 
 
ONE STEP FORWARD: DE-POLITICIZING THE DIRECTORSHIP 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶2.  Environment Minister Alban signed an agreement in August 
2005 with the United Nations Development Program (UNDP) to 
establish a transparent and independent selection process 
for park directors.  The new selection process, the details 
of which are based on a proposal developed by outside 
consultants and funded by USAID, UNDP, and IDB, seeks to 
replace a highly politicized process that resulted in 13 
Park Directors in the last 2 years.  While the use of the 
park directorship for political purposes was particular to 
former President Gutierrez, it left a weakened GNP in its 
wake.  The MOE is expected to initiate the new selection 
process on September 20.  The GNP currently is managed by an 
interim director. 
 
¶3.  The new selection process, while not ideal, nonetheless 
represents a step forward in the effort to strengthen the 
management of the park.  The GOE-UNDP agreement requires 
that future directors have an appropriate level of work 
experience and educational background in environmental 
sciences and management.  Recent park directors more often 
than not lacked such knowledge.  Transparency being a major 
concern in past appointments, the agreement also calls for 
an independent four-member committee to manage the hiring 
process and to publicly provide details as to why and how 
they made their decision.  Unfortunately, the agreement does 
not provide for job security, something that the 
consultant's proposal considered vital. 
 
TWO STEPS BACK? SALARY BENEFITS ELIMINATED 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶4.  The August 2005 SENRES resolution that created wage 
equality for public officials across all Ecuadorian 
provinces essentially overturned a provision of the 
Galapagos Special Law that calls for government officials in 
the Galapagos to earn an extra 100% of their salary. 
International donors, NGOs, and those managing the park 
consider this provision necessary to attract well-qualified 
personnel to serve in the Galapagos, where the cost of 
living is high relative to the mainland. 
 
¶5.  Park operators and NGOs (both international and 
domestic) have approached President Palacios, Minister Alba, 
and Galapagos Deputy Alfredo Serrano requesting support. 
They are requesting a GOE determination that the Special Law 
take precedence over the SENRES resolution.  While President 
Palacios has been silent on the issue, his legal advisor has 
informally agreed with their position.  Minister Alba has 
taken no action on the request other than to suggest the 
Solicitor General might be able to decide.  Serrano has 
taken up the matter directly with the Solicitor General, who 
has the authority to rule on the relative precedence of the 
law and resolution.  The Solicitor General has yet to make a 
decision. 
 
¶6.  In discussions with EconOff, NGO leaders and government 
officials in the Galapagos have expressed three major 
concerns with respect to the SENRES resolution.  First, 
morale has plummeted among government workers in the GNP and 
INGALA, the two main government institutions on the islands. 
Morale plays a crucial role in the park's monitoring 
effectiveness as workers already face an uphill battle 
against illegal fishermen who are better funded and better 
equipped.  Second, government officials within the GNP and 
INGALA have expressed doubt that they will be able to 
attract well-qualified personnel for important leadership 
positions, to include the new Park Director.  For example, 
citing the surrounding uncertainty, one well-known boat 
operator who considered serving as captain of a key GNP 
monitoring and research vessel has reportedly decided to 
take a job with a tour operator instead.   Third, the 
retention of existing personnel will become a problem.  In 
particular, park wardens and boat operators are unlikely to 
renew their contracts in the coming year and will instead 
seek employment with tour operators and fishing interests 
where the pay will be higher.  Those operators who choose to 
renew their contracts at a lower pay could be more 
susceptible to bribes. 
 
¶7.  Compounding these problems is a 2004 SENRES decision to 
reduce the number of GNP staff by 30%, from 220 to 154. 
This reduction already has hampered the GNP's ability to 
patrol the marine reserve, to monitor fishing catches, and 
to manage conservation.  Park officials and NGOs fear that 
low morale and their inability to attract and retain well- 
qualified personnel will add to these problems and cause 
irreparable long-term harm to their monitoring and 
conservation efforts. 
 
JEWELL