05TAIPEI3773
TAIWAN WEAK ON SEA TURTLE CONSERVATION
Mon Sep 12 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TAIPEI 003773 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
PLEASE PASS AIT/W 
STATE FOR EAP/RSP/TC, OES/OMC - DAVID HOGAN 
COMMERCE FOR NOAA/NMFS - BSCHROEDER AND TFARIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EFIS SENV TW JA ESTH
SUBJECT: TAIWAN WEAK ON SEA TURTLE CONSERVATION 
 
REF: A) 2004 TAIPEI 03671 B) 2004 SECSTATE 118401 
 
¶1. Summary: In preparation for upcoming AIT/TECRO bilateral 
meetings on fisheries, AIT has reviewed Taiwan's efforts to 
reduce sea turtle bycatch.  Taiwan has not kept 
comprehensive records on sea turtle bycatch, modified its 
fishing gear, or educated its fishermen to prevent sea 
turtle bycatch.  Continued international pressure will be 
necessary if progress is to be made.  End Summary. 
 
Taiwan's Involvement in Sea Turtle Conservation 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶2. Taiwan has participated in a number of meetings regarding 
sea turtle conservation.  For example, in November 2004 
Taiwan attended a meeting of the Food and Agricultural 
Organization (FAO) of the United Nations as an observer. 
The purpose of the meeting was to develop guidelines to 
reduce sea turtle mortality.  Also, as an observer at the 
2005 meeting of the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission 
(IATTC), Taiwan was witness to the adoption of a resolution 
for the conservation of sea turtles.  Thus, Taiwan's 
Fisheries Administration (FA) is well-informed about the 
need to protect sea turtles. 
 
Taiwan Cooperation Needed to Save Sea Turtles 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. Taiwan's cooperation is essential to help protect sea 
turtles.  Taiwan operates the world's sixth largest fishing 
fleet.  Taiwan's fishing ships operate in every ocean of the 
world, staying at sea for six to ten months at a time. 
According to FA, Taiwan also has the largest tuna fishing 
fleet in the world.  Approximately six hundred ships bring 
in 100,000 tons of tuna a year.  Taiwan is also known for 
its building of super-seiner ships.  These ships are so 
large that the U.S., South Korea and Fiji have lobbied for a 
moratorium on their construction to help reduce over- 
fishing. 
 
Fisheries Administration (FA) 
------------------------------ 
 
¶4. As reported in reftel A, in a meeting with AIT in 
November 2004, FA officials said they were increasing their 
efforts to save sea turtles.  They outlined specific 
efforts, including improving seaturtle bycatch data, 
implementing new gear modifications and educating fishermen. 
In August 2005, AIT did an extensive review of what Taiwan 
has done about sea turtle conservation.  AIT looked at 
Taiwan's efforts in three areas:  collecting data on sea 
turtle bycatch; introducing gear modification; and educating 
and reaching out to fishermen.  Little progress has been 
made in any of the three areas. 
 
Sea Turtle Bycatch Data Unreliable 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶5. Taiwan's sea turtle bycatch data is both lacking and 
inadequate.  While observers from FA claim that the data has 
been collected but not collated, the fact remains that no 
published Taiwan data on sea turtle bycatch is available for 
either 2004 or 2005.  Furthermore, information that is 
available suggests that what data has been collected is 
unreliable.  According to Dr Chen Tian Hsi, a scientist who 
is currently responsible for reporting bycatch data for FA, 
the data for 2002 and 2003 is not useful for statistical 
purposes.  In his words, "The field is too small to be able 
to extrapolate sea turtle bycatch.  Also, most of the sea 
turtle bycatch occurs in the East Pacific, and FA did not 
send any observers there." In the last four years FA has 
sent between three to six observers a year to monitor 
Taiwan's fishing vessels. 
 
¶6.  Prior to 2004, FA had a contract with Dr. Cheng I Jiunn 
of National Ocean University to collect sea turtle data. 
Dr. Cheng agrees that Taiwan's data is unreliable and told 
AIT that FA discharged him in 2002 over a disagreement in 
methodology used to obtain sea turtle bycatch data.  FA 
insisted it collect the data from the observers and give Dr. 
Cheng the finished results.  However, Dr. Cheng insisted 
that the observers report to him directly and provide him 
with the raw data.  FA instead stopped funding Dr. Cheng. 
Dr. Cheng told AIT "I told them that I could not put my name 
on this research because it was not done properly." Dr. 
Cheng believes that FA sanitizes any sea turtle data that 
might reflect poorly on its operations. 
¶7. AIT asked FA's director of Deep Sea Fisheries, Tsay Tzu 
Yaw about sea turtle bycatch information for 2004 and 2005. 
Tsay said that FA would not release that information because 
 
SIPDIS 
it is sensitive. The information would only be available at 
international meetings when requested. 
 
Gear Modification: Circle Hooks and Turtle Excluder Devices 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
¶8. Taiwan has also failed to make notable progress in gear 
modification.  As noted in reftel B, circle hooks are larger 
fish hooks that are designed to decrease sea turtle bycatch. 
Traditional hooks are smaller and more likely to cause harm 
to sea turtles.  Extensive studies by the National Oceanic 
and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) has shown that circle 
hooks can decrease sea turtle bycatch rates by 90% without 
affecting fish-catch rates.  Turtle excluder devices (TEDS) 
are devices designed for shrimp trawlers.  The TEDS provide 
an escape hatch for sea turtles so they do not drown when 
caught in a shrimp net. 
 
¶9. Taiwan has neither introduced circle hooks to the fishing 
fleet nor TEDS to shrimp trawlers.  Dr. Cheng Tien Hsi told 
AIT that additional research is needed to determine whether 
circle hooks or TEDS would make any difference on sea turtle 
bycatch.  His opinion was echoed by Tsay Tzu Yaw, the 
director of Deep Sea Fisheries for FA. Tsay said that the 
cost of modifying all ships was prohibitive when only a 
small number of ships will interact with sea turtles. 
 
Outreach to fisherman 
--------------------- 
 
¶10. The November 2004 FAO Technical meeting on Sea Turtle 
Bycatch, at which Taiwan was an observer, recommended that 
governments provide equipment and training to allow 
fishermen to dehook and release sea turtles that are caught. 
Nonetheless, FA does not provide any equipment or train 
fisherman on how to release incidentally caught sea turtles. 
 
¶11. According to three observers from FA, Taiwan fishermen 
might be inclined to save sea turtles if given proper 
training and equipment. Sea turtles are considered gods in 
Taiwanese folklore and it is believed that killing or 
injuring a sea turtle can bring bad luck to the ship and its 
crew.  The observers believed fishermen would be implement 
measures to protect sea turtles if provided the training and 
equipment. 
 
International Criticism Leads to Taiwan to Increase 
Observers 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶12.  Taiwan's participation in international fisheries 
organizations, has led it to make some progress. FA has 
hired more observers to meet its obligations under 
international fisheries organizations such as International 
Commission on the Conservation Atlantic Tuna (ICATT) and the 
Convention on Conservation of Southern Bluefin Tuna (CCSBT). 
ICATT and CCSBT have criticized Taiwan for its lack of data 
on its tuna fishing fleet.  As a result, FA's goal is to 
eventually hire between thirty to sixty observers to collect 
data on Taiwan's tuna fleet.  In 2005, FA has increased the 
number of observers in its fishing operations from 3 to 24. 
FA Officials have also promised to begin using circle hooks 
by the end of 2005. 
 
¶13. Comment:  To date, Taiwan has done little to address sea 
turtle bycatch in its international fishing operations.  It 
is particularly troubling that, at this late stage, Taiwan 
still calls for more research and tries to avoid sharing 
"sensitive" turtle bycatch data with AIT.  Nonetheless, 
criticism from international fisheries organizations for 
failure to conform to international fishing norms 
(particularly in ICAAT) has led Taiwan to promise to start 
using circle hooks and to hire more observers to collect 
data from fishing operations.  More observers may help to 
improve the data being collected on incidental bycatch of 
sea turtles, birds and other species.  For Taiwan's data to 
be reliable, however, increased international pressure is 
needed to ensure Taiwan does not "sanitize" its data. 
Taiwan also needs to be monitored to ensure it does indeed 
start using circle hooks and starts to educate its fishermen 
on preventing sea turtle bycatch. Post recommends that this 
issue be put on the agenda at the next AIT/TECRO bilateral 
meeting on fisheries.  End comment.