04HARARE561
INFLUENCE ANALYSIS -- ZIMBABWE
Thu Apr 01 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Harare
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 HARARE 000561 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
AF/PD FOR D. FOLEY AND C. DALTON 
AF/S FOR M. RAYNOR 
NSC FOR SENIOR AFRICA DIRECTOR J. FRAZER 
LONDON FOR C. GURNEY 
PARIS FOR C. NEARY 
NAIROBI FOR T. PFLAUMER 
 
¶E.  O.  12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OIIP ZI
SUBJECT: INFLUENCE ANALYSIS -- ZIMBABWE 
 
Introduction: Public Diplomacy Environment 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Zimbabwe's media operating environment is 
restrictive and becoming increasingly harsh.  The GOZ's 
Media and Information Commission (MIC) closed the only 
independent daily newspaper, the Daily News, and has 
threatened other independent newspapers and journalists with 
legal action.  Security forces and ruling party supporters 
harassed, intimidated, and beat journalists.  Authorities 
arbitrarily detained journalists and refused to investigate 
or punish those who assaulted journalists.  Journalists 
practiced self-censorship.  Most foreign journalists have 
been expelled from or denied entry to the country. 
Compounding the repressive legal environment are a deep- 
seated political polarization that cleaves society and the 
ruling party's refusal to engage meaningfully with the 
opposition on any issue of import. 
 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  Several major daily newspapers and one local- 
language tabloid belong to the Mass Media Trust (MMT), a 
holding company heavily influenced by the ruling party, ZANU- 
PF.  The Government, through the MMT, controlled two daily 
newspapers, the Chronicle and the Herald.  With the demise 
of The Daily News, the Herald is the most read newspaper in 
the country. Government-controlled newspapers generally are 
read with considerable skepticism by educated urban 
populations but are influential among ruling party faithful. 
News coverage in the MMT newspapers generally focuses on the 
activities of government officials, neglects opposition 
parties and other antigovernment groups, and also downplays 
events or information that reflect adversely on the 
Government.  They are relentless in their portrayal of the 
USG as part of a conspiracy (including white farmers and the 
United Kingdom) to overthrow the GOZ. The Minister for 
Information and Publicity controls the Zimbabwe Inter-Africa 
News Agency wire service.  Nonetheless, the Mission is 
trying to cultivate latent interest among numerous 
journalists from the official media who see value in a 
cordial albeit discreet relationship. 
 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  In addition to the Daily News, which had the 
nation's largest circulation until its closure, there are 
three independent major weeklies (the Financial Gazette, the 
Independent, and the Standard), and three monthlies that 
continued to operate despite threats and pressure from the 
Government.  The major independent newspapers continue to 
monitor government policies and publish stories critical of 
the government, but most of them also continued to exercise 
self-censorship in reporting due to growing government 
intimidation and the continuing prospect of prosecution 
under criminal libel and security laws.  They are read 
principally in urban areas.  The Mission's Information 
Resource Center, which records about 100,000 visits per 
year, is another source of independent information among 
those in the capital. 
 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  Radio remains the most important medium of public 
communication, particularly for the majority of the 
population living in rural areas.  The Government continued 
to control all domestic radio broadcasting stations through 
the state-owned Zimbabwe Broadcasting Corporation (ZBC), 
supervised by the Minister for Information and Publicity in 
the President's Office.  There are credible reports that the 
Minister routinely reviews ZBC news and repeatedly excises 
reports on the activities of groups and organizations 
opposed to or critical of the Government.  There are only 
two independent short wave radio broadcasts in the country; 
however, it is unclear how many citizens could actually 
listen to short wave broadcasts.  Voice of America (VOA) 
broadcasts a 1-hour program five times a week on short wave 
and AM featuring interviews with local opinion makers on a 
range of topics in English, Shona, and Ndebele.  Short Wave 
Radio Africa broadcast daily from the United Kingdom, using 
local sources and reporters. 
 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  The Government controls all domestic television 
broadcasting stations, and ZBC owns and operates television 
broadcasting facilities.  Broadcast media coverage's biases 
mirror those of the government-controlled print media.  The 
Government continues to refuse to lease broadcast time to 
Joy TV, the only privately licensed television station, and 
it remained off the air.  International television 
broadcasts were available freely through private satellite 
firms; however, the requirement that payment must be made 
exclusively in foreign currency made it unavailable for most 
citizens. 
 
MPP Goal: Democratic System and Practices 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  It is hard to get our message out.  Given GOZ 
hostility to the USG, principal avenues to engage on 
democracy issues are via personal engagement with selected 
influential individuals within or close to the government 
and widespread electronic dissemination of USG 
positions/statements (e.g., The Washington File) to press 
outlets, academics, and NGOs.  Effective placements in the 
official media regarding U.S. policy on democracy and human 
rights are rare in undistorted form.  Efforts to place 
pieces in the independent weeklies yield modest success, 
which generally is constrained by self-censorship and the 
weeklies' limited readership.  Public diplomacy through 
engagement with Zimbabwe's broad network of NGOs is 
handicapped by severe GOZ pressure on NGOs that share our 
objectives, especially in their information dissemination 
activities, and by the NGOs' limited reach to key audiences. 
Prospects for being able to describe and defend U.S. 
policies effectively in the foreseeable future are not good. 
Demonization of the United States is a principal GOZ tactic 
in attempting to unify and to motivate its supporters; the 
GOZ can be counted on to continue resisting and actively 
suppressing dissenting views generally, and positive 
portrayals of the USG in particular.  Accordingly, foremost 
among mission priorities is amendment of draconian legal and 
practical restrictions on freedom of speech but favorable 
government action is not likely in the foreseeable future. 
 
MPP Goal: Assistance for Refugees and Other Victims 
 
¶7.  (SBU)  The environment for public diplomacy in this area 
is complicated, notwithstanding the generous levels of 
humanitarian assistance we lavish on Zimbabwe each year.  A 
constant tension exists between the GOZ and donors over the 
GOZ's desire to direct to its supporters, project control 
over, and take credit for food distribution and public 
health services, the principal areas of our assistance in 
Zimbabwe.  This tension is expected to sharpen in the run-up 
to national parliamentary elections scheduled for next 
March.  GOZ efforts to control food and health resources 
already are increasing and official news outlets and public 
officials are manipulating coverage to political advantage 
and downplaying the impact of donor activities. 
Nonetheless, we are enjoying some success in placing 
articles about USG assistance, and our contacts in the GOZ 
and NGO community represent strong channels for personal 
engagement. 
 
MPP Goal: Global Health 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  Government suspicion of USG motives has 
complicated public diplomacy efforts in this area as well. 
For example, the Ministry of Information prevented 
transmission of a USG-funded innovative radio soap opera to 
heighten HIV/AIDS awareness, despite strong support from 
civil society and the Ministry of Public Health. 
Nevertheless, the official media has been willing to print 
material accurately describing USG activities in support of 
USG objectives.  In addition, USAID and CDC have 
collaborated on successful media and community-based 
behavior change communication programs targeting youth and 
young adults.   The mission is working with faith-based 
organizations to influence behavior at the community level 
and is expanding the role of family planning community-based 
outreach workers to include HIV/AIDS prevention activities. 
As with other areas of humanitarian assistance, our contacts 
in relevant ministries and civil society effectively 
buttress the limited public diplomacy opportunities 
available through traditional media. 
 
MPP Goal: American Values Respected Abroad 
------------------------------------------ 
 
  ¶9.   (SBU) Our goal is to strengthen the pillars of 
      democracy, including a free flow of information and support 
      for a free press.  Zimbabwe's ever-shrinking atmosphere to 
      support free debate is an overarching obstacle that 
      increasingly handicaps our efforts across the board. 
      Accordingly, we attach high priority in collaborating with 
      Zimbabwean individuals and institutions that share our 
      objectives to ameliorate the draconian laws and policies 
      used to stifle information flow.  Given the hostile 
      environment, our strategy must be flexible and 
      opportunistic, essentially employing all the means referred 
      to above: media placements where possible; widespread 
      electronic dissemination of materials to influential 
      players; academic events; and personal engagement. 
 
  SULLIVAN