04TELAVIV2416
THE SITUATION ON THE GROUND APRIL 28, 2004 --
Wed Apr 28 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEL AVIV 002416 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR BURNS/SATTERFIELD 
NEA/SA/EX FOR AUSTIN-FERGUSON; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; 
DEPT FOR DS/IP/ITA; DRL FOR A/S CRANER; 
NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN; 
USAID FOR DCHA, DCHA/FPP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG PTER ASEC PHUM CASC KPAL IS GZ
SUBJECT: THE SITUATION ON THE GROUND APRIL 28, 2004 -- 
(1300 HOURS LOCAL) -- FOUR SOLDIERS WOUNDED APRIL 28 AS IDF 
THWARTS SUICIDE ATTACK IN GAZA 
 
 
THIS IS A JOINT MESSAGE FROM EMBASSY TEL AVIV AND CONGEN 
JERUSALEM. 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: Israeli media reported that four Israelis 
were injured, one seriously, in an attempted suicide car 
bombing April 28 when a jeep exploded under IDF gunfire as it 
was speeding towards the settlement of Kfar Darom.  Three 
Palestinians were killed April 26 in the Mughazi camp in an 
argument that apparently broke out when two of the men tried 
to seize an explosive belt from the third at gunpoint.  Hamas 
issued a statement declaring that the two men who attempted 
to seize the belt were Israeli collaborators who tried to 
detain the third, who was a Hamas militant planning to use 
the belt in a suicide attack.  In the West Bank, the IDF 
killed two Palestinians alleged to be members of Hamas in 
Tulkarem.  The operation, in which another Palestinian was 
wounded, led to subsequent clashes in Tulkarem, injuring an 
additional six Palestinians.  Israel border police detained 
Al-Quds University President Sari Nussaybah for five hours of 
questioning on April 28. 
 
End Summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Death/Injury: The IDF killed two Palestinians April 27 in 
Tulkarm.  The two were reported to be members of Hamas. 
Another Palestinian was wounded in the operation and 
subsequently arrested.  Clashes in Tulkarm following this 
incident left another six Palestinians injured. 
 
-- Injury: nil 
 
-- Shooting: Palestinian gunmen shot at IDF jeeps in the 
Tulkarm and Janin areas on April 27, but no one was injured. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) ARRESTS: 
 
-- The IDF arrested 11 Palestinians throughout the West Bank 
during the night between April 27 and 28. 
 
-- Israeli police arrested a teenage Palestinian girl in 
Jerusalem who was carrying a large knife.  Press reports 
indicated she was suspected of planning to stab policemen. 
 
-- Israeli border police detained Al-Quds University 
President Sari Nussaybah for five hours of questioning on 
April 28.  Nussaybah's offense, according to the Israeli 
police spokesman, was allowing West Bank Palestinians to work 
at the AQU campus in the Beit Hanina section of Jerusalem 
without permits to enter Israel.  Nussaybah was released 
without any charges filed. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) CURFEWS/CLOSURES: 
 
-- Bayt Sahour was still under curfew April 27, after a 
weekend shooting attack against nearby Har Homa settlement. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶5. (SBU)  ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Three Palestinians were killed April 26 in the 
Mughazi camp when an argument apparently broke out between 
three men.  Two of the men reportedly tried to seize an 
explosive belt from the third at gunpoint.  Hamas issued a 
statement declaring that the two men who attempted to seize 
the belt were Israeli collaborators who tried to detain the 
third, who was a Hamas militant planning to use the belt in a 
suicide attack. 
 
-- Death/Injuries: Israeli media reported that four IDF 
soldiers were injured, one seriously, in an attempted suicide 
car bombing April 28 when a jeep exploded under IDF gunfire 
as it was speeding towards the settlement of Kfar Darom.  The 
Palestinian driver of the jeep was killed in the blast (see 
"Explosions"). 
-- Death/Injury: UNRWA and Israeli media reported that a 
14-year-old Palestinian boy was shot and killed April 26 when 
he and a group of teenagers gathered near the fence of the 
Nissanit settlement to watch IDF armored vehicles operating 
in the area of Bayt Lahiyah.  According to press reports, an 
IDF sniper shot the boy using live ammunition.  Several hours 
later, a larger group gathered and threw stones at the IDF 
vehicles.  One Palestinian was injured when the IDF responded 
with live ammunition, rubber-coated bullets and tear gas. 
 
-- UNRWA reported that two Palestinians, ages 14 and 15, were 
shot and injured April 27 near Bayt Lahiyah when IDF soldiers 
responded to stone-throwing with tear gas, rubber-coated 
bullets, and live fire ammunition. 
 
-- Injuries: UNRWA reported that a 17-year-old Palestinian 
woman was shot and seriously injured April 26 when IDF 
soldiers opened fire on her as she approached the border of 
the Slaw settlement.  Palestinian sources said that the woman 
was mentally handicapped; IDF officials said that the 
soldiers opened fire on her when she ran towards the 
settlement, thinking that she meant to attack them. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets/Hand Grenades: The IDF reported a total of 
10 mortar shells fired at IDF outposts and Israeli 
settlements April 26-28.  No injuries were reported. 
 
-- Shootings: The IDF reported four shooting attacks April 
26-28. 
 
-- Explosions: UNRWA and Israeli media reported that a 
Palestinian attempting to drive an explosive-laden jeep into 
Kfar Darom settlement was sighted by IDF soldiers who opened 
fire on him.  The jeep, apparently disguised as an IDF 
vehicle, exploded before reaching the settlement, killing the 
driver and wounding four IDF soldiers. 
 
-- Explosions: UNRWA reported that unknown Palestinians blew 
up two coffee shops in Burayj camp in the early morning hours 
of April 27.  PA police are investigating; no injuries were 
reported. 
 
-- Explosions: UNRWA reported that Palestinians exploded an 
IED April 26 near an IDF armored vehicle patrolling near Bayt 
Hanoun.  No injuries were reported.  The al-Aqsa Brigades 
claimed responsibility for the attack. 
 
-- Explosions: UNRWA reported that Palestinians exploded an 
IED April 26 near an IDF armored vehicle patrolling the 
border fence with Egypt.  No injuries were reported.  The 
al-Aqsa Brigades claimed responsibility for the attack. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) INCURSIONS/DEMOLITIONS: 
 
-- UNRWA reported that an IDF bulldozer and two tanks 
uprooted 10 dunams of olive trees near Khan Yunis April 26. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS/CHECKPOINTS: 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was open for Palestinians. 
 
-- Erez Crossing and the Erez Industrial Zone both remained 
closed April 27-28, despite earlier GOI statements that they 
would re-open after Independence Day April 27. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed April 27-28 for Palestinian 
laborers and for the import of construction materials. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was open April 27-28 for the import and 
export of goods into the Gaza Strip. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open April 27-28 for Palestinian 
travelers under age 16 and over age 35. 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan checkpoint was closed April 27-28.  Toufah 
checkpoint was open for residents of al-Mowassi. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) POLITICIAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- Israeli media reported that approximately 60-70,000 
Israelis gathered in the Gush Katif settlement bloc April 27 
to mark Israeli independence day and to show support for the 
settlers there. 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
KURTZER