05AMMAN9630
IRAQ ELECTIONS: LIGHT TURNOUT ON FIRST DAY OF IRAQ
Tue Dec 13 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Amman
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

131652Z Dec 05UNCLAS AMMAN 009630 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM PGOV IZ JO
SUBJECT: IRAQ ELECTIONS: LIGHT TURNOUT ON FIRST DAY OF IRAQ 
OCV IN JORDAN 
 
Ref: AMMAN 9513 
 
LIGHT FIRST DAY TURNOUT 
----------------------- 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Voter turnout was generally light on December 13, 
the first of three days of Iraqi election Out-of-Country 
Voting (OCV) in Jordan.  Amman-based Independent Election 
Commission of Iraq (IECI) OCV chief Hamdia al-Husseini told 
Emboff that less than 3,000 Iraqis had voted countrywide as 
of 3:00PM on December 13.  However, she noted that the polls 
will remain open until 8:00PM, and predicted that a 
significant surge in voting will occur after voters get off 
work. 
 
SMOOTH OPERATIONS, MANY OBSERVERS 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) During the course of the day, Embassy Amman 
election observer teams visited all thirteen OCV polling 
sites in Jordan, consisting of ten in Amman and one each in 
the cities of Zarqa and Irbid and at the Jordan-Iraq Police 
Training Center (JIPTC).  Embassy observers found polling 
operations proceeding smoothly, professionally, and without 
incident, in an overall atmosphere that ranged from business- 
like to celebratory.  Embassy teams also noted the presence 
at polling stations of other international observers, 
including many from the International Mission for Iraqi 
Elections (IMIE). 
 
¶3.  (SBU) A large number of Iraqi political party observers 
from across the spectrum were also noted; Allawi Coalition 
Amman campaign chief Jaffar al-Taie told us that the Allawi 
campaign would position observers at all polling sites from 
opening until closing.  International press was observed at 
some polling stations in Amman, including CNN, BBC, Japanese 
press, and even a correspondent from Mother Jones magazine. 
An Al-Iraqiyya TV crew was also in action. 
 
SINGING AND COOKIES 
------------------- 
 
¶4.  (U) Polling sites near areas inhabited by wealthy and 
middle class Iraqis, such as the relatively upscale 
neighborhoods of Rabia and Sweifeyeh, appeared to have 
attracted the largest turnout by midday.  By contrast, OCV 
polling stations in Zarqa and Irbid each had received less 
than 100 voters by 1PM.  Observers at some of the better- 
attended voting stations noted an almost jovial atmosphere, 
with occasional bursts of singing and the passing around of 
candy and cookies at one OCV location.  Voting at JIPTC was 
the most organized, as individual groups of cadet voters 
arrived to vote at pre-assigned times. 
 
SECURITY MEASURES 
----------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Perimeter security provided by the Jordanian 
police was uniformly excellent.  One or more blocks adjacent 
to each polling station (frequently an elementary school) 
were closed off, and a heavy and watchful security presence, 
some armed, was noticeable.  The inner ring of security, 
provided by a commercial security company, was more erratic 
- in some cases, Amman observers experienced two frisks plus 
a metal detector check, while in others there was only one 
or two frisks, with no metal detector. 
 
Hale