05CAIRO9135
EGYPT: WIDESPREAD OBSTRUCTION AND VIOLENCE AT
Wed Dec 07 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

071724Z Dec 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CAIRO 009135 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NSC STAFF FOR SINGH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM KDEM EG EGPHUM
SUBJECT: EGYPT: WIDESPREAD OBSTRUCTION AND VIOLENCE AT 
CLOSING DAY OF PARLIAMENTARY POLLS 
 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified.  Please protect accordingly. 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) December 7 saw runoff races for seats in most 
parliamentary constituencies in nine provinces of Egypt. 
Although many polling places appeared to be quiet and 
functioning normally, there were serious disruptions at many 
others.  Emboffs witnessed security force obstruction of 
polling places at numerous voting stations.  Contacts and 
press reports confirmed that the phenomenon was widespread. 
Thugs intended to intimidate opposition voters were also 
spotted at many sites across the Delta.  There were also 
reports of journalists obstructed, harassed, and in some 
cases beaten.  The current possible death toll from election 
related violence is 4-6.  End summary. 
 
------------------------------- 
Security Forces Obstruct Voting 
------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Emboffs visiting constituencies in Nile Delta 
provinces witnessed 13 instances where security forces had 
closed down polling stations, apparently to ensure the defeat 
of popular Muslim Brotherhood candidates. 
 
-- There was also security service closure of at least three 
polling stations where the NDP candidate (a brother of the 
Presidential Chief of Staff) was challenging Wafd Party 
(i.e., secular, liberal) candidate Mahmoud Abaza. 
 
-- Embassy contacts including domestic monitors and 
journalists confirmed that closures were widespread in the 
Delta. 
 
-- In many cases, security forces used tear gas to disperse 
crowds demanding admission polling stations. 
 
-- Roads into and out of the Nile Delta city of Mansoura were 
reportedly closed by security forces. 
 
-------- 
Tear Gas 
-------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Emboffs witnessed two instances of apparently 
unjustified use of tear gas: 
 
-- At Abu Hammad village east of Zagazig, Sharqiyya, an angry 
crowd gathered in front of a closed polling station.  They 
told poloff that the Egyptian police were the "Israelis" and 
stated they were living "under occupation."  Security forces 
responded with tear gas. 
 
-- In a second incident witnessed by poloff, police fired 
tear gas shells, and a police officer fired live ammunition 
over the heads of demonstrators.  Witnesses subsequently told 
poloff one citizen died of tear gas inhalation in the 
incident. 
 
----- 
Thugs 
----- 
 
¶4. (SBU) There were also reports of thugs throwing stones and 
bottles, and carrying clubs and machetes, in order to 
discourage and intimidate prospective voters. 
 
-- A journalist with AP advised poloff that she witnessed 
thugs carrying machetes disembarking from a police truck near 
a polling station in Sharqiya province. 
 
-- An embassy contact witnessed thugs raining stones down on 
prospective voters from rooftops in Nasiriya constituency, 
Sharqiyya. 
 
---------------------- 
Journalists Obstructed 
---------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) We witnessed one instance, and received reports of 
several others, in which journalists were obstructed, 
harassed, and in at least one case beaten. 
 
-- Emboffs witnessed an Egyptian TV crew ejected by police 
from a polling station in Sharqiyya province. 
 
-- Contacts also advised the Embassy that an Al-Jazeera crew 
in Damietta province was harassed and their equipment 
sabotaged. 
 
-- An American journalist contact advised poloff that he was 
struck by police and his camera was confiscated in Nasiriya 
constituency, Sharqiya. 
 
-- Police also attempted to confiscate an emboff's camera in 
Kafr al-Sheikh province. 
 
-------------- 
Other Violence 
-------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Other instances of election-related violence came to 
our attention. 
 
-- UK Embassy contact advised poloff that protestors in 
Sharqiya Province had blockaded and "set fire" to several 
major roads. 
 
-- An American journalist advised poloff that he had 
witnessed vigilantes detaining alleged NDP bullies in a 
building in Zagazig, Sharqiyya province. 
 
-- Poloff saw MB supporters stoning police after police set 
upon an MB candidate with batons. 
 
-- Nasserist Party Chairman and Parliamentary candidate Dia 
ed-Din Dawood was reportedly beaten by police in Damietta. 
 
-- The current possible death toll from today's election 
violence is 4-6. 
 
 
RICCIARDONE