05JERUSALEM2970
WB/G SITREP: TWO PALESTINIANS KILLED, FIVE
Wed Jul 13 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Jerusalem
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 JERUSALEM 002970 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FRONT OFFICE; NEA/SA/EX FOR AUSTIN-FERGUSON; DEPT 
FOR DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PBTS PHUM KWBG CASC IS
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: TWO PALESTINIANS KILLED, FIVE 
ARRESTED DURING IDF OPERATION IN TULKARM: JULY 13, 2005 
(1700 HOURS LOCAL) 
 
This is a joint Embassy/ConGen cable. 
 
¶1.    (SBU) Summary: In response to the July 12 suicide 
bombing in Netanya that killed four Israelis and wounded at 
least 90 others, and the attempted car bombing by a 
Palestinian in the West Bank settlement of Shavei Shomron, 
the IDF on July 13 launched an operation into Tulkarm, 
killing two Palestinians, including one member of the 
National Security Forces, and arresting five suspected PIJ 
activists.  The IDF also imposed a curfew on al-Til village, 
north of Tulkarm, the residence of the suicide bomber. 
Following the attack, the IDF ordered a total closure of the 
West Bank and Gaza Strip for an undetermined period. 
Palestinian Authority (PA) President Abbas condemned the 
attack and ordered the arrest of those responsible.  In the 
Gaza Strip, armed Palestinian militants kidnapped two 
European nationals working on a PA water project.  The PA is 
currently negotiating the terms of their release.  Sporadic 
mortar, rocket, and shooting attacks resulted in no reported 
injuries.  End summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2.    (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: IDF soldiers operating in Tulkarm on July 13 shot 
and killed two Palestinians, including a member of the 
National Security Forces at a PA checkpoint who the IDF 
claims was killed after opening fire on Israeli forces (the 
PA denies this, and said that the NSF member was merely 
manning the checkpoint when Israeli forces entered the city 
and fired on the uniformed NSF guards, who offered no 
opposition). 
 
-- Injuries: Two IDF soldiers operating in Tulkarm on July 13 
received light injuries during exchanges of gunfire with 
Palestinian gunmen. 
 
¶3.    (SBU) ARRESTS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Incursion/Arrests: The IDF on July 13 entered Tulkarm and 
reportedly arrested five Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ) 
activists, including the father of the Netanya suicide 
bomber.  The IDF also confiscated weapons during the 
operation.  According to IDF sources, the operation in 
Tulkarm will continue for an undetermined period. 
 
-- Closure: Following the July 12 suicide bombing in Netanya 
and the attempted car bombing in Shavei Shomron, the IDF 
imposed a total closure on the West Bank. 
 
-- Curfew: The IDF on July 13 entered al-Til village, north 
of Tulkarm, following reports that the suicide bomber in 
Netanya resided in the village.  During the operation, the 
IDF imposed a curfew and conducted searches of houses. 
 
-- Arrests: The IDF on July 12 entered Hebron and arrested 
two Hamas activists. 
 
¶4.    (SBU) DEMOLITIONS: 
 
-- Israeli bulldozers on July 12 demolished two Palestinian 
homes in East Jerusalem for lack of the proper building 
permits. 
 
¶5.    (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- According to Palestinian media reports, the Palestinian 
Authority (PA) strongly condemned the July 12 suicide bombing 
in Netanya.  PA President Mahmud Abbas labeled the attack a 
"crime against the Palestinian people," and reportedly 
instructed the PA Ministry of the Interior to arrest those 
connected to the attack in Netanya. 
 
-- According to Palestinian sources, the head of the PA 
"Special Forces," Bashir Nafa'a, placed two members of the 
Special Forces in protective custody in connection with their 
suspected participation in the July 12 attack on Ibrahim 
Salama, a senior official in the PA Ministry of the Interior. 
 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶6.    (SBU) ATTACKS: 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Kidnapping: According to UNRWA, Palestinian Authority 
security forces have confirmed that an Austrian national and 
a British national, who have been working on a water project 
with the PA, have been kidnapped by armed militants, who the 
PA identified as members of the Issa family from the Bureij 
camp in the northern Gaza Strip.  UNRWA reported that, 
according to the PA, the Issa family is demanding that the PA 
release members of the family and that the PA is currently 
negotiating with the kidnappers.  No further details were 
provided. 
 
-- Explosive Devices: According to the IDF, an explosive 
device detonated July 12 near the Netzer Hazani settlement. 
No injuries were reported. 
 
-- Mortar: According to the IDF, two mortar shells were fired 
July 12 south of Atzmona settlement, targeting IDF soldiers 
and Israeli civilians.  No injuries resulted. 
 
-- Shootings: The IDF reported 9 shootings July 12 aimed at 
IDF targets: 6 shootings near the Sufa Crossing, one shooting 
north of Rafah, one shooting near Kerem Shalom crossing, and 
one shooting near the Netzer Hazani settlement.  No injuries 
resulted. 
 
-- Shootings: The IDF reported two shootings July 13 
targeting IDF soldiers, one near the Morag settlement and one 
near the Neve Dekalim settlement. 
 
¶7.    (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS/INTERNAL CHECKPOINTS: 
 
-- Erez Crossing was open to internationals only on July 13. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone was closed July 13. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers on July 
13, but was open for construction materials. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was open on July 13. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open on July 13 in both directions 
without age restrictions. 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was open on July 13 with the exception of the closure 
noted below, with a major detour at Netzarim Junction. 
 
-- Kissufim Junction, the main entry point to Gush Katif 
settlement bloc, was closed to non-residents July 13. 
 
-- Toufah checkpoint was open July 13, except to males aged 
16-30. 
 
¶8.    (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- Following the July 12 suicide attack carried out by a PIJ 
bomber at a Netanya shopping mall in which four Israeli 
civilians were killed and some 90 injured, and the attempted 
car bombing in Shavei Shomron, the IDF issued a general 
closure of the Gaza Strip starting the morning of July 13. 
The IDF announced that the closure would remain in effect 
"until a renewed security assessment is held." 
 
-- Prime Minister Sharon issued an order July 13 that 
effectively bars all non-resident Israelis from entering the 
Gaza Strip and those areas to be evacuated in the northern 
West Bank.  According to media reports, the restrictions are 
likely to remain in place until after the Disengagement Plan 
is carried out.  Settler youth trying to enter Gaza 
reportedly clashed with IDF troops at Kissufim Junction, the 
main entry point to the Gush Katif settlement bloc. 
PEARCE