05JERUSALEM3325
WB/G SITREP: JULY 29, 2005 (1500 HOURS LOCAL) --
Fri Jul 29 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Jerusalem
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 JERUSALEM 003325 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FO; NEA/SA/EX FOR AUSTIN-FERGUSON; DEPT FOR 
DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/MUSTAFA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PBTS PHUM KWBG KPAL IS ASEC
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: JULY 29, 2005 (1500 HOURS LOCAL) -- 
PALESTINIAN MAN KILLED DURING IDF INCURSION NEAR TULKARM, 
SENIOR AIDE TO MOUSSA ARAFAT KIDNAPPED IN GAZA. 
 
 
This is a joint ConGen Jerusalem/Embassy Tel Aviv cable. 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  In the West Bank, IDF forces entered into 
Shufa village near Tulkarm July 28 and killed a 29-year old 
Palestinian, whom the IDF said helped organize the recent 
suicide bombing in Netanya.  The IDF arrested a total of four 
PIJ militants in Ramallah, Jenin, and Hebron July 28.  In 
Gaza, UNRWA reported that members of the Jenin Martyr's 
Brigade kidnapped a senior aide to Mousa Arafat and his 
brother on July 28 and took them to the Burej camp.  End 
Summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) ATTACKS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Deaths: According to Palestinian sources, IDF forces 
entered into Shufa village near Tulkarm July 28 and killed 
Muaya Musa, a 29-year old Palestinian.  Palestinian sources 
maintained that the IDF killed Musa in a targeted killing 
operation, that Musa was shot inside his home, and that he 
did not pose a threat to the IDF.  Israeli security sources 
maintained that Musa is a wanted Palestinian Islamic Jihad 
(PIJ) member, that he transported the suicide bomber to 
Netanya two weeks ago, and that he threatened the Israeli 
patrol when they confronted him. 
 
-- Injuries: According to Palestinian media, six Palestinians 
were lightly injured in the village of Bil'in, west of 
Ramallah, during protests against the construction of the 
separation barrier on July 28. 
 
-- Injuries:  Palestinian sources reported that three 
Palestinians were wounded during clashes with the IDF in the 
village of Anabta, near Tulkarm, on July 28. 
 
-- Injuries:  According to Palestinian media, a 15-year-old 
Palestinian boy was seriously injured during clashes with the 
IDF in the village of Bala, near Tulkarm, on July 28. 
 
-- Arrests: Palestinian newspapers reported that the IDF 
arrested a total of four PIJ militants in Ramallah, Jenin, 
and Hebron on July 28. 
 
-- Shootings:  According to Israeli and Palestinian reports, 
shots were fired at IDF patrols in Tulkarm and Jenin in the 
morning of July 29.  No injuries were reported. 
 
-- Shootings:  According to Israeli and Palestinian sources, 
armed Palestinian militants opened fire at an IDF post in the 
northern West Bank settlement of Kadim on July 28.  No 
injuries or damages were reported. 
 
-- Demonstration: According to Palestinian sources, a 
demonstration against the construction of the separation 
barrier was organized in the village of Budrus, west of 
Ramallah, on July 28.  No serious clashes took place during 
the demonstration. 
 
¶3. (SBU) CLOSURES/CURFEWS: 
 
-- According to Palestinian media, the IDF set up a gate at 
one of the entrances to al-Ibrahimi mosque in the Old City of 
Hebron. 
 
-- Palestinian sources reported that the IDF imposed a curfew 
on Sebastia village, north of Nablus, and conducted searches 
there on July 28.  The IDF entered into the village after 
shots were fired towards an IDF position near Sebastia.  The 
curfew was lifted late on the evening of July 28. 
 
¶4. (SBU) DEMOLITIONS/CONFISCATIONS: 
 
-- Palestinian sources reported that the IDF bulldozed lands 
in Immatin village, near Qalqiliya, on July 28 in preparation 
for construction of the separation barrier in the area.  A 
demonstration against the barrier construction took place in 
the village July 29. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶5. (SBU) ATTACKS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Deaths: None reported. 
-- Injuries: None reported. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: The IDF reported one shell fired on July 
28 at civilians in Neve Dekalim and one shell fired on July 
29 at an IDF outpost north of Eli Sinai.  UNRWA reported 
three rockets fired at Neve Dekalim on July 28. 
 
-- Explosive Devices: The IDF reported that Palestinian 
police located and destroyed two explosive devices near Dugit 
on July 28. 
 
-- Shootings: The IDF reported four shooting incidents on 
July 28: one targeting an IDF outpost near Netzet Hazani, one 
targeting an IDF outpost north of Khan Yunis, and two 
targeting soldiers and civilians near Rafah Yam.  UNRWA 
reported that the IDF responded to the attack on Neve Dekalim 
listed above in "mortars/rockets" with machine gun fire into 
the launching zone. 
 
-- Kidnappings: According to UNRWA, members of the Jenin 
Martyr's Brigade kidnapped Jihad Abed (a senior aide to Mousa 
Arafat) and his brother on July 28 after they passed through 
the Abu Houli checkpoint.  The two were reportedly taken to 
the Burej camp. 
 
-- Arrests: None reported. 
 
¶6. (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS/INTERNAL CHECKPOINTS: 
 
-- No Palestinians except those holding Jerusalem ID cards 
are currently allowed to use the Erez crossing.  The crossing 
is open for international travelers. 
 
-- The Abu Houli internal crossing was reopened on July 28. 
The IDF told UNRWA that the crossing would be open daily from 
0800 to 1930. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone was closed. 
 
-- The Karni terminal was partially open. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open in both directions, but closed to 
Palestinian males between the ages of 16 and 35. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers but open 
for construction materials. 
 
-- Netzarim Junction at Salahadeen Road was closed. 
 
-- The Netzarim Coastal Road was open. 
 
-- Salahadeen Road was open at Sufa/Morag. 
 
-- The Abu Al-Ajeen bypass road was closed. 
 
--- The Toufah checkpoint was open in both directions, except 
for males between 16 and 30. 
 
¶7. (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- The IDF briefed reporters on construction of a 
multi-layered barrier designed to prevent infiltration from 
Gaza into Israel.  The barrier will contain high-tech sensors 
and remote control weaponry; it will upgrade the existing 
fence already in place. 
 
-- U.S. media sources reported that real estate prices in 
Gaza are booming in the run-up to disengagement. 
 
-- Press reports indicated that PM Mahmud Abbas met with 
Hamas leaders in Gaza on the evening of July 28.  The meeting 
was arranged during a reception organized by the Egyptian 
Representative office marking the annual anniversary of the 
Egyptian revolution on July 23.  Palestinian sources said 
that the meeting was not meant to discuss a specific agenda 
but it was meant to contribute to the sense of national unity 
following the latest round of clashes between Hamas and PA 
security forces. 
WALLES