05JERUSALEM3181
WB/G SITREP: JULY 26, 2005 (1700 HOURS LOCAL) --
Tue Jul 26 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Jerusalem
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 JERUSALEM 003181 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FO; NEA/SA/EX FOR AUSTIN-FERGUSON; DEPT FOR 
DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/MUSTAFA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PBTS PHUM KWBG KPAL IS ASEC
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: JULY 26, 2005 (1700 HOURS LOCAL) -- 
PLANS FOR NEW JEWISH SETTLEMENT IN OLD CITY JERUSALEM; ONE 
PALESTINIAN WOUNDED IN HEBRON, THREE ISRAELIS WOUNDED IN 
SDEROT. 
 
 
This is a joint ConGen Jerusalem/Embassy Tel Aviv cable. 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  IDF soldiers shot and seriously injured a 
wanted Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ) member in Hebron July 
¶26.  The local planning and construction committee in 
Jerusalem approved July 25 plans to build a new Jewish 
settlement inside the Muslim Quarter of the Old City of 
Jerusalem.  Three Israeli civilians were lightly injured by 
rocket fire from the Gaza Strip into the Israeli town of 
Sderot.  UNRWA reported one Palestinian wounded by IDF fire 
from Rafah Yam in the direction of Tel al-Sultan.  End 
Summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
----Q--- 
 
2Q(SBU) ATTACKS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil 
 
-- Injuries/Shooting: According to Israeli and Palestinian 
sources, IDF soldiers shot and seriously wounded a wanted 
Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ) member in Hebron July 26. 
Sufian Qanaba, 31 years old, reportedly attempted to flee the 
building where he was hiding when the IDF surrounded it and 
opened fire.  Qanaba was transported to a hospital in 
Jerusalem. 
 
-- Arrests: According to Palestinian media, the IDF arrested 
PIJ member Samer Abu Hakam in Thinaba village, near Tulkarm, 
July 25.  IDF soldiers found three rifles and a pistol in his 
possession.  Five other Palestinians were arrested in the 
course of the same operation. 
 
-- Arrests: Palestinian newspapers reported that the IDF 
arrested a Palestinian carrying a knife at Qalandiya 
checkpoint July 25. 
 
-- Security Incidents:  According to Palestinian sources, 
Palestinian militants threw a firebomb at an Israeli car near 
Hebron July 25.  No casualties were reported. 
 
-- Security Incidents:  Palestinian media reported that 
Israeli settlers close to the village of Bala, near Tulkarm, 
beat a 70-year-old Palestinian man July 25. 
 
¶3. (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS 
 
-- Israeli daily Ma'ariv reported that the local planning and 
construction committee in Jerusalem approved July 25 plans to 
build a new Jewish neighborhood inside the Muslim Quarter of 
the Old City of Jerusalem.  According to the original plan, 
which was drafted by the Housing and Construction Ministry, 
30 housing units are to be built in the Muslim Quarter on a 
three-dunam (almost one acre) plot near Herod's Gate. 
Palestinian officials, including PLO Negotiations Chief Sa'eb 
Erekat, criticized the Israeli plan on July 26. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) ATTACKS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injuries/Rockets: The IDF reported that three Israeli 
civilians were lightly injured on July 26 when a Kassam 
rocket detonated in Sderot.  Israeli newspaper reports said 
that five people suffered shock. 
 
-- Injury/Shooting: UNRWA reported one Palestinian wounded 
after IDF soldiers fired from Rafah Yam in the direction of 
Tel Es Sultan. 
 
-- Rockets: In addition to the explosion noted above in 
"Injuries/Rockets," UNRWA reported an additional seven rocket 
attacks: two at Nisanit (one of which detonated on liftoff), 
one from east of Maghazi over the central Green Line area, 
and four additional rockets fired at Sderot (one of which 
detonated on liftoff). 
 
-- Mortars: The IDF reported three mortar shells fired 
overnight: two at IDF outposts west of Khan Yunis and one at 
civilians in Gadid.  UNRWA reported one mortar round launched 
at Ganei Tal. 
-- Explosive Devices: The IDF reported that Palestinian 
police located two explosive devices, one about 1.5 km south 
of Erez and one near Slav, on July 25.  Israeli sappers 
disarmed the bombs.  UNRWA reported that one IED detonated 
near Rafah. 
 
-- Incursion/Shooting: UNRWA reported that one IDF tank and 
two bulldozers entered Palestinian areas opposite Hay el 
Salam and that the tank fired into the built-up area. 
 
-- Shootings: The IDF reported three shootings on July 25: 
one at the Toufah Crossing, one at an IDF outpost north of 
Rafah, and one at an IDF outpost south of Atzmona.  UNRWA 
reported firing by Hamas at other Palestinians near Khan 
Yunis (see also Injury/Shooting" and "Incursion/Shooting" 
above). 
 
-- Arrests: Nil. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS/INTERNAL CHECKPOINTS: 
 
-- No Palestinians except those holding Jerusalem ID cards 
are currently allowed to use the Erez crossing.  The crossing 
is open for international travelers. 
 
-- The Abu Houli internal crossing was reopened in the 
evening of July 25. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone was closed. 
 
-- The Karni terminal was partially open. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open in both directions, but closed to 
Palestinian males between the ages of 16 and 35. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers but open 
for construction materials. 
 
-- Netzarim Junction at Salahadeen Road was closed. 
 
-- The Netzarim Coastal Road was open. 
 
-- Salahadeen Road was open at Sufa/Morag. 
 
-- The Abu Al-Ajeen bypass road was closed. 
 
--- The Toufah checkpoint was open in both directions, except 
for males between 16 and 30. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Political Developments: 
 
-- ISA Chief Yuval Diskin told the Israeli press that there 
have been 1,500 attempted terrorist attacks in Israel, the 
West Bank and Gaza in 2005. 
 
-- UNRWA told its staff that serious injuries from either 
Palestinian attacks or IDF fire could quickly escalate the 
violence. 
 
-- International media reported on a survey of the 
Palestinian security forces conducted by the Strategic 
Assessments Initiative.  According to the IHT, the report 
describes the PA's forces as "weak, overstaffed, badly 
motivated and under-armed," although it also notes that the 
PA has initiated significant reforms. 
WALLES