05LIMA2377
THRUSH AIRCRAFT SEARCHES FOR OPIUM POPPIES AMID
Fri May 27 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Lima
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS LIMA 002377 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR INL/LP, WHA/AND, DS/IP/WHA, DS/DSS/ITA; DEPT FOR 
ONDCP FOR D GETTINGS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: ASEC SNAR EAID ETRD PGOV PE
SUBJECT:  THRUSH AIRCRAFT SEARCHES FOR OPIUM POPPIES AMID 
FUMIGATION ALLEGATIONS 
 
REF:  A) LIMA 2111 
      B) LIMA 1062 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY: Cocalero leader Elsa Malpartida has renewed 
the groundless rumors of GOP coca fumigation, this time 
citing the presence of a U.S. Thrush surveillance aircraft. 
To counter these allegations, the Mission continues a 
concerted public affairs effort that included a tour of the 
Thrush for journalists. The Mission is working to bring 
experts together to try to reach some common conclusions as 
to the extent of opium poppy.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. U) Tingo Maria cocalero leader Elsa Malpartida traveled 
to the Tingo Maria airport on 5/17 with lawyers and press in 
tow, claiming that the U.S.-owned Thrush aircraft (Ref A) 
was fumigating coca fields.  (Note: the Interior Ministry 
invited the Thrush to look for opium poppy fields. End 
Note.) 
 
¶3. (U) To preempt Malpartida's renewed fumigation claims 
involving the Thrush, Embassy NAS and PAS supported a GOP 
Interior Ministry-organized visit for press and Malpartida 
to Tingo Maria on 5/19.  The group was given a helicopter 
flight to see the area that the Thrush has been surveying as 
well as view the Thrush in flight. 
 
¶4. (U) The visit resulted in significant coverage of opium 
poppy production in Peru.  An extensive article in leading 
daily "La Republica" included photographs of the Thrush in 
flight.  While noting that the Thrush could conduct 
fumigation operations, the article stressed the use in Peru 
for surveillance only as well as the growing problem of 
opium poppy cultivation and latex production. One reporter 
remained after the tour to gather information for the more 
extensive coverage of the opium problem in Peru, and it is 
unclear where she obtained the information leading to her 
headline describing an increase in opium cultivation to 2000 
hectares in 2005, up from the GOP estimate of 1400 hectares 
a year earlier. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) COMMENT: The misinformed reporter may have made 
the poppy cultivation estimate by extrapolating from the 
amount of latex seized this year, or from the GOP's CADA 
agency maps. The reality is that no one knows the actual 
area under cultivation. The objective of the Thrush flights 
is to gather accurate, verifiable information on poppy 
production.  As of May 23, no poppy fields have been located 
in the zones where the Thrush has done reconnaissance.  On 
claims of opium poppy increases, the Mission is working with 
DEVIDA to set up a meeting, including counterdrug police 
DIRANDRO and other knowledgeable parties, to try to draw 
some common conclusions on the extent of opium poppy 
cultivation - so far, all figures come from thin air.  END 
COMMENT. 
STRUBLE