05MADRID623
SECURITY ENVIRONMENTAL PROFILE QUESTIONNAIRE
Wed Feb 16 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Madrid
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MADRID 000623 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR DS/IP/ITA, DS/IP/EUR 
BARCELONA FOR CONSUL GENERAL 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PTER
SUBJECT:  SECURITY ENVIRONMENTAL PROFILE QUESTIONNAIRE 
RESPONSE (SEPQ) - SPAIN 
 
REF:  STATE 23078 
 
¶1.  (U) As directed in REFTEL, the following responses 
constitute the SEPQ for Mission Spain.  The responses will 
directly correlate in sequence with the questions asked. 
All questions and responses have been coordinated with the 
Emergency Action Committee (EAC) and the Consulate General 
in Barcelona. 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  POLITICAL VIOLENCE: 
 
DEMONSTRATIONS: 
 
¶A. There is a significant Islamic presence in Spain that 
could feasibly mount demonstrations.  Others of mixed 
ethnic and religious backgrounds have protested against 
American policy in Iraq. 
 
¶B. Yes. 
¶C. Yes 
 
¶D. The recent anti-American demonstrations have related 
directly to the "no-war-in-Iraq" movement, with specific 
implications attached to the death of a Spanish journalist 
in Iraq.  The demonstrations have ranged from 10 to 200 
persons in front of the Embassy and the Consulate General 
in Barcelona. 
 
¶E. Normally triggered by opposition to U.S. Policy on the 
war in Iraq and some relating to the death of a Spanish 
journalist in Iraq. 
 
¶F. Generally peaceful, but on occasion in demonstrations 
during the initial stages of the Iraq incursion, some 
minor violence was witnessed in Barcelona and Madrid. 
 
¶G. No recent violence has been witnessed. 
 
¶H. During one past demonstration in Barcelona, a person 
jumped the perimeter wall and entered the grounds of the 
Consulate General before being chased off by the local 
guards. 
 
¶I. Yes. 
 
¶J. Yes, near and in-front of Mission facilities in- 
country. 
 
¶K. The anti-GOS demonstrations were typically held in 
conjunction with the anti-American demonstrations and the 
response as to numbers of demonstrators is the same as in 
(D). 
 
¶L. Generally peaceful, but on occasion, some minor 
violence has been witnessed. 
 
¶M. N/A 
 
¶3.  (SBU) MACRO CONFLICT CONDITIONS: 
 
¶A. Yes, the intrastate conflict with the terrorist group 
ETA. 
¶B. ETA acts of terrorism have been carried out in all 
areas of the country including Madrid and Barcelona. 
 
¶C. N/A 
 
¶D. No. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) HOST COUNTRY CAPABILITIES: 
 
¶A. Yes. 
 
¶B. Yes, and the training they have received from DSS/ATA, 
DHS/ICE and the FBI has been incorporated into practical 
use and used against ETA terrorism. 
 
¶C. No. 
 
¶D. Yes. 
 
¶E. Yes. 
 
¶F. Yes, for example in recent captures of Al-Qaida cells 
and against ETA and recent GRAPO operations.  Following 
the Al-Qaida train bombings on March 11, 2004, which 
killed almost 200 citizens, the HCSS have had substantial 
success. 
 
¶G. Yes. 
 
¶H. Very good with respect to flights to the U.S. 
 
¶I. Average. 
¶J. Ineffective.  As a Schengen country, the land-based and 
maritime borders are porous with difficult enforceable 
controls. 
¶5.  (SBU) INDIGENOUS TERRORISM: 
 
ANTI-AMERICAN TERRORIST GROUPS: 
 
¶A. No. 
 
¶B. N/A 
 
¶C. N/A 
 
¶D. N/A 
 
¶E. N/A 
 
¶F. N/A 
 
¶G. N/A 
 
¶H. N/A 
 
¶6.  (SBU) OTHER INDIGENOUS TERRORIST GROUPS: 
 
¶A. Yes. 
 
¶B. ETA, GRAPO.  However, none have ever specifically 
targeted Americans. 
 
¶C. Yes. 
 
¶D. Yes. 
 
¶E. Yes.  In 1985, an explosion triggered by ETA killed an 
American citizen passer-by. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) TRANSNATIONAL TERRORISM: 
 
TRANSNATIONAL TERRORIST INDICATORS: 
 
¶A. Yes.  Al-Qaida, FARC, ELN, GIA, GSPC, GICM, AUC. 
 
¶B. The presence is operational, financial, support, and 
propaganda in cell structure.  Islamic extremists 
perpetrated the March 11, 2004 terrorist attack in Madrid, 
which killed 191 people and wounded some 1700, three of 
which were American citizens wounded slightly.  Also, on 
April 02, there was another attempted bombing of the high 
speed train, and on April 03, a suicide bombing killed 7 
terrorists and 1 police office, and wounding 3. 
 
¶C. No. 
 
¶D. Yes. 
 
¶E. Yes.  Owing to its geographic location, Spain has a 
large Muslim population, some of which is undoubtedly 
sympathetic to the Jihadi cause.  Terrorist organizations 
are known to have used Spain's large Islamic population as 
a recruiting ground, possibly including for the March 11 
attack. 
 
¶F. It is possible given the presence of Islamic 
fundamentalist terrorists who at least in March 2004 were 
capable of carrying out a large-scale attack, and with 
Spain being an ally, and being a proponent in the fight 
against terrorism, that there could be some limited 
support from hostile intelligence services in-country, but 
Spanish intelligence services monitor these group's 
activities closely and it would be difficult. 
 
¶G. Weapons and explosive materials are available and can 
be readily acquired. 
Manzanares