05QUITO2193
BACKGROUND ON NEW ECUADORIAN FOREIGN MINISTER
Fri Sep 23 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Quito
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS QUITO 002193 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PINR EC
SUBJECT: BACKGROUND ON NEW ECUADORIAN FOREIGN MINISTER 
 
¶1. Summary: (SBU) Francisco Carrion Mena, who has been tapped 
to replace Foreign Minister Antonio Parra, comes to the job 
with a history of leftist leanings, but with a solid 
background as a career diplomat and a good relationship with 
the United States.  Carrion, the current ambassador to Spain, 
and Parra will switch jobs in October.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Press accounts and Embassy sources say the veteran 
diplomat shares some ideology with his grandfather Benjamin 
Carrion (1897-1979), a prominent left-wing intellectual.  The 
elder Carrion penned numerous books, promoted cultural 
enrichment in Ecuador and is considered one of the country's 
most influential leaders.  An Embassy source claims the 
younger Carrion took part in leftist political movements in 
his youth. 
 
¶3. (U) Carrion is highly esteemed by his future peers in the 
cabinet. Media describe him as a demanding perfectionist who 
should not be seen as a pawn to U.S. interests.  President 
Palacio was quoted as saying that the change in leadership 
would not alter the country's foreign policy course.  Carrion 
will maintain Ecuador's defense of its sovereignty and 
national interests, Palacio stated publicly, "but in a less 
confrontational and belligerent way." 
 
¶4. (U) Carrion's 31-year diplomatic career includes postings 
in London (1991 to 1996) and Paris (1982 to 1988).  He 
achieved career ambassador rank in 1996 and served as Vice 
Minister of the Foreign Ministry from 1998 to 2000.  From 
1996 to 1998 he worked on peace negotiations with Peru while 
also serving as Subsecretary for National Sovereignty. 
 
¶5. (U) Born in Quito April 8, 1953, Carrion studied law and 
diplomatic affairs, receiving a undergraduate degree from 
Central University in Quito in 1974 and his doctorate from 
the same university in 1978.  He taught international 
relations courses at Central University and the Diplomatic 
Academy from 1988 to 1992.  Carrion came to the United States 
under the International Visitor program in 1989. He speaks 
English, French and Spanish.  He is married to Paulina Arcos, 
an art historian.  They have two sons. Carrion's brother, 
Andres, is a prominent TV news anchor in Quito. 
 
¶6. (U) Carrion's five-year term in Madrid coincided with a 
period of massive Ecuadorian economic migration to that 
country.  Between 1999 and 2003 the Ecuadorian population in 
Spain grew from 50,000 to 400,000.  As a consequence, Carrion 
focused on maintaining orderly migration and protecting 
migrants' rights.  He addressed the issue through contact 
with Spanish and Ecuadorian NGOs and by participation on the 
United Nations Committee on the Protection of the Rights of 
All Migrant Workers and Members of their Families. 
 
¶7.  Comment:  (SBU) Since his IV visit, Carrion has 
reportedly had an open and cordial relationship with U.S. 
counterparts.  Newly appointed cabinet ministers and solid 
USG contacts Oswaldo Jarrin of Defense and Oswaldo Molestina 
of Government hold Carrion in high regard for his talent and 
professionalism.  We are guardedly optimistic about the 
change in leadership at the Foreign Ministry. Admittedly, 
Carrion benefits from any comparison to his predessor who 
consistently set back mission goals by courting Venezuela and 
provoking Colombia. 
JEWELL