05TELAVIV4755
WB/G SITREP: EREZ CROSSING AND INDUSTRIAL ZONE
Mon Aug 01 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEL AVIV 004755 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FRONT OFFICE; NEA/SA/EX FOR RICHIE; DEPT FOR 
DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN; USAID 
FOR DCHA, DCHA/FPP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG PHUM PREL PTER ASEC CASC GZ IS
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: EREZ CROSSING AND INDUSTRIAL ZONE 
REOPENED; PA INTELLIGENCE OFFICER KILLED IN SHOOTOUT WITH 
AL-AQSA MARTYRS' BRIGADES.  AUGUST 1, 2005 (1700 HOURS 
LOCAL) 
 
This is a joint ConGen Jerusalem/Embassy Tel Aviv cable. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: On July 31 the GOI opened the Erez 
Crossing for Palestinian merchants and the Erez Industrial 
Zone for Palestinian laborers, both for the first time since 
the July 12 suicide bombing in Netanya.  Two UNDP consultants 
were kidnapped July 29 by a Gaza clan whose members hoped to 
pressure the PA into winning the release of a relative whom 
the Jenin Martyrs' Brigades had kidnapped a day earlier.  The 
UNDP hostages and the Jenin Martyrs' Brigades kidnapping 
victim were all subsequently released.  A Palestinian man was 
killed July 31 in a separate dispute between Gaza families. 
In the West Bank, a Palestinian intelligence officer was 
killed in Nablus during a shoot-out with members of the 
Al-Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades on July 29.  Eleven Palestinians 
were reported injured in three separate clashes with settlers 
or the IDF in the southern West Bank on July 30 and 31.  End 
summary. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶2. (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Death/family dispute: UNRWA reported that, on July 31 in 
Khan Yunis, a Palestinian man, Nabeel Shahwan, was killed by 
gunfire that erupted during a dispute between the Shahwan and 
Al Akad families. 
 
-- Injuries/work accident (catch-up): According to UNRWA, a 
Palestinian "militant" (no affiliation listed) suffered 
shrapnel wounds on July 29 at 0200 when a Qassam rocket that 
he and others were attempting to launch from Al Berka (Deir 
El Balah) exploded prematurely. 
 
-- Kidnappings: On July 29 at 1340, five armed men from the 
Abed family abducted two UNDP consultants in their car in 
Gaza City.  The Abeds reportedly abducted the two men to put 
pressure on the PA to secure the release of Jihad Abed, whom 
the Jenin Martyrs' Brigade had kidnapped on July 28 (see 
"Kidnappings" section of July 29 sitrep).  The hostages were 
released to the Head of PA Preventive Security at 1835 the 
same day.  The Jenin Martyrs' Brigades subsequently released 
Jihad Abed, who is a top aide to Musa Arafat, at 0100 on July 
¶30. 
 
-- Mortars: The IDF reported 11 mortar attacks (16 shells 
fired) during the 72-hour period ending at 0600 on August 1: 
On July 29, two shells were fired towards Sderot and Yad 
Mordechai at 1420, one shell was fired at Neve Dekalim at 
2330, and three more shells were fired at Sderot, Givim and 
Nir Am at 2350.  On July 30, a a shell was fired at an IDF 
outpost near "Slav" at 0500.  On July 31, a shell was fired 
at 0100 towards Netzer Hazani; another shell at 0110 towards 
Dekel: another shell at 0120 towards an IDF outpost west of 
Khan Yunis; and three shells were fired at IDF soldiers south 
of the Erez crossing at 0615.  On August 1, single shells 
were fired at 0025 towards Sderot, and at 0040 and 0305 
towards Neve Dekalim.  No injuries were reported in any of 
the incidents.  In addition to these incidents reported by 
the IDF, UNRWA reported that a mortar shell was fired from 
Khan Yunis toward Neve Dekalim on July 31 at 0230 (for which 
the Abu Er-Rish Brigades took credit).  UNRWA also reported 
that three mortar shells were fired at Morag and Rafiah Yam 
settlements on July 31 between 0300 and 0330.  UNRWA reported 
that the IDF responded with machine-gun fire. No injuries 
were reported. 
 
-- Rockets/Anti-tank: UNRWA reported that militants fired an 
anti-tank rocket at an IDF APC positioned near the Egyptian 
border at 0020 on July 29.  The IDF responded with sporadic 
machine gun fire for ten minutes.  UNRWA also reported an 
anti-tank rocket fired at a tank outside the Rafiah Yam 
settlement on July 30 at 2250.  No injuries were reported in 
either incident. 
 
-- Rockets/Qassams: Israeli media reported one Qassam fired 
from Beit Hanoun into the Negev at 0115 on August 1.  The IDF 
reported a Qassam fired at Gadid at 0950 on July 29.  UNRWA 
reported that militants fired "home-made rockets" from Beit 
Hanoun into the Negev at 1415 (2 rockets) and 2320 (one 
rocket) on July 29.  The 2320 rocket landed short and 
exploded in a Palestinian village.  No injuries were 
reported.  UNRWA reported three rockets fired from Rafah/Tel 
Es-Sultan towards Atzmona between 0320 and 0420 on July 30 
(for which PIJ took credit).  UNRWA also reported a rocket 
fired on July 30 at 1815 from Beit Lahia toward Dugit and two 
more fired at 0030 from Khan Yunis to Neve Dekalim (for which 
the Abu Er-Rish Brigades took credit). 
 
-- Shootings: The IDF reported 14 shooting incidents between 
0600 on July 29 and 0600 on August 1.  No injuries were 
reported in any of the incidents.  In each case the apparent 
targets were either IDF soldiers or settlements. 
 
¶3. (SBU) ARRESTS: (Catch-up item) UNRWA reported that an IDF 
patrol arrested four men in a house west of the Abu Houli 
checkpoint (Deir El Balah) on July 29 at 0200.  Two of the 
men were later released. 
 
¶4. (SBU) INCURSIONS/DEMOLITIONS:  UNRWA reported that four 
IDF tanks and two bulldozers moved from Kfar Darom into a 
Palestinian area about 300 meters southwest of the settlement 
on July 30 at 0010.  The bulldozers moved sand to form a 
protective barrier and departed at 0500. 
 
¶5. (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS: 
 
-- The GOI reopened the Erez Crossing for Palestinian 
merchants on July 31. It had been open only to international 
travelers and Jerusalem ID holders.  About 70 merchants 
crossed on July 31 and 100 merchants crossed on August 1. 
 
-- The GOI reopened the Erez Industrial Zone on July 31 for 
Palestinian laborers.  It had been closed since July 13 
following the July 12 Netanya suicide bombing.  On July 31, 
350 laborers entered the zone.  On August 1, 488 entered. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers, but 
open for the import of aggregates used in construction. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was partially open. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open in both directions except for 
Palestinian males between the ages of 16 and 35 traveling 
from Gaza to Egypt. 
 
-- Toufah checkpoint was open in both directions for all 
Palestinians except males between the ages of 16 and 30 
 
¶6. (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- UNRWA reported that that members of Al Aqsa Martyrs' 
Brigades blocked the coastal road at Nuseirat T junction 
between 2200 and 2300 on July 31.  The protesters demanded 
jobs from the PA. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) ATTACKS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Deaths: According to Palestinian sources, a Palestinian 
intelligence officer, Mohammad Rahal, was killed in a 
shoot-out in Nablus July 29.  Following an investigation, it 
was revealed that members of the Al-Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades 
from the village of Kufur Qalil killed Rahal.  The initial 
investigation, according to Palestinian Authority (PA) 
security sources, does not indicate that the killing was 
premeditated. 
 
-- Injuries: According to Palestinian media, five 
Palestinians on July 31 were injured during clashes with 
settlers near Yatta village in the southern West Bank (also 
see "Clashes"). 
 
-- Injuries:  According to Palestinian media, two 
Palestinians on July 30 were injured in clashes with IDF 
soldiers who entered into Bani Naim village, near Hebron. 
 
-- Injuries: Palestinian sources reported that four 
Palestinian youths on July 30 were injured by inhalation of 
tear gas during clashes with the IDF in Ayada refugee camp, 
near Bethlehem. 
 
-- Arrests: Palestinian newspapers reported that the IDF on 
August 1 arrested a total of four Palestinian Islamic Jihad 
(PIJ) militants in al-Bireh, Bethlehem, Beit Ummar, and 
Qalandiya, near Ramallah. 
 
-- Arrests: According to Palestinian media, IDF soldiers on 
July 31 arrested three PIJ militants in Nur Shams refugee 
camp, near Tulkarm. 
 
-- Arrests: According to Palestinian sources, IDF troops on 
July 30 arrested two wanted PIJ militants near Tulkarm. 
 
-- Shooting: According to Israeli and Palestinian reports, 
shots were fired on July 31 at Neve Zuf settlement, north of 
Ramallah.  No injuries were reported. 
 
-- Settler Violence:  According to Israeli and Palestinian 
sources, settlers from Sa Nur settlement, one of the four 
northern West Bank settlements to be evacuated, on July 31 
clashed briefly with Palestinians in the area.  There were no 
reported injuries or damage from this incident. 
 
-- Shooting: Palestinian media reported that Palestinian 
gunmen on July 30 opened fire at an IDF force examining a 
suspicious object in the village of Yatta, south of Hebron. 
No injuries or damages were reported.  (Also see 
"closures/Curfews.") 
 
-- Security Incident:  According to Palestinian reports, IDF 
soldiers on July 30 found a handgun after searching the 
belongings of a Palestinian at a roadblock south of Ramallah. 
 The Palestinian was detained for questioning. 
 
-- Clashes:  According to Palestinian sources, settlers on 
July 31 reportedly uprooted Palestinian-owned olive and fruit 
trees near Yatta village in the Hebron area.  (Also see 
"Injuries.") 
 
-- Demonstration:  According to Palestinian reports, PA 
special forces members on July 30 demonstrated in Tulkarm to 
protest the PA Ministry of Interior,s decision to disband 
the units and amalgamate them within the PA National Security 
Forces.  No incidents or clashes took place during the 
demonstration. 
 
¶8. (SBU) CLOSURES/CURFEWS: 
 
-- According to Palestinian media, the IDF on July 30 imposed 
a curfew on the southern parts of Hebron following shootings 
directed at IDF soldiers in the area. (Also see "Shootings.") 
 
-- Palestinian sources reported that the IDF on July 31 set 
up a gate north of Nablus on the main road leading to Jenin. 
Residents of the village of Dier Sharaf have subsequently 
demonstrated against the gate.  IDF sources said the gate is 
meant to control movement of traffic ahead of the pullout 
from the northern parts of the West Bank. 
 
¶9. (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- Palestinian sources reported that Palestinian Legislative 
Council Speaker Rawhi Fattuh was tasked to negotiate with the 
factions in order to set a date for the legislative 
elections.  Fattuh will be holding meetings with Hamas, PIJ 
and other factions to reach an agreement on a date before 
President Abbas signs a decree for the elections.  According 
to Palestinian media reports, PA Information Minister Nabil 
Sh,ath said that he expected Abbas to issue the decree 
specifying the date for the legislative elections by August 7. 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
KURTZER