05TELAVIV2421
WB/G SITREP: SETTLERS INJURE THREE PALESTINIANS IN
Mon Apr 18 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEL AVIV 002421 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FRONT OFFICE; NEA/SA/EX FOR RICHIE; DEPT FOR 
DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN; USAID 
FOR DCHA, DCHA/FPP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG PHUM PREL PTER ASEC CASC GZ IS
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: SETTLERS INJURE THREE PALESTINIANS IN 
THE WEST BANK, A FOURTH IS INJURED BY AN EXPLOSIVE DEVICE; 
PALESTINIANS SHOOT AT IDF APC IN THE GAZA STRIP, BUT NO 
INJURIES -- APRIL 15, 2005 (1300 HOURS LOCAL) 
 
This is a joint ConGen Jerusalem/Embassy Tel Aviv cable. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: Four Palestinians were injured and one 
Hamas activist was arrested in the West Bank April 14.   In 
the Gaza Strip, Palestinians fired five rockets, two at Neve 
Dekalim and three at Netzarim, but no injuries resulted, 
according to UNRWA.  The IDF reported that Palestinians shot 
at an armored personnel carrier west of Khan Yunis April 14, 
but no injuries occurred.  End Summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
(SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injury: A Palestinian minor on April 14 sustained injuries 
in Dura village, west of Hebron, when an abandoned explosive 
device detonated in his hands, according to Palestinian media 
sources.  The Palestinian security forces are investigating 
the circumstances of the incident, as well as the possibility 
that the minor was transporting the device at the time of the 
explosion. 
 
-- Injury: A Palestinian sustained injuries April 14 when 
bullets struck the windshield of his car as he traveled along 
route 60, near Hebron.  The Palestinian driver claimed that 
Israeli settlers fired upon his vehicle. 
 
-- Injuries: Two Palestinians sustained light injuries April 
14 after Israeli settlers in Hebron threw stones at a group 
of Palestinians (See &Settler Violence8). 
 
(SBU) ARRESTS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Arrest: The IDF arrested a wanted Hamas activist in Hebron 
April 14, according to Israeli newspapers.  During the 
operation, the IDF discovered a handgun and ammunition in the 
man,s apartment. 
 
-- Security: The IDF April 14 discovered approximately 6,000 
rounds of ammunition in an abandoned vehicle, according to 
Israeli radio.  The discovery took place after an 
unidentified man abandoned the vehicle at the  Ein Siniya 
checkpoint, north of Ramallah.  The IDF subsequently launched 
a search for the individual. 
 
-- Settler Violence: Palestinians living in Bani Na,im 
village and the al-Arrub refugee camp, both near Hebron, on 
April 14 claimed that Israeli settlers damaged at least three 
vehicles, according to Palestinian newspapers.  In addition, 
Israeli settlers threw stones at Palestinians in the old city 
of Hebron, near the Tel Rumaydah settlement. 
 
-- Arrests: The IDF April 15 entered Bethlehem and arrested 
three PFLP activists in the Aidah and Bayt Jabrin refugee 
camps, according to PA security sources. 
 
-- Arrest: The IDF April 14 arrested a Palestinian member of 
the National Security Forces in Jayyus, east of Qalqiliya, 
according to PA security sources. 
 
-- Arrest: The IDF arrested on April 14 a Fatah Tanzim 
activist in Deir Ballut, northwest of Ramallah, according to 
Palestinian newspapers. 
 
-- Security Incident: Members of the al-Aqsa Martyrs, 
Brigades on April 14 rampaged in Tulkarm following the 
killing that same day of an al-Aqsa member in Nablus, 
according to Palestinian newspapers.  The PA security forces 
eventually took control of the situation. 
 
-- Security Incident: A Palestinian bodyguard employed by the 
governor of Ramallah on April 12 fired his weapon at a 
Ramallah hospital when he was denied access to visit a 
relative after visiting hours, according to Palestinian 
newspapers.  Hospital staff complained to the governor, but 
no action was taken against the bodyguard.  In response, 
hospital staff organized a strike on April 14 to protest the 
incident. 
 
(SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- Palestinian Authority (PA) President Mahmud Abbas is 
scheduled to travel on April 17 to Jordan and Egypt for 
high-level meetings.  Abbas is expected to return to Ramallah 
on April 19. 
 
-- The al-Aqsa Martyrs, Brigades on April 14 circulated 
leaflets in Ramallah stating that the truce with Israel had 
ended following the killing of an al-Aqsa member in Nablus 
that same day.  According to Palestinian sources, senior PA 
officials are working with members of al-Aqsa and other 
wanted activists to ensure that there is no reaction to the 
April 14 killing.  During the evening of April 14, PA 
Preventive Security officers collected a number of the 
leaflets that were distributed earlier that day in Ramallah. 
 
-- Palestinian and Israeli media on April 15 reported that PA 
President Abbas has given orders to consolidate the PA 
security services into three branches under the Ministry of 
Interior.  Abbas also instructed that contacts between the PA 
security chiefs and foreign countries be initiated through 
the Interior Ministry. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
(SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injuries: Nil. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: According to UNRWA, five rockets were 
fired overnight April 14-15, two at Neve Dekalim and three at 
Netzarim, but no injuries were reported. 
 
-- Shootings: Palestinians shot at an IDF armored personnel 
carrier April 15 west of Khan Yunis, but no injuries 
occurred. 
 
-- Explosions: Nil. 
 
(SBU) INCURSIONS/DEMOLITIONS: Nil. 
 
(SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS: 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was open April 15, with a major detour at Netzarim 
Junction.  Abu Khouli checkpoint was open. 
 
-- Erez Crossing was open for internationals and for a 
limited number of Palestinians April 14, and 4,623 laborers 
and 331 merchants crossed into Israel. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone was open April 14 and 659 
laborers entered. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed April 15. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was open, but operating slowly April 15. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open for arrivals and departures April 
¶15. 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan checkpoint was closed April 15.  Toufah 
checkpoint was open for residents of al-Mowassi, except for 
males aged 16-30. 
 
(SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- Israeli media reported April 15 that the IDF has 
instructed its officers to negotiate agreements with settlers 
for them to surrender their weapons prior to Gaza 
disengagement in July. 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
CRETZ