05TELAVIV4213
WB/G SITREP: SETTLERS INJURE TEN PALESTINIANS IN
Wed Jul 06 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEL AVIV 004213 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FRONT OFFICE; NEA/SA/EX FOR RICHIE; DEPT FOR 
DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN; USAID 
FOR DCHA, DCHA/FPP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG PHUM PREL PTER ASEC CASC GZ IS
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: SETTLERS INJURE TEN PALESTINIANS IN 
GAZA -- JULY 6, 2005 (1300 HOURS LOCAL) 
 
This is a joint ConGen Jerusalem/Embassy Tel Aviv cable. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: In the West Bank, the IDF arrested two 
youths July 5 on suspicion of throwing a firebomb at an 
Israeli car near Nilli settlement, east of Highway 443.  IDF 
forces demolished 17 structures in the West Bank villages of 
Beit Furik and Ein al-Bida, both in the Jordan valley, on 
July 5.  The structures were reportedly built without permits 
from the Israeli authorities.  In Gaza, as many as 10 
Palestinians were injured, one of them critically July 5, 
after being run down by a settler vehicle just outside Kfar 
Darom.  According to UNRWA, the settlers entered the area in 
order to obtain signatures from the Palestinians residents 
validating the settlers' title to land in the area.  A group 
of Palestinians gathered and the settlers reportedly gunned 
the engine, crashing their vehicle through the crowd and 
escaping the area.  The IDF arrived on the scene subsequently 
to protect the Palestinian residents from further attack. 
Following the incident, Palestinian militants fired a barrage 
of seven missiles and mortar rounds on and around the 
settlement.  End Summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injury: Nil. 
 
--Arrests: Palestinian sources reported that the IDF arrested 
two youths on July 5 on suspicion of throwing a firebomb at 
an Israeli car near Nilli settlement, east of Highway 443. 
 
-- Security Incidents: Palestinian media reported that shots 
were fired at an Israeli car near Qalqilia on July 5.  No 
injuries were reported. 
 
--Demolitions: According to Palestinian media, IDF forces 
demolished 17 structures in the West Bank villages of Beit 
Furik and Ein al-Bida, both in the Jordan valley, on July 5. 
The structures were reportedly built without permits from the 
Israeli authorities. 
 
¶3. (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- PA Minister of Interior Nasir Yusif released a statement 
describing his July 5 meeting with Israeli Defense Minister 
Shaul Mofaz as positive and productive.  The two sides 
reportedly discussed security coordination for Gaza 
disengagement and the handover of Bethlehem and Qalqilia.  PA 
sources, however, report that the Israelis plan to keep 
certain parts of Bethlehem under their control.  Yusif and 
Mofaz are scheduled to meet again next week. 
 
-- President Abbas departed for Syria July 6.  He reportedly 
intends to meet with Syrian President Asad and the heads of 
the Palestinian factions based in Damascus.  President Abbas 
will visit Lebanon on July 8 before returning to the West 
Bank on July 9. 
 
--------- 
Jerusalem 
--------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) DEMOLITIONS 
 
-- Demolitions: Israeli and Palestinian sources reported that 
the IDF demolished four homes under construction in 
Jerusalem's Beit Hanina district on July 5.  The homes were 
being constructed without building permits, according to 
reports.  The municipality issued the demolition orders. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injuries: UNRWA reported that as many as 10 Palestinians 
were injured, one of them critically, on July 5 after being 
run down by a settler vehicle just outside Kfar Darom. 
According to reports, the settlers entered the area in order 
to obtain signatures from the Palestinians residents 
validating the settlers' title to nearby land.  A group of 
Palestinians gathered and the settlers reportedly gunned the 
engine, crashing their vehicle through the crowd and escaping 
the area.  The IDF arrived on the scene subsequently to 
protect the Palestinian residents from further attack. 
Following the incident, Palestinian militants fired a barrage 
of seven missiles and mortar rounds on and around the 
settlement (see "Mortars/Rockets"). 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets/Shootings: The IDF and UNRWA both reported 
that Palestinian militants fired a total of five mortar 
shells and two anti-tank rockets on southern Gaza settlements 
neighboring IDF outposts overnight July 5-6.  Militants also 
fired five Qassam rockets into Israel during the same period. 
 No injuries were reported in any of these attacks. 
 
-- Explosions: The IDF reported that IDF soldiers found and 
safely disposed of an IED two kilometers south of Kissufim 
Crossing. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS: 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was open July 6, with a major detour at Netzarim 
Junction. 
 
-- Erez Crossing was open July 5.  4,398 laborers and 502 
merchants crossed into Israel. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone was open July 5.   553 laborers 
entered. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers July 6, 
but was open for the import of aggregates used in 
construction. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was open July 6. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open for arrivals and departures July 
¶7.  As of July 6, the IDF increased the number of passengers 
processed per day from approximately 150 to 500-600. 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan checkpoint was closed July 6.  Toufah 
checkpoint was open for residents of al-Mowassi, except males 
aged 16-30. 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
KURTZER