05TELAVIV2655
WB/G SITREP: ONE IDF SOLDIER INJURED IN GUSH KATIF
Thu Apr 28 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEL AVIV 002655 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FRONT OFFICE; NEA/SA/EX FOR RICHIE; DEPT FOR 
DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN; USAID 
FOR DCHA, DCHA/FPP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG PHUM PREL PTER ASEC CASC GZ IS
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: ONE IDF SOLDIER INJURED IN GUSH KATIF 
DISENGAGEMENT PROTEST - APRIL 28, (1300 HOURS LOCAL) 
 
 
This is a joint ConGen Jerusalem/Embassy Tel Aviv cable. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: IDF troops arrested two Palestinian minors 
at the Jalama checkpoint, east of Jenin, April 27, whom the 
troops claimed were planning to carry out an attack inside 
Israel.  Two bags loaded with explosives were found with the 
two youths, one of whom claimed that he was dispatched by 
Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ) to carry out an attack inside 
Israel, while his companion said that he was sent by the 
al-Aqsa Martyrs, Brigades to carry out a double suicide 
bombing.  According to Palestinian media, sources in both PIJ 
and the al-Aqsa Martyrs, Brigades denied responsibility, 
saying that they are committed to the declared ceasefire.  In 
Gaza, shrapnel injured one IDF soldier when Palestinian 
militants fired a mortar at an anti-disengagement protest as 
it passed near Neve Dekalim.  Although the Yesha Council, 
which organized the protest march, claimed that some 100,000 
people would arrive in 600 buses rented for the purpose, 
Israeli police estimated the crowd at no more than 30,000. 
UNRWA staff reported that they observed some 52 buses 
arriving and leaving Gaza along the main settler access point 
at Kissufim.  End Summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) ATTACKS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Deaths/Injuries: Nil. 
 
-- Arrests: According to Palestinian sources, IDF troops 
arrested two Palestinian minors at the Jalama checkpoint, 
east of Jenin, April 27.  IDF sources said that the two were 
planning to carry out an attack inside Israel and that two 
bags loaded with explosives were found with the two 
Palestinians.  Palestinian press sources said that one of the 
youths told reporters before being taken into custody by the 
IDF that he was dispatched by Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ) 
to carry out an attack inside Israel, while his companion 
said that he was sent by the al-Aqsa Martyrs, Brigades to 
carry out a double suicide bombing.  According to Palestinian 
media, sources in both PIJ and the al-Aqsa Martyrs, Brigades 
denied responsibility, saying that they are committed to the 
declared ceasefire. 
 
-- Arrests: According to Palestinian media, IDF forces 
entered Nablus and conducted searches April 27.  Two Fatah 
members were arrested. 
 
-- Arrests: According to Palestinian reports, IDF forces 
arrested a Palestinian member of Fatah in the village of Bani 
Na,im, near Hebron, while five other members of Fatah were 
arrested in the village of Yatta, south of Hebron, April 27. 
 
-- Attacks: According to Palestinian reports, four 
Palestinians were attacked and beaten by settlers in Hebron's 
Old city, April 27. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) SECURITY INCIDENTS: 
 
-- According to Palestinian sources, Palestinian gunmen 
opened fire towards an IDF position near the Palestinian 
village of Turmus Ayya, close to Ramallah, April 27.  No 
injuries were reported.  IDF forces entered the village in 
pursuit of the gunmen, but no arrests were made. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) ROADBLOCKS/CLOSURES: 
 
-- According to Israeli and Palestinian reports, the Israeli 
police continue to be on high alert in Jerusalem over a 
general threat to carry out an attack in the city April 28. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- According to Palestinian media reports, about 36,000 
Palestinian teachers continue to strike for the second day, 
April 28, pressing for a pay raise.  Thousands of teachers 
gathered in front of the Palestinian Authority (PA) Prime 
Minister's office April 27, demanding that the PA implement 
the pay raise to which they claim they are entitled in the 
civil service law.  As of April 28, negotiations between 
representatives of teachers and the PA cabinet have failed to 
reach a compromise on the issue. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injuries: The IDF reported that shrapnel lightly wounded 
one soldier April 27, when Palestinian militants fired a 
mortar shell at an anti-disengagement demonstration in Gush 
Katif (see "Political Developments" and "Mortars/Rockets"). 
UNRWA reported that two of the mortars aimed at Neve Dekalim 
fell short and landed in a Palestinian area.  Two houses were 
damaged, but no injuries were reported, according to UNRWA. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: The IDF reported that Palestinian 
militants fired a total of nine mortar shells and at least 
one Qassam rocket at IDF and Israeli settler targets in the 
Gaza Strip April 27-28. 
 
-- Shootings: The IDF reported that Palestinians launched two 
shooting attacks in Gaza April 27-28. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS: 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, closed at 0830 hours April 28 at Abu Khouli, after 
re-opening for two hours in the morning.  Gaza remained 
divided into two parts for the second day. 
 
-- Erez Crossing was open for internationals but not for 
Palestinian laborers April 27. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone was closed April 27. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers April 
28, but was open for the import of aggregates used in 
construction. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was open, but operating slowly April 28. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open for arrivals and departures April 
¶28. 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan checkpoint was closed April 28.  Toufah 
checkpoint was open for residents of al-Mowassi, except males 
aged 16-30. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- Israeli media reported that the Yesha Settlers Council 
organized an influx of disengagement opponents April 27 to 
the Gaza Strip to participate in a mass march in Gush Katif 
and through the al-Mowassi Palestinian area to protest the 
Israeli withdrawal from Gaza.  Although the Council claimed 
that some 100,000 people would arrive in 600 buses rented for 
the purpose, Israeli police estimated the crowd at no more 
than 30,000.  UNRWA staff reported that they observed some 52 
buses arriving and leaving Gaza along the main settler access 
point at Kissufim.  Shrapnel injured one IDF soldier when 
Palestinian militants fired a mortar at the demonstration 
when it passed near Neve Dekalim (see "Injuries" and 
"Mortars/Rockets"). 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
KURTZER