05TELAVIV2899
WB/G SITREP: AL-AQSA MILITANTS AND PA POLICE CLASH
Mon May 09 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEL AVIV 002899 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FRONT OFFICE; NEA/SA/EX FOR RICHIE; DEPT FOR 
DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN; USAID 
FOR DCHA, DCHA/FPP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG PHUM PREL PTER ASEC CASC GZ IS
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: AL-AQSA MILITANTS AND PA POLICE CLASH 
IN JENIN, HAMAS AND FATAH SUPPORTERS CLASH IN GAZA -- MAY 
9, 2005 (1300 HOURS LOCAL) 
 
 
This is a joint ConGen Jerusalem/Embassy Tel Aviv cable. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: Exchanges of gunfire erupted between 
al-Aqsa gunmen and PA police May 9 in Jenin, after the police 
opened fire on an al-Aqsa leader's car when he refused to 
stop at a PA police checkpoint, according to PA security 
sources.  As of 1300 hours, community leaders were working to 
contain the situation.  Six Israeli peace activists, 
including head of Rabbis for Human Rights Arik Ascherman, and 
five Palestinians were arrested in non-violent protests 
against the separation barrier in Bil'in near Ramallah, on 
May 6.  At least 15 Palestinians were wounded in clashes that 
broke out between Hamas and Fatah supporters in Rafah, Dayr 
al-Balah and Khan Yunis May 6 following local elections held 
in five Gaza municipalities May 5.  Six Palestinians suffered 
gunshot wounds during clashes in Rafah, and at least another 
ten were injured by stones in clashes in al-Burayj.  End 
Summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) ATTACKS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Deaths: PIJ members killed a Palestinian accused of 
collaborating with the IDF in Tulkarm May 7, according to 
Palestinian media. 
 
-- Injuries: According to Palestinian sources, five 
Palestinians were injured in clashes with the IDF in Dura 
village, near Hebron, on May 7. 
 
-- Armed Clashes: On May 9, exchanges of gunfire erupted 
between al-Aqsa gunmen and PA police in Jenin, after the 
police opened fire on an al-Aqsa leader's car when he refused 
to stop at a PA police checkpoint there, according to PA 
security sources.  As of 1300 hours, community leaders were 
working to contain the situation. 
 
-- Arrests: Six Israeli peace activists, including head of 
Rabbis for Human Rights Arik Ascherman, and five Palestinians 
were arrested in non-violent protests against the separation 
barrier in Bil'in, near Ramallah, on May 6, according to 
Israeli and Palestinian newspapers. 
 
-- Arrests: IDF soldiers arrested a suspected Hamas militant, 
Salam Zaidan, on May 7 at the Huwwara checkpoint.  Zaidan was 
carrying a bag with bomb-making materials, according to an 
IDF press release. 
 
-- Arrests: IDF soldiers arrested seven alleged PIJ activists 
in Burqin village, north of Jenin, on May 8, according to 
Palestinian sources. 
 
-- Arrests: IDF soldiers arrested Palestinian Salamah 
Rashaydah near Bethlehem on May 8 on suspicion of selling 
weapons, according to Palestinian sources. 
 
-- Security Cooperation: PA police detained an Israeli woman 
in Ramallah and returned her to the IDF on May 8, according 
to PA security sources. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- The PA Higher Elections Committee will announce results 
for municipal elections on May 9, resolving disputed polling 
results in several localities. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injuries: UNRWA reported that at least 15 Palestinians 
were wounded in clashes that broke out between Hamas and 
Fatah supporters in Rafah, Dayr al-Balah and Khan Yunis 
following local elections held in five Gaza municipalities 
May 5.  Six Palestinians suffered gunshot wounds during 
clashes in Rafah and at least another ten were injured by 
stones in al-Burayj, according to UNRWA (see "Political 
Developments"). 
 
-- Catch-up item: Injury: UNRWA reported that shrapnel 
injured one Palestinian May 6, when a Qassam rocket fired 
towards the Israeli town of Sderot fell short and landed on 
his house east of Bayt Hanoun. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: The IDF reported that Palestinians 
militants fired two mortar shells at Israeli settler and IDF 
targets in the Gaza Strip May 6-7. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: UNRWA reported that Palestinians 
militants fired a Qassam rocket towards the Israeli town of 
Sderot May 6 that fell short and injured one Palestinian, in 
addition to the two reported in the May 6 SitRep. 
 
-- Shootings: The IDF reported that Palestinian militants 
launched three shooting attacks overnight May 6-7. 
 
-- Explosions: UNRWA reported that the IDF safely detonated 
an IED May 7 near the barrier fence east of Bayt Hanoun. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) ARRESTS: 
 
-- Israeli media reported that IDF soldiers arrested two 
Palestinians May 7 after the two attempted to cross illegally 
into Israel. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS: 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was open May 6-9, with a major detour at Netzarim 
Junction. 
 
-- Erez Crossing was closed May 6-8. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone was closed May 6-8. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers May 7-9, 
but was open for the import of aggregates used in 
construction May 8-9. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was open May 7-9. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open for arrivals and departures May 
6-9. 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan checkpoint was closed May 7-9.  Toufah 
checkpoint was open for residents of al-Mowassi, except for 
males aged 16-30. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- UNRWA reported that clashes between Fatah and Hamas 
members broke out in various locations in the Gaza Strip May 
6-9, in the aftermath of elections for local councils held in 
five Gaza municipalities May 5.  Unofficial results 
proclaimed Hamas the winner of a majority of council seats in 
al-Burayj, Rafah, and Bayt Lahiya.  On May 6 in Rafah, some 
10,000 Hamas supporters turned out to celebrate the Hamas 
victory there.  Several hours later, 15,000 Fatah supporters 
took to the streets in Rafah, clashing with the Hamas 
supporters.  UNRWA reported that six Palestinians were 
injured, one of them seriously.  Palestinian sources put the 
number of injured at 10 in Rafah.  A similar scene played out 
in al-Burayj where a reported 15,000 Hamas supporters were 
met in the streets by 8,000 Fatah supporters.  Hamas 
reportedly canceled its celebratory marches in Jabaliya to 
avoid further clashes, according to UNRWA. 
 
-- Fatah supporters held a demonstration of some 4,000 people 
in al-Burayj May 7, protesting the results of the municipal 
elections there. 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
KURTZER