05TELAVIV3539
A Political Map of the Orthodox Movement in
Wed Jun 08 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 TEL AVIV 003539 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
STATE FOR NEA/IPA DGREENE, NEA/PPD FOR JSMITH, DBENZE 
STATE INFO FOR DRL/IRF 
JERUSALEM PASS ICD DANIELS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PREL KIRF KPAO IS ISRAELI SOCIETY
SUBJECT: A Political Map of the Orthodox Movement in 
Israel 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED - PLEASE HANDLE ACCORDINGLY 
 
¶1. (U) Summary: The Jewish Orthodox sector in Israel 
today is composed of an increasingly complex fabric, 
from ultra-orthodox to "modern" or "liberal" orthodox. 
Religious strands are represented by political parties 
in the Knesset -- from Shas and Agudat Yisrael to the 
National Religious Party (NRP) and its breakaway 
"Hitchabrut" ("Re-engagement") faction, to the Labor- 
affiliated Meimad party of Deputy Education Minister 
Rabbi Michael Melchior.  Comprised of people with 
diverging religious and political worldviews, the 
orthodox movement includes men and women of vastly 
differing political ideologies as well as slightly 
diverging theologies.  Moreover, the degree of a 
person's religious orthodoxy or level of religious 
observance does not always -- or predictably -- 
correspond with the degree to which the person can be 
defined as right or left-wing on critical social and 
political issues facing Israel's democracy today. 
Religiously right can include the politically left, and 
religiously left/secular can include the most hawkish 
of political views.  Understanding the religious sector 
in Israel is critical because Israel's coalition 
politics often give small parties, including the 
religious parties, influence far exceeding their 
electoral weight.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
The Spectrum of Religious Belief: Defining Terms 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Demographic figures in Israel isolating Jewish 
religious belief and observance vary widely and are 
therefore difficult to pin down with any precision. 
Most observers agree that the Jewish ultra-orthodox 
sector in Israel makes up some six to eight percent of 
Israel's Jewish population.  The National Religious, or 
Religious Zionist community (referred to as "dati 
leumi" in Hebrew), meanwhile, makes up some 17 percent 
of Israel's Jewish population.  Taken together, 
therefore, the orthodox constitute about 25 percent of 
Israel's Jewish population and about 20 percent of 
Israel's population overall. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Using widely accepted definitions, the ultra- 
orthodox (called "haredim" in Israel, meaning ones who 
tremble or fear God), are the distinctively garbed Jews 
for whom religious studies and sheltered religious life 
are of primary importance.  Their black clothing and 
head coverings are based on the 18th and 19th century 
apparel of European Jewry, and today they wear it to 
set themselves apart from the general population. 
Religious Zionists, meanwhile, according to the late 
Professor Daniel Elazar, founder of the Jerusalem 
Center for Public Affairs, "are similar to the modern 
or centrist orthodox Jews in the Diaspora, partaking of 
most of the aspects of modern civilization except that 
they maintain orthodox observance of Jewish religious 
law and tradition." 
 
¶4. (SBU) Therefore, the word "religious" ("dati") is 
somewhat synonymous with the American usage of the term 
modern orthodox, depending on the context, while 
"haredi" refers to ultra-orthodox. Most Jews who define 
themselves as "religious" or "observant" in Israel are 
orthodox.  Reform, Conservative-Masorti, 
Reconstructionist, and other religious movements, which 
encompass a large segment of the Jewishly affiliated 
population in the U.S. and elsewhere in the Diaspora, 
do not yet have a large foothold in Israel, though they 
continue to expand their reach.  Most American Jews who 
would define themselves as Reform or even 
Conservative/Masorti would be considered by the ultra- 
orthodox in Israel as "secular" in the Israeli context. 
The term "traditional" in Israel has widely varying 
meanings depending on the speaker's perspective. 
Elazar places some 55 percent of Israelis in this 
category - Jews who "value traditional Jewish life, but 
who are prepared to modify Jewish practices required by 
Jewish religious law in those cases where they believe 
it to be personally necessary or attractive to do so." 
As a result of such an expansive definition of 
traditional, Elazar categorizes only 20 percent of 
Israelis as "secular."  If, instead of that approach, 
one defines as "secular" all those who are not orthodox 
(whether haredim or religious Zionist versions of 
orthodox), the percentage of secular Jews could go up 
to 70-80 percent of Israel's Jewish population.  In 
short, when referring to groups in Israel, one must 
consider the source before interpreting terms such as 
"religious," "traditional" and "secular," which may 
seem unambiguous at first. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Given the strong religious component in 
Israeli society, one would expect to find strong 
religious parties influencing Israeli policy.  However, 
even religious Israelis do not always determine their 
party affiliation via the religious-secular prism, and, 
except for the ultra-orthodox, they do not necessarily 
vote for religious parties.  National Religious- 
Religious Zionist Israelis, for example, mostly voted 
for the National Religious Party in the early decades 
of the State, but today they can be found in the Likud 
and in other, often right-of-center, non-religiously 
affiliated parties. Furthermore, the religious parties 
often cannot encompass for long the multiplicity of 
views and positions within them, resulting in sub- 
groups and splits that then re-form, consolidate, and 
often fracture again. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
Religious Parties: Background, Voters, Key Positions 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) The political parties representing the 
orthodox religious sector in Israel divide on their 
relations with the State of Israel, the disengagement 
plan, on army service, and on countless social and 
economic issues.  Outside the political arena 
altogether is the small Neturei Karta group (Guardians 
of the City), ultra-orthodox anti-Zionists who reject 
the State and often side with its most virulent 
critics.  Satmar hassids and a tiny minority group 
within Chabad Lubavitch hassids also reject the State. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Within the accepted political sphere, 
religious parties differ over the importance of the 
"State of Israel" vs. the "land of Israel," over the 
religious significance of the establishment of the 
State, and their degree of involvement in the society 
and the broader life of the country.  At one end of the 
spectrum, some ultra-orthodox groups see 
political/nationalist Zionism as taboo, with the 
epithet "Zionist" having a pejorative connotation. 
Other groups, particularly within the Religious Zionist 
camp, see the State as the ultimate good, an almost 
messianic achievement, while others in the same camp 
place "the land of Israel" above the "State of Israel" 
in religious significance.  The following paragraphs 
take a closer look at each of the religious parties and 
review their background and key positions. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Ultra-Orthodox ("Haredi") Parties 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) A diverse movement that encompasses different 
strands, the ultra-orthodox include both Sephardi and 
Ashkenazi groupings, with cross cutting and 
distinguishable differences in liturgy, styles of 
observance, and manners of dress.  In Israel's pre- 
state history, members of this movement were by and 
large anti-Zionist.  They believed that only God could 
establish Jewish sovereignty over the land of Israel. 
Certain pre-conditions had to be met, primarily the 
coming of the messiah.  Also, a state under Jewish 
sovereignty would be governed by Jewish law (halacha). 
Since the aggressively secularist "political Zionism" 
of the founders of the State did not meet these 
conditions, the haredi view was that there should not 
yet be Jewish sovereignty over the land of Israel.  But 
as Tel Aviv University Professor Menachem Friedman 
explained, "The Holocaust in Europe changed things. 
Many ultra-orthodox dropped their active opposition to 
Zionism and became non-Zionists instead of anti- 
Zionists, because the Jewish people had to go 
somewhere, and the gates to the rest of the world were 
locked. So they came to Israel." 
 
¶9. (SBU) Israel's first Prime Minister, David Ben 
Gurion, reached a "status quo" agreement with the ultra- 
orthodox that convinced some of them to join the 
Israeli government -- or at least not to oppose it -- 
in return for the government's agreeing to carve out 
certain areas which would allow the ultra-orthodox to 
feel at home in Israel.  The agreement provided for 
some Jewish religious observance in the Israeli public 
space: recognition of the Jewish Sabbath as the 
official day of rest; observance of kosher dietary laws 
in government kitchens; provision for a system of 
orthodox religious education; exemption from the draft 
of young men studying in yeshivas, as well as young 
religiously observant women; application of Jewish 
religious law to issues of personal status - marriage, 
divorce, and conversion.  The "status quo" agreement 
allowed the ultra-orthodox to live in Israeli society, 
and participate politically, but still remain slightly 
apart.  Attempts over the years by the predominantly 
secular political establishment of Israel to change the 
"status quo," and thereby increase the separation 
between church (or synagogue, in this case) and state, 
have so far largely failed. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
Ashkenazi Ultra-Orthodox: Agudat Yisrael/Degel HaTorah 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) Background: The State of Israel was founded 
by secular leftists who fled the Eastern European world 
of the shtetl and yeshiva and sought to create a state 
based on Jewish national identity, not religious 
orthodoxy. Orthodox parties such as Agudat Yisrael were 
anti-Zionist from formation in Europe in 1912 until the 
late 1930s, and later became non-Zionist, still not 
recognizing the legitimacy of founding the Jewish State 
of Israel on the land of Israel, but nevertheless 
coming to an understanding with Ben Gurion via the 
"status quo" agreement.  Under the status quo 
arrangement, Agudat Yisrael joined the government from 
1949 to 1953.  In 1953, the United Religious Front, an 
amalgam of all the religious parties at that time, 
split, with the pro-Zionist Mizrachi element staying in 
and Agudat Yisrael moving out of government. In the 50 
years since, the ultra-orthodox have been in and out of 
government, sometimes in temporary alliances such as 
United Torah Judaism (UTJ).  When the aggressively 
secularist "Shinui" ("Change") party, headed by Yosef 
Lapid, scored major gains in the 2003 Knesset 
elections, it formed a coalition with Sharon's Likud on 
the condition that no ultra-orthodox parties would be 
in the government. 
 
¶11. (SBU) Prime Objectives: The Ashkenazi ultra- 
orthodox community's main goal is to preserve Torah 
study and to have its community live according to 
Jewish law.  Its parties, therefore, are mainly 
concerned with securing funding for yeshivas and 
educational institutions.  Because many haredi men 
study full time and cannot support themselves and their 
families from donations and charity alone, they require 
state funding, best secured by their parties being 
represented within the governing coalition.  In January 
of 2005, therefore, UTJ (composed of Agudat Yisrael 
with three Knesset members and Degel HaTorah with two 
Knesset members) joined the coalition and saved Prime 
Minister Sharon's majority, which was threatened when 
Shinui and the National Religious Party left. Shinui 
had quit over funding for ultra-orthodox parties, and 
the remnants of the NRP left the coalition over 
opposition to the disengagement policy.  UTJ faction 
chief Rabbi Avraham Ravitz told Israel's Army Radio 
that his party was joining the coalition only to secure 
new concessions on some of the key issues on its 
agenda, principally more state funding for ultra- 
orthodox Jewish schools.  It should be noted that 
shortly after joining Sharon's coalition, the UTJ 
split, with Agudat Yisrael and Degel Hatorah once again 
becoming separate parties. 
 
¶12. (SBU) Core voters: The Ashkenazi ultra-orthodox 
community.  A higher value is placed on Torah study 
than on earning a living.  With few exceptions, 
adherents do not serve in the army and have resisted 
many parliamentary efforts to draft them into army 
service. 
 
¶13. (SBU) Disengagement. The leadership generally opposes 
disengagement.  The issue is not central, though, to 
the ultra-orthodox community, which does not have a 
constituency in the Gaza settlements. (There are three 
ultra-orthodox settlements, all in the West Bank.) 
Most rabbis in the ultra-orthodox community have not 
been outspoken on the issue of whether soldiers should 
refuse orders to participate in the evacuation of 
settlements. 
 
¶14. (SBU) The State of Israel.  Agudat Yisrael does not 
regard the State as having any religious significance. 
As noted above, many condemn the establishment of the 
State as an act of rebellion against Divine providence, 
arguing that Jews should have waited for God to set up 
a place of refuge in Israel rather than doing it for 
themselves.  For this reason, Agudat Yisrael's 
politicians do not accept posts as ministers, but serve 
only as deputy ministers and chairmen of Knesset 
committees. (For example, Yaacov Litzman of Agudat 
Yisrael is currently Chair of the Knesset Finance 
Committee.)  Some in the younger generation are showing 
signs of coming to terms with the existence of the 
Jewish state, though they still deny it religious 
legitimacy.  In this group, some vote for Likud rather 
than ultra-orthodox or orthodox parties, seeing in the 
Likud a right-wing agenda combined with respect for 
religion and greater opportunities for influence on the 
State from within a non-religious party. 
 
----------------------------- 
Sephardi Ultra-Orthodox: Shas 
----------------------------- 
 
¶15. (SBU) Background: Established in 1983, the Sephardi 
ultra-orthodox party Shas is both a religious haredi 
party parallel to Ashkenazi Agudat Yisrael and an 
ethnic party for Jews who emigrated to Israel mostly 
from North Africa, known as Sephardim.  As Professor 
Friedman explained, "The origins of Shas as a movement 
and as a political party were based on a reaction to 
internal discrimination in the decades leading up to 
1983, in which Sephardi children were educated in 
Ashkenazi frameworks to `save' them from secularism." 
With maturity, the Sephardi Jews "copied the Ashkenazi 
model," according to Shas activist Rabbi Arie Smadja, 
and established their own separate yeshivas and other 
educational institutions separate from the dominant 
Ashkenazi institutions.  Rabbi Smadja explained that, 
with these social developments, Shas also began to 
develop a distinct political identity. 
 
¶16. (SBU) Prime objectives. As with Agudat Yisrael, 
Shas participates in government largely to assure 
maximum funding for its religious institutions. 
Professor Menachem Friedman points out that "Shas has 
no life in the opposition," and therefore, it has 
historically joined coalitions on both the right and 
the left of the political spectrum.  The presence of 
the ideologically secular Shinui in the Sharon 
government from early 2003 to late 2004 presented a 
unique stumbling block to Shas' entry into the 
governing coalition.  Shas must have government funds 
to support its separate Sephardi ultra-orthodox 
educational institutions and social programs.  The 
party is a strong advocate of increased spending on 
social welfare to assist its primarily blue-collar 
voters, many of whom live in Israeli towns suffering 
from high unemployment. 
 
¶17. (SBU) Core voters: Shas voters are drawn from the 
various Sephardi communities, including ultra-orthodox, 
orthodox/dati and "traditional."  More than is the case 
with other religious parties, its voters also include a 
large number of non-observant Jews, though these are 
people who respect religious leaders and hold religion 
in high regard.  Unlike the average Ashkenazi ultra- 
orthodox voter who is dedicated to full time study, the 
average Shas voter works and serves in the army. 
 
¶18. (SBU) Disengagement:    The Shas leadership generally 
opposes disengagement from the territories and 
uprooting of settlements on both religious and national 
security grounds, though spiritual leader Rabbi Ovadia 
Yosef accepts in principle that territories may be 
evacuated, based on the primacy of saving Jewish life 
over the sanctity of land.  On a related issue, Rabbi 
Yosef also opposes the refusal of orders by soldiers, a 
position he first stated in 1995 and which he has not 
changed since.  Rabbi Arie Smadja notes that Shas, like 
Agudat Yisrael, has no firm ideology on the greater 
land of Israel.  The ultra-orthodox position, he 
argues, is that the "Jewishness of Jews" -- their 
ability to live as observant Jews wherever they might 
be -- is of supreme importance, not the sanctity of the 
land. 
 
¶19. (SBU) The State of Israel.  Shas supports the State 
and, when in the government, its politicians serve as 
ministers.  It regards the State as having religious 
significance, but does not subscribe to the more 
messianic views of some of the national 
religious/religious Zionist groups. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
Modern Orthodox: National Religious Party (NRP) 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶20. (SBU) Background: The NRP was founded in 1956 to 
apply spiritual values to governing a modern nation- 
state.  Journalist/commentator Yair Sheleg has said 
that the religious Zionists have an "ideological and 
psychological need not to be isolated from the secular 
world and general society."  Religious Zionists saw 
their role as improving the spirit of the people and 
looked to the Israeli Chief Rabbinate for their 
spiritual guidance.  Until 1967, the NRP was a junior 
member in coalition governments and successfully 
established the state religious educational 
institutions and flagship yeshiva high schools.  After 
1967, with what many young religious Israelis saw as 
the miraculous, messianic return to the biblical lands 
of Israel, the NRP became almost synonymous with the 
settler movement, and, more recently, with resistance 
to withdrawal from any settlements whether in the West 
Bank or Gaza. 
 
¶21. (U) Former NRP MK Yehuda Ben Meir notes that 
"between 1974 and today, Israel's national religious 
population has undergone far-reaching social, cultural, 
educational, demographic and ideological changes."  The 
more strongly ideological part of that population has 
influenced the educational system and the youth 
organizations of the national religious population, 
and, Ben Meir argues, has "moved mainstream religious 
Zionism to the right, to the point that religious 
Zionism as a whole came to symbolize the right wing of 
Israeli politics.  It spawned some extreme and 
uncontrolled offshoots, such as `noar hagvaot' (the 
hilltop youth) and movements along the lines of Kach, 
the outlawed extremist political party." 
 
¶22. (SBU) Prime objectives. In its first twenty years, 
the NRP leadership and voters' primary interest was in 
education, combining a religious lifestyle with a full 
contribution to the wider society, and in fulfilling a 
"bridging" role between the religious and secular in 
Israel.  The maintenance and expansion of settlements 
has been its main issue since 1967.  In the wake of its 
defeat in the political fight to stop the 
disengagement, many NRP politicians are returning to 
stress issues that were its core objectives before, 
including the maintenance of its educational system, 
its advocacy of integrating the values of work and 
religious observance, and improving the Jewish 
character of the State of Israel. 
 
¶23. (SBU) Core voters: The national religious (sometimes 
called by the shorthand "knitted kippa") community. 
Its adherents are schooled in the state's religious 
school system, parallel to the secular system.  They 
participate fully in the economy, and serve in the 
army, including in increasingly significant numbers in 
the officer corps. 
 
¶24. (SBU) Disengagement. This party has the most complex 
relationship to the disengagement issue.  Most settlers 
are identified with the religious nationalist movement, 
even though today the majority of settlers vote for 
parties further to the right of the NRP.  They moved to 
the territories both because of political nationalist 
ideology and out of religious fervor with the 1967 
capture of biblically significant sites.  The 
settlements issue has divided the party between hard- 
liners and those who identify more closely with the 
overall social/economic agenda of the NRP.  Hard-line 
MKs more closely associated with the "Hardal" (haredi 
dati leumi, the ultra-orthodox nationalist/Zionist 
movement), including Rabbi Yitzhak Levy and Effie 
Eitam, finally split from the NRP and formed the 
"Hitchabrut" ("Re-engagement") party, due to their 
opposition to the disengagement and the NRP's decision 
at that time to stay in Sharon's coalition. 
 
¶25. (SBU) Other NRP MKs, who have since also left 
Sharon's coalition, are trying to restore the balance 
in the party and return it to its traditional wider 
interests.  NRP MK Gila Finkelstein - the first woman 
NRP member to be elected to the Knesset in over two 
decades - told us that the NRP's position on 
disengagement is based on both religious and national 
security considerations.  Finkelstein also explained, 
"the NRP's interests are really broad-spectrum, giving 
equal emphasis to education, social issues, religion, 
and the land of Israel.  Each of these flags is raised 
to the same level.  We consult the rabbis on key 
issues, but, unlike the ultra-orthodox parties, the 
rabbis do not decide.  The decisions are made by the 
members."  This is another issue on which the NRP and 
its "Hardal" members divide.  The "Hardalniks," largely 
composed of the children of the traditional national 
religious public, are more inclined to listen to rabbis 
of yeshivas where they study, or other charismatic 
religious leaders, than to the more mainstream, 
accepted rabbinical authorities.  Finkelstein, an 
educator and principal for many years at a Tel Aviv 
area national religious high school, told us that she 
was among those who fought hard, ultimately without 
success, to keep the NRP in Sharon's governing 
coalition, because she wanted to fight disengagement 
and pursue the NRP's wider secular-religious bridging 
agenda from within. 
 
¶26. (SBU) Another emotional and divisive issue for the 
national religious movement is the issue of refusal of 
soldiers to obey orders.  Highly regarded national 
religious rabbis have spoken out on both sides of the 
issue.  Notably, the head of the Ateret Cohanim Yeshiva 
in Jerusalem's Old City, Rabbi Shlomo Aviner, a hard- 
liner on many issues, and contradicting his own mentor, 
former Chief Rabbi Avraham Shapira, is vehemently 
against the refusal to obey orders.  Aviner issued a 
ruling in March 2005 that states: "Do not say: the 
state is finished, I have finished with the state. We 
have not finished with the state. We have not finished 
with anything - not with the people, not with the 
state, and not with the army.  We have only just begun. 
We are now in a great test.... I hereby declare: I love 
Gush Katif [Jewish settlement area in Gaza] and I love 
Northern Samaria, but I love my people above all." 
Aviner's neighbor and fellow Chief Rabbi of the West 
Bank settlement of Beit El, Rabbi Zalman Melamed, on 
the other hand, has publicly and repeatedly called on 
soldiers not to take part in anything related to the 
disengagement.  Another prominent West Bank religious 
figure, Rabbi Shlomo Riskin of Efrat, has warned of the 
dangers to Israeli society of rabbis encouraging 
soldiers to disobey orders.  He wrote in the Jerusalem 
Post this winter, "I am unalterably opposed to those 
rabbinic voices which call upon the soldiers of the IDF 
to refuse to obey orders of evacuation claiming that 
such orders are against absolute Torah law." 
 
¶27. (SBU) Despite calls from some rabbis for religious 
soldiers to disobey orders, the vast majority of the 
religious nationalist population is expected to obey 
military orders and to continue to be an integral part 
of Israeli society. 
 
¶28. (SBU) The State of Israel. Yair Sheleg notes that 
religious Zionists see the sanctity of the State as the 
realization of religious prophecy.  Many of the 
movement's rabbis regard the State as the precursor of 
the Messiah.  In the last few years, some NRP members 
whose religious observance is ultra-orthodox 
("Hardalniks") have become estranged and alienated from 
the State, which they see as having failed in its 
mission. Others have stayed loyal and see disengagement 
as a temporary setback that must be endured.  Those 
members see continued political involvement in the 
State as necessary. 
 
---------------------------- 
Orthodox Center/Left: Meimad 
---------------------------- 
 
¶29. (U) Background: In the mid-1980s, Meimad was 
founded as an NRP breakaway party with more liberal 
political and religious views than the NRP.  It failed 
to reach the threshold percentage of votes to enter the 
Knesset, though it gained some seats in Jerusalem 
municipal elections.  It now exists as a semi- 
independent one-man faction within the Labor Party, 
represented by Deputy Minister of Education, MK Rabbi 
Michael Melchior. 
 
¶30. (U) Prime Objectives: Meimad members favor 
territorial compromise; rabbinical leaders are active 
in interfaith activities, and, while orthodox, are more 
liberal in religious practices.  Some are open, for 
example, to giving women greater participation in 
prayer services.  They stand at the extreme political 
left of religious Zionism.  Aligned now with the Labor 
Party, some say Labor uses Meimad's presence to ward 
off accusations that it is an anti-religious party like 
Shinui. 
 
¶31. (U) Core Voters: Meimad voters are liberal in religious 
and political outlook.  Their current voting numbers 
are unknown, but Meimad supporters almost certainly 
form less than 10 percent of the Jewish orthodox 
religious vote. 
 
¶32. (U) Disengagement: Like its Labor Party partner, Meimad 
favors the disengagement plan. 
 
¶33. (U) State of Israel: Meimad members, like the NRP from 
which many of its members split, are integrally 
involved in Israeli society and the broader life of the 
State.  They do not see the State in purely messianic 
terms. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
Secular/Religious partnership: National Union Party 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶34. (SBU) Background: The National Union party was 
formed for the 1999 elections, and combined three right- 
wing parties (Herut, Tekuma, and Moledet) that banded 
together to try to increase their voter appeal and 
parliamentary effectiveness.  They were later joined by 
the "Yisrael Beteinu" ("Israel: Our Home") party. 
 
¶35. (SBU) Prime objectives. National Union supports the 
maintenance and expansion of Israeli settlements in the 
West Bank and Gaza and opposes the emergence of a 
Palestinian state west of the river Jordan.  Some of 
their members are also in favor of the voluntary 
transfer of Arabs from the West Bank and Gaza to other 
Arab countries. 
 
¶36. (SBU) Core voters: National Union voters include a 
heterogeneous mix of right-wing nationalists, both 
religious and secular. 
 
¶37. (SBU) Disengagement: This party is bitterly opposed to 
disengagement from any of the West Bank and Gaza, on 
both religious and security grounds.  It broke from the 
current Sharon government before the NRP did.  Some of 
its secular members have grown uneasy at the overtly 
religious tone of protests against disengagement. 
 
¶38. (SBU) The State of Israel. The National Union fully 
supports the State, but is not as messianist as the 
NRP. 
 
------------------------ 
Israel's Chief Rabbinate 
------------------------ 
 
¶39. (SBU) The Israeli Chief Rabbinate, which is led by 
one Ashkenazi and one Sephardi Chief Rabbi, is the 
State of Israel's official religious authority.  The 
current Chief Rabbis, Yona Metzger (Ashkenazi) and 
Shlomo Amar (Sephardi), while wielding some influence, 
are less charismatic and carry less influence than some 
of their predecessors.  They both spoke out in Passover 
2005 interviews against soldiers' refusal to obey 
orders, even though they oppose the disengagement on 
religious grounds.  It is unclear at this point which 
religious groups adhere to the rulings of the Chief 
Rabbinate, but it is clear that two previous Chief 
Rabbis, Avraham Shapira (the head of Israel's most 
influential modern orthodox yeshiva, Jerusalem's Mercaz 
Harav) and Mordechai Eliyahu, are more influential than 
the current incumbents.  Both Shapira and Eliyahu have 
spoken out repeatedly for soldiers to refuse to obey 
orders to evacuate settlements. 
 
----------- 
Conclusions 
----------- 
 
¶40. (SBU) Polls show that the Israeli public in general 
is divided on the disengagement issue, with a clear 
majority favoring the plan.  For Israel's religious 
public, the internal debates and conflicts are often 
more intense, fanned by divisions on the basic issues 
of the State of Israel vs. the land of Israel; on the 
source of authority for religious soldiers -- their 
commanding officers or their religious leaders; and on 
the relationship of religion and politics in Israel 
more broadly. 
 
¶41. (SBU) Orthodoxy in Israel includes a wide spectrum 
of religious belief and practice.  Across Israel's 
orthodox spectrum, the majority of voices are against 
Israel's withdrawal from Gaza and settlements in the 
West Bank.  There is wide variance, though, in the 
degree of resistance that leading orthodox figures are 
advocating or supporting and in the degree of 
resistance likely to be offered by those at the 
grassroots level.  It is not the first time the 
religious parties will split and re-form into new 
coalitions, nor the first time many religious voters 
will find it more advantageous to vote for secular 
right-wing parties or religious-secular coalition 
parties like the National Union.  What is new since the 
disengagement debate started in late 2003 is the 
resurgence in -- not the emergence of -- the level and 
intensity of those voices rejecting the legitimacy of 
the State and its elected structures based on perceived 
betrayal of the land of Israel and violations of Jewish 
law.  For those who hope to understand the factors 
determining policy positions held by Israel's religious 
population and to understand the influence of the 
religious community on the State and society at large, 
the political positions and behavior of all these 
diverse strands within the orthodox movement merit 
continued attention as the disengagement process moves 
forward. 
 
KURTZER