05TELAVIV2967
WB/G SITREP: SETTLERS INJURE PALESTINIAN GIRL IN
Wed May 11 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEL AVIV 002967 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FRONT OFFICE; NEA/SA/EX FOR RICHIE; DEPT FOR 
DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN; USAID 
FOR DCHA, DCHA/FPP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG PHUM PREL PTER ASEC CASC GZ IS
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: SETTLERS INJURE PALESTINIAN GIRL IN 
HEBRON -- MAY 11, 2005 (1300 HOURS LOCAL) 
 
This is a joint ConGen Jerusalem/Embassy Tel Aviv cable. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: Settlers in Hebron beat and lightly 
injured a Palestinian girl May 10.  Also on May 10, the IDF 
arrested three Fatah activists in Zawata village, near 
Qalqiliya, and four Palestinians in Yatta, south of Hebron. 
Israeli police shut down two PA election registration centers 
in East Jerusalem on May 10 and confiscated the registration 
rolls.  In Gaza, militants fired one mortar shell towards 
Neve Dekalim May 10, and launched a total of four shooting 
attacks on IDF outposts in the Gush Katif settlement bloc 
overnight May 10-11.  End Summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) ATTACKS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injuries: Settlers in Hebron beat and lightly injured a 
Palestinian girl May 10, according to Palestinian sources. 
 
-- Arrests: The IDF arrested three Fatah activists in Zawata 
village, near Qalqiliya, on May 10, according to Palestinian 
sources. 
 
-- Arrests: The IDF arrested four Palestinians in Yatta, 
south of Hebron, on May 10, according to Palestinian sources, 
who said the four were in possession of handguns and 
ammunition. 
 
-- Closures: The IDF imposed a near-complete closure of the 
West Bank for Palestinians on May 11, lasting until May 15. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- Israeli police shut down two PA election registration 
centers in East Jerusalem on May 10 and confiscated the 
registration rolls. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injuries: Nil. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: The IDF reported that Palestinian 
militants fired one mortar shell towards Neve Dekalim May 10. 
 
 
-- Shootings: The IDF reported that Palestinians launched 
four shooting attacks at IDF outposts in the Gush Katif bloc 
overnight May 10-11. 
 
-- Explosions: The IDF reported that the IDF found and safely 
disposed of an IED near Kissufim Crossing May 10. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS: 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was open May 11, with a major detour at Netzarim 
Junction. 
 
-- Erez Crossing was closed May 11. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone was closed May 11. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers May 11, 
but was open for the import of aggregates used in 
construction. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was open May 11. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open for arrivals and departures May 
11, with periodic closures throughout the day, according to 
UNRWA. 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan checkpoint was closed May 11.  Toufah 
checkpoint was open for residents of al-Mowassi, except males 
aged 16-30. 
 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
KURTZER