05TELAVIV3893
WB/G SITREP: IDF SWEEP ARRESTS 52 PIJ MILITANTS IN
Tue Jun 21 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEL AVIV 003893 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FRONT OFFICE; NEA/SA/EX FOR RICHIE; DEPT FOR 
DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN; USAID 
FOR DCHA, DCHA/FPP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG PHUM PREL PTER ASEC CASC GZ IS
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: IDF SWEEP ARRESTS 52 PIJ MILITANTS IN 
THE WEST BANK, THREE PALESTINIANS INJURED IN GAZA -- JUNE 
21, 2005 (1300 HOURS LOCAL) 
 
This is a joint ConGen Jerusalem/Embassy Tel Aviv cable. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: The IDF arrested 52 PIJ activists in the 
West Bank on June 20, including 25 in Bethlehem and a senior 
PIJ leader, Ra'id al-Hijawi, in Jenin, according to PA 
security sources.  Eight Palestinians were injured in clashes 
with the IDF near Yatta village, south of Hebron, in 
anti-barrier protests June 20, and the IDF shot and injured a 
Palestinian who was a passenger in a car that allegedly 
failed to stop at a checkpoint near Hebron the same day.  PA 
President Abbas and Israeli PM Sharon met in Jerusalem June 
21 to discuss th security situation, prisoner releases, city 
handovers, freedom of movement, home demolitions in 
Jerusalem, and Israeli settlement expansion, according to 
Palestinian media.  In Gaza, two Palestinians were injured 
June 21 in Khan Yunis during an exchange of fire between IDF 
soldiers and Palestinians militants, and one Palestinian was 
lightly injured June 20 by IDF soldiers stationed northwest 
of Khan Yunis who opened fire after they were targeted by a 
Molotov cocktail.  Militants fired some 15 mortars shells in 
seven separate attacks in the Gaza Strip overnight June 
20-21.  End Summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Injuries: Eight Palestinians were injured in clashes with 
the IDF near Yatta village, south of Hebron, in anti-barrier 
protests, according to Palestinian newspapers. 
 
-- Injury: The IDF shot and injured a Palestinian who was a 
passenger in a car that allegedly failed to stop at a 
checkpoint near Hebron on June 20, according to Palestinian 
newspapers. 
 
-- Arrests: The IDF arrested 52 PIJ activists in the West 
Bank on June 20, including 25 in Bethlehem and a senior PIJ 
leader, Ra,id al-Hijawi, in Jenin, according to PA security 
sources. 
 
-- Arrests: PA security forces arrested 12 militants in Bayt 
Rima that had earlier participated in armed demonstrations 
and shootings of businesses in Ramallah, according to PA 
security sources. 
 
-- Arrests: The IDF arrested a Palestinian outside Ramallah 
June 20 who allegedly attempted to bring a Molotov cocktail 
through a checkpoint, according to Palestinian newspapers. 
 
-- Arrests: Israeli police arrested a Palestinian youth who 
attempted to stab an Israeli yeshiva student in central 
Jerusalem on June 20, according to Israeli newspapers. 
 
-- Arrests: Israeli police arrested two Palestinians June 20 
for allegedly throwing three Molotov cocktails at the Bet 
Orot Institute on the Mount of Olives, according to 
Palestinian newspapers, but no injuries or damage resulted. 
 
-- Attacks: Palestinian gunmen affiliated with al-Aqsa 
Martyrs Brigades fired at an Israeli car near Qalqiliya June 
20, according to Palestinian newspapers, but no injuries 
resulted 
 
-- Attacks: Palestinian militants threw four Molotov 
cocktails at Israeli cars northwest of Ramallah on June 20, 
but no injuries resulted, according to Israeli radio. 
 
-- Incursions: The IDF entered and imposed a curfew on Bayt 
Furik village, near Nablus, on June 20, and searched houses 
but left without making arrests, according to Palestinian 
security sources. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- PA President Abbas and Israeli PM Sharon met in Jerusalem 
June 21 to discuss the security situation, prisoner releases, 
city handovers, freedom of movement, home demolitions in 
Jerusalem, and Israeli settlement expansion, according to 
Palestinian media. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injuries: UNRWA reported that two Palestinian youths were 
injured June 21 in Khan Yunis during an exchange of fire 
between IDF soldiers and Palestinians militants. 
 
-- Injury: The IDF reported that one Palestinian was lightly 
injured June 20 by IDF soldiers stationed in an IDF outpost 
northwest of Khan Yunis who opened fire after being targeted 
by a Molotov cocktail. 
 
-- Injuries: UNRWA reported that, in addition to the 
policeman reported wounded in the June 20 SitRep, a female 
passerby was also shot and seriously injured June 20 in an 
altercation between two families in Jabaliya.  Several of the 
battling family members were injured by sticks and clubs and 
were admitted to hospital, according to UNRWA. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: The IDF reported that Palestinian 
militants fired a total of 15 mortar shells in seven separate 
attacks in the Gaza Strip June 20-21.  Mortar fire was 
particularly heavy over night near Netzarim, following the 
funeral of a man shot and killed by IDF soldiers June 20 for 
approaching too close to the settlement's border fence. 
-- Shootings: The IDF reported that Palestinian militants 
launched a total of six shooting attacks on IDF and Israeli 
settler targets June 20-21. 
 
-- Explosions: The IDF reported that IDF soldiers found and 
safely deactivated an IED near the Erez Crossing June 20. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS: 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was open June 21, with a major detour at Netzarim 
Junction. 
 
-- Erez Crossing was open June 20, and 4,375 laborers and 432 
merchants crossed into Israel. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone remained closed June 20. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers June 21, 
but was open for the import of aggregates used in 
construction. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was open June 21. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open for arrivals and departures June 
¶21. 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan checkpoint was closed June 21.  Toufah 
checkpoint was open for residents of al-Mowassi, except males 
aged 16-30. 
 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
KURTZER