05TELAVIV3127
WB/G SITREP: EIGHT PALESTINIANS INJURED IN WB
Mon May 23 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEL AVIV 003127 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FRONT OFFICE; NEA/SA/EX FOR RICHIE; DEPT FOR 
DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN; USAID 
FOR DCHA, DCHA/FPP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG PHUM PREL PTER ASEC CASC GZ IS
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: EIGHT PALESTINIANS INJURED IN WB 
BARRIER PROTEST; GAZA MUCH QUIETER -- MAY 23, 2005 (1300 
HOURS LOCAL) 
 
This is a joint ConGen Jerusalem/Embassy Tel Aviv cable. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: In the West Bank, eight Palestinians 
protesting against the construction of the separation barrier 
were wounded by the IDF near the village of Bil'in, near 
Ramallah, May 20, and a 14-year-old Palestinian was wounded 
by an explosion as he was playing in a valley near the East 
Jerusalem village of Sur Baher May 22.  Jerusalem police 
believe that the boy had uncovered an unexploded mine. 
Police arrested a total of 13 Palestinians and 32 Israelis in 
the West Bank May 21-23.  In Gaza, two Palestinian boys, ages 
11 and 12, were injured in an explosion May 22 when they were 
playing near the border fence with Egypt in Rafah.  The 
circumstances of the blast are under investigation, but the 
blast may have been caused by unexploded ordinance.  End 
Summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) ATTACKS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injuries: According to Palestinian and Israeli media, 
eight Palestinians protesting against the construction of the 
separation barrier were wounded by the IDF near the village 
of Bil'in, near Ramallah, May 20. 
 
-- Injuries: According to Palestinian sources, a 14-year-old 
Palestinian was wounded by an explosion as he was playing in 
a valley near the East Jerusalem village of Sur Baher May 22. 
 Jerusalem police believe that the boy had uncovered an 
unexploded explosive device. 
 
-- Injuries: According to Palestinian sources, a Palestinian 
worker was moderately injured by IDF gunfire at a roadblock 
near Tulkarm May 22.  The incident allegedly took place after 
the Palestinian failed to stop when ordered to do so by IDF 
soldiers. 
 
-- Arrests: According to Palestinian sources, IDF forces 
entered Balata refugee camp, near Nablus, May 21 and arrested 
seven Fatah activists. 
 
-- Arrests: According to Palestinian sources, IDF troops 
arrested three Palestinians in Yatta village, near Hebron, 
for weapons smuggling May 21. 
 
-- Arrests: According to Palestinian media, Israeli police 
arrested 32 Israeli leftist activists who entered the 
Palestinian part of Hebron (H1) May 21. 
 
-- Arrests: According to Palestinian sources, IDF troops 
entered Nablus and arrested three Palestinian militants May 
¶23.  During the arrest, two Fatah gunmen were wounded. 
 
-- Security Incidents: According to Palestinian sources, 
Palestinian gunmen fired on an IDF post near the settlement 
of Kadim, in northern West Bank, May 20.  No injuries were 
reported. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) CLOSURES 
 
-- On May 21, the IDF lifted the closures imposed on Nablus 
and Jenin.  These closures had been in effect since May 12. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injuries: UNRWA reported that two Palestinians boys, ages 
11 and 12, were injured in an explosion May 22 when they were 
playing near the border fence with Egypt in Rafah.  The 
circumstances of the blast are under investigation, but the 
blast may have been caused by unexploded ordinance. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets/Shootings: The IDF reported that 
Palestinian militants fired a total of four mortar shells and 
launched at least four shooting attacks in the Gaza Strip May 
20-22.  UNRWA reported that at least seven mortar shells were 
fired during the same period, the majority of which were 
aimed at Neve Dekalim.  Another five were fired at Rafiah Yam 
settlement on May 20, according to UNRWA. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS: 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was open May 22-23, with a major detour at Netzarim 
Junction.  Abu Khouli Junction was closed May 21. 
 
-- Erez Crossing was closed May 20-21.  It re-opened May 22, 
and 4,707 laborers and 130 merchants entered Israel. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone was closed May 20-21.  It 
re-opened May 22, and 580 laborers entered the zone. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers May 
21-23, but was open for the import of aggregates used in 
construction May 22-23. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was closed May 19-21 due to security 
threats, but it re-opened May 22-23. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open for arrivals and departures May 
21-23. 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan checkpoint was closed May 21-23.  Toufah 
checkpoint was open for residents of al-Mowassi, except males 
aged 16-30. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- Israeli media reported that the IDF has decided not to 
collect weapons from Gaza settlers until closer to the actual 
time of disengagement. 
 
-- UNRWA reported that approximately 1,000 Fatah/al-Aqsa 
Brigades supporters demonstrated in Gaza City May 22.  Some 
reports claim the demonstration was in response to a 
demonstration May 21 by some 6,000 Hamas supporters 
protesting the court decision to re-do municipal elections in 
parts of Bayt Lahiya, Rafah and al-Bureij; others claim that 
the demonstrators marched to demand jobs from the PA. 
 
------ 
Israel 
------ 
 
¶7.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- The IDF reported that Hizbullah fired eight mortar shells 
from Lebanese territory into the Har Dov region May 21.  No 
injuries or damage were reported; the IDF returned fire. 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
KURTZER