05TELAVIV4861
WB/G SITREP: IDF SOLDIER KILLS FIVE ISRAELI ARABS
Fri Aug 05 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEL AVIV 004861 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FRONT OFFICE; NEA/SA/EX FOR RICHIE; DEPT FOR 
DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN; USAID 
FOR DCHA, DCHA/FPP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG PHUM PREL PTER ASEC CASC GZ IS
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: IDF SOLDIER KILLS FIVE ISRAELI ARABS 
IN GALILEE; IDF KILLS THREE-MAN MORTAR CREW IN GAZA; SEVEN 
PIJ MEMBERS ARRESTED IN WEST BANK.  AUGUST 5, 2005 (1400 
HOURS LOCAL) 
 
This is a joint ConGen Jerusalem/Embassy Tel Aviv cable. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: A religious, right-wing IDF soldier, who 
had been AWOL for a month, killed four Israeli Arabs on a bus 
in the north of Israel on August 4, before a crowd killed him 
(septel).  IDF soldiers overnight killed three Palestinians 
who approached the Gush Katif settlement, reportedly with the 
apparent intention of firing mortar shells and rockets into 
the settlement.  In the West Bank, the IDF arrested seven PIJ 
members near Ramallah and Hebron.  End summary. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶2. (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: IDF soldiers killed three Palestinians who were 
preparing to fire mortar shells and anti-tank rockets into 
the the Gush Katif settlement bloc overnight August 4-5. 
 
-- Injuries/Clan Dispute: According to UNRWA, two members of 
a Gaza City family were shot and wounded in a dispute that 
broke out around 2300 on August 4 in the Rimal Quarter of 
Gaza City.  Members of the Hillis and Tabash families chased, 
and shot at, each other near President Abbas's Gaza City 
residence.  Force 17 guards reportedly fired their weapons 
when the battling families neared the presidential residence. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: The IDF reported three mortar attacks 
(seven shells).  On August 4, a shell was launched at Netzer 
Hazani at 0555.  At 0720 on August 4, five shells were 
launched at an IDF outpost near Khan Yunis.  Another shell 
was launched at 2045 on August 4 toward Netzarim.  No 
injuries were reported from these incidents.  No rocket fire 
was reported. 
 
-- Shootings: The IDF reported three shooting incidents on 
August 4.  At 0540, gunmen opened fire on IDF soldiers near 
an IDF outpost south of Netzer Hazani.  At 1100 on August 4, 
gunmen fired at Israeli civilians north of Rafah.  At 1555 on 
August 4, gunmen fired at soldiers in an IDF outpost east of 
Rafiah Yam. 
 
-- Shootings/Intra-Palestinian: Palestinian sources reported 
an exchange of gunfire between Hamas members and PA police 
and Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades members in Gaza City around 2300 
on August 4. 
 
-- Explosions: The IDF destroyed an explosive device 
discovered at 1520 on August 4 about 1 km west of Gan Or. 
Palestinian police discovered another device about 1 km north 
of Sufa Crossing at 2000 on August 4.  IDF soldiers 
dismantled the device. 
 
¶3. (SBU) ARRESTS:  None reported. 
 
¶4. (SBU) INCURSIONS/DEMOLITIONS: None reported. 
 
¶5. (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS: 
 
-- No information was available on August 5. 
 
¶6. (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- About 120 anti-disengagement demonstrators were arrested 
at the Kissufim Crossing point, Israel Radio reported on 
August 5. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) ATTACKS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injuries: According to Palestinian reports, three 
Palestinians were injured from tear-gas inhalation after IDF 
soldiers dispersed a Palestinian demonstration near Salfit, 
south of Nablus, August 4. 
 
-- Arrests: According to Palestinian sources, IDF forces 
arrested seven members of Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ) 
August 4 in Ramallah and Hebron areas. 
 
-- Security Incidents:  Palestinian media reported that shots 
were fired at the residence of Tulkarm mayor August 4.  No 
injuries were reported. 
 
-- Shootings: According to Israeli media, Palestinian 
militants fired at armored Israeli police vehicles near 
Hermesh settlement August 5.  Some damage was caused to the 
vehicles, while no injuries were reported. 
 
------ 
Israel 
------ 
 
¶8. (SBU) At 1750 on August 4, an AWOL IDF soldier shot dead 
four Israeli Arab civilians on a bus in Shfaram village.  Ten 
persons were reported wounded.  A crowd of civilians attacked 
and killed the soldier, who was identified as a religious 
19-year-old Jewish Israeli from the ultra-right Tapuah 
settlement in the West Bank (see septel). 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
KURTZER