05TELAVIV5099
DISENGAGEMENT SITUATION REPORT, AUGUST 17, 2005
Wed Aug 17 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 TEL AVIV 005099 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR DIBBLE 
NSC FOR ABRAMS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG KPAL PREL ECON EAID IS GAZA DISENGAGEMENT
SUBJECT: DISENGAGEMENT SITUATION REPORT, AUGUST 17, 2005 
 
This is a joint message from Embassy Tel Aviv and Consulate 
General Jerusalem. 
This message is sensitive but unclassified.  Please protect 
accordingly.  This message conveys information as of 1700 
hours local time. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  On the third day of disengagement, IDF 
soldiers and police began to evacuate several settlements by 
force, meeting almost exclusively non-violent resistance. 
While most settlers continued to leave their homes either 
voluntarily or after brief non-violent refusal, Israeli 
Police and IDF forces clashed with hardliner settlers and 
non-resident agitators who had infiltrated areas designated 
for evacuation.  The Head of IDF operations said the 
evacuations are proceeding faster than anticipated, and some 
Israeli leaders are now gauging the settler evacuation 
process in days rather than weeks.  The message below 
outlines the status of evacuation efforts at key Israeli 
settlements; the overall security situation in Gaza; 
Palestinian reactions to disengagement; and internal Israeli 
political developments.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) SETTLER EVACUATION STATUS 
 
-- According to press reports, Head of IDF Operations Israel 
Ziv said that the evacuation is proceeding faster than 
anticipated.  The IDF announced that the Israeli residents of 
583 houses and public buildings have been evacuated, out of a 
total of 2206 buildings that exist throughout all Israeli 
communities in the Gaza strip. 
 
-- Significant numbers of settlers voluntarily left prior to 
the August 16 midnight deadline that rendered their continued 
presence illegal, jeopardized compensation and subject them 
to physical removal. 
 
-- During forced evacuations on April 17, Israeli police and 
IDF forces clashed with some settlers.  However, in most 
instances the IDF has been successful in negotiating the 
voluntary departure of those resisting evacuation with only 
limited delays.  Israeli agitators who had recently 
infiltrated Gaza continue to challenge evacuation efforts, 
primarily through non-violent means. 
 
-- An Israeli settler took a weapon from an Israeli guard at 
Shilo settlement in the West Bank and opened fire, killing 
three Palestinians and wounding two. 
 
-- A settler, resident of Qedumim settlement in the West 
Bank, set herself on fire in the Negev town of Netivot, 
presumably to protest disengagement.  She caused burns to 60 
percent of her body and is in serious condition. 
 
-- Press reports indicate that approximately 2,000 
disengagement protestors gathered today outside Prime 
Minister Ariel Sharon's Sycamore Ranch in the Negev.  They 
promised to disperse after 19:00. 
 
-- There were various fires to protest disengagement all 
throughout the Gaza Strip.  Protestors in Morag set a garbage 
dumpster on fire, while protestors in Bedolah set tires and 
at least two homes on fire.  In Neve Dekalim, at least 60 
homes were burned, and in Atzmona, residents asked the IDF 
for packing boxes and then burned them. 
 
-- Residents in Kfar Darom cut cables, pierced tires, and put 
sugar in the gas tanks of IDF D-9 bulldozers.  A female 
soldier was stabbed with a needle by an infiltrator in Morag, 
and protestors threw eggs and plastic bottles at troops in 
Neve Dekalim. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) STATUS OF INDIVIDUAL SETTLEMENTS 
 
The following is an outline of the evacuation of the Gaza 
Strip and West Bank settlements as of 1700 hrs August 17, 
according to IDF reports and Israeli media. 
 
Atzmona:  Press reports in the morning indicated that all of 
the estimated 83 families in the settlement agreed with the 
IDF to leave voluntarily by noon today, but the negotiations 
failed around mid-day.  The IDF entered to evacuate by force. 
 
Kerem Atzmona (outpost):  Press reported at approximately 
16:00 that the evacuation of 70 people and 16 families was 
complete.  The settlers had negotiated to stay until this 
afternoon, but then said they would not leave until Saturday, 
August      20, so the IDF began forced evacuations at 
approximately 14:00. 
 
Bedolah:  As of yesterday, there were an estimated 24 
families still in the settlement, although some press reports 
indicate that many may have been infiltrators and not actual 
residents of the settlements.  The evacuation was complete at 
approximately 15:00 today. 
Dugit:  100% evacuated as of approximately midnight 
yesterday, August 16. 
 
Ele Sinai:  Press reports indicate that there are 30 
remaining families in the settlement, indicating that an 
estimated 44-54 have left voluntarily. 
 
Gadid:  No updates today.  As of yesterday, there were an 
estimated 37 families remaining. 
 
Gan Or:  Press reports in the morning said that were 
approximately 30 families remaining, and that the IDF was 
prepared to evacuate by force. 
 
Ganei Tal:  All of the estimated 85 families in the 
settlement agreed with the IDF to leave voluntarily by 15:00 
today.  Fifty-eight families remained as of noon; one family 
was still holding out at approximately 16:00. 
 
Kfar Darom:  Only about 8 families left voluntarily during 
the night, but the 65 remaining families said they may 
evacuate voluntarily by tomorrow, August 18. 
 
Kfar Yam:  Press reports indicate that there are 
approximately 20 families and 500 infiltrators remaining in 
the settlement.  The IDF was prepared to evacuate by force. 
 
Morag:  The figures for this settlement are inconsistent. 
The original IDF assessment said that there were 22 families 
in the settlement, but press reports say that over half left 
voluntarily yesterday and that 15-30 families remained.  The 
IDF entered to evacuate by force, using a bulldozer to break 
through the gate, and completed the evacuation by 16:00. 
 
Netzarim:  All of the estimated 64 families in the settlement 
agreed with the IDF to leave voluntarily by Monday, August 22. 
 
Netzer Hazani:  All of the estimated 46 families that are 
remaining in the settlement agreed with the IDF to leave 
voluntarily by tomorrow, August 18. 
 
Neve Dekalim:  Almost half of the residents left the 
settlement by midnight, and the remaining families reached an 
agreement with the IDF to begin voluntary evacuation after 
prayers ended at 16:00.  Some settlers requested an extension 
to finish packing. 
 
Nissanit:  Captain Uri Bar Lev reported that the settlement 
was completely evacuated as of the early hours of the 
morning, but settlers in the early afternoon claimed that ten 
families remained. 
 
Peat Sadeh:  100 percent evacuated as of last night, August 
¶16. 
 
Qatif:  No updates today.  There are approximately 58 
families remaining. 
 
Rafah Yam:  100 percent evacuated as of last night, August 16. 
 
Shelo/Shalev:  100 percent evacuated as of last night, August 
¶16. 
 
Tel Qatifah:  There are no figures available for the number 
of families that lived in the settlement before 
disengagement, but press reported that all of 16 families 
remaining this morning reached an agreement with the IDF to 
evacuate voluntarily, and did so by approximately 14:30 on 
buses. 
 
West Bank Settlements: 
 
Gannim:  100 percent evacuated as of yesterday, August 16. 
 
Homesh:  No updates available 
 
Kaddim:  100 percent evacuated as of yesterday, August 16. 
 
Sa Nur:  On the morning of August 17, about 600 Israelis 
protested IDF/Israeli police efforts to evacuate settlers. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) SECURITY SITUATION 
 
-- Palestinian contacts and CNN report that an Israeli 
grabbed a weapon from a guard at the Israeli settlement of 
Shilo, located 20 km north of Ramallah and adjacent to the 
Palestinian village of Tormsaya. 
 
As of 1800 local, reports are that three Palestinians are 
dead and two are wounded. The wounded have been transferred 
to hospitals in Jerusalem, where one is reportedly in 
critical condition and the other in serious-to-moderate 
condition. 
 
LTG Ward has called PA Interior Minister Nasir Yusif and 
Egyptian security officials and Consul General Walles talked 
with Abu Mazen's Chief of Staff, Rafik Husseini, urging calm 
in the wake of this attack.  Husseni agreed with the need for 
calm, but observed that this attack could easily be used a 
pretext for attacks by Palestinian factions. 
 
-- Kidnapping: The French Channel 3 journalist kidnapped 
August 15 is still being held August 17.  Gaza contacts say a 
family in the central Gaza strip refugee camps may be 
responsible, but they are unclear on a motive for the 
abduction.  One source speculated that the kidnapping may be 
an effort to force concessions from the PA, such as a 
prisoner release by the PA and/or Israel.  According to 
UNRWA, Security Forces have identified the vehicle used in 
the kidnapping as having been stolen the day before. 
According to a Gaza private sector contact, Gazans are angry 
that the PA has not taken immediate and aggressive action in 
response to the kidnapping.  Gazans fear that the 
international community will withhold support if the PA fails 
to act.  A Gaza businessman noted that people think it is 
strange that "no one is even whispering" about the 
kidnapping, whereas those responsible for such deeds are 
usually quick to claim responsibility. 
 
-- Mortar/Rocket Attacks:  According to the IDF, on the 
evening of August 16 Palestinian militants fired a Kassam 
rocket in the vicinity of the Nachal Oz Crossing.  No 
injuries were reported.  The IDF also reported a mortar shell 
firing near Gadid Village late on August 16. 
 
-- Shootings: According to UNRWA, gunmen opened fire from an 
area near Malaka Observation Post.  The IDF responded with 
heavy fire at the National Security Forces position west of 
the road.  The PA security forces left the area until their 
return can be coordinated with the IDF. 
 
-- Shootings: According to the IDF, Palestinian militants 
engaged in two instances of shooting at IDF soldiers late on 
August 16, one at the IDF post in Netzarim and the other in 
the vicinity of Nachal Oz crossing. 
 
-- Incursions: According to UNRWA, IDF troops occupied a 
house near Netzarim while they started to demolish their 
observation post at the Salah Ed-Din/Netzaarim junction.  In 
addition, the IDF removed two families from homes south of 
Dugit to use them as observation posts. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) PALESTINIAN REACTIONS 
 
-- In an August 17 news conference from Beirut carried live 
by Al-Jazirah TV, Hamas Political Bureau Chief Khalid Mish'al 
described the disengagement as "a malicious tactic by Sharon" 
aimed at reinforcing Israel's grip on the West Bank.  He 
stated that Gaza is the first liberated territory and that it 
will be followed by the West Bank and each and every single 
inch of the Palestinian territories.  He declared:  "We will 
not lay down arms.  We will force our will." 
 
 -- According to Israeli media reports, Mahmoud Azahar, the 
head of Hamas in the Gaza Strip, called upon his organization 
to move the focus of its resistance to the West Bank to 
secure Israeli withdrawal.  He also is reported to have said, 
"The period of calm will terminate in 2005." 
 
¶6.  (SBU) GOI POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS 
 
-- At a joint mid-day press conference with President Katsav 
on August 17, PM Sharon paid tribute to the restraint of the 
settlers but offered no apologies.  He said that the 
evacuation of Israeli settlements does not constitute the 
destruction of Zionism or the devastation of the settlement 
enterprise.  The settlers' efforts had not been in vain, 
Sharon said, claiming that the settlement enterprise had 
produced very great achievements for Israel -- including 
American recognition of large settlement blocks in Judea and 
Samaria. 
 
-- Pro- and anti-disengagement Knesset members continued to 
visit Gaza settlements, some to show support for the 
settlers, others to show sensitivity to the settlers, but 
support for the IDF and police.  The Israeli media has 
interviewed numerous MKs, who, on August 17, included 
disengagement foes Likud MK Uzi Landau and National Religious 
Party MK Nissan Slomiansky.  Labor Minister Matan Vilna'i was 
hit on the head with an egg during his visit to Neveh 
Dekalim, whereupon he got back in his car and drove off. 
Israel radio reported August 17 that Interior Minister Ofir 
Pines-Paz (Labor) has called on all politicians to refrain 
from visiting Gush Katif. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS/HUMANITARIAN ACCESS 
 
-- Erez Crossing and Industrial Zone:  According to Gaza 
private sector contacts, Erez is closed to Palestinians, but 
the IDF is allowing a small number of people to pass based on 
humanitarian/medical grounds with prior coordination.  Some 
Gazan businessmen have also been able to cross. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal: According to UNRWA, Rafah remains open. 
 
-- Abu Kholi junction:  According to UNRWA, Abu Kholi has 
been closed since 7 p.m. August 16 but is due to open again 
at 9 p.m. August 17.  Gaza private sector contacts have 
commented that because Abu Kholi had remained open for two 
days, the business community has had more time to prepare for 
the eventual closure and, therefore, the negative impact may 
be significantly less than previously thought. 
 
-- Karni Terminal: According to Gaza private sector contacts 
Karni was open on August 17. 
 
-- Kissufim, the main crossing used to enter Gush Katif and 
Kfar Darom settlements, remains closed. 
 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
KURTZER