05VATICAN89
POPE URGES GENUINE RELIGIOUS FREEDOM IN CUBA
Tue Jan 11 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Vatican
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS VATICAN 000089 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/WE (LEVIN); WHA/CCA (SIBILLA) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM CU VT
SUBJECT: POPE URGES GENUINE RELIGIOUS FREEDOM IN CUBA 
 
 
1.(U) Pope John Paul II told Cuba's new Ambassador to 
the Holy See January 8 that the Catholic Church needed 
"genuine religious freedom" in order to be more effective 
in promoting the good of the Cuban people.  Such freedom, 
according to the Pope, included better access to Cuba by 
foreign missionaries as well as the ability to maintain 
links with Catholics in other countries.  The Pope said 
Cuba's Catholic Church was ideally suited to promote the 
common good of the people, and he told the Cuban Ambassador 
that religious liberty would ensure it was even more 
effective in this service.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (U) In a strong appeal for greater religious freedom in 
Cuba, the Pope vigorously defended the role of the Catholic 
Church in Cuba during the presentation of credentials by 
Cuba's new Ambassador to the Holy See, Raul Roa Kouri.  The 
Pope pointed out that the Church played a vital role in 
promoting human dignity, working on behalf of the family 
and supporting the education of a new generation in the 
culture of life, peace and hope.  He also cited the 
Church's potential to shed light on the complex 
relationship between economics and spiritual values. 
 
¶3.  (U) The Pope's call for religious freedom was, however, 
prefaced by praise for Cuba's spirit of solidarity and 
compassion "made evident by sending personnel and material 
resources and basic necessities to various populations 
affected by natural disasters, conflict or poverty."  John 
Paul II also referred to the U.S. economic embargo against 
Cuba, saying that the Holy See hopes that the obstacles 
impeding free communication and trade "be overcome as soon 
as possible."  The Pope maintained that Cuba's development 
depended on respectful and open dialogue with everyone. 
 
¶4. (U) Career diplomat Raul Roa Kouri previously served as 
ambassador to the United Nations Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), Ambassador to France, 
and Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs.  His reply to the 
Pope -- peppered with anti-American rhetoric -- lamented 
the rise of neo-liberal capitalism that made a few rich 
countries wealthier but impoverished many others.  Roa 
Kouri also criticized "first world" efforts at the United 
Nations to maintain an economic, financial and trade 
embargo on Cuba.  Kouri juxtaposed the Pope's efforts to 
build a "better world" with Fidel Castro's, citing Cuba's 
efforts around the world and at home in the medical and 
educational fields and even likening Cuban doctors working 
overseas to Church missionaries. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Holy See Country Director for Cuba Monsignor 
Giorgio Lingua told us January 11 that, while the Pope's 
speech contained nothing groundbreaking, it was important 
for the Holy See to reemphasize its position on Cuba every 
so often, particularly its desire for greater religious 
freedom.  According to Lingua, Vatican Foreign Minister- 
equivalent Archbishop Giovanni Lajolo delivered a similar 
message to the Cuban ambassador when the two met for a 
courtesy call on the margins of the Papal audience.  "We 
try to reinforce our position when we can," said Lingua. 
Nevertheless, he foresaw no change in the dynamic of the 
Cuba-Holy See relationship.  Lingua did note that the Pope 
had continued his emphasis upon the importance of religious 
freedom by devoting a sizable portion of his annual address 
to the Vatican Diplomatic Corps to the topic two days after 
his remarks on Cuba (septel). 
 
Nicholson 
 
 
NNNN 

 2005VATICA00089 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED