05ZAGREB1422
GOVERNMENT OF CROATIA ISSUES STATEMENT SUPPORTING
Tue Aug 30 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Zagreb
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

301400Z Aug 05UNCLAS ZAGREB 001422 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL HR IZ
SUBJECT:  GOVERNMENT OF CROATIA ISSUES STATEMENT SUPPORTING 
IRAQI CONSTITUTIONAL DRAFTING PROCESS 
 
REF: STATE 158420 
 
¶1.  SBU) A/DCM and Pol Counselor presented reftel points to 
MFA State Secretary Biscevic August 29.  Later that same 
day, a supportive statement was released on the GoC 
website.  Text of statement (informal translation provided 
by Embassy Zagreb)follows. 
 
¶2.  Statement by GoC:  "The Government of Croatia welcomes 
the fact that the Temporary Peoples' Assembly of Iraq on 
the 28th of August 2005, adopted Iraq's constitution as a 
particularly important step towards stabilization of the 
situation in this country. The government congratulates 
Iraq's political leaders on their persistent and patient 
efforts towards building the widest possible consensus on 
the issues essential for further establishment of the Iraqi 
state, and expresses hope that the constitution would be 
accepted at the forthcoming referendum. Such development is 
of particular importance for overcoming security and 
developmental challenges that Iraq's society is faced with. 
The Government of Croatia also supports the international 
community's efforts aimed at helping political processes in 
Iraq which are related to the development of democracy and 
the rule of law as basic elements in building a stable and 
a secure environment, crucial for the development of Iraq 
as a prosperous and secure land for all of its citizens. 
The Republic of Croatia will continue to back the Iraqi 
authorities' efforts to establish peace and security and a 
stable democratic government. Opening of Croatia's special 
diplomatic mission in Baghdad is a an additional incentive 
in that direction." 
DELAWIE 
 
 
NNNN