06ANKARA5867
TURKEY: CMEA REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
Wed Oct 11 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO5147
RR RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #5867/01 2840518
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 110518Z OCT 06
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9303
INFO RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 1444
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 1212
RUEABND/DEA HQS WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 005867 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INL, EUR/SE, SA 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: SNAR PREL TU
SUBJECT:  TURKEY: CMEA REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 
 
REF: STATE 155254 
 
¶1.  Summary:   This cable details Embassy Ankara's assessment of 
Turkey's imports of ephedrine and pseudoephedrine as requested in 
reftel.  Embassy Ankara and our Turkish government contacts have no 
information which indicates Turkey's imports of ephedrine or 
pseudoephedrine are used for anything other than the licit 
production of pharmaceuticals.  We have also briefed MFA officials 
on the the issue. End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Turkey does not produce either ephedrine or pseudoephedrine 
domestically.  In order to import ephedrine or pseudoephedrine, 
Turkish chemical and pharmaceutical companies must obtain an import 
permit through the Ministry of Health (MOH).   Within MOH, the 
Department of Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances and Drug 
Precursors (DNPD) has established specific mechanisms for tracking 
and monitoring these chemicals after import.  Importers using the 
chemicals for the manufacture of pharmaceutical products must supply 
detailed information on end use, whereas importers distributing to 
other entities must indicate to whom the chemicals are distributed 
and how they are used. The DNPD is the liaison for Turkey to the 
INCB. 
 
¶3. (SBU) According to MOH officials, the importation of ephedrine or 
pseudoephedrine to Turkey is strictly for licit purposes; both are 
used in the production of pharmaceuticals. Turkey has a significant 
pharmaceutical industry, exporting to more than seventy countries. 
In 2005, Turkey's pharmaceutical exports reached 282 million 
dollars.  Turkish pharmaceutical products meet ninety percent of the 
local consumer demand.  At ninety-two dollars per capita, Turkey is 
one of the countries with the lowest per capita pharmaceuticals 
consumption.  Medicines containing ephedrine and pseudoephedrine are 
produced in tablet, syrup, and ampule forms.  Consumption of cough 
and cold medicines account for 8.5% of the market share, whereas 
analgesics and migraine products make up 9.5%. MOH insists there is 
no export of ephedrine or pseudoephedrine from Turkey, either in 
pure form or in finished products such as cold medicines. 
 
¶4. (SBU) MOH estimated that in 2005 945,702 boxes of tablets and 
371,100 of boxes in ampule form of medicine containing ephedrine 
were produced totaling 3,099 kilograms.  As for consumption of these 
products in 2005, MOH estimated 876,879 boxes of tablets and 221,100 
boxes in ampul form totaling 2,160 kilograms. 2005 estimates for the 
production of pseudoephedrine were 1,331,484 in tablet form and 
2,706,236 in syrup form totaling 4,483 kilograms.  As for 
consumption, MOH estimated 1,496,992 in tablet form and 2,551,482 in 
syrup form totaling 4,641 kilograms. 
 
¶5. (SBU) According to MOH statistics, in 2005 Turkey imported 2,501 
kg of ephedrine and 20,783 kg of pseudoephedrine.  MOH officials 
expressed skepticism about the data we provided (from the INL web 
site) which differed slightly from the above.  MOH stands by its 
import figures which they are also reporting to the INCB.  MOH 
officials explained that total imports of pseudoephredine and 
ephedrine are considerably higher than total production and 
consumption because production and consumption data are for pure 
ephedrine and pseudoephedrine medicines only - they do not include 
medicines which combine ephedrine or pseudoephedrine with other 
drugs. 
 
¶6. (SBU) DEA-Ankara indicates there is no known diversion of 
ephedrine or pseudoephedrine to the illicit market.  Turkish drug 
traffickers are not involved in methamphetamine production, nor is 
there a consumer market for methamphetamine in Turkey or surrounding 
countries. 
 
¶7. (SBU) In March 2006, DEA queried the Turkish National Police 
(TNP) and Turkish Customs officials regarding seizures of ephedrine 
and pseudoephedrine.  Turkish officials acknowledged past seizures 
but emphasized they were uncommon.  DEA officials indicated that 
prior seizures normally involved quantities of ephedrine or 
pseudoephedrine destined for Russia.  DEA is unaware of any recent 
reports of seizures. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Both ephedrine and pseudoephedrine are listed chemicals in 
the 1988 UN Convention, to which Turkey is a signatory.  Turkey's 
Regulation on Controlled Chemicals, effective as of June 16, 2004, 
decrees that the import, export and internal distribution of all 
controlled substances must be approved by MOH.  A prescription is 
required to purchase any medications containing ephedrine and 
pseudoephedrine in Turkey.  However, MOH officials acknowledge that 
physicians continuing use of self-copied and serial numbered 
prescription forms (red for narcotics and green for psychotropic 
substances) in Turkey may occasionally lead to individuals' use of 
controlled substances for illicit purposes. Officials expressed the 
need for technical and financial assistance to create an electronic 
prescription database system to guard against theft of prescriptions 
and fraudulent prescriptions. 
 
ANKARA 00005867  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
¶9. (SBU) Although Turkey does not have a professional equivalent to 
DEA's Diversion Investigator, the MOH, TNP, Jandarma, and Customs 
have well-trained personnel who work effectively on chemical-related 
issues.  Moreover, MOH is authorized to deny or rescind permission 
to import specific shipments of ephedrine or pseudoepehdrine if it 
suspects they will be diverted for illicit use. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Acetic anhydride, a chemical used in heroin processing, is 
of primary concern for law enforcement officials in Turkey.  Given 
Turkey's active participation in international chemical control 
programs such as Operations Purple/Topaz, DEA is confident that 
Turkish officials would likely use their contacts from these 
programs to immediately notify a destination country and/or the 
appropriate international authorities regarding possible diversion 
of a shipment of ephedrine or pseudoephedrine. 
 
¶11. (SBU) We have also alerted MFA officials to the CMEA and the 
link to USG assistance programs, using reftel talking points.  Vakur 
Erkul, the Americas Desk Head of Department undertook to ensure we 
had all the information we needed. 
 
 
WILSON#