06BAGHDAD511
DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY PERSONNEL
Sat Feb 18 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO1990
RR RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK RUEHMOS
DE RUEHGB #0511/01 0491332
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 181332Z FEB 06
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2771
INFO RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC
RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000511 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
PLEASE PASS TO DHS HQ 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: MOPS PBTS ASEC EAIR SMIG PARM PBTS IZ
SUBJECT: DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY PERSONNEL 
REQUIREMENTS FOR CY 2006 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: Multi-National Security Transition 
Command  Iraq (MNSTC-I) and U.S. Department of 
Homeland Security (DHS) Attache and Country Director 
have agreed to submit the following request for DHS 
specialists to assist the GOI in controlling its 
borders and ports of entry (POEs) for CY 2006.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
---------- 
BACKGROUND 
---------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Continued support of the Customs and Border 
Protection (CBP) mission in Iraq from DHS remains a 
critical component of the Iraq border enforcement 
initiative.  There are 23 POEs -- 14 land (two of 
which are closed), five air, and four sea.  There is 
also a General Directorate Headquarters located in 
Baghdad that requires training and staff support from 
DHS specialists. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Two senior DHS leaders are working in the 
Embassy and, until recently, four 4-person teams 
(formerly known as Border Support Teams, or BSTs) from 
CBP were providing invaluable support at the following 
POEs: Trebil, Waleed, Rabea, and Baghdad International 
Airport (BIAP).  These teams historically have rotated 
every 90 days.  During the period from November 29, 
2005, to January 6, 2006, there were 5 CBP team 
members who remained in Iraq, assigned to the BIAP, 
Trebil, Al Waleed, and Rabiah Ports of Entry.  Full 
DHS CBP teams started the current 90-day rotations in 
early January 2006. 
 
---------------------------- 
CY 2006 REQUIREMENTS DEFINED 
---------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) LAND POE REQUIREMENTS: Three CBP teams, each 
comprising 4 specialists with skill sets that include 
primary/secondary customs and immigration inspections 
of vehicles and persons; examination and processing of 
commercial vehicles and cargo; and the collection of 
customs duties and fees.  Additional border 
enforcement skill sets may be useful within the team, 
but should not preclude the primary skill sets 
requested.  Each team should include a subject-matter 
expert in visas, passport control, and detecting 
fraudulent travel documents. These individuals will 
train, coach, and mentor POE personnel at POEs to 
facilitate the transfer of POE operations to complete 
Iraqi control.  Teams will be assigned to specific 
border areas and work with Multi-National Corps-Iraq 
(MNC-I). 
 
¶5.  (SBU) AIR POE REQUIREMENTS: One CBP team composed 
of 2 specialists with experience in international 
airport operations, passenger processing, immigration 
and customs processing and inspections, cargo 
examination, and aircraft inspections. The team should 
include a subject matter expert in visas, passport 
control, and detecting fraudulent travel documents. 
These specialists will train Iraqi personnel in 
primary and secondary inspection techniques, to 
include interviewing skills and the use of databases 
to query suspected travelers at the international 
airports within Iraq. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) NATIONAL OR REGIONAL ACADEMIES: One 2-person 
CBP team assigned to an academy.  The team will 
conduct train-the-trainer courses (T3) and provide 
oversight of Iraqi instructors and courses to include 
POE basic and advanced individual training and junior 
and mid-level leadership training.  Additionally, the 
team will assist in curriculum development and course 
instruction for other critical POE tasks.  The team 
will initially be assigned to the Basrah Academy. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) CPATT PLANNERS: One 2-person DHS team 
assigned to Civilian Police Assistance Training Teams 
(CPATT) Headquarters.  The team requires extensive 
experience in working POE-related joint interagency 
operations. This team requires experience in port 
operations and management, policy development, 
identifying complex issues, developing solutions, 
 
BAGHDAD 00000511  002 OF 003 
 
 
briefing recommended solutions to senior leaders, and 
implementing the senior leader decisions.  The team 
requires expertise primarily in sea and land POEs. 
The team members will be expected to visit Iraqi ports 
of entry as required, and in conjunction with CPATT 
leader assessment visits.  The team will assist in 
assessing the ports, developing plans for the port way 
ahead, and assisting in implementing the way ahead 
plans.  The CBP team members may be expected to visit 
the Directorate of Border Enforcement (DBE) and POE 
Academies to assist in the development and 
implementation of instruction. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) COMMAND RELATIONSHIPS: To support unity of 
command, the CBP Teams will be ADCON to the DHS 
Country Director, and may be detailed out or assigned 
as OPCON to MNSTC-I and on order TACON to selected 
MNC-I Multinational Divisions (MND) for specific 
missions or time periods.  The command relationship 
agreement will be defined in detail in a future MNSTC- 
I / DHS Memorandum of Understanding that is currently 
being staffed between the two commands. 
 
----------------------------- 
SPECIFIC CY 2006 REQUIREMENTS 
----------------------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) Requirements for CY 2006: 18 total positions. 
Request DHS ensure total number of specialists in 
country remains constant at all times.  A separate 
memorandum of understanding is being staffed at this 
time outlining specific tasks and command and control 
relations for the teams.  In accordance with that MOD, 
teams could be re-missioned based on critical needs. 
For the January 2006 start point the teams will be 
staffed and positioned as specified below: 
 
-- 12 positions for land POEs: (three 4-person teams, 
one each TACON to MND-W and MND-N, to provide coverage 
to the Syrian, Jordanian, and Iranian borders in 
coordination with MND operations; and one TACON to 
MND-SE and, on order, MND-CS, to provide coverage to 
the Iranian border; 
 
-- 2 positions for air POEs: (one 2-person team to 
provide coverage at BIAP, with possible rotations to 
other international airports as necessary); 
 
-- 2 positions for academies: (one 2-person team to 
assist in program of instruction development and 
instruction at an academy, with possible future 
rotations to the other two Regional Academies as 
necessary); 
 
-- 2 positions for CPATT headquarters: (one 2-person 
team to provide POE expertise for land and sea POEs at 
CPATT HQ. This team will complete at a minimum a 120- 
day rotation). 
 
------- 
FUNDING 
------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) MNSTC-I currently provides funding for 16 
CBP positions covering the next two rotations: January 
9 to April 9 and April 9 to July 9, 2006.  MNSTC-I 
requires a detailed accounting of all expenses that 
are covered by the MNSTC-I funding no later than the 
end date of each 90-day rotation. Next rotation end 
date is April 9, 2006. The current funding provided to 
DHS includes the two additional positions in support 
of CPATT HQ which have yet to be filled. MNSTC-I 
understands that DHS will recruit these two 
individuals and deploy them to MNSTC-I as soon as 
possible. MNSTC-I does not provide funding for any DHS 
positions in support of the U.S. Embassy and its 
mission. 
 
------------------- 
FUTURE REQUIREMENTS 
------------------- 
 
¶11.  (SBU) The above are validated requirements for 
DHS support through June 2006.  No later than March 
10, MNSTC-I will determine if this initiative needs to 
 
BAGHDAD 00000511  003 OF 003 
 
 
continue beyond June. If so, a subsequent DHS support 
and funding request will be provided at that time to 
continue the force rotation. 
 
--------------- 
DESIRED OUTCOME 
---------------- 
 
¶12.  (SBU) The desired outcome of this initiative is 
POEs that are "able to disrupt cross-border support to 
insurgents and terrorists with no support from 
coalition forces transition teams and enablers 
resulting in the reduced flow of foreign fighters and 
enemy financial resources crossing the Syrian border" 
(Annex C to MNSTC-I FRAGO 05-115). Meanwhile, POEs are 
internally synchronized with realistic administrative 
procedures, operating procedures that conform to the 
law, technology, adequate organizational structure, 
trained and equipped manpower, and modem facilities. A 
sustainable national training system is in place that 
supports the professionalism of POE management and 
leadership. 
 
---------- 
CONCLUSION 
---------- 
 
¶13. (SBU) DHS personnel are valuable partners to MNF-I 
as the Iraqi government accomplishes the difficult 
tasks of refining customs and immigration laws, 
developing policies and procedures, and building 
capabilities in an undeveloped part of its government 
apparatus. 
 
KHALILZAD