06CAIRO721
EGYPTIAN STUDENTS FRET OVER MB INFLUENCE, FUTURE
Tue Feb 07 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CAIRO 000721 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV SCUL ELAB KDEM EG
SUBJECT: EGYPTIAN STUDENTS FRET OVER MB INFLUENCE, FUTURE 
PROSPECTS 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified.  Please Protect Accordingly. 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  In a recent encounter, secular Egyptian 
university students expressed worry over the growing 
influence of Islamists on and off campus and blamed 
GOE-imposed restrictions on student life for fueling support 
for the MB.  The students discussed their on-campus efforts 
to counter widespread Islamist influence.  While they 
welcomed U.S. support for political reform, they cautioned 
these efforts should not cross the line into "interference," 
which they would oppose.  All viewed with trepidation the 
increasingly difficult economic circumstances facing the 
country, including the lack of work opportunities at home and 
abroad.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
Restrictions on Student Life Counterproductive 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶2. (SBU) On January 29, Emboffs invited a group of university 
students to coffee at the American Center in Alexandria, to 
share their thoughts and concerns about Egypt's present and 
future.  Each of the students was active in student politics 
and affiliated with either the ruling NDP or the opposition 
Wafd party.  Chief among their concerns was the rising 
influence of Islamists on campus.  However, they slammed the 
GOE's heavy-handed efforts to contain Islamism on campus as 
worse than futile - and indeed counterproductive.  Several 
participants pointed out that regulations prohibiting student 
unions from partisan activities have led the MB to organize 
"underground" and off campus, outside the official system. 
At the same time, recognized student organizations must seek 
the approval of highly conservative State Security officers 
and University administrators for even the most mundane of 
activities, such as organizing school trips, arts programs or 
activity days.   The MB, they said, meanwhile directs a 
"shadow" and highly active student union which has gained in 
popularity among a student body starved for activity and 
stimulation. 
 
¶3. (SBU) As a result of last fall's parliamentary gains for 
the MB, both Wafdist and NDP members of the group cited 
halting further MB inroads as a key part of their outreach to 
fellow students.  Both parties produce campus newsletters, 
flyers, and leaflets, aimed at countering MB influence. 
However, a volatile political climate in the past several 
years has enabled MB student groups to define the campus 
political agenda, often through the posting of anti-Israel or 
anti-US posters and leaflets among students.  In the long 
run, the students believe that real support for the MB is 
thin.  Participants view support for the MB in recent 
elections as a protest vote rather than a viable vehicle for 
reform.  As one Wafdist opined, the MB's inability to tackle 
reform would become apparent if opponents forced them to 
propose real solutions to problems rather than relying on the 
mantra, "Islam is the solution." 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
U.S. Should "Support Reform  - but Don't interfere!" 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) The student activists became animated when 
discussing American policy toward Egypt and the region, and 
their statements reflected a common theme:  the U.S. should 
support reforms but avoid interference, which they viewed as 
counterproductive.  One NDP activist chided the USG for 
reportedly tying progress on a Free Trade Agreement to the 
release of presidential candidate Ayman Nour.  The Wafdists 
took a more populist stance in their criticisms.  One, a 
recent participant in the USG,s International Visitor 
Leadership Program, characterized American Middle East policy 
as destabilizing and of benefit only to extremists such as 
Hamas, the MB, and Iran.  Another Wafdist took aim at QIZs by 
alleging that they undercut the Egyptian textile industry 
while aiding "established Egyptian traders" and American 
companies, especially "Jewish ones with business ties in 
Israel."   (Note: Despite the criticism, the meeting was 
friendly and held on the premises of the American Alexandria. 
The students were pleased to engage Emboffs, and expressed no 
reservations about coming to the APP.) 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Few Links To A World That Is Passing Them By 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) Like the vast majority of Egyptian students, most 
participants lacked significant travel outside of Egypt.  Two 
of the six had never been abroad, while two others had travel 
experience limited to the Gulf many years ago.  With the 
exception of one previous IV participant, most of their prior 
interaction with foreigners came from contact at tourist 
centers such as Luxor and Sharm el-Sheikh.  All expressed 
frustration at the difficulty in obtaining visas to other 
countries - particularly those in the Gulf, a region which 
once served as a major outlet for excess Egyptian labor. 
Several cited the increasing emphasis on education and 
specialized skills among Gulf companies as a contributing 
factor to the drop in Egyptian expatriate workers.  A sense 
of apprehension among the students was clear about Egypt's 
need to produce a more educated and employable workforce lest 
it be left behind by other countries in the region.   This 
last point was obvious when one student referred to the UAE 
as "the same as Europe" (though he had never traveled to 
Europe). 
 
-------------- 
The Road Ahead 
-------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) All participants expressed general anxiety about 
Egypt's future but avoided making sweeping generalizations 
about domestic developments over the next five years.  Most 
predicted that President Mubarak would continue in office for 
the remainder of his term and several expressed the hope that 
he would pursue economic and political reforms, perhaps with 
the assistance of his son Gamal.  Another student predicted 
that GOE intolerance of the MB would lead to a dissolution of 
parliament, an option Mubarak exercised in the 1980's. 
(Comment: We believe Mubarak would be loathe to dissolve 
parliament, given the current context of strong internal and 
external pressures on the GOE to democratize.  End comment.) 
RICCIARDONE