06HELSINKI355
HIGHLIGHTS OF ADMIRAL COLLINS VISIT TO FINLAND,
Thu Apr 27 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Helsinki
VZCZCXYZ0001
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHHE #0355/01 1171128
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 271128Z APR 06
FM AMEMBASSY HELSINKI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1797
RULSJGA/COMDT COGARD WASHINGTON DC//G-CI//
INFO RUEGABF/COGARD MIO EUROPE ROTTERDAM NL
RHEFHLC/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHINGTON DC
RHFJUSC/USCUSTOMS WASHDC
RUEAIAO/HQ ICE IAO WASHINGTON DC
RULSDMK/DEPT OF TRANSPORTATION WASHDCUNCLAS HELSINKI 000355 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DHS FOR US COAST GUARD PORT SECURITY DIRECTORATE 
DHS FOR TSA-INTL AFFAIRS 
ICE FOR FOREIGN OPS DIVISION 
CBP FOR OIA-KTHOMSEN 
DOT FOR MARAD 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PHSA EWWT SENV IMO FI
SUBJECT: HIGHLIGHTS OF ADMIRAL COLLINS VISIT TO FINLAND, 
MARCH 28 - April 1, 2006 
 
¶1. (U) Admiral Thomas Collins, Commandant of the U.S. Coast 
Guard, visited Finland, March 28 - April 1, 2006.  Finnish 
Chief of the Border Guard, Vice Admiral Jaakko Smolander, 
was the host of the visit.  The Admiral's itinerary 
included meetings with senior GoF officials, briefings by 
the Finnish Border Guard (FBG), and visits to operational 
units in Helsinki, on the Russian border and West coast. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
THE FINNISH APPROACH TO BORDER CONTROL 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) An introductory meeting at FBG headquarters on 28 
March provided Admiral Collins and the Ambassador an 
overview of Finnish border control threat perspectives and 
strategy.  From the Finnish perspective, the primary border 
threat areas are the Mediterranean and, in the future, from 
the Balkans.  There is strong migrant pressure from North 
Africa into Spain and the Canary Islands; and cocaine 
smuggling from South America.  Border security in southern 
European countries is hindered by the absence of a coast 
guard function; coastal security there is usually a 
national police responsibility.  FBG noted that illegal 
migrants and criminals do not travel through Russia and 
Belarus, since the route is longer and more dangerous. 
Trafficking in persons (TIP) is a problem, but Finland is 
primarily a transit country.  The largest problem is 
presented by people who apply for asylum and then 
disappear.  Admiral Collins noted that the USG is aware of 
and commends Finland for its progress against TIP. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Finland's four-tier approach to border security 
consists of (1) posting consular and liaison officers in 
other countries; notably, as of 1 April, one Border Guard 
officer will be serving in the Finnish Embassy in Beijing; 
(2) cooperating with neighboring countries' border, customs 
and police; (3) conducting border and customs control 
(border control consists of surveillance plus checks at 
crossing points); (4) conducting domestic activities 
pertaining to alien control. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) EU countries in the Schengen area have no 
controls at internal borders, but border control remains a 
national competence and responsibility.  Admiral Collins 
observed that this arrangement creates seams, making the EU 
only as safe as its weakest link.  Admiral Collins 
questioned whether this arrangement was creating pressure 
for more integrated solutions, such as a European Coast 
Guard.  Smolander said such a concept had been discussed, 
but that the member states believe that border control is a 
national responsibility and cannot be shared. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) During the briefing, FBG noted that the GoF 
intends to propose a common EU border strategy calling for 
increased transparency of the border through risk analysis 
and inspections, interagency cooperation, joint resources 
and readiness for operations, and improved liaison and 
operations with neighboring and source countries. 
Smolander said that Germany and the Netherlands would 
probably support the proposal.  Admiral Collins noted that 
a common surveillance system is the key to transparency; 
joint resources are best employed through deployable, 
common units; and military-law enforcement cooperation is 
essential. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
MEETING AT THE MINISTRY OF THE INTERIOR 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) In a 29 March meeting with Finnish Minister of 
the Interior, Kari Rajamaki, the Minister and the Admiral 
discussed Finnish and U.S. threats and security 
perspectives.  (The Ambassador did not attend this 
meeting).  Minister Rajamaki said illegal immigration is an 
increasing problem that is regarded as a human rights issue 
within the EU; and trafficking in persons is a global crime 
that has surpassed the illegal drug trade.  Admiral Collins 
said that immigration -- which is a major issue in the U.S. 
 
-- is a complex, global issue; and that regional and 
multilateral solutions are needed to help build glbal 
understanding.  The Admiral noted that accounability and 
transparency are essential for security.  For the maritime,the USG is seeking a strong audit mechanism -- such as what 
currently exists for the aviation communty; as well as an 
international system for Long Range Identification and 
Tracking of vessels.  Admiral Collins said that for the 
U.S. 9/11 was a transformational event, that the USG cannot 
approach security unilaterally -- regional and global 
partnerships are essential.  Rajamaki noted that the Madrid 
bombing was a transformational event for Europe, and 
affirmed that the GoF wants to be involved in strengthening 
these international security ties. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
MEETING AT THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS 
(MINTC) 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) For Admiral Collins meeting at MINTC, Finnish 
attendees included Juhani Korpela (Permanent Secretary, 
MINTC), Silja Ruokala (International Affairs, MINTC), Rauli 
Parmes (Security, MINTC), Jari Gron (Logistics, MINTC), 
Paavo Wihuri (Maritime Safety/Security, Finnish Maritime 
Administration).  (The Ambassador did not attend this 
briefing).  Korpela noted that transportation security is a 
priority item on the Finnish agenda, and the GoF plans to 
address it through the Security and Safety in Global 
Intermodal Transport program.  Korpela also offered that it 
may be of interest to the USG to learn more about Finnish 
icebreaking capabilities.  Wihuri noted that Finnish ports 
conduct background checks on each employee.  Truck drivers 
are escorted as they drive trucks on boats. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Admiral Collins outlined USCG responsibilities, 
and noted that the USCG has been active within the IMO on 
safety and security, particularly ISPS.  USCG wants to 
partner robustly around the world, and it is in everybody's 
interest to ensure the regime is working.  Sub-standard 
ships must be prohibited; and the USCG looks to countries 
like Finland to be aggressive and to exchange best 
practices.  Domestic legislation requires USCG to visit 
trading partners to see how they are implementing port 
security. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Admiral Collins said that the current USCG agenda 
includes a formal port assessment for Finland in 2007, and 
that we welcome the Finns to see our ports in the US.  The 
USCG is working with China to help other nations develop 
security in their transportation systems.  If there are 
possibilities to do that in Europe with Finland, USG is 
interested, particularly with regard to West Africa.  USCG 
may look into replacing two icebreakers that are nearing 
the end of their lifecycles.  There is a national debate on 
who will build the icebreakers and who will pay for them. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
BRIEFING FOR MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶10.  (SBU) Admiral Collins provided a USCG overview 
briefing to Finnish MPs Jari Vilen (Grand Committee, 
chairman), Kimmo Kiljunen (Grand Committee, vice chairman), 
Eero Akaan-Penttila (Grand Committee), Veijo Puhjo 
(Administrative Committee, vice-chairman) and Lauri Oinonen 
(Administrative Committee).  (The Ambassador did not attend 
this briefing).  The Admiral observed that the lack of 
clarity in IMO positions between the European Commission 
and individual countries made it difficult to develop a 
common approach to common issues; and underscored the 
purpose of LRIT, the importance of establishing an ICAO 
type of audit mechanism for IMO, and the need for greater 
transparency and accountability. 
 
¶11.  (SBU) Vilen said he was pleased to hear the Admiral 
emphasize multilateral approaches, noting that previous 
unilateral USG actions had made it difficult to work with 
 
the Administration.  Vilen said the U.S. is Finland's most 
important partner, noting that the EU is in a pause 
following the defeat of the EU constitution and that the 
elections in France would have a huge effect on the EU. 
Vilen believes the EU must have a common approach to 
security matters; but because the EU is not a federal 
state, larger countries (Vilen noted France, UK, Germany, 
Spain, Poland) might have different ideas.  Since terrorism 
is also a threat in Finland -- the willingness to cooperate 
internationally is growing.  Vilen cited Finland's 
assistance during a recent oil slick in Estonian waters for 
which Estonia had not requested assistance; and the Police, 
Customs and Border Guard cooperation as a model that the 
GoF is seeking to introduce elsewhere. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
FIELD SITE VISITS DEMONSTRATE FINNISH MODELS FOR 
INTERAGENCY COOPERATION 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶12.  (SBU) Following the policy-level meetings in Helsinki, 
Admiral Collins, joined by the Ambassador, visited various 
field sites to obtain first-hand understanding of Border 
Guard operations and highlight areas of interagency 
cooperation. 
 
¶13.  (SBU) On Thursday, 30 March, the delegation visited 
the Gulf of Finland Coast Guard Command Center in Helsinki 
and the Pelkola border crossing point on the Russian 
border; and participated in a snowmobile patrol along the 
Russian border.  The visit to the Coast Guard Command 
Center demonstrated the close operational level 
coordination among the FBG, the Finnish Navy and the 
Finnish Maritime Administration (FMA).  The FBG and FMA are 
collocated in the same building and on the same floor.  All 
three maritime authorities contribute data to build a 
single, unified maritime operational picture and can draw 
on this picture as the basis for conducting activities. 
Later, at the Pelkola border crossing point, the delegation 
received presentations about (1) FBG border checkpoint 
procedures that include the use of an EU-wide database to 
verify the identity of potential criminals; (2) methods and 
equipment Finland uses for detecting fraudulent documents; 
and (3) the working-level cooperation be Finnish police and 
customs officials. 
 
¶14.  (SBU) On Friday, 31 March, the delegation visited the 
Western Finland Coast Guard District, and received 
briefings on the FBG Air Patrol unit in Turku.  Later the 
delegation embarked the renovated FBG ship, TURSAS, for a 
brief underway period in the Port of Turku that included an 
overview of ISPS implementation by the port director. 
 
¶15.  (SBU) On Saturday, 1 April, just before departure, the 
Admiral received an overview briefing on the Police, 
Customs and Border Guard unit at the Helsinki-Vantaa 
international airport. (The Ambassador did not attend this 
briefing). 
 
--------------------------- 
FUTURE USCG-FBG COOPERATION 
--------------------------- 
 
¶16.  (SBU) Admiral Collins' visit provides a solid 
foundation for future USG-GoF cooperation on a range of 
security issues.  Admiral Collins and Vice Admiral 
Smolander discussed potential areas for future USCG-FBG 
professional exchange.  Post looks forward to working with 
the USCG to advance both USCG-FBG cooperation and bilateral 
and EU policy objectives involving the USCG. 
 
WARE