06KHARTOUM2632
Bashir Calls for Commitment to National Unity
Wed Nov 08 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO2801
RR RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #2632/01 3120721
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 080721Z NOV 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5155
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 002632 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV SU
SUBJECT:  Bashir Calls for Commitment to National Unity 
 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY:  Sudanese President Omer Bashir addressed the 
opening of the third session of the National Legislative Council 
(the National Assembly and Council of States in joint session) on 
October 30, reiterating the government's commitment to implementing 
peace agreements reached with groups in the south, east, and west. 
Bashir announced the government is focused on four primary areas of 
governance:  enhancing comprehensive peace; strengthening good 
governance; promoting economic development and social justice; and 
improving international relations.  Bashir spoke of stronger 
political relations with African and Arab countries, and expressed 
appreciation for their support against the "unfair campaign" taking 
place against Sudan.  End summary. 
 
--------------- 
Enhancing Peace 
--------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) President Bashir focused initially on matters pertaining to 
national peace, stating that the third session of the National 
Assembly would witness the second year of finalizing the 
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA), the first year of implementing 
the Darfur Peace Agreement (DPA), and the first month of 
implementing the Eastern Sudan Peace Agreement (ESPA).  Pointing to 
the CPA as a guideline and noting the remarkable developments under 
the agreement that have been unique in Sudan's history, Bashir said 
that disagreements are inevitable and that the best way to address 
them is through continued dialogue.  According to Bashir, the ESPA 
timeframe for implementation will be submitted to the National 
Legislature for approval and the government would support a U.S. 
$600 million five-year development and rehabilitation fund for the 
region, with an immediate end to the state of emergency and a 
declaration of amnesty. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Bashir Notes DPA Implementation Intentions 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶3. (SBU) Regarding the DPA, the President addressed the formation of 
a higher committee to supervise implementation, initiation of the 
DDR plan to occur within two months in consultation with the African 
Union (AU) to ensure only government troops retain weapons, and 
establishment of various compensation and rehabilitation funds as 
well as promoting humanitarian assistance through establishment of 
basic infrastructure projects and social services.  Bashir used the 
opportunity to thank AU forces for the work they have performed in 
keeping peace despite limited resources and capacity, and advocated 
additional regional and international financial, technical, and 
logistical support to make AMIS more effective and efficient. 
Additionally, he praised parliament for rejecting UN troops.  The 
Government, Bashir said, is launching a plan for dialogue with 
regional and international interlocutors and the non-signatory 
factions with the objective of reaching a formula for consolidating 
peace and security in Darfur. 
 
----------------------------- 
Strengthening Good Governance 
----------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) According to the President's speech, the Sudanese Interim 
National Constitution has "laid the foundations, principles, and 
basic provisions to establish good governance."  As specified, the 
Government will develop the capacity of the legislative, 
constitutional, and political institutions to carry out the 
monitoring and accountability roles in a way that protects the 
rights of all citizens.  Bashir noted that responsible political 
performance depends upon the establishment of basic freedoms of 
expression, and called upon all officials to cooperate positively 
with the media by providing true statements, accurate figures, and 
well explained policies. 
 
------------------------------------- 
Promoting Economic and Social Justice 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) According to Bashir, there must be a basis of sustainable 
development and social justice.  Development of the five-year 
comprehensive strategic plan aims at building a unified, 
economically self-sufficient nation; the plan consists of the 
following major guidelines: 
 
-- enhancement of the principles of national dialogue and peaceful 
political competition, rather than war and conflicts; 
 
-- sustaining the rate of economic growth; 
 
-- increasing production and productivity in both agricultural and 
industrial sectors and expanding the role of non-oil products; 
 
-- continuing infrastructure projects, particularly in electricity, 
roads, railway, and river transport to link parts of the country; 
 
--completion of major irrigation facilities, such as the enlargement 
 
KHARTOUM 00002632  002 OF 002 
 
 
of the Rosaries dam, Seteit dam, and other water collection, 
storage, and distribution projects; 
 
-- focusing on human development to build capacity and widen 
employment opportunities in all sectors; 
 
-- expand scientific research and improve higher education; 
 
-- balance equally the allocation of resources between the states 
and localities and guarantee the fair distribution of water, health, 
and education services in keeping with national commitment to the 
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs); 
 
-- adoption of specific projects to combat poverty, with a special 
focus on rural and social development; 
 
-- concentration on income generation projects for returnees, 
whether internally displaced persons, refugees, or people from 
war-affected areas; 
 
-- focusing on quality standards to gain competitiveness locally, 
regionally, and internationally; 
 
-- initiating projects for the revival of cultural, intellectual, 
and sports areas; 
 
-- review of state structures and increasing their efficiency, 
combined with the devolution and redistribution of powers and 
jurisdiction between different levels of governance; and 
 
-- developing defense and security institution capacities to defend 
peace, the homeland, and the nation's sovereignty. 
 
----------------- 
Foreign Relations 
----------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Bashir announced that Sudan's foreign policy would promote 
stronger relations with friendly countries and enhance relations 
with African and Arab-Islamic nations.  Sudan will work with friends 
and allies to establish international relations marked by mutual 
respect.  Bashir concluded by stating that as long as the government 
sticks to its principles, it would have the support of both the 
Sudanese people and of other nations. 
 
POWERS