06KHARTOUM2113
DARFUR: PROTESTS LEAD TO VIOLENCE AS N. DARFUR GOVERNOR
Mon Sep 04 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO4197
OO RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #2113/01 2471433
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 041433Z SEP 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4398
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/CJTF HOAUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KHARTOUM 002113 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE, SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/SPG, S/CRS, DS, DS/IP/AF, DS/DSS/ITA 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/SUDAN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KPKO SOCI AU UN US SU
SUBJECT: DARFUR: PROTESTS LEAD TO VIOLENCE AS N. DARFUR GOVERNOR 
LEADS CHARGE AGAINST UNSCR 1706 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) The Governor of North Darfur state led a peaceful 
demonstration against UN Security Council Resolution (UNSCR) 1706 on 
September 2.  In prepared remarks, he called for "jihad" against any 
"foreign invaders" and urged the Government of National Unity (GNU) 
to support all efforts to resist an expanded UN presence.  He warned 
the U.S. and UK - whose flags were burned - that the introduction of 
UN peacekeepers would lead to "grave consequences."  The rally 
concluded with a procession to the UN compound, where a letter 
spelling out the Governor's demands was presented to the Head of 
Office.  In a separate confrontation, two persons were killed, 
twelve injured, and forty detained when students in favor of UN 
intervention clashed with police.  The Governor's statements 
represent a disturbing trend and constitute the crossing of a number 
of noteworthy tripwires.  End summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
FIERY FLAGS AND RHETORIC AGAINST "FOREIGN INVADERS" 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶2. (SBU) According to UN and AMIS sources, in response to the August 
31 passage of UNSCR 1706, government officials in North Darfur state 
organized a September 2 demonstration in El Fasher to protest the 
introduction of UN peacekeepers.  The Governor of North Darfur, 
Othman Mohammed Yousif Kibir, led the rally.  An estimated three to 
four thousand individuals attended the demonstration, including 
students of all ages, government employees, teachers, union members, 
religious and community leaders, and local tribal/government 
officials.  (Comment:  As in previous National Congress Party 
(NCP)-sponsored demonstrations in El Fasher, it appears there were 
organized efforts to recruit attendance at the demonstration.  It is 
not known, however, whether rumors of students being paid to 
demonstrate are valid.  Despite claims by official speakers at the 
rally, several participants in the demonstration affirm that there 
were few, if any, internally displaced persons (IDPs) represented in 
the gathering.  End Comment.) 
 
¶3. (SBU) The Governor, dressed in military uniform and sporting the 
red ribbon of "Dababeen" (fighters willing to die for religious 
causes), proclaimed the outright rejection of UNSCR 1706 by all 
Darfurians.  He affirmed Sudan's ability and willingness to confront 
any "foreign invaders" that would undermine the unity and 
sovereignty of the country.  The Governor said the GNU is pressing 
ahead in the implementation of the Darfur Peace Agreement (DPA) and 
in realizing the aspirations of the people of Darfur.  He held that 
UNSCR 1706 was "unfair" and would only serve to further destabilize 
Darfur. 
 
¶4. (SBU) The Governor strongly denounced the introduction of 
"international" forces to Darfur.  He warned the world community, 
with particular emphasis on the U.S. and UK, that such a move would 
only invite additional bloodshed and war in the region.  Prior to 
the Governor's remarks, U.S. and UK flags were burned to cheers and 
chanting of national slogans.  The Governor declared the solidarity 
of the NCP, the National Security Council, the Legislative Council, 
and local tribal/government officials, in rejecting the UN 
resolution, and offered his appreciation for the attendance and 
tangible support of Badawi Al Khair Idriss, GNU representative and 
head of the NCP delegation to El Fasher.  (Comment: Idriss made only 
brief remarks at the outset of the rally, which began near the 
Governor's office.  He urged support for the Governor and labeled 
the gathering a "demonstration of anger."  End Comment.) 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
GOVERNOR'S CALL FOR JIHAD AND MARCH ON UNMIS 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) The Governor continued his inflammatory remarks in avowing 
all Darfurians' willingness to fight the "colonizers," particularly 
the U.S and UK, who co-sponsored the UN resolution.  He called on 
the crowd to participate and support a jihad against any "foreign 
intervention," the outcome of which would only lead to "grave 
consequences" for the foreigners.  In reaffirming the absolute 
integrity and sovereignty of the Sudanese state, the Governor 
proffered a seven-point declaration: 
 
-- The absolute refusal of UNSCR 1706; 
 
-- The complete refusal of any negotiations concerning the issue; 
 
-- A declaration of "jihad" against UN peacekeeping troops and 
"international forces;" 
 
-- The opening of all military training centers for those interested 
in receiving military training to fight "international forces;" 
 
KHARTOUM 00002113  002 OF 003 
 
 
 
-- A call on all Muslims, religious men, and students in religious 
schools, to ask for God's support in defeating the invaders; 
 
-- A demand to avail Sudan's human resources and funds to support 
jihad; and 
 
-- Activation of emergency rules to protect the country and the 
state from foreign agents. 
 
¶6. (SBU) In concluding the demonstration, the Governor appealed to 
the crowd to march to the UN Mission in Sudan (UNMIS) compound to 
deliver a letter containing the points in para 5.  The crowd moved 
peacefully from downtown El Fasher to the UN compound, where the 
letter was delivered to Head of Office Niels Scott and a UN security 
representative.  To publicize their message, government officials 
orchestrated local media coverage of the day's events, including 
delivery of the letter to the UN.  (Note:  National television 
channels covered the story and broadcast images from the 
demonstration on the evening of September 2.  End Note.) 
 
----------------------------------------- 
GNU MILITARY AND POLICE FLEX THEIR MUSCLE 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Backing up the tough talk, GNU military and police units 
flexed their muscle on September 3 in a large-scale military parade 
through El Fasher town and its outskirts.  One convoy included more 
than eighty technical Land Cruisers mounted with multiple-rocket 
launchers, anti-aircraft weapons, and heavy machine guns moving 
north past the Pacific Architects and Engineers (PAE) compound in 
the direction of Abu Shouk IDP camp.  The ground element procession 
was supported by MI-24 HIND attack helicopters, which carried out 
multiple passes over El Fasher and its outskirts from 10:30 a.m. - 
11:30 a.m. 
 
¶8. (SBU) On September 2, tensions also flared between SLA-Minawi 
party members and GNU national security officers, who demanded 
Minawi's people cease displaying signs that proclaimed support for a 
UN force.  Unconfirmed accounts suggest that fighting nearly broke 
out between the two sides before Head of National Security General 
Hassan Mostafa intervened to resolve the confrontation. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Also on September 3, El Fasher University students 
protesting against the GNU and its position on UN transition clashed 
with police, who reportedly shot and killed one person and injured 
an additional five.  Unconfirmed accounts describe fifteen minutes 
of looting and opposing student demonstrations - one in favor of the 
government and the other opposed to it - engaging in a hostile 
confrontation, at which point GNU riot police were dispatched to 
control the situation.  UN sources later confirmed that two persons 
were killed (one of the injured having died overnight), twelve were 
injured, and forty were detained.  The specific circumstances 
leading to the violence are yet to be independently verified. 
 
--------- 
TRIPWIRES 
--------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) The Governor's statements on behalf of the GNU represent a 
disturbing trend and merit close attention.  With this event, a 
number of noteworthy tripwires have either been approached or 
outright crossed, to include those cited below.  Post continues to 
review and update contingency planning for personnel under Chief of 
Mission authority based in Darfur. 
Mission response will be discussed in greater detail septel. 
 
-- Initiation of Government-sponsored demonstrations wherein 
Government leaders actively participate; 
 
-- Initiation of Government-sponsored demonstrations calling for 
violence against the international presence, to include the burning 
of U.S. and UK flags; 
 
-- Popular expressions of discontent against the Government's 
position on UN intervention in Darfur; 
 
-- Use of force to contain popular expressions of discontent; and 
 
-- Non-renewal of the African Union Mission in Sudan (AMIS) 
September 30. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) The Governor has consistently rejected the necessity of UN 
peacekeepers in Darfur, making note of this position both publicly 
 
KHARTOUM 00002113  003 OF 003 
 
 
and privately, including in a meeting August 22 with the CDA and a 
U.S. Congressional Delegation.  His most recent public remarks, 
however, indicate an up-tick in rhetoric, particularly in calling 
for jihad against "colonizers" and in allowing the burning of the 
U.S. and UK flags.  There are reports that many of the demonstrators 
were either paid to attend or participated only reluctantly, as we 
believe the vast majority of Darfurians support a UN PKO. 
Notwithstanding the fact that the Governor is a genuine Darfurian of 
non-Arab lineage (Berti tribe), rumors have been swirling for months 
that he may lose his position as Governor in the power-sharing 
arrangements mandated under the DPA.  Perhaps for this reason, he 
has opted to take a hard-line position on the UNSCR, hoping that his 
loyalty to the NCP will reap benefits in the coming months should he 
find himself ousted in North Darfur. 
 
¶12. (SBU) Comment continued:  The political divisions between the 
GNU and SLA-Minawi that have been evident in Khartoum on the 
specific issue of UN peacekeepers are becoming more pronounced on 
the ground in Darfur.  Minawi forces and GNU military troops in 
Darfur maintain a healthy and respectful separation.  However, the 
passage of UNSCR 1706 and the question of demonstrating public 
support (SLA-Minawi) or opposition (GNU) to it, could undermine that 
respectful separation and heighten tensions between the two groups, 
as well as other constituencies (like students), leading to 
potentially violent consequences.  End comment. 
 
HUME