06MANAGUA45
NICARAGUA FEELING HEAT FOR PRO-WHALING POSITION
Wed Jan 11 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0018
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #0045 0110019
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 110019Z JAN 06
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4857

INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC PRIORITYUNCLAS MANAGUA 000045 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV IWC EFIS NU
SUBJECT: NICARAGUA FEELING HEAT FOR PRO-WHALING POSITION 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: Nicaragua's largest daily newspapers have 
recently published articles critical of the country's 
pro-whaling votes in the International Whaling Commission 
(IWC).  The Executive Director of the National Fisheries 
Agency (ADPESCA) told ECONOFF that he has consequently become 
the target of increasing criticism by environmental groups. 
Despite having no whaling tradition, Nicaragua consistently 
votes in the IWC for the interests of Japan and other whaling 
nations.  Discussing his government's support for whale 
hunting in the IWC, ADPESCA Executive Director Miguel Marenco 
 combined familiar pro-whaling talking points with a blunt 
admission that Nicaragua was participating in a quid pro quo 
bargain with the Japanese.  Japan is the third most generous 
bilateral donor to Nicaragua behind the U.S. and Sweden 
(another nation with strong whaling interests).  Nicaragua 
has received an average of $40 million annually in financial 
assistance from Japan since 1990, including recent funding to 
build docks for fishing vessels.  There is no reason to 
believe that recent public criticism will result in a change 
in the GON position.  END SUMMARY 
 
¶2. (SBU) The front page of the daily newspaper 'El Nuevo 
Diario' on January 9 contained a photo of a Japanese vessel 
reeling in a bloody, harpooned whale under the headline, 
"Cruelty and Danger of Extinction."  The article states that 
"the government of Nicaragua supports the hunting of whales 
on behalf of Japan and other industrialized nations, although 
this animal is in danger of extinction."  Nicaragua's other 
leading newspaper 'La Prensa' has also recently featured 
opposition to Nicaragua's pro-whaling stance.  Marenco 
declared that these articles and a host of critical websites 
are part of a campaign orchestrated by Greenpeace and other 
international environmental organizations to pressure 
Nicaragua to change its positions on the IWC.  He also 
believes that left-wing organizations in Latin America are 
using environmentalism as a proxy issue to attack centrist 
and conservative governments. 
 
¶3. (SBU) In defense of Nicaragua's position, Marenco repeated 
familiar pro-whale hunting talking points.  He said that his 
country is "pro sustainable use" and would oppose the hunting 
of any endangered whale species based on "scientific 
evidence."  He stated the GON view that species such as minke 
whales have been replenished, and therefor can be safely 
hunted.  He further echoed the notion that the "replenishment 
of large predators harms the replenishment of endangered fish 
species since they are eaten by the whales." 
 
¶4. (SBU) Marenco was candid about Nicaragua's quid pro quo 
understanding with Japan on the whaling issue.  "Remember 
that Japan is a good ally of Nicaragua and that they provide 
almost $50 million a year in assistance," he said.  Marenco 
bluntly remarked that Nicaragua has taken a "You scratch my 
back and I'll scratch yours" approach to whaling with the 
Japanese.  (Comment: Part of the 2005-2006 aid package from 
Japan includes the construction of two docks for fishing 
boats in San Juan del Sur.  End Comment) 
 
¶5. (SBU) Marenco emphasized that the U.S. should not consider 
this one area of disagreement to be a cause for concern about 
overall relations between our two countries concerning 
fisheries issues.  He pointed out that the GON is a close 
partner with the United States on issues related to tuna, 
shrimp, turtles and lobster.  (Note: With the exception of 
the IWC, Nicaragua frequently supports U.S. proposals and 
candidates for positions in organizations such as the 
International Tuna Commission. End Note) 
 
¶6. (SBU) COMMENT: While clearly annoyed with the public 
campaign to criticize the GON whaling position and him 
personally, Marenco gave no reason to believe that the GON 
will alter its strategic decision to align itself with 
Japanese interests on the International Whaling Commission. 
TRIVELLI