06OTTAWA54
CANADA COMFORTABLE WITH AFGHANISTAN COMPACT TEXT;
Mon Jan 09 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ottawa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS OTTAWA 000054 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
FOR SA AND WHA/CAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID AF CA CIDA FAC
SUBJECT: CANADA COMFORTABLE WITH AFGHANISTAN COMPACT TEXT; 
PREPARING FOR LONDON CONFERENCE 
 
REF: STATE 226670 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  The GOC is comfortable with the current 
version of the Compact, plans to continue its solid 
commitment to Afghanistan (C$100 million/US$85 million in 
FY2006) and is moving ahead with troop deployments.  Canada 
is committed to success in Afghanistan and constantly 
monitors assistance levels.  However, with federal elections 
on January 23, no new policy or spending initiatives are 
possible between now and the London conference.  We believe a 
high-level call from Washington this month urging additional 
contributions would be counterproductive.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  In a December 12 meeting, Canadian Agency for 
International Development (CIDA) Vice President for Asia Hau 
Sing Tse confirmed that Canada's support for Afghanistan 
remains strong.  He said that "Afghanistan wants to make a 
big splash" at the London conference, and that the GOC "would 
begin strategizing" for the conference in early January. (GOC 
officials confirm that process is underway.)  Planning is 
complicated by the election on January 23, as there may or 
may not be a new Cabinet by January 31 and if Minister for 
International Cooperation Aileen Carroll is replaced her 
successor may not be able to travel so soon after being 
appointed.   The tentative plan, if the Minister is not able 
to travel, is for Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs Peter 
Harder to lead Canada's delegation to London. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  The GOC came out early with strong support for 
Afghanistan and has committed funds through FY2009. 
Contributions this fiscal year (ending March 31) are at C$100 
million (about US$85 million).  A gradual drop-off in aid, 
based on the assumption the Afghanistan would develop 
increasing fiscal capability, was planned starting in FY2007, 
with levels of C$80 million anticipated next year.  Decisions 
on whether those levels are adequate will be made as the 
situation in Afghanistan evolves.  The GOC remains strongly 
committed to Afghanistan (a major troop deployment begins 
February 1) and closely monitors needs.  All of Canada's 
pledged aid is disbursed on schedule, with most of it going 
through the trust funds. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) A Foreign Affairs Canada counterpart says the GOC 
is "pretty confident" with the current draft of the Compact 
and had no comments to submit regarding the most recent 
version. However, given the Canadian election no new policy 
or major spending decisions can be made between now and the 
conference.  (Note:  A call from Washingtion encouraging the 
GOC to do more would before the conference, in our view, 
indicate a counterproductive lack of faith in a strong 
partner.  End note.) 
 
Visit Canada's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/ottawa 
 
DICKSON