06PRETORIA1324
SOUTH AFRICA: AFRICA'S BIOTECH POWERHOUSE
Mon Apr 03 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Pretoria
VZCZCXRO0386
PP RUEHDU RUEHJO RUEHMR
DE RUEHSA #1324/01 0931224
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 031224Z APR 06 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY PRETORIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2552
RUEHRC/USDA WASHDC
INFO RUCNSAD/SOUTHERN AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 PRETORIA 001324 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/TRASTOGI, OES/PCI/ESHAW 
STATE FOR OES AND EB 
USDA FOR FAS/BIOTECH GROUP/BSIMMONS, GIPSA, APHIS 
STATE PASS USTR 
 
TOFAS:  19 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR ETRD SENV TBIO TSPL SF
SUBJECT: SOUTH AFRICA: AFRICA'S BIOTECH POWERHOUSE 
 
PRETORIA 00001324  001.2 OF 004 
 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED; PROTECT ACCORDINGLY.  NOT FOR 
INTERNET DISTRIBUTION. 
 
¶1. (U) Summary.  South Africa leads the African continent in 
the adoption, acceptance and advancement of biotech 
knowledge.  It has a vibrant and productive biotech 
community that produces far more scientific articles and 
patents than any other Africa country.  Funding for biotech 
grew 360% between 2000 and 2004.  Growth in related fields 
of biochemistry, genetics, molecular biology, microbiology, 
genetic engineering and biotechnology exceeded 46% for the 
same time period, totaling about R 260 M (USD 43 M). 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
SOUTH AFRICA ACCEPTED BIOTECH IN 1992 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
¶2. (U) South Africa has a long history of acceptance of 
biotech crops, beginning with its first field trials of GMOs 
in 1992 and with the first permits issued only 5 years 
later.  Today South Africa is one of only four countries in 
the world (USA, Canada, and Argentina) that produces more 
than two biotech crops.  The scope of research at the 
Agricultural Research Council (ARC) extends across plant 
tissue culture, molecular biology, recombinant DNA and 
diagnostics.  Three ARC institutes conduct research on the 
development of transgenic crops - the Vegetable and 
Ornamental Plant Institute (Gauteng), the Fruit, Vine and 
Wine Research Institute (Western Cape) and the Grain Crops 
Institute (North West). 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
TODAY THE SOUTH AFRICA GOVERNMENT CONDUCTS LEADING EDGE 
RESEARCH 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
¶3. (U) BioTech scientists at the Veterinary Institute of the 
University of Pretoria completed the first genome to be 
sequenced in Africa.  The bacterium that was sequenced, 
Ehrlichia ruminantium, is spread by ticks and causes the 
economically devastating heartwater disease in livestock and 
wild ruminants.  Scientists will now use this data to 
develop a vaccine. 
 
¶4. (U) South Africa's Council for Scientific and Industrial 
Research (CSIR) is one of the leading scientific and 
technology research and development organizations in Africa. 
CSIR provides science and technology services including 
skills in biosciences, material science, manufacturing, 
natural resources and the environment.  CSIR has assisted in 
the development of genetically superior trees and is 
continuing efforts to improve breeding techniques to design 
trees with improved wood properties and improved resistance 
to alien invasion.  CSIR has also aided the successful 
commercialization of the manufacturing of beta-carotene from 
algae.  CSIR is a key player in research into use of micro- 
organisms to remove toxins from industrial waste and in 
aiding soil remediation. 
 
¶5. (U) CSIR has been a key researcher into the use of 
indigenous plants since the early 1960's.  A research 
breakthrough by CSIR scientists relating to the isolation 
and structure elucidation of a new chemical entity (P57) 
extracted from the indigenous succulent Hoodia has led to a 
new treatment for obesity.  CSIR licensed a UK company in 
1997 to further develop and commercialize this discovery.  A 
contact for mass production was signed with Unilever in 
¶2004.  The agreement between CSIR and the San People, an 
indigenous group, whose knowledge was used as the basis for 
the preliminary research provides that CSIR will pay the San 
8% of all milestone payments it receives once the product 
becomes fully commercialized. 
 
¶6. (U) CSIR also collaborates with traditional healers in 
the study of indigenous plants with mosquito repellent 
properties.  A community-owned mosquito repellent candle 
factory has been launched in Limpopo where this plant is 
being cultivated and distilled. 
 
¶7. (U) The Medical Research Council (MRC) focuses on local 
health priorities, playing a key role in furthering health 
research within South Africa.  A leading MRC program is the 
South African AIDS Vaccine Initiative (SAAVI) which is 
 
PRETORIA 00001324  002 OF 004 
 
 
working with key national and international partners to 
produce a locally affordable vaccine.  Local participation 
in this project includes over 250 scientists at ten national 
institutions with funding coming primarily from MRC, the 
South African government and Eskom.  SAAVI collaborates on 
product development and clinical trials with the U.S. 
National Institutes of Health, the HIV Vaccine Trials 
Network (HVTN) and the International AIDS Vaccine 
Initiative. In 2004, the SAAVI group included the only 
accredited laboratory outside the U.S. to perform clinical 
immunological studies and testing within the HVTN. 
 
¶8. (U) The National Research Foundation (NRF), the national 
agency responsible for promoting and supporting basic and 
applied research, is another active player in the biotech 
field.  Two NRF-created Centers of Excellence are 
biotechnology based, including the Center of Excellence for 
BioMedical TB Research, and the Center of Excellence in Tree 
Health Biotechnology.  NRF also manages the Innovation Fund 
that invests in technological innovations.  Funds allocated 
to the Innovation Fund have increased from approximately 
R329 million (USD 54 million) in 2000 to R714 million (USD 
119 million) in 2004. 
 
¶9. (U) Launched in 2001, BioVentures is South Africa's first 
and only niche biotechnology venture capital fund.  It 
invests in seed and start-up stage biotech companies. 
Investments to date have been in fields as diverse as drug 
discoveries to medical devices to waste water 
bioremediation.  Since 2001 BioVentures has invested more 
than R50 million (USD 8.3 million) in 8 South Africa start- 
up companies. 
 
¶10. (U) Under the National Biotechnology Strategy adopted in 
2001, South Africa has developed several other initiatives, 
programs and centers.  Six Biotech Regional Innovation 
Centers have been established, including the Biotech 
Partnerships and development (BioPAD), Cape Biotech trust, 
LIFELab (the East Coast BioTech Center), PlantBio Trust, the 
National BioInformatics Network and Public Understanding of 
BioTech (PUB).  Each regional center has a specific mission 
and vision. 
 
¶11. (U) BioPAD establishes companies that use biotech in the 
fields of health (animal and human), industrial, mining and 
environmental biology.  Working with the Agricultural 
Research Council (ARC), the Water Research Commission, 
Rhodes University, CSIR, the University of Pretoria and 
other partners, BioPAD has helped develop: 
 
  -- Innovative bio processes that reduce the acidity of 
  drainage water, a serious problem in mining, 
 
  -- A novel method for extracting active ingredients in 
  aloe plants, 
 
  -- Production of a pro-biotic range of koi fish, and 
 
  -- A new diagnostic kit for use against animal diseases 
  spread by ticks such as corridor disease. 
 
¶12. (U) Cape BioTech Trust has focused upon cluster 
interventions benefiting the broader biotech community and 
industry.  It has several pending projects including a micro 
array platform at the University of Cape Town, BioCareers 
Portal, and Genecare Molecular Genetics.  Three other 
projects are in the development and funding stage. 
 
¶13. (U) LIFELab in the Eastern Coastal region has 
concentrated on projects that improve human health.  It 
currently provides venture capital for bioprocess and 
biotech projects focusing on infectious diseases such as 
malaria, TB and HIV/AIDS.  One key project is the 
development of a Liquid Fermentation Lab south of Durban 
which will set up an incubator for commercialization of 
processing requiring liquid fermentation and cell cultures. 
 
¶14.  (U) PlantBio focuses on food security and 
biofertilization.  One key project located in a rural area 
south of Durban with a population of 50,000 assists small 
scale organic farmers.  PlantBio recently invested R10 
million (approx USD 1.6 Million) is a plant multiplication 
facility that uses tissue cultures to produce plants for 
 
PRETORIA 00001324  003 OF 004 
 
 
local and international sales. 
 
¶15. - (U) The National BioInformatics Network (NBN) and the 
Public Understanding of Biotech (PUB) are both information 
dissemination organizations.  NBN's goal is to ensure that 
molecular and high throughput biology information is 
centralized and available to the South African biotech 
community.  PUB develops school-based resources, hosts 
biotech workshops and training courses and provides biotech 
information to mass media. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
PRIVATE BIOTECH INDUSTRIES IN SOUTH AFRICA - AN EXPANDING 
UNIVERSE 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
¶16.  (U) Beyond the official South African government 
umbrella, a National Biotechnology Survey in 2003 found that 
South Africa had 622 research groups engaged in 911 biotech 
research projects, involving about 4300 researchers.  Key 
private companies include Synexa Life Sciences which has 
developed a proprietary bioprocessing technology for 
production of natural and recombinant products from 
microbial hosts.  Aspen Pharmacare is Africa's largest 
generic pharmaceutical manufacturer.  Aspen pioneered the 
production of low-cost generic anti-retroviral (ARV) drugs 
under voluntary licenses from GlaxoSmithKline and Boehringer 
Ingelheim, among others.  Aspen's ARVs are manufactured at 
its oral solid dose facility which has been accredited by 
the US Food and Drug Administration, as well as by the World 
Health Organization. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
-------- 
AGRICULTURAL BIOTECH - A SUNNY PICTURE 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶17. (SBU) The South African Government generally supports 
biotechnology: transgenic varieties of cotton, corn and soy 
are approved for commercial planting and account for 
approximately 90 percent of South Africa's cotton, 20 
percent of corn, and 70 percent of soybeans.  South Africa 
can play a vital role as other countries in Africa develop 
biotechnology policies because it has the most resources, 
such as scientific expertise and financial support, as well 
as a progressive regulatory system.  Without the South 
African Government's leadership role in this region, future 
progress in biotechnology can be stifled by anti-technology 
groups. 
¶18. (SBU) South African farmers can be divided into two 
categories.  Large-scale, commercial farmers, usually white, 
are modern businessmen who often have more in common with 
their American counterparts than with their fellow, more 
traditional Africans.  Small-scale farmers, sometimes 
growing only for their subsistence needs, are usually black 
and have smaller plots of land planted to grains and 
vegetables.  GM products have a wide appeal with both 
groups.  Each group appreciates that GM crops use fewer 
inputs and have higher yields, both in quantity and in 
quality.  In fact, small-scale farmers find some GM crops 
easier to manage than traditional varieties. 
¶19. (SBU)  Seed companies have found that small-scale 
growers are an important market for GM crops, and they 
promote their new seeds extensively by hosting Farmer Field 
Days at company test plots throughout the country. 
Distributors are from the local area, speak the local 
language, and take the time to explain to the people the 
benefits of using modern seeds.  Most important, the seed 
companies of South Africa visit each of their customers' 
farms several times each season for after-sales service to 
give advice and to try to ensure satisfied customers.  The 
seed companies in essence perform the extension service 
function that was formerly performed by the South African 
Department of Agriculture.  In recent years, the Provincial 
Departments of Agriculture have taken on the extension 
function, and it is difficult to find a farmer, large or 
small-scale, who has anything positive to say about their 
performance.  When care is taken by the seed company 
representatives, both large and small-scale growers are 
generally receptive to new technologies.  This has led to 
significant increases each year in the area planted to 
biotech seeds in South Africa. 
¶20. (SBU)  A good example of products under development is 
 
PRETORIA 00001324  004 OF 004 
 
 
the USAID-funded transgenic potato project, in cooperation 
with Michigan State University and South Africa's 
Agricultural Research Council (ARC) (the ARC is a UNESCO 
biotechnology training center for Africa).  The project is 
in the third year of contained field trials with projected 
commercialization time frame of 2008.   Before petitioning 
for commercialization, a "socio-economic impact" 
questionnaire will be completed in order to gain the views 
of farmers and their communities about the use of the 
genetically engineered potato.  The chief researcher told 
post that the ARC is working closely with the GMO 
Registrar's office to ensure that trials are on the right 
track, and she believes that they will need another year of 
field trials before submitting a formal application for 
commercialization to the GMO Registrar. 
 
¶21. (SBU) The potato contains a Syngenta-developed gene in 
South African cultivars engineered to resist the tuber moth, 
which is particularly important for small-scale farmers 
storing their potatoes after harvest.  The contained trials 
are taking place in six regions, representing different 
ecological areas of South Africa.  Five of the six planting 
trials are completed.  Recent storage trials show 100 
percent control of the moth. 
 
¶22. (U) The ARC is also working on a drought-resistant 
soybean, which is locally produced with a gene licensed from 
Belgium.  The earliest that the soybean could be 
commercialized would be 2009 as they still need two more 
years of multi-locality field trials.  The group is also 
working on a virus-resistant ornamental plant, which has 
shown some success; a virus resistant sweet potato that has 
not been successful due to weevil problems; and virus 
resistant tomatoes.  It also is working on gene mining 
projects on cow peas, sorghum and potatoes to locally 
develop genes that will help resource-poor farmers. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
---------------------------------------FUTURE OF 
AGRICULTURAL BIOTECH IN SOUTH AFRICA - BEYOND POTATOES AND 
CORN 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
--------------------------------------- 
¶23. (SBU) The South African Parliament is currently debating 
proposed amendments to the GMO Act.  ARC researchers believe 
that rules under the Cartagena Protocol of Biosafety will be 
more restrictive to research, development and 
commercialization of new products than the proposed 
amendments.  ARC remains hopeful that the new amendments 
will not be too restrictive or expensive. 
¶24. (SBU) Comment.  Agricultural biotech is well-entrenched 
in South Africa.  While a few, vocal but limited membership 
groups still question the safety of GMOs, the ordinary 
consumer in South Africa pays little attention.  GMO crops 
that are in place will be difficult, if not impossible, to 
dislodge.  Farmers appreciate the vale added by GMO seeds 
and crops and will be reluctant to return to non-GMO 
products.  Meanwhile, biotech is exploding into other fields 
of research and activities.  The government is actively 
encouraging the expanse of biotech research, positioning 
South Africa as a biotech leader not only for Africa, but 
for the developing world. The government would be hard- 
pressed to now begin decrying the folly of biotech, and we 
see no sign that is disposed to do so. 
TEITELBAUM