06ROME111
CRISIS MANAGEMENT EXERCISE FOR ROME, TURIN, MILAN
Thu Jan 12 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Rome
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

121546Z Jan 06UNCLAS ROME 000111 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR FSINFATC, EUR/EX, S/ES-O/CMS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AEMR AMGT ASEC CA IT CA OCS ACS POSTS FOR RSO
SUBJECT: CRISIS MANAGEMENT EXERCISE FOR ROME, TURIN, MILAN 
 
REF: A. FSINFATC 02754 
 
     ¶B. ROME 003863 
 
Sensitive But Unclassified 
 
¶1. (SBU)  On December 14 and 16, Embassy Rome, the Olympic 
Coordination Office in Turin, and Consulate Milan underwent a 
coordinated Crisis Management Exercise (CME) facilitated by 
the Foreign Service Institute's Office of Crisis Management 
Training. According to FSI, this was the first time a CME of 
this size and complexity had been attempted with three 
separate missions participating simultaneously.  Mission 
Italy believes that the exercise was a resounding success 
with all 3 posts taking away pertinent and applicable lessons 
learned.  It is also our conclusion that the exercise was 
vital to testing our communications, command and control and 
emergency response protocols for the Winter Olympic Games 
being held in Turin February 10-26.  Representatives from 
NGA, FBI, DOE, S/CT, FEST, EUCOM were also present for both 
the Turin and Rome portions of the exercise. 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  The CME highlighted the importance of coordination 
between security, Consular and Public Affairs portfolios and 
was extremely useful to participants not accustomed to 
working in a task force environment overseas.  The fact that 
the Rome EAC was able to monitor and communicate directly 
with Turin and Milan during their "scenarios", proved 
enormously useful for practicing how Embassy Rome would react 
and coordinate with Milan and Turin during events in those 
locations.  Of significant value was the exercise in Turin, 
which allowed the Olympic Security Coordination team to work 
together through a number of scenarios that would effect 
every aspect of their operations, from the possibility of 
requesting a FEST to working with injured and displaced 
American visitors and the ever voracious international press 
contingent.  This was the first time the OSC team was able to 
work together on crisis planning and response to simulate 
working conditions should a crisis take place during the 
Games, which was beneficial to all. 
 
¶3.  (U)  Mission Italy would like to thank FSI and 
particularly,  Douglas Kinney, Douglas Treat and Mark 
Mayfield for their superb job crafting such reality driven 
scenarios, and guiding us so skillfully through the 2 day 
exercise.  We received positive feedback from all 
participating agencies and the exercise culminated in 
extremely useful lessons learned for Milan, Turin and Rome. 
It is with pleasure that we look forward to our Mission wide 
CME in the spring. 
 
END 
SPOGLI