06TELAVIV1799
EU AMBASSADORS SEEK CLARITY ON USG POSITIONS ON
Tue May 09 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEL AVIV 001799 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PHUM KPAL KWBG IR IS KBTS ICRC ISRAELI PALESTINIAN AFFAIRS GOI INTERNAL
SUBJECT: EU AMBASSADORS SEEK CLARITY ON USG POSITIONS ON 
CONVERGENCE, ABBAS'S ROLE 
 
REF: STATE 63865 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: The Ambassador briefed some 25 EU 
ambassadors plus the Swiss and Norwegian ambassadors May 8 on 
USG policy regarding acceptable humanitarian assistance to 
the Palestinians; assistance to and contact with Palestinian 
Authority President Mahmud Abbas; the importance of EU 
solidarity in maintaining the Quartet position on Hamas; 
Prime Minister Ehud Olmert's upcoming visit to the U.S.; 
assistance for the border crossings; Iran; and Magen David 
Adom (MDA) issues.  EU representatives sought clarity on USG 
policy on acceptable humanitarian assistance to the 
Palestinians, the role of Abbas, the GOI's convergence plan, 
a realistic timetable for identifying a negotiating partner, 
and the USG position on the GOI's policy on the Jordan 
Valley.  Repeated themes from EU ambassadors were that GOI's 
policy on humanitarian assistance to the Palestinians seems 
to be more liberal than they had originally anticipated; that 
the GOI policy on Hamas and the PA is still "foggy," that 
Olmert's convergence plan still lacks detail, and that 
permanent borders should be determined through negotiations. 
End summary. 
 
------------- 
On Assistance 
------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) In a May 8 briefing of EU ambassadors, the 
Ambassador covered five main areas: U.S. policy on acceptable 
assistance to the Palestinians and the need for continued EU 
solidarity on maintaining the Quartet principles on Hamas; 
USG contact and assistance policy with Abbas and on Hamas; 
Prime Minister Olmert's May 23 visit to Washington; Iran's 
nuclear program and USG opposition to Iran's serving on the 
UN Human Rights Council; and MDA issues.  He also highlighted 
the status of the customs protocol between the GOI and PA, 
pitched the continued need for technical assistance for the 
crossings, especially on the Egyptian side of Rafah, support 
for the EU Border Assistance Mission, and discussed the EU 
position on assistance to the Multinational Force and 
Observers in light of the EU's May 15 meeting on the MFO.  He 
noted the United States Security Coordinator's interest in 
convening a meeting of the security working group by the end 
of the month. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The Ambassador noted the significant amount of 
continuing USG humanitarian assistance to the Palestinians 
despite the U.S. decision to cease any assistance to the 
Hamas-led PA.  He commented that in some cases the USG's view 
of what is acceptable humanitarian assistance may be more 
restrictive than that of the EU.  Austrian Ambassador Kurt 
Hengl, representing the Presidency, stressed that the EU 
wants to develop a common political, technical, and 
assistance approach with the USG toward the Palestinians.  He 
commented that it is apparent to him from FM Tzipi Livni's 
recent meeting with EU HighRep Solana that GOI policy 
regarding Hamas and assistance issues is still "foggy."  He 
agreed with the Ambassador that GOI policy seems to be more 
liberal than originally anticipated on humanitarian 
assistance.  He referred to a May 7 Jerusalem Post article 
about a EU proposal that the Quartet create a fund to funnel 
humanitarian assistance directly to the Palestinian people, 
bypassing the Hamas-led PA. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Czech Ambassador Michael Zantovsky asked about a 
May 5 Ha'aretz report stating that Labor MK Colette Avital 
claimed that Secretary Rice told her in their May 5 meeting 
in Washington that the USG is amenable to channeling 
humanitarian aid to the Palestinians through the office of 
Abbas.  The Ambassador questioned the accuracy of the 
article, noting that the USG policy has not changed in that 
we oppose any U.S. funding being channeled through Abbas.  He 
noted that Abbas himself has indicated he does not want to be 
such a conduit because it will inevitably subject him to 
unwanted pressure to divert the funds. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Irish Ambassador Michael Forbes asked about USG 
policy on GOI non-transfer of tax revenues to the PA.  He 
made the point that "attacking (the PA's) civil service is 
not the same as "attacking Hamas."  The Ambassador responded 
that the USG has been consulting with the GOI on ways to use 
those funds for humanitarian purposes, such as for provision 
of water and electricity or for medical care.  He noted that 
the GOI is providing the water and electricity and claims to 
have decided to cover medical care, but has not yet 
determined how to implement this pledge.  Cypriot Ambassador 
George Zodiates asked about the possibility of funding the 
salaries of PA civil servants.  The Ambassador noted that the 
U.S. has practical objections -- it would be hard to tell 
which civil servants on the list are Hamas-affiliated -- and 
policy objections -- paying salaries would take pressure off 
Hamas and help it hold on to power without changing its 
policies -- to this proposal. 
 
--------- 
Crossings 
--------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Regarding the crossings, Hengl said that the 
Agreement on Movement and Access (AMA) is "very much in our 
heart" and said he hopes that it can serve as a "starting 
point" for other access projects such as a seaport and 
airport, again with third-country involvement.  He indicated 
that the EU budget for Solana's office will be increased, and 
that additional funds, therefore, may be available for the 
border crossing assistance. 
 
------------------ 
On Hamas and Abbas 
------------------ 
 
¶7.  (SBU) The Ambassador said that it is the USG's goal that 
Hamas not consolidate its power, or set down roots.  He said 
that the U.S. wants to keep the pressure on Hamas to show 
that if it does not accept the Quartet conditions, there will 
be repercussions and to show the Palestinians that it is not 
in their interest that Hamas remain in power.  UK Ambassador 
Simon MacDonald asked rhetorically what would be a realistic 
timetable to expect Hamas to change.  MacDonald said Olmert 
had recently claimed that it would take Hamas a generation, 
or at the minimum 10 years, to change.  MacDonald noted that 
the GOI needs Hamas to change within the next year or it will 
declare that no PA partner exists and will pursue its 
convergence plan unilaterally.  He stressed that for the EU, 
negotiations between the GOI and Palestinians are a goal and 
that the EU "unequivocally" views Abbas as a partner.  He 
noted, however, that Livni told EU ambassadors in Israel last 
week that she does not view Abbas as a partner.  MacDonald 
then asked about USG policy regarding Abbas's political role 
or if a policy has been established yet.  MacDonald confirmed 
that Olmert will visit the UK during the week of June 12. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) The Ambassador responded that the question is still 
open on what Abbas's role will be and that this is really a 
matter for the GOI to review.  The Ambassador made clear that 
the USG continues to have contact with Abbas.  He said that 
whether the USG will see Abbas as a possible partner depends 
on how Abbas delivers on various matters, such as the 
strengthening of crossings, addressing violence, and dealing 
with Fatah reform.  The Ambassador pointed out that given the 
GOI's current composition -- which includes the Labor Party 
-- there could be some movement on the GOI's receptivity to 
dealing with Abbas.  The Ambassador agreed that timing is 
important, especially in pressuring Hamas.  If the 
international community only gently pressures Hamas, the 
Ambassador said, then Hamas could refuse to change and/or 
stay in power longer, thereby leaving the GOI with no 
partner. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Questions About the Convergence Plan 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Several EU ambassadors echoed the view that details 
of the convergence plan are largely unknown at this point, 
with the Czech Ambassador referring to it as an idea, rather 
than a plan.  They expressed interest on the USG position 
regarding the plan in light of Olmert's upcoming visit to 
Washington.  Irish Ambassador Forbes said that the assumption 
exists in Israel that Olmert will get the USG's "blessing" 
for his convergence plan, since Olmert will likely determine 
that no partner exists.  Forbes questioned how such a plan 
could determine the final borders of Israel without 
negotiations with the Palestinians.  Swedish Ambassador 
Robert Rydberg said he understands there is some GOI 
expectation of a "quid pro quo," i.e. that the USG would 
accept the convergence plan in return for the GOI giving 
Abbas a greater political role.  The Czech Ambassador said 
that the only real model the GOI has is that of disengagement 
and that as with disengagement, it may take a while for the 
details on convergence to take shape.  He commented that it 
would be a mistake to reject convergence out of hand. 
Finnish Ambassador Kari Veijalainen said that the GOI and 
Palestinians need to negotiate on permanent borders.  He 
asked whether the USG plans to develop a response to the 
convergence plan on its own or in coordination with the 
international community.  Danish Ambassador A. Carsten 
Damsgaard asked whether the USG would negotiate with the GOI 
on the exact line of a new "border."  Portuguese Ambassador 
Pedro Nuno Bartolo and Polish Charge Janusz Omietanski asked 
about USG policy regarding the GOI's stated intention to 
retain control over the Jordan Valley. 
 
¶10.  (SBU) In response to these comments and questions, the 
Ambassador said that he expects that the convergence plan 
will take time to develop and be accepted within Israel.  He 
also observed that the USG would be reluctant to negotiate on 
behalf of the Palestinians regarding final borders and 
stressed that in any case Olmert's stated policy now is to 
rally international opinion around his plan, not to seek a 
separate USG position.  Regarding the Jordan Valley, the 
Ambassador said he is aware of the GOI interest in retaining 
control over the Jordan Valley and agreed that the 
international community would likely view this as Israel's 
continued occupation of that region. 
 
-------- 
Outposts 
-------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) Italian Ambassador Sandro DeBernardin asked about 
USG policy on the GOI's removal of illegal outposts.  The 
Ambassador said that while we have some differences with the 
GOI over the number of illegal outposts remaining, USG policy 
on this issue has not changed and we are still engaged with 
the GOI on this issue.  The Ambassador noted that Kadima's 
coalition agreement with Labor calls for the removal of 
outposts. 
 
---------------- 
Magen David Adom 
---------------- 
 
¶12.  (SBU) The Ambassador noted the June 20-21 meeting of the 
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to amend the 
ICRC statutes to reflect the adoption of the third Additional 
Protocol to the Geneva Conventions, establishing the "Red 
Crystal" as a new protective emblem.  He also highlighted 
progress in implementation of the MOU between the Magen David 
Adom and the Palestinian Red Crescent Society (PRCS) (see 
reftel).  Swiss Ambassador Francois George Chappuis said, 
unhelpfully, that he is aware of problems regarding the 
implementation of the MOU, including with the stationing of 
PRCS ambulances in East Jerusalem and priority access for 
PRCS ambulances crossing from the West Bank to East 
Jerusalem. 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
JONES