07AMMAN3871
IRAQIS IN JORDAN ENROLLING AT A MODERATE PACE;
Mon Sep 17 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Amman
VZCZCXRO9464
PP RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHAM #3871/01 2601552
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 171552Z SEP 07
FM AMEMBASSY AMMAN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0341
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 003871 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA AND PRM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREF SOCI EAID IZ JO
SUBJECT: IRAQIS IN JORDAN ENROLLING AT A MODERATE PACE; 
FOCUS SHIFTING TO HEALTH NEEDS 
 
REF: A. AMMAN 3754 
     ¶B. AMMAN 3545 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY:  Iraqi enrollment in Jordanian schools 
reached 21,000 as of September 15, with the GOJ agreeing to 
extend enrollment through September 30.  No consensus has 
emerged to fully explain the low enrollment totals.  UN 
agencies and NGOs are actively engaged in a last-ditch effort 
to clarify any misunderstandings so as to encourage 
enrollment.  Meanwhile the UN and the GOJ are beginning to 
shift focus towards addressing challenges facing the health 
sector.  UNHCR and the Ministry of Planning intend to amend 
their $10 million agreement on education assistance (ref b), 
while USAID and UNICEF conduct a qualitative survey to inform 
relief efforts.  END SUMMARY. 
 
 
EDUCATION 
--------- 
 
¶2. (U) Following what was to have been the final day of 
school registration for Iraqis on September 15, the Jordanian 
Ministry of Education (MoE) reported that 21,000 Iraqi 
students had enrolled in Jordanian public schools, 
representing an increase of 7,000 over last year's 
registrants.  At the request of UNHCR, the MoE agreed to 
extend the registration period until September 30.  Local and 
regional press carried news of the decision on September 14 
and 15.  Meanwhile, UNHCR, UNICEF, and NGOs received MoE and 
Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation (MOPIC) 
permission to conduct a last-ditch public information 
campaign directed at Iraqis registered with UNHCR and other 
Iraqi recipients of NGO services in Jordan. 
 
¶3.  (U) USAID and contractor CDM have begun visiting schools 
in East Amman, where an estimated 150 additional classrooms 
will be constructed with USG funds.  Site selection is 
expected to continue through September.  School construction 
remains on track to begin in January 2008. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Several NGOs have confirmed to poloff the limited 
numbers of Iraqi student enrollment.  Note: Initial estimates 
of expected enrollment revolved around the figure of 50,000. 
End note.  NGOs claimed to poloff that less Iraqis are 
enrolled because some schools have reached capacity and are 
not maintaining waiting lists.  Save the Children, for 
example, identified 20 schools that have no additional 
capacity.  Both Save the Children and Mercy Corps report that 
the decision to maintain a waiting list as directed by the 
MoE is being made by school principals.  In the absence of 
waiting lists, schools reportedly suggest that Iraqi 
registrants approach other schools.  Relief International 
reported that some Iraqi children are also dropping out after 
discovering that the differences in curriculum make it 
difficult for Iraqi students to assimilate into the Jordanian 
system. 
 
¶5. (SBU) According to minutes of a September 13 meeting 
between UNHCR, MOPIC, and MOE, the latter has formalized an 
education task force comprising MOE managing directors and 
the MOPIC.  No UN agency will be a standing member of this 
body, but MOE reports that UNHCR and UNICEF will be invited 
to participate as needed. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) NGOs continue to report that not all schools have 
received the Ministry of Education's September 3 letter 
outlining procedures for enrolling Iraqi students and waiving 
school and textbook fees.  Save the Children told poloff that 
6 out of 10 headmasters or headmistresses they called on 
September 10 had not received the letter.  The MOE reportedly 
told UNICEF and UNHCR representatives that they will handle 
the issue on a case by case basis. 
 
HEALTH 
------ 
 
¶7. (SBU) On September 12, Ambassador Hale met with Salah 
Al-Mawajdeh, the newly appointed Health Minister, and 
highlighted the importance of healthcare for displaced 
Iraqis.  Al-Mawajdeh committed to stay actively engaged. 
 
¶8. (U) UNICEF and USAID are in the process of conducting a 
qualitative survey of the health situation of displaced 
Iraqis in Jordan over the next 90 days.  At present, very 
little qualitative data is available because patients are not 
requested to provide details of their nationality when health 
care is provided.  In addition, USAID plans to spend $2.3 
million in facility renovations in East Amman and Zarqa - 
areas where there are many Iraqi refugees - focusing on safe 
 
AMMAN 00003871  002 OF 002 
 
 
motherhood and neonatal care facilities. 
 
¶9. (U) UNHCR told emboff on September 16 that UNHCR and MOPIC 
plan to revise their $10 million education agreement (ref b) 
to incorporate a health component whereby UNHCR would provide 
funds to cover additional staffing, supplies and equipment 
incurred by the MOH in providing care to Iraqis.  The parties 
are also exploring the feasibility of waiving certain health 
fees that may limit Iraqi access to facilities and services. 
 
 
ADMISSIONS 
---------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) The most recent DHS circuit ride finished on 
September 13 after the six-member team interviewed almost 200 
cases comprising approximately 525 individuals.  Based on 
these interviews, approximately 69 percent were conditionally 
approved, 19 percent were denied, and 11 percent were either 
"no decision" or remain pending with DHS for further review. 
Six percent of the total scheduled caseload did not appear 
for their interviews.  DHS plans to conduct its next circuit 
ride from October 17 to December 5. 
 
¶11. (SBU) As of September 12, the consular section in Embassy 
Amman had issued nearly 200 Special Immigrant Visas to 
qualified Iraqi translators.  There were an additional 125 
interviews scheduled before the end of the fiscal year in 
Amman alone. 
 
Hale