07ANKARA1853
RISING CONSUMERISM IN TURKEY
Thu Jul 19 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO7301
RR RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1853/01 2001446
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 191446Z JUL 07
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3041
INFO RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 3041
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2152
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001853 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O.12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EINV EFIN TU
SUBJECT: RISING CONSUMERISM IN TURKEY 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: Recent years have seen a rapid growth in 
consumerism in Turkey with private consumption and retail sales more 
than doubling between 2002 and 2006.  Credit has helped drive this 
consumerism trend, as newly-affordable interest rates have increased 
the use of consumer loans and credit cards twenty-five-fold and 
five-fold, respectively.  And as incomes have risen, the growing 
number of upper-middle class consumers has driven a retail sector 
transformation. High-end shopping malls and retailers have blossomed 
and franchised brands have appeared across Turkey.  With the days of 
economic turmoil and hyperinflation seemingly over, Turkish 
consumers are likely to continue to spend their way toward Western 
standards. End Summary. 
 
------------------- 
A Shopping Spree... 
------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) After decades of economic uncertainty, the combination of 
stability, growth and lower inflation in recent years has given rise 
to an explosion of consumerism as Turks have unleashed pent-up 
consumer demand.  From 2002 to 2006, private consumption, which 
makes up nearly two-thirds of GDP, increased from $184 billion in 
2002 to $383 billion in 2006 and retail sales from $66 billion to 
approximately $140 billion.  Rising per capita income, from $2,620 
to $5,305, has also created a growing class of upper-middle class 
consumers.  Although the growth of private consumption has stalled 
in the first half of 2007, and consumer durable sales fell compared 
to 2006, this is attributable to higher interest rates starting in 
June 2006.   As the Central Bank begins to cut rates later in 2007 
or in 2008, the longer-term trend of booming durable sales is likely 
to resume. 
 
------------ 
...On Credit 
------------ 
 
¶3. (SBU) While economic growth and increasing disposable incomes are 
the essential elements, credit has also supported the surge of 
consumerism.  Inflation has come down dramatically under the 
newly-independent Central Bank's tight monetary policy following the 
2001 financial crisis.  Following a generation of hyper-inflation, 
nominal interest rates -- still high by international standards -- 
fell in 2005 and early 2006 to levels at which some consumers can 
afford to borrow.  At the same time, banks changed strategy to 
target consumers, as banks' earnings from government securities went 
into a steady decline.  The result has been a boom in personal 
credit as consumers use loans to pay for housing and durable goods 
and credit cards for everyday purchases.  Banking Regulation and 
Supervision Agency (BRSA) numbers show that from December 2002 to 
April 2007, consumer loans increased over twenty-five-fold, from 
less than two billion lira to nearly fifty billion, and credit card 
use increased over five-fold, from four billion lira to over twenty 
billion.  The number of credit card accounts has also increased from 
15.7 million in 2002 to 30.6 million in 2006.  In addition to 
bank-provided consumer credit, retailers are using credit to 
stimulate sales by selling items with payment in installments.  In 
this way retail companies pass on to customers some of the benefit 
of their ability to borrow more cheaply than consumers. 
 
------------ 
Housing Boom 
------------ 
 
¶4. (SBU) The passage of a mortgage law in February 2007 (due to come 
into effect in January 2008) will for the first time allow for long 
term and adjustable-rate mortgages.  Aspiring home owners previously 
had to rely on family borrowing or high-interest relatively 
short-term home loans, constraining the growth of the housing 
market.  While the recent availability of cheaper credit has already 
created a housing boom, the new mortgage law is likely to further 
expand this boom as extended families living under one roof continue 
to break off into smaller households.  TUSIAD, the Turkish 
Industrialists' and Businessmen's Association, forecasts an increase 
of households from the present 15 million to 18.5 million by 2010. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Non-performing Loans Under Control 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) Despite this surge in credit, non-performing loans and 
credit card debt have not increased disproportionately, according to 
the BRSA.  From December 2002 to April 2007, non-performing consumer 
loans increased approximately ten-fold to 573 million liras and 
credit card debt delinquency increased nearly eight-fold to 1.8 
billion.  Credit card regulations have helped curb debt, as rampant 
credit card use and debt accumulation led the Turkish parliament to 
pass a law in February 2006 to restrict the amount of credit card 
debt consumers could take on.  The level of consumer credit in 
 
ANKARA 00001853  002 OF 003 
 
 
Turkey also remains relatively low.  Household liabilities are at 10 
percent of GDP in Turkey versus an EU-25 average of 61 percent, 15 
percent in Poland, 17 percent in Hungary, and 15 percent in the 
Czech Republic. 
 
--------- 
New Malls 
--------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) The retail sector has benefited greatly from the increases 
in income and credit in Turkey, as retail sales have risen from $66 
billion in 2002 to $140 billion in 2006.  However, as retail sales 
have boomed, the traditional face of Turkish retail -- open-air 
markets and small shops -- has lost ground to high-end shopping 
malls and retail chains owned by companies.  While traditional 
retailers still control about 65 percent of the retail market, 
modern outlets are increasing their market-share.  There were 128 
shopping malls in Turkey at the end of 2006; 54 were in Istanbul, 
including Cevahir, the largest mall in Europe and the second largest 
in the world.  Year-on-year investment in malls increased threefold 
in 2006 to 770 million euros and press report that an additional 60 
to 80 new malls are under construction.  Much of the retail boom has 
occurred in Turkey's principal urban centers of Istanbul, Ankara, 
and Izmir -- the three account for 70 percent of gross leasable 
space in malls.  However, other urban and industrial areas of Turkey 
are feeling the retail boom as well, reflecting economic growth and 
prosperity in "second tier" cities that would have been unthinkable 
even five years ago.  Kahramanmaras, a provincial capital in 
southeast Turkey, will be the site of a 624,300 square foot mall. 
Large, modern malls have opened up at the central Anatolian 
crossroads town of Afyon.  Denizli, a textile center inland from the 
Aegean region sports a large, modern hypermarket.  And the French 
Carrefour has opened hypermarkets in Mersin, Bursa, Eskisehir and 
Adana. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Retail chains, such as those in the grocery sector operated 
by the Turkish conglomerate Koc Group, British Tesco, and Carrefour, 
have also expanded and continue to expand.  Koc's Migros chain -- 
the leading retailer in Turkey -- has over 500 stores and the 
discount BIM chain has over 1600.  Sabanci Holding, a leading 
Turkish conglomerate, plans to open an additional 500 of its Teknosa 
Cep electronics retail outlets (there are presently 2) by 2010.  As 
Turkey's economic stability and growth continue, corporate retail 
chains -- including major international names -- are likely to gain 
more ground against their small-time competition.  Ikea has opened 
in Istanbul and Izmir and is scheduled to open in Ankara in 2008. 
Rumors also persist of Wal-Mart and BestBuy entering the retail fray 
in Turkey.  The Migros chain was recently put up for sale and may be 
the opportunity Wal-Mart has been eyeing to enter the Turkish 
market.  All of this is to the detriment of the small-scale 
shopkeepers.  The Chamber of Commerce President in the north-central 
Anatolian town of Kastamonu complained that small shopkeepers were 
being squeezed out by chains like Migros and Carrefour. 
 
------------------------------------- 
Starbucks and the Rise of Franchising 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) Also fueled by rising consumerism, and Turkey's increasing 
integration with the world economy, brands and franchises have 
flourished.  Of the 800 leading franchised brands in the Turkish 
market, approximately 200 are foreign, including 50 from the U.S. 
In addition to assuring the quality of products, brands -- in 
particular foreign brands -- have gained in popularity because they 
project the wealth and status of the growing Turkish upper-middle 
class.  No hard numbers exist on the growth of brands and their 
franchised establishments, but it can be seen from the proliferation 
around Turkey in the past few years of establishments such as 
Starbucks, which only opened in Turkey in 2004, and Gloria Jeans 
Coffee. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Much of the growth of foreign brands and franchise has been 
confined to wealthier western Turkey, but this is changing. 
Carrefour is becoming active in eastern Turkey, both through 
acquisitions and greenfield investments and Ford executives joke 
that their distributors "guard the southern border."  With its 
growing economy and 72 million people, 65 percent of whom are under 
35, Turkey will continue to support the development of local brands 
and attract the attention of foreign brands.  A Foreign Commercial 
Service report on the franchising market in Turkey estimates the 
turnover of franchised brands, excluding franchised "dealerships," 
to increase to $10 billion by 2010 from the current $1.5 billion. 
The growing demand for non-food services, including children's 
education, training and personal development, and logistics, will 
also provide an opening for established foreign brands to enter the 
Turkish market. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Comment: Turkey's growing population and progressive 
 
ANKARA 00001853  003 OF 003 
 
 
urbanization, up to 67 percent today from 60 percent in 1990, will 
continue to fuel the consumerism trend.  Economic speed bumps, such 
as the mid-2006 drop in the lira's value, can temporarily set back, 
but cannot derail, this trend.  Consumer credit has room to grow in 
Turkey, but regulators will need to monitor the breakneck pace of 
expansion in credit.  The growth of high-end retail speaks to the 
growing population of upper-middle class Turks.  This growth is 
likely to be at a more modest pace among working-class Turks.  And 
despite poll data showing increased anti-Americanism, the steady 
stream of Turks visiting American-affiliated establishments around 
the country suggests that American brands and franchises stand to 
benefit from the broader trend. 
WILSON