07BAGHDAD434
Iraqi Kurdistan Region Media Summary --
Thu Feb 08 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO2014
RR RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #0434/01 0391517
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 081517Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9511
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000434 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PKPA PGOV ECON PINS IZ US
 
SUBJECT:  Iraqi Kurdistan Region Media Summary -- 
      February 8, 2007 
 
¶1.  (U) This is a Regional Reconstruction Team (RRT) cable. 
 
Ansar al-Islam Plot to Murder Sulaimaniyah Security Officials 
Thwarted 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶2.  (U) Hawlati independent newspaper published details of a plot by 
three members of Ansar al-Islam to murder the Head of the 
Sulaimaniyah Asayish Political Department, Hassan Noori.  (Note: 
Asayish are local security forces.)  According to Hawlati, the plan 
included a suicide bomber and two marksmen in-case the suicide 
bomber was not effective.  Noori told Hawlati in an interview "we 
had gained information about the plan from day one and we have been 
tracking it down.  I think the only reason I was targeted by Ansar 
al-Islam is because I have been quite insistent on cracking their 
members down and stopping their terrorist activities within the 
Sulaimaniyah province."  All three terrorists have been arrested by 
the Sulaimaniyah Asaiysh and a full investigation is being 
conducted. 
 
No Kurdish Soldiers Have Been Killed in Baghdad 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶3.  (U) In a statement to Hawlati newspaper, KRG-Sulaimaniyah Deputy 
Minister of Region for Peshmarga Affairs, Jabbar Yawar said that so 
far no one from the Sulaimaniyah Battalion of the Iraqi Army has 
been killed or injured in Baghdad.  (Note:  This contradicts reports 
in Awena newspaper last week that said 17 Kurdish soldiers who had 
been killed in the fighting in Baghdad were secretly returned to the 
Kurdistan Region.)  Yawar said, "The recent reports on casualties 
among the Kurdish soldiers in Baghdad are fabricated and very far 
from the truth."  He also mentioned that the Ministry has not 
received any reports of Kurdish soldiers deserting the Iraqi Army. 
 
KRG PM Calls for Fight against Corruption, Protection for 
Journalists, Children 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶4.  (U) Newspapers today carried fuller coverage of KRG Prime 
Minister Nechirvan Barzani's statement at the merger of the Justice 
Ministries on February 6.  Articles said Barzani asked the new KRG 
Minister of Justice, Mahmood Ito (PUK member) to do an immediate 
follow-up of all recently implemented legal projects.  He also 
called for the new merged ministry to form follow-up committees for 
anti-corruption, for protection of freedom of the press and the 
rights of journalists, and for the protection of the rights of women 
and children. 
 
Nishtiman "Homeland" Enterprise Zone Opens in Erbil 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶5.  (U) Newspapers reported on the opening of part of the Nishtiman 
"Homeland" Enterprise Zone in Erbil today.  The zone is located in 
the heart of Erbil, and the part to be opened today will include 
more than 500 office spaces for lawyers, merchants, doctors, and 
contractors with all services and utilities.  As soon as the whole 
market is complete, it will have annual estimated revenue of $24 
billion for the KRG. 
 
NGO for Kurdish Political Prisoners Announced 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶6.  (U) Kurdish media reported on the establishment of the United 
Political Prisoners of Kurdistan, an NGO to assist Kurdish political 
prisoners and refugees as they return to the Kurdistan Region.  A 
ceremony was held in Erbil to mark the new NGO and was attended by 
Iraqi President Jalal Talabani (PUK member), KRG President Massoud 
Barzani (KDP member), KRG Prime Minister Nechirvan Barzani (KDP 
member) and representatives from various KRG ministries and offices. 
 The new NGO will replace political prisoners organizations that had 
previously been run by the KDP and PUK.  Mahmood Ito will head the 
new group. 
 
Fuel Rations to Sulaimaniyah Government and Party Offices Cut 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶7.  (U) Major newspapers reported that fuel rations for government 
and party offices in Sulaimaniyah will be temporarily cut by up to 
90% to allow greater availability on the market for commercial and 
private purposes.  Abdulla Ali, an official from the Fuel Projects 
Foundation said, "We have received 4,745,000 liters of kerosene, 
724,816 liters of gasoline, and 660,590 liters of diesel from 
Kirkuk, Basra, Iran, Ibrahim Khalil, and Nokan Gas from January 29 
through February 7."  He also said that distributing fuel to 
government institutions and parties will now take place on a weekly 
basis. 
 
Salahaddin University Will Not Recognize Koya University 
Post-Graduate Degrees 
 
BAGHDAD 00000434  002 OF 002 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶8.  (U) According to Aso and Hawlati newspapers, Salahaddin 
University in Erbil will not recognize Masters and PhD degrees 
earned from the University of Koya.  (Note:  The University of Koya 
is new PUK-run University in Erbil province along the border with 
Sulaimaniyah.  Salahaddin University in Erbil city has close ties to 
the KDP.)  A formal letter issued by Salahaddin University denies 
the existence of any problems with the Kurdistan Region 
universities, especially the University of Koya, but says based on a 
vote by the majority of the Salahaddin University Council, the 
university has decided to disregard post graduate degrees from the 
University of Koya, claiming that they do not meet the scientific 
and academic standards. 
 
Commentaries: 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶9.  (U) PUK-run Kurdistani Nwe newspaper ran an interview with, 
Muhammed Ihsan, KRG Minister for Extra-regional Affairs and KRG 
representative to the GOI Higher Committee for the Implementation of 
Article 140.  Ihsan states that any "Arab of Aribization" family in 
Kirkuk that objects to returning home should lose the right to vote 
in any referendum on the status of Kirkuk.  The article says that 
Ihsan's statement is supported by the fact that 7,400 Arab families 
have already registered for relocation and compensation. 
 
¶10.  (SBU) This media summary is completed by Press and Cultural 
Specialist Hama Othman.