07BAGHDAD3726
DIYALA PRT: EDUCATION SYSTEM UPDATE
Tue Nov 13 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO4468
RR RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #3726/01 3170848
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 130848Z NOV 07
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4314
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 003726 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PTER ECON IZ
SUBJECT:  DIYALA PRT: EDUCATION SYSTEM UPDATE 
 
¶1. (U) This is a Diyala PRT reporting cable. 
 
Summary 
------- 
¶2.  (U) The education system in Diyala continues to face severe 
challenges.  Pre-OIF infrastructure shortcomings combined with the 
effects of recent kinetic activity in the province and general 
neglect have left only a skeleton of a school system in place.  The 
PRT, other Coalition Force (CF) units, a dedicated Provincial 
Director General of Education (PDGE), Jaafar Maan Faris, and an 
enthusiastic Provincial Council Education Committee (PCEC) are 
coordinating closely to de-conflict efforts to repair and supply 
schools throughout the province.  The office of the PDGE is unable 
to ascertain the extent of recent damage or current needs.  The 
inability to provide even basic data highlights the severity of the 
crisis.  PRT efforts to work with the PDGE and the PCEC and CF units 
in repairing schools have been successful but the job is far from 
done.  Lack of security is a major consideration impairing the 
improvement of the education system in Diyala. End Summary. 
 
Best Statistics Available 
------------------------- 
¶3.  (U) Reports published in an Iraqi newspaper in September 2006 
provide the most current picture of Diyala's education system.  In 
2006, there were reportedly 354,000 students attending 1,125 
schools.  The student population encompassed 31 kindergartens, 767 
primary schools, 307 intermediate and secondary schools, 
(18)vocational training schools, and two teacher training institutes 
(one male, one female).  In recent meetings with the PRT, neither 
PDGE Jaafar nor the PCEC were able to venture a guess as to how many 
students are in the province today. The number of schools operating 
and the number of teachers is similarly unclear, but the PDGE is 
focused on ascertaining the student population and the condition of 
all schools as well as getting a full inventory of the teaching 
staff before the end of November. 
 
¶4.  (U) There has been significant destruction of schools and 
considerable population shift due to the ebb and flow of operations 
since the last data were compiled. Estimates of Internally Displaced 
Persons (IDP) vary but are a factor the PDGE expects will impact the 
numbers.  Directives have been sent throughout the province 
instructing schoolmasters to accept any student regardless of 
origin, but no numbers of IDPs enrolled in school have been compiled 
to date. 
 
High Hurdles On The Road Ahead 
------------------------------ 
¶5.  (U) It is estimated that the majority of schools in Diyala 
Province are in desperate need of rehabilitation or at the least 
emergency repairs.  The results of security actions are such that 
that many schools are damaged beyond repair, and need to be 
completely rebuilt.  The teaching staff reports a constant need for 
new textbooks and supplies.  There is an uneven distribution of 
textbooks and supplies due to the security situation in different 
parts of the province.  The normal number of teachers for a single 
school is 16.  The PDGE relates that because of the lack of freedom 
of safe movement he has some schools with as few as four teachers 
and other schools reporting as many as 40 teachers present. 
Administrative and custodial staff numbers are similarly skewed 
throughout the parts of the province that are reporting.  Many 
schools are not reporting at all.  The PDGE emphatically states that 
establishing security is critical, and only when teachers are free 
to move safely through the province to work at their assigned place 
of duty will the education system be able to able to really start 
reconstruction. 
 
¶6.  (U) In the city of Buhriz, the primary school is a good example 
of a school in dire need of reconstruction assistance.  The school 
was open when a recent U.S. Army Civil Affairs Team visited, but all 
the windows and doors had previously been blown out as a result of 
CF activity that destroyed a house across the street from the 
school.  That is a typical example of the problems that are faced 
here daily.  The school's restrooms were inoperable, with excrement 
on the floors and no running water.  With the help of a provincial 
council member whose district is Buhriz, emergency repairs were made 
for less than $10,000.00.  Windows, doors, and the bathrooms were 
repaired, and the school painted.  In a small way this case depicts 
the issues facing the system today.  The students are in school, but 
they need books and new desks.  One school may have new books and 
supplies, but the windows are gone or the bathrooms are inoperable. 
Some schools were completely destroyed this past summer, and others 
were occupied by the Iraqi Army, Coalition Forces, or enemy forces. 
Last week the deputy PDGE reported that 11 schools are still 
occupied by Iraqi Army forces and asked CF support in expelling the 
troops. 
 
Beyond Buildings and Books: 
Recent PRT Efforts 
--------------------------- 
¶7.  (U) Presently, coordination between PDGE Jaafar, the PCEC, and 
the PRT is optimal.  The focus of all actions is the information 
exchange between the PDGE and the many CF units that are trying to 
 
BAGHDAD 00003726  002 OF 002 
 
 
renovate schools.  The units and the PRT are now passing renovation 
project information to PDGE Jaafar so that he knows which schools 
are being renovated and can make provisions for contracting repairs 
on other schools.  The PCEC is involved in distributing donated 
school supplies to schools in a fair and equitable manner.  Between 
the stakeholders there is patchwork of good intentions that is being 
worked into a blanket of cohesive coverage. 
 
¶8.  (U) PRT efforts within the last six months have focused on 
building a solid relationship with PDGE Jaafar and the PCEC. This 
effort came to fruition during the provincial education examination 
process.  Every day during the exams, a PRT representative met with 
PDGE Jaafar and coordinated the exam process with CF, Iraqi Army, 
and Iraqi police forces.  When PDGE Jaafar was ambushed while en 
route to Baghdad delivering exam results, the PRT and CF rendered 
aid to his bodyguard who was wounded and later died, and arranged 
the return of his body to Baquba.  That incident became the catalyst 
for increased trust and has made it easier to discuss issues and 
resolve problems.  The PRT has established goals and a way forward 
for the PCEC.  The coordination of school rehabilitation has been 
the major goal and the one that all involved felt could best be 
accomplished. 
 
Comment 
------- 
¶9.  (SBU) The challenges facing the Educational Directorate of 
Diyala Province are daunting.  Due to the destruction and 
displacement of populations in the last year the provincial schools 
are working under extreme stress.  The groundwork laid in the last 
six to eight months shows great promise.  PRT efforts remain focused 
on helping PDGE Jaafar to effectively administer his duties. 
Continuing PRT efforts are necessary to maintain and improve 
coordination with CF units, PDGE Jaafar, and the PCEC.  Without a 
continued unified effort the provincial education system is at risk 
of regressing to an ad hoc firefighting effort that cannot succeed. 
The PRT is actively searching for additional support from 
educational groups and NGOs to help sustain and enhance the progress 
already made, but to date has had little success. End Comment. 
 
CROCKER