07HELSINKI162
AMBASSADOR'S MEETING WITH FOREIGN MINISTER TUOMIOJA
Thu Mar 08 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Helsinki
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHHE #0162/01 0670929
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 080929Z MAR 07
FM AMEMBASSY HELSINKI
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 3045UNCLAS HELSINKI 000162 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV MOPS MARR FI
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR'S MEETING WITH FOREIGN MINISTER TUOMIOJA 
 
REF: A. HELSINKI 144 
 
     ¶B. EMBASSY HELSINKI - PEKALA EMAIL 7 MARCH 2007 
     ¶C. WARE - PEKALA EMAIL 2 MARCH 2007 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: Ambassador met with Foreign Minister 
Tuomioja to thank him for his helpful comments regarding 
the US missile defense initiative with Eastern Europe, 
but also to note her disappointment with other public 
comments he had made suggesting that the US made grave 
mistakes in Iraq and might now repeat those mistakes in 
Iran.  Tuomioja thanked the US for sharing missile 
defense information with Finland and reaffirmed that 
Moscow's claims and threats were to be rejected.  On the 
US in Iran, he noted that there is a widespread public 
fear in Europe that the US will resort to military 
action and that European politicians have a duty to 
respond to questions from voters.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) The Ambassador met with Finnish Foreign 
Minister Erkki Tuomioja and U/S for Political Affairs 
Markus Lyra March 7.  She thanked the FM for his 
positive response to our recent demarche asking that he 
make a public statement to help calm the waters in 
response to baseless Russian claims and veiled threats 
regarding the US intention to place missile defense 
assets in the Czech Republic and Poland.  (NOTE: A 
surprisingly helpful post appeared March 5 on Tuomioja's 
campaign web site -- see refs A and B). 
 
¶3. (SBU) Tuomioja thanked the US for sharing with the 
GOF information both on the missile defense initiative 
and on the extensive briefings Washington has offered 
Moscow.  Tuomioja said he had not been asked on-the- 
record about the missile defense issue in either his 
official capacity or his role as a candidate in the 
current election campaign.  Strategically, he noted, the 
non-threatening nature of the program vis--vis Russia 
was clear, and either baseless or threatening comments 
about the program were to be "rejected."  He did note, 
however, that US missile defense has become a political 
question in the EU, with Austria having raised it during 
the March 5-6 GAERC.  The Poles and Czechs responded 
adequately, he reported, and the GAERC agreed that the 
issue does not fall under EU competencies and should 
remain a bilateral one between the US and the 
governments concerned -- a judgment Tuomioja said he 
fully supports.  He and the Ambassador also agreed that 
NATO would be a more appropriate forum for exchanges of 
information about the missile defense initiative. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Turning to less pleasant issues, the Ambassador 
strongly expressed disappointment with one of Tuomioja's 
recent campaign-trail statements.  She pointed to the 
particularly unhelpful comments he made during an on- 
the-record debate before the Swedish-speaking press, in 
which Tuomioja said, "One can only hope that the 
Americans will not seek to correct their mistakes in 
Iraq by making an even bigger mistake in Iran" (Ref C). 
The Ambassador noted that she understands the difference 
between an office-holder and a candidate, but suggested 
that comments such as this and other disagreements over 
policy should be discussed in private, not in the 
campaign context.  The US remains committed to the 
diplomatic track in Iran, she added, and Europe and the 
US need to remain united. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Tuomioja said he felt a duty to respond to 
Europeans' growing fears about the possibility that 
Washington will resort to military strikes against Iran. 
"This is a recognizable and significant concern in 
Europe," he said; it is reasonable to expect that 
worried voters will demand answers from their leaders -- 
and their candidates -- on an issue like Iran.  "I have 
always said it is not helpful to talk about a military 
option" in Iran, Tuomioja continued, "and I am not 
alone."  He noted that EU leaders have consistently 
voiced that same concern, and the EU Foreign Ministers 
reaffirmed their unanimity in support of following the 
UN process at the March GAERC.  The Ambassador reminded 
Tuomioja that the US is committed to the diplomatic 
track both by its public comments and actions; he 
welcomed that assurance. 
 
¶6. (SBU) COMMENT: Although the conversation addressed 
areas of disagreement, the overall tone was cordial; 
Tuomioja was open and occasionally expansive, offering 
views on a range of other issues, including his party's 
chances for success in the upcoming parliamentary 
election (septel).  Although he did not promise the 
Ambassador he would keep differences of opinion over 
policy within diplomatic channels, he did welcome the 
Ambassador's suggestion for more frequent face-to-face 
exchanges, should he be designated Foreign Minister 
following the election.  END COMMENT. 
WARE