07IRANRPODUBAI56
PRESIDENT AHMADINEJAD ATTEMPTS TO TONE DOWN TENSIONS BUT
Tue Aug 28 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Iran RPO Dubai
VZCZCXRO2380
OO RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHKUK
DE RUEHDIR #0056/01 2401850
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O P 281850Z AUG 07
FM IRAN RPO DUBAI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0171
INFO RUCNIRA/IRAN COLLECTIVE
RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDHP/DIA DHP-1 WASHINGTON DC
RUEHDIR/IRAN RPO DUBAI 0164
RUEHDE/AMCONSUL DUBAI 0155
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI 0121UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 IRAN RPO DUBAI 000056 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
LONDON FOR GAYLE, BERLIN FOR PAETZOLD 
BAKU FOR HAUGEN, PARIS FOR WALLER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IR PREL PGOV KNNP IZ
SUBJECT: PRESIDENT AHMADINEJAD ATTEMPTS TO TONE DOWN TENSIONS BUT 
STAY FIRM IN AUGUST 28 PRESS CONFERENCE 
 
RPO DUBAI 00000056  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
1.(SBU) Summary.  "The nuclear file is closed, and we have 
cleared up all questions," said President Ahmadinejad in his 
second public press conference this year.  Ahmadinejad made it 
clear that Iran will continue to discuss Iraq security with the 
US at an ambassadorial level, stating that a secure Iraq is in 
Iran's best interest.  Taking questions from the international 
press, Ahmadinejad asserted that along with Saudi Arabia, Iran 
is ready to fill a power vacuum that is developing in the 
region.  He said that Iran also enjoys good relations with its 
neighbors in the Gulf and is ready to reinstate relations with 
Egypt.  Ahmadinejad dismissed allegations of a US military 
attack on Iran and a US decision to designate the Islamic 
Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) as unlikely.  He said he 
personally believes that Woodrow Wilson Center scholar Haleh 
Esfandiari can return to the US, but in the end this is a matter 
for the judiciary to decide.  The tone of his speech was calm, 
and--though firm--less aggressive than in the past.  End Summary. 
 
2.(SBU) In his second public address this year, President 
Ahmadinejad spoke for roughly 45 minutes and took questions from 
the national and international press August 28.  He began with 
an inclusive statement about Judaism, Christianity, and Islam, 
saying each believes that a savior will come to bring justice to 
the world.  He stressed Muslims' belief in the Imam Mahdi, whose 
birthday is to be celebrated August 29.  Calling mismanagement 
and "bad governance" the basis of wrongdoing in the world, his 
address covered Iran's nuclear program and Iraq.  Following his 
speech he took roughly 45 minutes of questions on regional 
security and stability, the economic situation in Iran, and the 
status of jailed Iranian-American Haleh Esfandiari. 
 
---------- 
Nuclear 
---------- 
 
¶3. (U) Ahmadinejad reiterated previous statements that Iran is 
working within the framework of the International Atomic Energy 
Agency (IAEA) and the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), 
and that according to this framework; all nations have the right 
to nuclear technology.  Furthermore, he added, nuclear-capable 
states are obliged to help non-nuclear states attain nuclear 
energy.  Iran is a member of the nuclear club now because it has 
mastered the fuel cycle and has industrial-level production, he 
said.  Iran is willing to help other nations attain nuclear 
energy capacity, in accordance with its obligations, Ahmadinejad 
stated.  He accused "some powers" of not obeying the rules they 
have set up and using political and economic pressure against 
Iran. 
 
4.(U) President Ahmadinejad said that attempts to pressure Iran 
and threats against it have not and will not be effective.  He 
called the decision to send Iran's nuclear file to the UN 
Security Council "illegal," and said that Iran followed the 
first UN resolution against it by re-opening the Natanz 
facility, and the second resolution by announcing 
industrial-scale enrichment.  Ahmadinejad asserted that Iran's 
cooperation with the IAEA has been exemplary, announcing clearly 
that "the nuclear file is closed, and we have cleared up all 
questions."  He asserted that all reports of the IAEA say that 
Iran is operating within the regulations, and stated that is now 
clear that Iran's activities are peace-seeking. 
 
¶5. (U) Iran's president warned the "power" against repeating its 
mistakes with other IAEA members, and excoriated it for 
"discrediting the UN."  Ahmadinejad said the behavior of the 
"power" has made nations distrust it.  "You have a nuclear 
arsenal, but no peace of mind," he said, "Why don't you get rid 
of it?"   He warned "statesmen who talk with the language of 60 
years ago" against arrogance and bullying.  "You've done things 
that won't be corrected for years," he said, "but, in time, you 
might be forgiven." 
 
6.(U) Responding to reporters' questions about the nuclear 
issue, Ahmadinejad suggested that Iran does not intend to end 
its cooperation with the IAEA, even in the face of another UNSC 
resolution.  He said news reports suggesting Iran had scaled 
back its enrichment activity at Natanz were false and that the 
speed of progress of Iran's nuclear program depends solely on 
technical matters.  There was no political decision to slow the 
program, he said.  Asserting that Iran is cooperating fully with 
the IAEA and working within the framework of the NPT, he said 
however that the IAEA Safeguards Additional Protocol was an 
entirely different matter, inferring that Iran does not intend 
 
RPO DUBAI 00000056  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
to adhere to the Additional Protocol.  Ahmadinejad called the 
IAEA a "legal entity" and cautioned it against political 
decisions which would take it outside its mandate. 
 
------ 
Iraq 
------ 
 
7.(U) Returning to the theme of mismanagement, Ahmadinejad 
criticized the "powers" for initially supporting and arming 
Saddam Hussein against Iran in the 1980s', hoping to "break 
Iran's national will."  These same people later opposed Saddam, 
he said, by coming up with "false claims of weapons."  After 
deposing Saddam, the "occupiers" became the sole cause of the 
problems in Iraq, Ahmadinejad said.  They have created problems 
that they cannot solve, and the longer they stay, the worse the 
situation will be.  When asked, Ahmadinejad denied allegations 
that Iran is behind the current instability in Iraq, accusing 
the US of trying to shift the blame for the failure of its 
policies, instead of analyzing its mistakes.  He said the 
"occupiers of Iraq" are creating instability and sectarian 
tensions in order to justify their presence there, adding that 
they want to "divide and rule, conquer the oil wealth, and 
create a central power base."  Ahmadinejad accused the "powers" 
of seeking to undermine the Iraqi government, replace the Prime 
Minister, and change the constitution.  Iran, he said favors a 
stable Iraq as the two countries share a long border, cultural 
connections and history. 
 
8.(U) The political power of the "occupiers" is waning and a 
power gap is developing, Ahmadinejad said.  Iran is ready -- 
with the help of friends like Saudi Arabia and others -- to fill 
that power gap.  Responding to reporters' questions, Ahmadinejad 
called US accusations of Iranian interference in Iraq false. 
Asked if an apparent lack of US support for the Maliki 
government would affect US-Iran discussions on Iraq, Ahmadinejad 
said that "as long as there has been no change in request," Iran 
is ready to help in Iraq and continue negotiations at an 
ambassadorial level.  He said Iran is "ready to help you come 
out of this bog you have created," but that Iran would not 
"force you out."  Nonetheless, Ahmadinejad pressed for a US 
withdrawal, saying, "Let Iraqis run Iraq and go back to your 
country.  You are gate crashers. No one sent you an invitation. 
No one rolled out the red carpet." 
 
9.(U) Ahmadinejad warned against a "new plan to pressure the 
Iraqi government," saying it would fail.  Referring indirectly 
to the US, he said those advising them in the "old colonial 
ways" are working against them, and advised them to sit down and 
review what they have done.  "Two months ago they gave arms to 
people," he said, "and now they've come out of the frying pan 
and into the fire."  There have been 600,000 deaths, Ahmadinejad 
charged.  "What have you achieved? Who is to blame? Who will be 
tried?"  The problems in Iraq can be solved without further 
casualties, Ahmadinejad claimed, but said the [presumably US] 
government does not listen to the advice of wise men and women. 
"Don't you have brains in your head," he asked. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
Regional security and other questions 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶10. (U) Asked by reporters about Iran-US negotiations, 
Ahmadinejad said Iran is already working with the international 
community on Iraq security, but is ready for to talk to anyone 
except "the occupiers of Palestine" about broader issues if it 
is met on equal terms.  Equality is condition for such 
discussions, he said.  Ahmadinejad dismissed rumors of a US 
military attack against Iran, saying that the Iranian people are 
not worried.  Ahmadinejad said the problems in Afghanistan and 
Iraq would need to be solved first.  Asked to clarify French 
President Sarkozy's comments about a possible military attack 
against Iran if it continues uranium enrichment, Ahmadinejad 
said Sarkozy is a new president who wants to make his mark. 
Sarkozy's comment "has no political value," he said. 
Ahmadinejad focused instead on Sarkozy's call for dialogue, 
praising these efforts. 
 
11.(U)  Asked whether Iran would block the Straits of Hormuz, he 
said it was not on the agenda, and that those who have suggested 
this have done it only to increase tensions and oil prices. 
Ahmadinejad also said he doubted that the US would designate the 
IRGC a terrorist organization, saying it would be "absurd" for 
 
RPO DUBAI 00000056  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
the US to take such an "extreme, illegal measure."  He said it 
was more a reflection of political infighting in the US between 
a group that is "worried" about arms sales and is trying to 
create tensions, and more "logical" actors. 
 
¶12. (U) Asked about the possibility for renewal of ties between 
Egypt and Iran, Ahmadinejad said Iran was willing to send an 
ambassador, and that the two countries' vice foreign ministers 
are discussing the promotion of ties.  Asked why Iran has not 
pursued closer relations with the Gulf, Ahmadinejad defended 
Iran's diplomacy, saying it maintains friendly relations with 
Gulf countries.  He added that Iran's annual trade with the UAE 
is $11 billion. 
 
13.(U) Asked his response to criticism of his economic policy, 
Ahmadinejad said people in Iran are free to express their 
opinions.  The economic policy was approved by the legislature, 
and the government is proceeding on that basis.  Investments in 
Iran have grown two-fold, he said, claiming that "Iran is the 
most secure country in the world."  Some infrastructure in the 
energy and transportations sectors is lacking, he admitted, 
saying that the government has increased investment in those 
sectors.  Asked whether there would be further changes in his 
cabinet, Ahmadinejad responded with an analogy, likening the 
cabinet to a football team, of which the president was the 
coach.  "No player can expect to stay in the game the whole 
time," Ahmadinejad said, stressing however, that it was still a 
team effort in the end. 
 
14.(U) Asked whether jailed Iranian-American scholar Haleh 
Esfandiari would be allowed to return to the US, Ahmadinejad 
responded that personally he thinks she is free to return, but 
the final decision on the case lies with the judiciary. 
 
15.(SBU) Comment.  The tone of President Ahmadinejad's second 
press conference this year was relatively calm and -- though 
firm -- less aggressive than in the past.  Ahmadinejad appeared 
more relaxed than in previous international press conferences, 
joking with reporters.  He began his speech by pointing to 
common beliefs among Judaism, Christianity, and Islam and 
refrained from any strident anti-Israel comments.  He reiterated 
several times Iran's willingness to engage in discussions with 
the US, and to help in Iraq. 
BURNS