07JAKARTA3181
COUNTERNARCOTICS STRATEGY REPORT (INSCR) PART II:
Fri Nov 16 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Jakarta
VZCZCXRO8016
OO RUEHCHI RUEHCN RUEHDT RUEHHM
DE RUEHJA #3181/01 3200748
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 160748Z NOV 07
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7077
INFO RUEHZS/ASSOCIATION OF SOUTHEAST ASIAN NATIONS PRIORITY
RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA 1578
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO 1124
RUEHWL/AMEMBASSY WELLINGTON 2022
RUEAWJB/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDC
RHMCSUU/FBI WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RHHJJPI/USPACOM HONOLULU HI
RUEABND/DEA HQ WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 JAKARTA 003181 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EAP, EAP/MTS, INL, INL/AAE 
DEA SINGAPORE FOR COUNTRY ATTACHE RUSSEL HOLSKE 
NSC FOR EPHU 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KCRM SNAR AFIN PREL ID
SUBJECT: COUNTERNARCOTICS STRATEGY REPORT (INSCR) PART II: 
MONEY LAUNDERING; FINANCIAL CRIMES 
 
REF: A. STATE 137250 
     ¶B. STATE 136787 
     ¶C. STATE 136782 
     ¶D. STATE 136780 
 
¶1.  (U) This message is Sensitive but Unclassified -- Please 
handle accordingly. 
 
¶2. (SBU) SUMMARY:  Indonesia--the fourth largest country in 
population in the world--has historically has not been 
considered a major drug producing, consuming or transit 
country.  However, in recent years Indonesia has experienced 
a major increase in the production, transshipment, 
trafficking and consumption of narcotics.  The executive 
branch of the Indonesian government has made anti-corruption 
efforts a major policy initiative along with 
counter-terrorism and counternarcotics.  Since 2002, 
Indonesia has seen a significant increase in the number of 
large-scale clandestine MDMA and methamphetamine laboratories 
seized by Indonesian authorities. 
 
¶3. SUMMARY (Cont'd):  MDMA and methamphetamine production 
syndicates exploit Indonesia's lax precursor chemical 
controls and use corrupt means to operate with relative 
impunity.  These clandestine laboratories are capable of 
producing multi-hundred kilogram quantities of amphetamine 
type substances (ATS).  However, in August 2006, there was a 
highly successful police raid.  In addition, regional drug 
trafficking syndicates are exploiting Indonesia's 1.2 million 
miles of coastline, lack of border and port security 
resources, etc., for the transshipment of heroin and ATS. 
Increases in narcotics production/trafficking have been 
mirrored in drug abuse rates.  These rates--specifically 
intravenous drug use--combined with substandard health care, 
rehabilitation and demand reduction programs has resulted in 
a significant increase in HIV/AIDS infection.  END SUMMARY 
 
¶4. (SBU) Indonesian counter narcotics code is sufficiently 
inclusive to enable police, prosecutors and the judiciary to 
arrest, prosecute and adjudicate narcotics cases. 
Nevertheless corruption in Indonesia is problematic.  Among 
the 161 countries ranked by Transparency International in 
their Corruption Index, Indonesia was ranked 130th, making it 
one of the most corrupt countries in the world.  The level of 
political corruption in Indonesia seriously limits the 
effectiveness of all law enforcement, including narcotics law 
enforcement and poses the most significant threat to the 
country's counter drug strategy. However, the current INP 
Chief Sutanto is committed to reducing corruption and illegal 
activities by members of the police.  Sutanto has made 
significant progress in internal investigation reform, human 
rights and governance of the organization.  In 2006 over 4000 
officers were disciplined for violations of the Code of 
Ethics and Discipline Code with 230 officers being terminated 
for ethics violations 
 alone.  The INP leadership has been consistently improving, 
with the integration of more modern law enforcement 
management systems and procedures including anti-corruption 
efforts. 
 
¶5. (SBU) The Indonesian National Police (INP) participates in 
several international donor-initiated training programs and 
continues to commit increased resources to counter narcotics 
efforts. The INP has received both specialized investigative 
training and equipment, including vehicles, software, safety 
and tactical equipment to support its efforts against crime 
and drugs. INP efforts are firmly based on counter narcotics 
legislation and international agreements. The INP relies 
heavily on assistance from major international donors, 
including the U.S.  Indonesia is a party to the 1988 UN Drug 
Convention. 
 
----------------- 
STATUS OF COUNTRY 
----------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) In 2006 Indonesian authorities continued to seize 
 
JAKARTA 00003181  002 OF 007 
 
 
large-scale clandestine methamphetamine and MDMA 
laboratories, suggesting that Indonesia is quickly becoming a 
manufacturing site for narcotics.  As recently as 2005, 
Indonesia has been the second largest non-US importer of 
pseudoephedrine.  Lax and inadequate precursor chemical 
controls combined with porous borders and endemic levels of 
corruption continues to be a significant threat to 
Indonesia's counter drug efforts. 
 
¶7. (SBU) The Indonesian National Narcotics Board (BNN) 
estimates that approximately 3.2 million people or, 1.5 
percent of Indonesia's total population are drug abusers. 
According to Indonesian National Police (INP) arrest data, in 
2006, the INP conducted 14,105 narcotics investigations.  All 
major groups of illegal drugs are readily available in 
Indonesia; methamphetamine, primarily in its form, MDMA, as 
well as, heroin, marijuana and small user quantities of 
cocaine. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Based upon INP arrest data, marijuana is the most 
commonly abused drug in Indonesia.  During 2006, out of 
14,105 narcotics investigations, 7,257 investigations were 
for marijuana.  During 2006, out of 14,105 narcotics 
investigations, 7,257 investigations were for marijuana. 
Similarly, during 2006, INP arrested 6,898 people were 
arrested for marijuana consumption and 5,897 were arrested 
from distribution. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Methamphetamine is the second most commonly abused 
drug in Indonesia.   INP reports methamphetamine in Indonesia 
is most often seized in its crystalline form. During 2006, 
out of 14,105 narcotics investigations, 3,125 investigations 
were for methamphetamine.  Similarly, during 2006, INP 
arrested 3,333 people for methamphetamine consumption and 
1,712 were arrested for distribution. 
 
¶10. (SBU) INP reports that heroin is the third most commonly 
abused drug in Indonesia. Despite Indonesia's proximity to 
the golden triangle, heroin from sources of supply in 
Southwest Asia is the predominant type of heroin in Indonesia 
and is increasingly abused and available throughout the 
country.  During 2006 INP conducted 2,143 heroin 
investigations, during which 1,631 individuals were arrested 
for consumption and 979 were arrested for distribution. 
 
¶11. (SBU) MDMA is readily available throughout Indonesia and 
is predominately consumed in nightclubs and discotheques. 
Per INP, MDMA is the fourth most commonly abused drug in 
Indonesia. During 2006, out of 14,105 narcotics 
investigations, 1,548 investigations were for MDMA. 
Similarly, during 2006, INP arrested 1,278 people were 
arrested for methamphetamine consumption and 1,051 were 
arrested for distribution. 
 
------------------------------------- 
COUNTRY ACTIONS AGAINST DRUGS IN 2006 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶12. (SBU) policy initiatives:  The Indonesian counter 
narcotics code is sufficiently inclusive to enable, police, 
prosecutors and judiciary to arrest, prosecute and adjudicate 
narcotics cases.  Under Indonesian Laws No. 22/1997 on 
narcotics and 5/1997 on psychotropic substances, the 
Indonesian courts have sentenced approximately 57 drug 
traffickers to death.  The continued lack of modern 
detection, enforcement and investigative methodologies and 
technology, and pervasive corruption, are the greatest 
obstacles to advancing Indonesia's anti-drug efforts. 
 
¶13. (SBU) During 2006, the Government of Indonesia (GOI), via 
the Indonesian National Narcotics Board (BNN), the government 
agency responsible for the coordination of Indonesian counter 
narcotics efforts, singed an Association of Southeast Asian 
Nations (ASEAN) declaration stating Indonesia's commitment 
for a "drug-free ASEAN 2015".  "Drug-Free ASEAN 2015" is a 
political commitment of the ASEAN member countries, of which 
Indonesia is a member, in achieving a drug free condition by 
 
JAKARTA 00003181  003 OF 007 
 
 
the year 2015. 
 
¶14. (SBU) According to BNN, the GOI has established new 
policies and strategies, in a "goal oriented rolling Plan of 
Action", consisting of stages covering 3 years for each 
stage.  These stages will continue until Indonesia reaches a 
drug-free condition, hopefully by 2015.  Specifically 
Indonesia has established a National Drug Control Plan which 
addresses the illicit drug supply and demand reduction.  The 
goals and targets for the GOI's drug control plan were 
developed from the 1998 UNGRASS and ASEAN and China 
Cooperative Operations in Response to Dangerous Drugs 
(ACCORD) plan of action. 
 
¶15. (SBU) The mission of Indonesia's National Drug Plan is 
to:  1) To reduce illicit drug supply, trafficking and 
production; 2) To reduce drug use among the Indonesian youth; 
and 3) To minimize the harmful effects of drugs and drug use 
in Indonesian society. 
 
¶16. (SBU) The primary policy goals of Indonesia's National 
Drug Plan are to:  1) To minimize the level of illness, 
disease, injury and premature death associated with the use 
of illicit drugs; 2) To minimize the level and impact of 
drug-related crime and violence within the community; and 3) 
To minimize the loss of productivity and other economic costs 
associated with illicit drug use. 
 
¶17. (SBU) In March 2007, lawmakers from Indonesia's House of 
Representatives Commission III and the National Narcotics 
Agency (BNN) proposed a new regulation, to be attached to the 
national narcotics law which would allow for law enforcement 
agencies to confiscate convicted drug traffickers assets to 
fund Indonesia's drug trafficking eradication program.  The 
aim of the proposed regulation is to deny drug trafficking 
networks of their assets. Under the new regulation assets 
seized by the GOI would be used to rehabilitate impoverished 
drug abusers and would serve to supplement the budget of the 
BNN.  The BNN receives approximately $30 million (USD) per 
year from the state budget, far below $53 million (USD) the 
agency requests for its yearly budget. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
ACCOMPLISHMENTS:  LAW ENFORCEMENT EFFORTS 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶18. (SBU) According to INP arrest data, prosecutions for drug 
possession, trafficking and manufacturing have decreased in 
to 14,105 cases in 2006 from 14,515 cases in 2005.  Data 
provided by the GOI seems to suggest that the increase noted 
in 2005 where prosecutions for drug possession, trafficking 
and manufacturing had quadrupled to 14,515 from 3,617 in 
CY-2001 has stabilized in 2006. 
 
¶19. (SBU) The BNN continues to strive to improve interagency 
cooperation in drug enforcement, interdiction, and precursor 
control.  In 2005, under the auspices of BNN, the USG 
sponsored PACOM JIATF West Joint Interagency Counter Drug 
Operations Center (JIACDOC) was opened in Jakarta, Indonesia. 
In 2006, the BNN had begun staffing and subsequently 
utilizing the JIACDOC's facilities to improve coordination 
and information exchange between various Indonesian law 
enforcement agencies and supporting ongoing narcotics 
investigations. 
 
¶20. (SBU) The INP Narcotics and Organized Crime Directorate 
continues to improve in its ability to investigate and 
dismantle international drug trafficking syndicates, as well 
as, cooperate with other international law enforcement 
agencies. The Narcotics Directorate has become increasingly 
active in the regional targeting conferences designed to 
coordinate efforts against transnational drug and crime 
organizations.  In 2006, INP attended the Drug Enforcement 
Conference (IDEC) held in Montreal, Canada.  INP's Director 
for Narcotics and Organized Crime was subsequently appointed 
as the Chairman of the East Asia Regional IDEC Working Group. 
 
 
JAKARTA 00003181  004 OF 007 
 
 
---------- 
CORRUPTION 
---------- 
 
¶21. (SBU) Indonesia has laws against official corruption and 
an effective anti-corruption commission; but despite these 
laws, corruption in Indonesia is endemic.  As a matter of 
government policy and practice, the GOI does not encourage or 
facilitate the illicit production or distribution of drugs or 
the laundering of proceeds from illegal transactions. 
 
¶22. (SBU) Corruption of Indonesia's judiciary is   pervasive 
and poses a significant threat to the country's counter drug 
strategy.  Indonesian prosecutor's low wages encourage 
official corruption and a low level of motivation.  The 
average salary of an Indonesian prosecutor with 30 years of 
seniority is approximately $400 USD a month.  Furthermore, 
corrupt police and prosecutors abuse their authority in 
illegal searches, as Indonesian courts do not exclude 
evidence obtained without a warrant.  Corrupt prosecutors are 
suspected of carrying out investigations to elicit bribes 
from suspects.  Corruption within the police force has led to 
corrupt officers in narcotics cases, asking for bribes, for a 
reduction in charges, with the defense attorneys serving as 
facilitators. 
 
----------------------- 
AGREEMENTS AND TREATIES 
----------------------- 
 
¶23. (SBU) Indonesia is a party to the 1988 UN Drug Convention 
against The Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and 
Psychotropic Substances.  During January 2007, delegations 
from the U.S. and Indonesia met in Jakarta for the initial 
negotiations to develop a mutual legal assistance treaty 
(MLAT) between the two countries.  The delegations exchanged 
information about their respective legal systems and mutual 
legal assistance practices, and began drafting a text from 
each of the proposals. Articles of the proposed MLAT 
addressed prevention of crime, scope of assistance, the types 
of evidence to be covered by the treaty, intellectual 
property rights, dual criminality between the U.S. and 
Indonesia, and delegation of central authorities in the U.S. 
and Indonesia for MLAT related requests. 
 
---------------------- 
CULTIVATION/PRODUCTION 
---------------------- 
 
¶24. (SBU) The large-scale production of MDMA and 
methamphetamine is one of the most significant drug 
trafficking threats in Indonesia.  Indonesian/Chinese 
trafficking syndicates exploit Indonesia's lax precursor 
chemical controls, weak law enforcement and political 
corruption to establish large-scale clandestine MDMA and 
methamphetamine laboratories capable of producing 
multi-hundred kilogram quantities.  These syndicates utilize 
supply sources from the Peoples Republic of China (PRC) for 
precursor chemicals and laboratory equipment.  Production 
syndicates rely upon chemists trained in the Netherlands for 
the production of MDMA, as well as chemists form Taiwan and 
Hong Kong for the production of crystal methamphetamine. 
 
¶25. (SBU) Historically the production of MDMA and crystal 
methamphetamine in Indonesia has never occurred in the same 
laboratory.  The common practice is separate production 
syndicates that specialize in either MDMA or methamphetamine. 
 However, in the 2005, INP seized the world's first 
combination clandestine MDMA/methamphetamine laboratory in 
near Jakarta, Indonesia.  This large-scale dual 
MDMA/methamphetamine laboratory was the third largest 
clandestine laboratory seized by law enforcement in the world 
and was capable of producing thousand pound quantities. 
Subsequent investigation revealed that the construction of 
this clandestine laboratory was directed by Chinese organized 
crime syndicates based in Hong Kong and mainland China.  This 
syndicate utilized chemists from Taiwan for the production of 
 
JAKARTA 00003181  005 OF 007 
 
 
methamphetamine and chemists from the Netherlands for the 
production of MDMA. 
 
¶26. (SBU) Marijuana is cultivated throughout Indonesia and 
the equatorial climate of Sumatra allows for year round 
growing and cultivation of marijuana.  Large-scale (greater 
than 20 hectares) marijuana cultivation occurs in the remote 
and sparsely populated regions of the province, often in 
mountainous topography.  Regional marijuana cultivation 
syndicates are believed to be exploiting INP's limitations by 
locating cultivation sites in remote and high elevation 
areas.  There is no known cultivation of heroin or cocaine in 
Indonesia. 
 
--------------------- 
DRUG FLOW AND TRANSIT 
--------------------- 
 
¶27. (SBU) The Indonesian National Police (INP) report that 
the majority of heroin seized in Indonesia originates from 
supply sources in Southwest Asia.  The heroin trade in 
Indonesia is predominantly controlled and directed by West 
Africans; Nigerians. Heroin is smuggled by West African and 
Nepalese trafficking organizations utilizing sources of 
supply in Karachi, Pakistan and Kabul, Afghanistan.  West 
African and Nepalese couriers travel utilizing commercial air 
carriers transiting Bangkok, Thailand, and India, en route to 
Jakarta, Indonesia.  In addition to heroin being trafficked 
domestically in Indonesia, heroin is also transshipped from 
Indonesia, by couriers traveling via commercial air carrier 
to Europe, Japan and Australia. 
 
¶28. (SBU) Historically, MDMA has been smuggled into Indonesia 
from sources of supply in the Netherlands.  However, in 
recent years Indonesia is experiencing an increase in the 
large-scale MDMA and methamphetamine production.  The 
large-scale production of MDMA and methamphetamine is one of 
the most significant drug trafficking threats in Indonesia. 
MDMA and methamphetamine produced in Indonesia is trafficked 
both domestically and internationally.  Since 2002, 
Indonesian/Chinese MDMA and methamphetamine production 
syndicates have established numerous large-scale clandestine 
MDMA and methamphetamine laboratories capable of producing 
multi hundred kilogram quantities, utilizing precursor 
chemicals from the Peoples Republic of China (PRC).  In 
addition, MDMA and methamphetamine produced in the PRC is 
smuggled to Indonesia by Chinese organized crime syndicates 
based in Hong Kong, in multi hundred kilogram quantities by 
sea. Specifically, Indonesian authorities cite that two of 
the largest methamphetamine seizures 
 of 2006, 200 kilograms (February 2006) and 956 kilograms 
(August 2006), originated from the PRC and were smuggled on 
via maritime cargo and fishing vessels. 
 
¶29. (SBU) INP reports that marijuana trafficking in Indonesia 
is controlled by Indonesian trafficking syndicates based out 
of Jakarta.  The majority of marijuana cultivated in 
Indonesia is consumed domestically and typically is not 
trafficked on the international market.  Although cocaine 
seizures continue to occur in major Indonesian airports, the 
market for cocaine in Indonesia is believed to be very small. 
 
---------------- 
DEMAND REDUCTION 
---------------- 
 
¶30. (SBU) The Government of Indonesia views drug abuse and 
narcotics trafficking as a major long term threat to social, 
Islamic and political stability.  Government agencies 
continue to promote anti-drug abuse and HIV/AIDS awareness 
campaigns in throughout various media avenues.  The 
Indonesian National Narcotics Board (BNN) is responsible for 
the development of Indonesia's demand reduction programs. 
During 2006, BNN engaged in a large anti narcotics campaign 
targeting a wide demographic of Indonesia's citizenry. No 
statistics exist regarding the success of these anti drug 
abuse programs. 
 
JAKARTA 00003181  006 OF 007 
 
 
 
------------------------------------ 
U.S. POLICY INITIATIVES AND PROGRAMS 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶31. (SBU) Bilateral Cooperation:  Indonesia and the United 
States maintain excellent law enforcement cooperation in 
narcotics cases.  During 2006, the United States sent 
hundreds of INP officers to training on a variety of 
transnational crime topics.  Furthermore, 120 Indonesian law 
enforcement officers attended training at the International 
Law Enforcement Academy (ILEA) in Bangkok.  Similarly, 
training and development initiatives by Department of State 
INL funded DOJ ICITAP Indonesia Program, DEA, and PACOM JIATF 
West has trained hundreds of law enforcement officers from a 
variety of Indonesian government agencies.  In 2006, DEA 
provided training in the areas of drug intelligence analysis, 
precursor chemical control, basic drug investigations and 
airport narcotics interdiction.  INP and BNN maintain 
excellent relationships with the DEA regional office in 
Singapore and continue to work closely with DEA in narcotics 
investigations. 
 
-------------- 
THE ROAD AHEAD 
-------------- 
 
¶32. (SBU) In 2007 the U.S. will assist the BNN and its member 
agencies further utilizing the resources and capabilities of 
the Counter Drug Operations Center and Network. The U.S. will 
further work with INP and BNN to standardize and computerize 
the reporting methods related to narcotics investigations and 
seizures; development of a drug intelligence database; 
building an information network designed to connect to the 
major provinces of Indonesia. This will permit Indonesian law 
enforcement to contribute to, and access the database for 
investigations.  Similarly, the U.S. will work with INP and 
BNN to further expand the scope and impact of narcotics 
investigations targeting the large scale production of 
methamphetamine and MDMA in Indonesia. The U.S. and Indonesia 
will continue to cooperate closely on narcotics control. 
 
------------------ 
STATISTICAL TABLES 
------------------ 
 
¶33. (SBU) Recorded drug cases, including trafficking 
throughout Indonesia: 
 
2001:        3,013 
2002:  3,544 
2003:  3,729 
2004:  7,753 
2005:       20,023 
2006:       14,105 
 
Drugs Seized: 
 
       Heroin  Cocaine   Cannabis    MDMA     Meth. 
         (kg)    (kg)   (metric ton)(tablets)   (kg) 
 
2001    13.5         15.2     15.7     22,627    412.5 
2002    19.0          8.3     59.8     68,324     46.2 
2003    13.0         13.4     43.3    183,721     16.3 
2004   12.7     6.32    50.4    251,072     28.4 
2005    17.71       1.0     20.9    233,467    318.15 
2006    11.9          1.12     111.17   466,907   1,241.2 
 
2005          Marijuana Plants:   160,211 
2006          Marijuana Plants: 1,019,307 
 
---------------- 
CHEMICAL CONTROL 
---------------- 
 
¶34. (SBU) Overview:  The GOI, in an effort to more 
effectively and efficiently control precursor chemicals and 
 
JAKARTA 00003181  007 OF 007 
 
 
pharmaceutical drugs, reorganized the Ministry of Trade and 
Industry and the Ministry of Health.  In 2004 the Ministry of 
Trade became a separate agency from the Ministry of Trade and 
Industry.  Currently the Ministry of Trade is responsible for 
licensing of non-pharmaceutical precursor chemical imports. 
Similarly, in 2005, the Ministry of Health, assumed 
responsibility for the  management of  pharmaceutical 
precursor chemical licenses, from the National Agency for 
Drug and Food Control (formerly known as Department of Drug 
and Food Control under the Ministry of Health.  While the 
National Agency for Drug and Food Control now only controls 
post-market or finished products of precursor chemicals. 
 
¶35. (SBU) Ministry of Health and Ministry of Trade accept, 
review, and approve precursor chemical import applications 
for pharmaceuticals and non-pharmaceuticals.  The import 
applicants are categorized into Importer Producer (IP) and 
Register Importer (RI) but more commonly identified as IT, 
Importer Trader).  All prospective applicants desiring to 
import precursor chemical must submit a drug registration 
application to obtain market authorization as IP or IT to the 
respective ministries. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
IDENTIFICATION OF PRECURSOR CHEMICAL DIVERSION 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶36. (SBU) The diversion and unregulated importation of 
precursor chemicals remains a significant problem facing 
Indonesia's counter drug efforts. To date, Indonesian 
Authorities have been unsuccessful in controlling the 
diversion of precursor chemicals and pharmaceuticals. 
Numerous pharmaceutical and chemical corporations have large 
operations throughout Indonesia.  In June 2006, the 
Indonesian National Police in cooperation with the Australian 
Federal Police (AFP) identified more 380 kgs of 
pseudoephedrine that had been diverted from PT Glaxo Wellcome 
Indonesia, by a single trafficking syndicate based in Jakarta 
and Sydney, Australia. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
EPHEDRINE AND PSEUDOEPHEDRINE IMPORTS AND QUOTAS 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶37. (SBU) The International Narcotics Control Board (INCB) 
lists Indonesia's quota for    ephedrine imports as 12,339 
kgs and 30,221 kgs for pseudoephedrine imports. According to 
available data from the state agencies visited, import of 
precursor chemicals pseudoephedrine and ephedrine to 
Indonesia between Nov 04 and May 06 are as follows: 
 
Chemical                                  Quantity (kg) 
 
EPHEDRINE 
 
Quota, Nov 04-Mar 06                 14,740.00 
Quota, Apr-May 06                     8,522.35 
Total Quota, Nov 04-May 06           23,262.35 
 
Import, Nov 04-Mar 06              -12,494.98 
Import, Apr-May 06                         -6,525.00 
Total Imported, Nov 04-May 06 -19,019.98 
 
Quota Balance as of May 06            4,242.37 
 
PSEUDOEPHEDRINE 
 
Quota, Nov 04-Mar 06                 40,550.00 
Quota, Apr-May 06                    10,835.00 
Total Quota, Nov 04-May 06           51,385.00 
 
Import, Nov 04-Mar 06               -29,675.00 
Import, Apr-May 06                         -8,443.00 
Total Imported, Nov 04-May 06       -38,118.00 
 
Quota Balance as of May 06           13,267.00 
HUME