07MANAGUA2577
FRAUD SUMMARY - MANAGUA, NICARAGUA
Wed Dec 12 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0001
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #2577/01 3462243
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 122243Z DEC 07
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1800
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDCUNCLAS MANAGUA 002577 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR CA/FPP; DEPT PLEASE PASS TO KCC FPMAND TO 
NVC FOR FPM; TO DS/CR/OCI James Schnaible 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KFRD CVIS ASEC CPAS CMGT PREL PTER XK NU
SUBJECT: FRAUD SUMMARY - MANAGUA, NICARAGUA 
 
REF:  (A) Managua 2544 
      (B) Managua 2332 
      (C) Managua 1899 
 
Â¶1. (SBU) The following is Managua's quarterly report on the fraud 
situation at post for the fourth quarter FY 07.  Headings follow 
reftel information requests. 
 
 
a. COUNTRY CONDITIONS 
 
In the last few months Nicaragua has been impacted by natural 
disasters, political instability and rising oil prices that have 
negatively affected the economy. Furthermore, Hurricane Felix had a 
serious impact on the infrastructure of the country's coastal region 
and continuing heavy rains adversely affected harvests in the 
central and northern part of the territory. These economic factors 
could lead to an increase in NIV applications for the next year. 
 
 
b. NIV FRAUD 
 
For the fourth quarter of FY 2007, 84 percent of the NIV workload at 
post consisted of B1/B2 cases, followed by 6 percent C1/D and 3 
percent C1. 
 
The most common NIV fraud continues to involve B1/B2 cases with 
easily detectable altered bank statements, falsified job letters and 
fake payment stubs. However, there have been a few serious NIV fraud 
cases worth noting this quarter. 
 
The annual Exponica Crafts Fair in Miami brings forth hundreds of 
marginal NIV applicants, creating ample opportunity for fraud. 
Through pre-screening the Exponica cases, FPU has been able to alert 
adjudicating officers to potential fraud. In one particular case, 
FPU detected two different applicants with pictures of themselves 
posing at the same workshop claiming to be from two different 
geographic regions. Small retailers use these pictures as a way to 
provide the consular officer with "evidence" of their alleged work. 
FPU has started grouping these cases to report fraud trends in large 
groups such as this. 
 
FPU remains alert to problems related to trafficking in children. 
One success story involved a voice message tip advising that a child 
would be smuggled to the U.S. through putative parents holding valid 
visas. Taking advantage of the "text search" option in CCD, FPU 
located the three minors and the parents from the alert. The 
Nicaraguan Civil Central Registrar's Office confirmed the biological 
relationship between two of the minors and the parents; however, one 
child was not listed as the alleged parent's biological child. FPU 
interviewed both of the parents separately. The father was the first 
confronted with the evidence. He openly admitted that the minor was 
not his daughter but his niece. He also stated the minor's parents 
were illegally present in the U.S. The alleged mother was reluctant 
to admit fraud to FPU, but in the end signed a sworn confession to 
the fraud. All visas were revoked. Interviewing techniques played a 
major role in solving this case. 
 
FPU initiated a communication between DHS and DOS in regard to 
providing I-275 electronically to CONS. Once it becomes fully 
functional, the electronic process will save time and allow 
adjudicating officers to search for and review files electronically. 
 
 
c. IV FRAUD 
 
Nicaraguan civil documents are still vulnerable to fraud in IV 
cases. An FPU Assistant detected a late birth inscription in an 
immigrant visa case and referred the case to FPU. During the 
interview the beneficiary admitted being the nephew and not the 
petitioner's biological son. 
 
d. DV FRAUD 
 
No changes or updates to report this quarter. 
 
e. ACS AND PASSPORT FRAUD 
 
During this reporting period, two fathers admitted to the Consul 
while processing CRBA applications for their "children" that they 
were not the biological fathers.  Interviewing techniques played a 
major role in deterring these fraudulent applications.  The FPU has 
performed five investigations for the ACS unit.  While none of these 
investigations confirmed fraud, they were invaluable in uncovering 
potential vulnerabilities in the documentation process of children 
born at private hospitals and actually helped expedite the 
processing of these CRBA and passport applications. 
 
f. ADOPTION FRAUD 
 
Post continues to work on one of the adoption fraud cases mentioned 
in the last three quarter's fraud summary. The case involves a 
five-year-old girl that obtained an NIV to travel to the U.S. with 
American citizens (Amcits) for medical treatment. The surviving 
parent gave the Amcits consent to take the child to the U.S. for a 
short period while she was being treated. (Note: This child was 
under the custody of the Ministry of the Family when the child was 
taken out of Nicaragua. The biological mother had no legal authority 
to grant consent for the child to exit the country. Although the 
child was permitted out of the country, the consent was invalid. End 
Note.) 
 
Once in the U.S., the Amcits initiated adoption proceedings. FPU 
discovered that the Amcits used falsified documents to file for the 
adoption with the Government of Nicaragua (GoN) and with the 
Department of Homeland Security (DHS). The organization that 
conducted the family's home study has since rescinded because of the 
fraud and other related reasons. 
 
The Ministry of the Family recently provided post with a renewed 
official request to have the child returned to the Nicaragua, 
including copies of the legal documents which made the child a ward 
of the state. FPU has provided ICE these legal documents in order to 
facilitate the removal of the child from the custody of these 
particular Amcits.  The GoN may consider granting adoption of the 
child to another Amcit family who has already adopted four 
handicapped Nicaraguan children. 
 
g. ASYLUM AND OTHER DHS BENEFITS 
 
No changes or updates to report this quarter. 
 
h. COOPERATION WITH HOST GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES 
 
FPU worked with host government authorities at the request of the 
Office of the Attorney General of Texas who requested Nicaraguan 
Civil documents to confirm the true age of a Nicaraguan accused in a 
murder case. 
 
The GoN recently implemented new procedures for consular access to 
American prisoners, which have limited consular, family, and 
attorney access to American prisoners. On four different occasions 
Consular Staff members were denied access to American prisoners in 
local facilities although the proper procedures to request access 
were followed. 
 
While a recent meeting between the Ambassador and the Minister of 
Government has appeared to resolve these issues for now, based on 
past experience, we project that this will be an ongoing issue for 
the Consular Section during the Ortega Administration. 
 
The FPU has played an active role in attempting to set up consular 
prison visits as well as enhance communication between the GoN and 
the consular section. 
 
i. AREAS OF PARTICULAR CONCERN 
 
The GoN has a three category visa system. Category A countries do 
not require visas to enter Nicaragua; many of the category A 
countries coincide with U.S. Visa Waver Countries. Category B visas 
consist of consular visas that can be issued at the discretion of 
consular officials posted abroad without any consultation with 
Managua. Category C countries require the approval of the Nicaraguan 
Immigration Service prior to visa issuance by a Consular Official, 
and consist largely of countries of special concern (both with 
regard to illegal migration and international terrorism). 
 
The GoN is currently considering a redesign of their Visa Category 
Chart to reflect the new diplomatic relations and priorities of the 
Ortega Administration. The first step in this direction was taken on 
November 28, 2007, when the Nicaraguan government sent a letter to 
all air carriers operating at Managua's International Airport 
announcing that all Libyans and 
Iranians(diplomats/officials/regulars)could enter Nicaragua without 
a visa (REF A).  Additional changes are expected to follow. 
 
High-ranking government officials in the Foreign Ministry have also 
suggested to Embassy officials on several occasions the possibility 
of making Nicaragua a completely "visa free" country which allows 
all nationalities in without visas.  Obviously, such a radical 
change would be of major concern to the USG in terms both of illegal 
immigration and the movement of terrorists and other criminal 
elements. 
 
Costa Rica's new diplomatic relationship with The People's Republic 
of China has the potential to draw a large numbers of 
northward-bound Chinese migrants to the Central America region. 
Nicaragua's southern border with Costa Rica is extremely vulnerable 
to illegal immigration (and trafficking of people and/or drugs). 
The GoN continues to meet with neighboring northern partners in the 
CA-4 free movement area (Guatemala, Honduras and El Salvador) 
towards establishing a single Central American Visa.  Although the 
recent GON decision to allow Iran visa-free entry has caused 
consternation among the other C-4 nations. 
 
j. STAFFING AND TRAINING 
 
The FPU in coordination with ARSO-I continue to hold bi-weekly fraud 
training sessions for consular officers and local consular staff. 
This quarter FPU and ARSO-I conducted basic U.S. travel document 
fraud training for twenty individuals from two major airlines. 
 
Trivelli