07STATE126663
CONFERENCE ON THE CARIBBEAN - MOVING AHEAD ON
Mon Sep 10 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO3083
OO RUEHGR RUEHQU
DE RUEHC #6663/01 2531801
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 101747Z SEP 07
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO EC CARICOM COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
HAITI COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
INFO RUEHUB/USINT HAVANA IMMEDIATE 4532
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY 3353UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 STATE 126663 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL ETRD ENRG SNAR EAID CU XL
SUBJECT: CONFERENCE ON THE CARIBBEAN - MOVING AHEAD ON 
DELIVERABLES 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (SBU) This is the first in a series of periodic updates 
for posts describing progress on June initiatives and 
deliverables of the 2007 Conference on the Caribbean. It also 
requests posts to engage with host governments to encourage 
effective follow-through on the part of relevant host 
government agencies regarding these initiatives (see para 
13). Coordination is underway in Washington on initiatives to 
advance economic growth, invest in people, and improve 
security as outlined in the joint statement of the  President 
and CARICOM heads of government.  The success of these 
initiatives requires posts' continued support in 
communicating our goals and next steps with CARICOM members 
and officials. End Summary. 
 
-------------------------- 
ECONOMIC GROWTH INITIATIVES 
-------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Before the Conference, WHA and the U.S. Trade 
Development Agency (USTDA), in coordination with Customs and 
Border Protection (CBP), successfully developed an action 
plan for the U.S.-CARICOM Customs Partnership.  USTDA is 
working with implementing partners (e.g., CBP) to further 
develop training programs and capacity building assistance to 
strengthen and modernize CARICOM members' customs procedures 
and policies.  In coordination with State, USTDA plans to 
conduct a definitional mission in the region in the Fall of 
2007, to further this joint Customs project. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The USG remains engaged in finalizing an updated 
Trade and Investment Framework Agreement (TIFA) with CARICOM. 
 CARICOM first requested updating our existing 1991 TIFA at 
the Trade and Investment Council in October 2006.  USTR 
suggested edits to this agreement and awaits CARICOM's 
response. USTR has also expressed interest in another TIC 
meeting, but wants a substantive agenda with CARICOM before 
setting a date. In June, USTR received official notification 
from the CARICOM Secretariat that ASYG Irwin LaRoque would be 
their new interlocutor on trade issues.  Heretofore, the 
Director General of the Caribbean Regional Negotiating 
Machinery (currently Richard Bernal), had been the primary 
point of contact for such issues. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) State continues to work with the Government of 
Brazil, the InterAmerican Development Bank, and the OAS on a 
biofuels partnership program.  The President announced Haiti, 
St. Kitts and Nevis, the Dominican Republic and El Salvador 
as target countries. USG and Brazilian officials traveled 
with a senior OAS delegation to St. Kitts, Aug. 28-29, to 
present the OAS' feasibility study to the government and seek 
support to advance biofuel cooperation there.  In Haiti, the 
Dominican Republic and El Salvador, USTDA has hired Winrock 
International as technical consultants who will travel to 
these three countries in September to begin feasibility 
work.Primary State POCs on this are Matt McManus (EEB/ESC), 
Brenda Haendler (EEB/ESC/IEC) and Faith Corneille (WHA/EPSC). 
 
¶5.  (U) At the June Conference on the Caribbean, the 
Secretary reiterated her interest in negotiating a Science 
 
SIPDIS 
and Technology Agreement with CARICOM by the end of calendar 
year 2008.  WHA/CAR and OES are responsible for coordination 
with CARICOM. 
 
------------------- 
INVESTING IN PEOPLE 
------------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) WHA/CAR is working with WHA/PPC, PRM, and the 
International Organization for Migration (IOM) to develop a 
returnee reintegration pilot program for CARICOM.  We expect 
IOM to submit a grant proposal in early September, thereby 
allowing us to obligate funds before the end of the fiscal 
year.  The current plan is to launch this project in Jamaica 
and then expand it to Guyana and  the Bahamas; the CARICOM 
countries that receive the most deportees from the United 
States. The program will aim to help returning citizens 
reintegrate into their home countries and strengthen each 
target country's capacity to provide such services as 
referrals, information on relevant laws, temporary housing, 
health care, job/skills training, and microcredits. 
 
STATE 00126663  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
¶7.  (SBU) USAID will expand the Caribbean Centers for 
Excellence in Teacher Training (C-CETT), starting in 2008. 
Plans for the expansion remain preliminary, but the project 
will either focus on reaching more teachers or on expanding 
operations beyond those countries currently benefiting from 
the program.  USAID will implement this through the Jamaica 
mission.  (Note: The C-CETT is based in Jamaica, and Kingston 
is the only USAID mission in the English-speaking Caribbean 
so involved in education, and has been since 2002. End Note) 
 
¶8.  (SBU) USAID will also fund the creation of a dedicated 
Caribbean ENTRA 21 program in partnership with the 
International Youth Foundation (IYF).  IYF relies on both 
public and private partners to fund and implement this 21st 
century job-skills training program aimed at high-tech and 
labor-market-needs based employment.  USAID will coordinate 
with IYF for 2008 implementation. 
 
---------------- 
SECURITY FOR ALL 
---------------- 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Working through the OAS/CICTE process, we provided 
CARICOM members with port, tourism, and infrastructure 
security training in advance of the 2007 Cricket World Cup. 
We will provide additional funding to CICTE to build upon the 
CWC assistance to:(1) enhance member states' capacities in 
access controls to port facilities, cargo security, customs 
and immigration performance and procedures, including police 
and guard procedures; (2) improve the ability of target 
countries' law enforcement personnel to detect fraudulent 
travel and identity documents, as well as enhance 
communication and institutional links between customs and 
border security agencies in order to promote cooperation and 
collaboration in the control and fight against document 
fraud; and (3) build the capacity of CARICOM states to 
improve and standardize security controls in airports to 
comply with ICAO standards.  CICTE will work with governments 
directly in coordination  with USOAS, and is already putting 
together a DHS/DOE assessment of energy systems security in 
Trinidad and Tobago. 
 
¶10.  (SBU) DHS remains fully committed to completing and 
perhaps expanding APIS.  Originally developed for Cricket 
World Cup, APIS proved a mutually beneficial border security 
tool. APIS also enjoys senior support from the USG and 
CARICOM.  DHS hopes to send an audit team to Bridgetown in 
September and is seeking a telcon with Bajan Attorney General 
Marshall regarding the still un-negotiated Operational 
Protocols. 
 
¶11.  (SBU) Officials from TSA proposed expanding the Federal 
Air Marshals program to CARICOM earlier in 2007.  A 
successfully negotiated MOU with interested countries would 
allow TSA to provide training on developing a similar program 
in the region, in addition to interim U.S. FAMS on board 
intraregional flights.  State will renew coordination with 
TSA to determine next steps. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
¶12.  (SBU) State will support NOAA's expanded Caribbean 
disaster preparedness efforts, including development of a 
regional all-hazards warning system and consortium building 
on current information and best-practices sharing.  NOAA 
awaits a response from CDERA (Caribbean Disaster Emergency 
Response Agency) on this concept, but NOAA has met with the 
CARICOM ambassadors in Washington as a precursor to the 
Conference. (Implementation is expected to begin in 2008.) 
 
----------------- 
POST COORDINATION 
----------------- 
 
¶13.  (SBU) While closing the Conference on the Caribbean, 
Secretary Rice acknowledged CARICOM's commitment to partner 
 
SIPDIS 
with the United States on a wide array of mutually important 
areas.  To follow through on the commitments made by the 
President and Secretary to Caribbean counterparts at that 
gathering, posts are requested to engage with their CARICOM 
and host nation interlocutors by reiterating our commitment 
to this process and encouraging prompt, effective 
follow-through from pertinent ministries/offices on the 
above-mentioned initiatives.  WHA/CAR will spearhead overall 
coordination and commits to sending monthly updates to ensure 
proper coordination with posts. 
RICE