07TORONTO448
Narcotics Smugglers Still Working the U.S.-Canada Border
Tue Nov 13 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Toronto
VZCZCXRO4948
RR RUEHGA RUEHHA RUEHQU RUEHVC
DE RUEHON #0448/01 3171528
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 131528Z NOV 07
FM AMCONSUL TORONTO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2253
INFO RUCNCAN/ALCAN COLLECTIVE
RUEWMCS/DEA HQS WASHINGTON DC
RUEAHLC/HOMELAND SECURITY CENTER WASHDC
RUEPINS/HQ BICE INTEL WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TORONTO 000448 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV SNAR KCRM CA
SUBJECT: Narcotics Smugglers Still Working the U.S.-Canada Border 
 
REF: Toronto 90 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified - protect accordingly. 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  Drug smuggling continues to be a major challenge 
for Ontario law enforcement.  Organized criminal groups smuggle 
ecstasy, cocaine, and marijuana in and out of Canada on a regular 
basis, trying to exploit seams along the lengthy shared border with 
the United States, and Pearson International Airport--a major North 
American air hub.  Information-sharing and operational cooperation 
between U.S. and Canadian law enforcement agencies has been key to 
several recent significant arrests and seizures on both sides of the 
border.  END SUMMARY. 
 
---------------------- 
Border Vulnerabilities 
---------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) The lengthy Ontario-U.S. border remains vulnerable to drug 
trafficking.  In July 2007, cooperation between the Drug Enforcement 
Administration (DEA), Chicago Police, and the Toronto Police Service 
led to the successful dismantling of a large high-grade marijuana 
smuggling organization and blocked a previously unknown smuggling 
route between Canada and United States.  According to media reports, 
the accused drove through St. Joseph Island, near Sault Ste. Marie, 
and crossed the river to Michigan's upper peninsula where they were 
caught by U.S. authorities.  The operation netted 13 arrests, more 
than 1,000 pounds of high-quality marijuana (with a wholesale value 
of over US$4 million), 85 pounds of cocaine, and US$350,000 in cash. 
 Four residents of Sterling Heights, Michigan have been charged with 
conspiracy to import marijuana into United States.  In related 
action, Canadian police seized about US$41,000 in cash, C$487,000 in 
cash, 1,000 pounds of high-quality marijuana valued at C$3,000,000, 
and one kilo of cocaine valued at C$30,000 in raids in the Greater 
Toronto Area and British Columbia on July 5, 2007.  24 people were 
arrested for numerous drug and weapons related offences. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Pearson Airport: A Drug Trafficking Hub 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (U) In counter-narcotics operations at Toronto's Pearson 
International Airport, Canada Border Services Agency and the RCMP 
seized 100 kilos of drugs worth C$10.5 million on April 16, 2007 -- 
one of the largest drug seizures ever at Pearson.  40 kilos of 
cocaine and 61 kilos of hash oil were found under the cargo area 
floor of a SkyService jet returning from Jamaica.  On May 20, the 
RCMP seized 75,000 doses of heroin worth about C$24 million at 
Pearson and in Scarborough.  Three Toronto residents are facing 
charges.  Police say the investigation, which began last December, 
specifically targeted female drug couriers smuggling heroin from 
Colombia.  Police note that Southeast Asia has been a more typical 
point of origin for smuggled heroin.  All three suspects are also 
alleged members of an Asian organized crime and drug trafficking 
network in Toronto, raising suspicions among Canadian law 
enforcement officials that Colombian drug syndicates have formed an 
alliance with Asian crime groups to distribute heroin in Toronto. 
 
¶4. (U) The Toronto Airport Drug Enforcement Unit charged eight 
people with trafficking approximately 39 kilos of ecstasy tablets, 3 
kilos of cocaine, 8 pounds of marijuana, and C$106,000 in cash on 
July 19, 2007. Police say that this group had members working within 
the airport who were able to utilize their positions to facilitate 
the movement of drugs and money.  In conjunction with the Pearson 
investigation, U.S Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) agents 
in Atlanta, Houston, and Hartford seized MDMA that originated from 
the Toronto area.  Four employees of two different companies at 
Pearson were charged with theft-related offences by Peel Regional 
Police in the incident. 
 
¶5. (U) Six Pearson employees separately were arrested on drug 
trafficking charges on June 13, 2007.  The arrests were part of a 
larger operation that resulted in 95 arrests for allegedly smuggling 
drugs into Canada from the United States.  The smuggling activity is 
reportedly connected to the North York, Ontario branch of the Los 
Angeles-based gang "Driftwood Crips."  The RCMP seized 30 kilos of 
cocaine at Pearson during the investigation.  During the predawn 
raids across the Greater Toronto Area on June 13, police seized 
firearms, ammunition, and more than C$2 million in cocaine, 
marijuana, and other drugs.  The operation involved more than 700 
officers from the Toronto Police Services, RCMP, and Ontario 
Provincial Police (OPP). 
 
¶6. (U) On October 16, 2007, CBSA officials at Pearson intercepted 
nine kilos of liquid hash and more than 16 kilos of marijuana in a 
shipment of fresh produce from the Caribbean.   In total, officers 
intercepted 13 packages of liquid hashish worth more than C$320,000 
and 15 individual packages of marijuana worth in excess of 
C$325,000.  No arrests have been made in this case though the RCMP 
 
TORONTO 00000448  002 OF 003 
 
 
is still investigating.  On the same day, CBSA officers discovered 
seven kilos of cocaine worth C$875,000 inside a bag that arrived on 
a flight from Saint Vincent, in the Caribbean.  In this case, the 
RCMP arrested a 38-year-old woman.  On October 21, CBSA intercepted 
more than six kilos of cocaine (valued at about C$757,000) inside an 
unclaimed bag that arrived from Panama. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Organized Crime-Bike Gang exposed 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (U) Earlier this spring, on April 7, the OPP-led inter-agency 
Biker Enforcement Unit and the Halton Regional Police Tactical 
Rescue Unit arrested 31 people in connection with alleged criminal 
activities of the Hell's Angels and Bacchus Motorcycle Club.  Police 
seized C$996,000 worth of GHB (Gamma Hydroxy Butyrate, a common 
"date rape" drug), C$982,800 worth of cocaine, and C$48,000 worth of 
hashish. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
European and North African Mob Connections 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶8. (U) On July 5, 2007, police seized 1,000 pounds of marijuana in 
raids on 29 houses across Canada.  The raids were an effort to 
disrupt the Canadian operations of Eastern European criminal 
organizations.  The organization had been smuggling marijuana from 
Canada to the U.S. and importing cocaine from the U.S. to Canada. 
The marijuana was shipped from British Columbia to Ontario and then 
across the border into Michigan.  The group also smuggled cocaine 
into Canada from the U.S.  Police also seized more than C$500,000 in 
Canadian and U.S. cash, three handguns, and two stolen vehicles.  24 
Canadian residents of Romanian, Hungarian, and Algerian descent have 
been charged. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
Organized crime--RCMP and ICE bust international ring 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶9. (U) A ten-month long investigation with U.S. ICE agents led the 
RCMP to arrest 11 Toronto-area residents for drug trafficking in 
September 2007.  Approximately 325 pounds of marijuana, 9 houses, 9 
vehicles, and over C$350,000 in cash were seized by Canadian police, 
while ICE seized US$5.7 million in cash, 150 pounds of cocaine, and 
800 pounds of marijuana.  Authorities allege that the marijuana and 
cocaine were destined for transport across the U.S.-Canada border. 
ICE arrested 12 people in the U.S. 
 
----------------------------- 
Ontario Combats Crystal Meth 
----------------------------- 
 
¶10. (U) On June 25 Ontario Community Safety and Correctional 
Services Minister Monte Kwinter announced the province would 
allocate C$2 Million to fight the production, trafficking, and use 
of crystal methamphetamine.  Crystal meth is one of the most 
addictive street drugs and among the hardest addictions to treat. 
C$1.5 million will boost OPP staffing and equipment.  Fire 
departments across Ontario will use the remaining C$500,000 for 
investigations related to crystal meth labs and marijuana growing 
operations.  The city of Stratford will also receive a special 
allocation of C$1 million for drug prevention and treatment programs 
in south central Ontario. 
 
------------------------------------ 
"Grow-Op" Industry Continues to Boom 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶11. (U) Marijuana "grow-ops" are a multi-billion dollar business 
across Ontario.  In the Niagara region alone in 2006, 45 grow-ops 
were busted and C$7 million worth of marijuana seized.  The Ontario 
Association of Chiefs of Police (OACP) estimates 85% of grow-ops are 
connected to organized crime.  It can cost as little as C$25,000 for 
the hydroponics, lighting, and chemicals needed to start a full 
scale grow-op, while a single plant can produce C$1,000 worth of 
drugs within just a few months. 
 
¶12. (U) Guelph police arrested two people on July 25, 2007 after 
discovering 600 plants and hydroponic equipment in their residence 
during an early morning raid.  Like most grow ops, the location was 
in a quiet, suburban area unlikely to attract attention. 
 
¶13. (U) 20 unusually tall marijuana plants, up to 8 feet tall and 
valued at C$20,000 were seized from a house in Guelph on September 
¶5.  Guelph Police charged the man who grew them with possession for 
the purpose of trafficking. 
 
¶14. (U) The Kawartha Combined Forces Drug Unit and OPP officers 
discovered C$10 million worth of marijuana in a private house in 
 
TORONTO 00000448  003 OF 003 
 
 
Peterborough County on September 9. Three Mississauga-area residents 
were arrested.  During 2007 Peel Regional Police (in the Greater 
Toronto Area) dismantled more than 40 illicit drug manufacturing 
operations. 
 
--------------------------- 
Other Notable Drug Seizures 
--------------------------- 
 
¶15. (U) More than C$20 million worth of ecstasy was seized from 
Toronto's McCowan Road/Steeles Avenue area on March 6, 2007.  A 
large amount of caffeine-used as a fixing agent in manufacturing 
ecstasy-was also seized.  Used properly, the fixing agent would 
double the street value of the drug, to approximately C$43 million. 
Four people were charged. 
 
¶16. (U) The OPP seized 673 pounds of marijuana and 30 pounds of 
marijuana "shake"(marijuana which has had the stems and seeds 
removed), worth C$1.4 million from a residence, in Toronto on 
September 14, 2007.  Two men were charged after an unrelated search 
in rural Bruce County on the same day resulted in the discovery of 
198 marijuana plants worth C$198,000. 
 
¶17. (U) A music teacher at a Waterloo public school was charged with 
trafficking along with her husband, a one time soccer star and 
former Olympian on June 15.  A raid on their home in Waterloo netted 
8.5 kilos of marijuana, 3,000 ecstasy pills, drug paraphernalia, and 
more than C$11,000 and US$6,000 in cash.  The marijuana and ecstasy 
were valued at C$85,000 and C$30,000, respectively.  The teacher's 
husband was arrested in Port Huron, Michigan, after allegedly trying 
to smuggle almost six kilos of marijuana into the U.S.  The drug 
bust was a combined effort of local police, the RCMP, ICE, and the 
Illinois State Police. 
 
¶18. (SBU) Comment:  Ontario-based law enforcement agencies are 
working hard to combat illegal drug smuggling.  The volume and 
frequency of illicit drug seizures in the Greater Toronto Area and 
along the U.S.-Ontario border demonstrate the continued 
profitability, particularly for organized criminal groups, of the 
trans-border drug trade.  Recent significant seizures on both sides 
of the border illustrate that information sharing and operational 
cooperation between U.S. and Canadian law enforcement agencies is 
helping to stem the flow of drugs, guns, and illicit cash across the 
border. 
 
NAY