08BEIRUT1181
LEBANON:  ALL THE PRESIDENT'S MEN...AND WOMAN
Tue Aug 12 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Beirut
VZCZCXRO8781
PP RUEHAG RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHDF RUEHIK RUEHKUK RUEHLZ RUEHROV
DE RUEHLB #1181/01 2251606
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 121606Z AUG 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIRUT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2730
INFO RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVE
RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVE
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIRUT 001181 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL LE
SUBJECT: LEBANON:  ALL THE PRESIDENT'S MEN...AND WOMAN 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Though President Sleiman is still in the process of 
forming his staff, following is a list of individuals we believe 
will be key advisors and members of his staff as well as persons 
close to him who have no official role. 
 
OFFICIAL ADVISORS 
----------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Nazem Khoury, Political Advisor: 
 
Khoury is a close personal friend of President Sleiman and will 
accompany him on his August 13-14 trip to Damascus.  A former MP, 
Khoury is a member of the Lebanese American University's board of 
trustees.  He also sits on the board of the World Alliance of Young 
Men's Christian Association (YMCA) Geneva, and is the Chairman of 
the League of YMCAs in the Middle East.  Khoury sits on the board of 
a British construction company "Stow."  Stow is partially owned by 
Minister of Economy and Trade Mohammed Safadi, a close friend of 
Khoury's.  Khoury was born on March 18, 1946.  Khoury seems to 
concentrate on domestic matters.  He has greeted us in the waiting 
room prior to our meetings with Sleiman at Baabda Palace, but never 
participated in them. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Ambassador Naji Abi Assi, Diplomatic and Political 
Advisor: 
 
In addition to being appointed as the Diplomatic and Political 
Advisor to President Sleiman, Abi Assi is the Lebanese Ambassador to 
the Vatican and is expected to maintain this role.  Abi Assi also 
will accompany Sleiman to Damascus.  Abi Assi is a career diplomat 
who also served in the Lebanese Permanent Mission to New York and 
Geneva, and as Ambassador to Senegal and France.  He also held 
several positions at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, including 
Director of the International Organizations Department and Director 
of the Consular and Political Affairs Department.  Abi Assi 
participated in Lebanese delegations at various international and 
regional conferences.  Abi Assi was born on April 16, 1947.  We 
believe Abi Assi will concentrate on foreign affairs. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Elie Assaf, Head of the General Directorate of Economic 
Affairs: 
 
Assaf previously served in this capacity for seven months in 1996, 
during late President Elie Hraoui's term.  However, during former 
President Emile Lahoud's term, Assaf was sidelined, and instead 
managed educational and francophone issues.  Assaf also headed the 
Lebanese Customs in 1997.  Assaf set up the Lebanese Ecole Nationale 
d'Administration (ENA), the national school for administration 
attended by public sector employees, and served as its president 
from 2004 until 2008.  Assaf also was Dean of Economic Affairs at 
the Lebanese University in the 1980s and Dean of Information and 
Documentation at the Lebanese University in the 1990s. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Ambassador Bahjat Lahoud, Foreign Affairs Advisor: 
 
Lahoud, no relation to former President Emile Lahoud, is a cousin of 
President Sleiman and a retired diplomat.  He comes from Amchit, 
President Sleiman's hometown.  Lahoud served as Ambassador to 
Mexico, Charge d'Affaires in Gabon, Japan, and Switzerland, and 
Consul General in Egypt and Rio de Janeiro.  Lahoud was born on 
January 10, 1943. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Adib Abi Akl, Press Advisor: 
 
Abi Akl is the editor-in-chief of the Central News Agency.  Rafiq 
Chelala, the former press advisor, remains at the Presidential 
Palace, but has been sidelined in his responsibilities in favor of 
Abi Akl. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Brigadier General Abdulmuttaleb Hannaoui, Military 
Advisor 
 
General Hannaoui, another personal friend of Sleiman's, is not 
expected to play a substantive role.  In 2001, Hannoui was appointed 
the office director for then-LAF commander Michel Sleiman, and 
became a close aide and confidente of Sleiman.  In 1996, he was 
charged with preserving the security in the Baalbek area after 
former Hizballah SYG Sheikh Subhi Tufayli called for a "revolution 
of the hungry."  He graduated from the military academy in 1975, and 
participated in several military training courses in the U.S., 
notably at Fort Benning.  He also headed the recruitment department 
in the Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF).  Hannoui is married and has two 
Amcit children. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Shadi Karam, Financial Affairs Advisor: 
 
Karam was the former Chairman and General Manager of Banque 
Libanaise pour le Commerce (BLC).  Sources close to Central Bank 
 
BEIRUT 00001181  002 OF 002 
 
 
(CBL) Governor Riad Salameh told Econstaff that Karam wrote the 
economic part of President Sleiman's inaugural speech.  Karam is 
related to CBL Governor Salameh and close to Nazem Khoury, who was a 
BLC board member. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Ms. Rayyan Assaf, Legal Advisor: 
 
The only female advisor, Assaf is a lawyer working on her Ph.D. 
thesis.  She is known to be poised and professional.  Assaf holds a 
law degree from the Saint Joseph University. 
 
ADMINISTRATIVE STAFF 
-------------------- 
 
¶10.  (SBU) General Salem Bou Daher, Director General of the 
Presidency: 
 
Bou Daher, a retired general, was appointed to this position by a 
cabinet decree in 1998 at the request of former President Emile 
Lahoud.  We expect a new person to fill this position once the 
cabinet embarks on appointing new director generals to the various 
institutions.  The Director General oversees the General 
Secretariat, which handles administrative issues at Baabda Palace. 
 
¶11.  (SBU) Dr. Antoine Choucair, Secretary General, General 
Secretariat: 
 
Choucair most recently worked at the Investment Development 
Authority of Lebanon, IDAL, a one-stop-shop for local and foreign 
investors.  Choucair held several positions in IDAL since 1997 and 
still retains his current Director of the Export Plus Program and 
Director of Administration and Finance positions at IDAL.  Choucair 
lectures in several institutions including ENA, where he has been 
teaching Human Resources Development since 2006, the Institute of 
Finance, and the Holy Spirit Kaslik University, where he has been 
teaching strategic management since 2000.  Choucair holds a 
doctorate in management from Paris VIII University. 
 
UNOFFICIAL ADVISORS 
------------------- 
 
¶12.  (SBU) President Sleiman also has unofficial advisors including 
former MP Mansour Ilbon and prominent industrialist Neemat Frem, 
whose late father was a former minister.  In the event that Sleiman 
forms a parliamentary bloc, Ilbon and Frem probably would be 
included as MP candidates. 
 
¶13.  (SBU) Mansour Ilbon: 
 
Ilbon, a former MP and member of March 14, inherited his business, 
his land, and his parliamentary seat from his father, Fouad Ghanem 
Ilbon.  He was elected to parliament in 1992 and served until he was 
defeated in the 2005 parliamentary elections.  Ilon maintains his 
father's legacy through the Fouad Ilbon Social Foundation.  Ilbon 
was born in 1953. 
 
¶14.  (SBU) Neemat Frem: 
 
A prominent industrialist, Frem is the President and CEO of INDEVCO, 
an international manufacturing group headquartered in Lebanon and 
solely owned by the Frem family.  INDEVCO consists of 28 
manufacturing plants located in Brazil, Egypt, England, the U.S., 
Lebanon, and Saudi Arabia, as well as 20 commercial companies 
throughout the Europe-Middle East-Africa (EMEA) region.  Frem is 
also a board member of BADER, an organization that aims to promote 
private initiative by inspiring the youth and providing support to 
entrepreneurs through education, finance and networking.  Frem is 
the son of late former Minister of Industry George Frem. 
 
GRANT