08HONGKONG2051
U.S. ASSISTS HONG KONG TO MONITOR AIR POLLUTION
Fri Nov 07 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Hong Kong
VZCZCXRO5382
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHHK #2051/01 3120847
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 070847Z NOV 08
FM AMCONSUL HONG KONG
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6199
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEAEPA/HQ EPA WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HONG KONG 002051 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/CM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV TPHY HK CH
SUBJECT: U.S. ASSISTS HONG KONG TO MONITOR AIR POLLUTION 
 
 ¶1. (U) Summary:  Air pollution levels in the Pearl River 
Delta (PRD) remain high, though slightly improved from last 
year, according to data recently released jointly by the Hong 
Kong Environmental Protection Department (EPD) and the 
Environmental Protection Bureau of Guangdong (GDEPB).  A U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) expert, Dr. Golam 
Sarwar, working at Consulate General Hong Kong under a 
two-month Science Fellowship from the State Department, is 
helping the Hong Kong government analyze this and other 
historical data.  Dr. Sarwar is working with scientists at HK 
EPD and the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 
(HK UST) to adapt a U.S. EPA-developed air pollution model 
for use here.  This model will help researchers better 
predict air pollution sources and levels across the Pearl 
River Delta (PRD), supporting policy recommendations to 
reduce air pollution regionally. End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Comment:  Air pollution reportedly is responsible 
for an estimated 10,000 premature deaths and 440,000 
hospital-bed days annually in the PRD; direct air pollution 
related health care costs to the region are over RMB 1.8 
billion a year, according to local environmental NGO Civic 
Exchange.  In that context, Dr. Sarwar's research has been 
enthusiastically received by Hong Kong's EPD Air Science 
Group, which is providing him full access to their data. The 
EPA model is now running at HK UST; initial results should be 
available by late November. The Hong Kong government 
recognizes air quality is a serious concern and is devoting 
significant resources to monitoring pollution, but finds it 
easy to blame the problem on Guangdong factories and claim 
Hong Kong's ability to act is limited. The EPD Air Science 
Group is particularly excited about Dr. Sarwar's research and 
expertise. The Group sees the EPA model as a way to analyze 
years' worth of data and put it in an understandable format 
for policy makers. End Comment. 
 
PRD Pollution Down; Thank the Weather 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶3. (U) The Hong Kong Environmental Protection Department 
(EPD) and the Environmental Protection Bureau of Guangdong 
Province (GDEPB) jointly released a statistical report from 
the Pearl River Delta (PRD) Regional Air Monitoring Network 
covering the first half of 2008 (Jan-June), on October 29. 
The network comprises 16 automatic ambient air monitoring 
stations scattered across the PRD Economic Zone (13 in 
Guangdong, 3 in Hong Kong).  The stations monitor four major 
air pollutants: sulphur dioxide, nitrogen dioxide, ozone and 
large respirable suspended particulates; EPD and GDEPB 
publish the data in a consolidated format for research use 
bi-annually. 
 
¶4. (U) According to the latest report, pollution levels 
decreased slightly overall when compared to the first half of 
¶2007.  Nitrogen dioxide levels were unchanged, ozone levels 
were up slightly, but sulphur dioxide and respirable 
particulate measurements were notably down.  The report 
speculates this improvement was due to favorable weather 
dispersal patterns and heavier then usual rainfall during the 
period, rather than reduced industrial emissions. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Commenting on the sharing of data and its 
relationship with Guangdong environmental authorities, EPD 
Senior Air Science Group Officer Peter Louie told Econoff 
that working-level cross-border relationships between the EPD 
and GDEPB are good.  At higher levels, and despite formal 
exchanges like the network report, Mainland authorities still 
treat air pollution data as a state secret; its release is 
typically delayed significantly, Louie said.  Aside from the 
major pollutants noted above, other data is impossible or 
difficult to acquire and measurements for the more dangerous 
fine respirable suspended particulate are not collected under 
the program at all.  EPD Air Science Group Officer, 
Christopher Fung, noted that Hong Kong has been collecting 
air quality data for over ten years. The goal now is to use 
modeling to show the impact of pollution and support decision 
makers in developing sensible air pollution control policies. 
 
Dr. Sarwar's Air Pollution Modeling Research 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (U) The PRD Regional Air Monitoring Report release 
occurred during a 60-day research trip by Dr. Golam Sarwar, a 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) scientist based at 
the EPA's National Exposure Research Laboratory in North 
Carolina.  Dr. Sarwar is in Hong Kong through November 28 as 
a State Department Science Research Fellow to apply an 
EPA-developed air quality model for use in the PRD.  His 
specific research goal is to use the model to evaluate the 
 
HONG KONG 00002051  002 OF 002 
 
 
impact of excited nitrogen dioxide (a major air pollutant 
produced by combustion) on ozone. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Dr. Sarwar's research has been enthusiastically 
received and is generating a measure of excitement among Hong 
Kong researchers and NGOs involved in air quality issues. 
With Consulate General Hong Kong assistance, Dr. Sarwar has 
engaged with major universities, government offices and NGOs 
in Hong Kong focused on improving air quality.  He has 
presented his research to groups at four scheduled seminars 
and during a number of less formal discussions.  HK EPD has 
given Dr. Sarwar wide access to the EPD pollution monitoring 
network and data base and HK UST Environmental Engineering 
Department has offered use of their computer lab.  Working 
with faculty there, he installed the EPA-developed Community 
Multi-Scale Air Quality Model (CMAQ) on October 28 and began 
running the model with the added excited nitrogen dioxide 
chemistry.  Initial results showing ozone impact should be 
available soon. 
 
¶8. (U) The cited Civic Exchange Study &A Price Too High: The 
Health Impact of Air Pollution in Southern China8 is posted 
on-line at 
http://www.civic-exchange.org/eng/upload/file s/200806 
AirQualityPublichealth.pdf.  The PRD Regional Air Quality 
Monitoring Network report is posted on-line at 
http://www.epd.gov.hk. 
DONOVAN