08PHNOMPENH128
CHEVRON DOWNGRADES PETROLEUM ESTIMATES IN
Fri Feb 01 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXRO7165
PP RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM RUEHNH
DE RUEHPF #0128/01 0321214
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 011214Z FEB 08
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY 0716
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PHNOM PENH 000128 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/MLS, EEB/ESC/IEC--KOPP, INR 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO OPIC FOR PEREIRA AND FRANTZ 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO USTR FOR BISBEE 
COMMERCE FOR ITA 
TREASURY FOR OFFICE OF EAST ASIA--CHUN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EPET ECON PGOV CB
SUBJECT: CHEVRON DOWNGRADES PETROLEUM ESTIMATES IN 
CAMBODIAN WATERS, LOOKS TO OVERLAPPING CLAIMS AREA 
(C-AL7-02497) 
 
REF: 06 PHNOM PENH 2039 
 
¶1.  (U) This cable contains sensitive and proprietary 
business information.  It is sensitive but unclassified (SBU) 
and not for distribution via the internet. 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  Summary:  Chevron's analysis of Block A, the 
offshore oil block widely believed to have the most heavily 
endowed oil reserves in Cambodia, has shown that the area is 
much less promising than initially believed and probably not 
even profitable if exploited on its own.  However, Chevron 
General Manager for Exploration Gerry Flaherty believes that 
the Overlapping Claims Area (OCA), the disputed waters 
between Cambodia and Thailand, is "one of the best areas for 
exploration in the world."  Chevron and other oil and non-oil 
companies are beginning to cooperate on a strategy to 
encourage Cambodia and Thailand to resolve their differences 
over the OCA and reach a solution which will allow for 
exploration and exploitation.  The onset of significant oil 
revenue now looks to be delayed past earlier estimates of 
2010 or 2011, as Chevron seems unlikely to move ahead quickly 
with Block A development and other companies lag 2-3 years 
behind Chevron in the exploration process.  Given Cambodia's 
long list of legislative and other preparations needed before 
oil revenues trickle in, this delay is likely good news for 
the Cambodian people, and for revenue accountability.  End 
Summary. 
 
Rumors of Block A Petroleum Bonanza Greatly Exaggerated 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Flaherty began his January 18 discussion with 
Econoff by addressing the question on everyone's minds:  How 
much oil is there, and how much revenue does Cambodia stand 
to gain?  Flaherty was clearly uncomfortable with public 
discussions of potential oil flows, saying that a 2003 quote 
by a Chevron partner, LG Caltex, that there "could be as much 
as 400 million barrels" in Block A had fueled unrelenting 
speculation and questions about potential oil flows and 
revenues.  However, the oil executive agreed to summarize the 
latest data for the embassy, and explained that Block 
A--which is widely viewed as the best resourced of all of 
Cambodia's off-shore blocks--has much less recoverable oil 
than was first thought. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Initial projections and plans for Block A were 
based on the assumption that the Khmer Trough, which lies 
beneath Cambodian waters, would be similar in geology and 
resources to the Pattani Basin, which is largely in Thai 
waters.  Petroleum deposits in the Pattani Basin are 
concentrated and relatively easy to access, leading oil 
companies to build multiple wells around a central processing 
platform.  However, data from 15 exploratory wells show that 
the Khmer Trough lacks sufficient source rock to get similar 
flows, and the petroleum deposits are more dispersed and 
harder to access.  Flaherty estimated that there could be as 
many as 500 million barrels in Block A, but with recovery 
rates of only 10-20 percent, development of Block A alone was 
unlikely to be profitable.  The block could likely produce 
15,000 barrels per day, but would cost USD 500 million to 
develop.  This is a dramatic reversal from Chevron's original 
plans to build several wells around a central processing 
platform in Block A, as they did in the Gulf of Thailand. 
(Note:  Flaherty downplayed expectations for Block A more 
than a year ago in a conversation with Ambassador (Ref A), 
but this is the first time we have heard that production in 
Block A alone would not be profitable.  End Note.) 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Flaherty added that, in contrast to the Pattani 
Basin, which holds more natural gas than oil, the Khmer 
Trough is mostly oil with relatively little gas.  He 
described the Khmer Trough's mix of resources as more 
advantageous from a commercial standpoint, but not 
significant enough to make exploitation of that block alone 
profitable. 
 
Gunning for the Overlapping Claims Area 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Chevron is now most interested in gaining rights to 
a block in the Overlapping Claims Area (OCA), an area of 
disputed sovereignty between Thailand and Cambodia, Flaherty 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000128  002 OF 003 
 
 
revealed.  While much of the Pattani Basin is in Thai waters, 
one-third of the basin is in the OCA and this area may hold 
as much as a "couple hundred million" barrels of oil and six 
to eight trillion cubic feet of natural gas--an impressive 
deposit.  Flaherty was as excited about the OCA as he was 
downbeat about the current Cambodian blocks, saying that the 
OCA was now "one of the best areas for exploration in the 
world" and its revenues could "revolutionize Cambodia." 
(Note:  Thailand and Cambodia will need to negotiate a 
formula for OCA exploitation and work out other legal details 
or otherwise overcome the sovereignty dispute before even 
exploration begins.  End Note.) 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Flaherty revealed that he was scheduled to meet 
with Prime Minister Hun Sen on January 29, and planned to use 
that meeting to press for a block in the Overlapping Claims 
Area.  (Comment:  We have heard through a third party that 
the meeting occurred and that the Cambodians felt it "went 
well."  We will report on the meeting septel when we are able 
to get a readout.  End Comment.)  Cambodia and Thailand have 
made competing tentative assignments to blocks in the OCA. 
Companies clearly see a value in pressing each government to 
gain access to the blocks in preparation for eventual OCA 
dispute resolution.  Cambodia has divided the OCA into four 
areas.  Area 1 was granted to ConocoPhilips, Area 2 to 
Japanese firm Idemitsu, Area 3 to BHP and Shell, and Area 4 
to BHP and Inpex of Japan.  Areas 1 and 2 were granted 
indefinitely, but the exploration rights to Areas 3 and 4 
expired in October 2007 and have yet to be re-negotiated or 
re-assigned, according to Flaherty. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) While Chevron's real interest is in developing the 
OCA, the company plans to maintain its rights to Block A and 
continue exploration there, albeit at a more moderate pace. 
Flaherty stated that the Cambodian government is invested in 
Chevron's exploration of Block A--likely the most heavily 
endowed block in undisputed Cambodian waters.  Publicly 
abandoning their interest in Block A would be a big 
disappointment to the Cambodian government, Flaherty stated. 
Moreover, while Block A extraction might not be commercially 
viable alone, in combination with a larger operation in the 
OCA, the economies of scale could make it profitable. 
 
Other Companies Hoping for a Drop of the Action 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Chevron is not the only company hoping to get in on 
the action in the OCA, Flaherty noted.  Both large, 
established oil companies, including Total, British Gas, and 
BHP, and smaller oil companies--essentially speculators--are 
interested in claims in the OCA.  Flaherty noted that while 
the smaller companies might initially seem unlikely to be 
awarded an exploration contract, the Cambodian National 
Petroleum Authority (CNPA) might award full or partial rights 
to these companies, many of which have links to the Cambodian 
elite, "if there are financial incentives." 
 
Chevron's Sunny Outlook on OCA Resolution 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶10.  (SBU) Flaherty said that he felt that a number of signs 
pointed to potential to resolve the OCA sovereignty issue 
quickly.  The potential for political unrest to disrupt 
Burma's delivery of natural gas to Thailand and rising oil 
prices worldwide are hurting both Cambodian and Thai economic 
growth, he said.  Meanwhile, valuable petroleum reserves sit 
untapped.  For the first time, Thailand's latest master 
energy plan included petroleum from the OCA as a resource it 
would tap in the future.  Flaherty said that it did not make 
sense for the two countries to ignore the OCA sovereignty 
issue while pumping so much money into buying foreign oil and 
gas. 
 
¶11.  (SBU) Meanwhile, Chevron and the companies with licenses 
in the OCA have taken preliminary steps to begin coordinating 
efforts to encourage resolution of the OCA sovereignty issue. 
 Flaherty said that the group, which included six oil 
companies as well as five other firms with rights to operate 
mining, ship building, or other enterprises in the area, met 
for the first time recently in Bangkok.  He described the 
meeting as productive, saying that they made progress in 
developing common messages. 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000128  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
A Look Inside the Cambodian Government's Petroleum Policy 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
¶12.  (SBU) When asked, Flaherty described briefly some of the 
internal politics that he and Chevron's advisor to the CNPA, 
Mick McWalters, had witnessed within the RGC.  Flaherty said 
that Te Doung Tara, CNPA Director General, and Ho Vichet, 
CNPA Vice President, were rivals, each controlling a separate 
team of officials.  Each group is working on its own version 
of the draft petroleum law, with the key differences being 
potential incentives offered to industry and the size of the 
government's share of revenues.  Nonetheless, Flaherty 
predicted that a draft petroleum law would be before Deputy 
Prime Minister Sok An "within months."  (Note:  He did not 
specify which team's law he thought was likely to go to Sok 
An, nor whether elements from each would be included in the 
final.  End Note.) 
 
¶13.  (SBU) The oil executive said that the CNPA had made 
"lots of progress" in understanding what policy actions need 
to be taken in order to start oil production.  He hoped that, 
in the future, McWalters might be able to help facilitate the 
CNPA's collaboration with other ministries.  (Note:  Chevron 
says that McWalters is an independent consultant who, 
although paid by Chevron, is providing independent advice to 
the CNPA.  However, Chevron plans to end their funding in 
April and hopes that a donor--perhaps the World Bank or the 
Asian Development Bank--will step in to fund McWalters' work, 
making it easier for him to be seen as advocating for 
Cambodia's best interest.  End Note.)  Flaherty noted that 
the CNPA holds on to petroleum information very tightly, not 
even sharing with other Cambodian government ministries. 
Instead, these ministries rely on donors for information, 
which is not uniformly reliable.  (Comment:  The CNPA's 
information is likely largely coming from Chevron, as the 
CNPA has very limited resources to conduct or analyze 
studies.  Flaherty said that they have shared numbers about 
petroleum reserves "in general terms" with the CNPA.  End 
Comment.) 
 
¶14.  (SBU)  In response to Econoff's questions about a 
potential state-owned oil company in Cambodia, Flaherty 
described this as an "aspiration."  He suggested that 
Cambodia look to Thailand's PTT and PTTEP as examples, but 
said that Cambodia's more ambitious hopes of something 
similar to the Kuwait Oil Company or Malaysia's Petronas just 
distracted the CNPA from the real issues. 
 
Comment:  Longer Wait A Blessing in Disguise? 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶15.  (SBU) Chevron's news that tapping Block A deposits is 
not likely to be profitable on its own comes after months of 
obvious efforts by the government to tone down expectations 
that Block A will be making a big payoff soon.  The 
international community seems uncertain as to whether the 
CNPA's new caution is an attempt to downplay donor concerns 
or an accurate reflection of new data.  Meanwhile, neither 
the Cambodian government nor the donors have focused on the 
OCA, even though Te Doung Tara himself told a 2001 conference 
that there were estimates of "up to 11 trillion cubic feet of 
natural gas" and undetermined amounts of oil in the OCA. 
 
¶16.  (SBU) With Chevron taking a slow approach to Block A 
while it tries to pursue its real interest in the OCA, oil 
revenue now seems likely to flow later than the 2010 or 2011 
projections.  Chevron is well ahead of its competitors in 
exploring Cambodia's petroleum reserves.  While other 
companies have begun to explore in their blocks, they are two 
to three years behind Chevron.  Meanwhile, exploration in the 
OCA has not even started due to the sovereignty dispute. 
Thus, Cambodia will continue to feel the pinch of high oil 
and gas prices for a longer period of time.  However, there's 
a significant silver lining:  Cambodia will gain some of the 
time it needs to strengthen the CNPA, pass a Petroleum Law 
and Anti-Corruption Law, join the Extractive Industries 
Transparency Initiative, and take other steps to prepare for 
looming oil revenue.  While it appears that Cambodia now has 
the time to do some or all of these things, whether it has 
the political will to do so remains to be seen. 
MUSSOMELI