08RABAT1063
MOROCCO: DELIVERY OF 2009 INDICATOR SCORECARD
Mon Nov 10 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Rabat
VZCZCXRO7407
RR RUEHLMC
DE RUEHRB #1063/01 3151209
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 101209Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY RABAT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9327
INFO RUEHLMC/MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORPORATION WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 RABAT 001063 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EEB/IFD/ODF AND NEA/MAG 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID EFIN PGOV PREL ECON KMCA MCC
SUBJECT: MOROCCO: DELIVERY OF 2009 INDICATOR SCORECARD 
 
REF: STATE 111916 
 
Sensitive but unclassified -- please handle appropriately. 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: Economic Counselor and MCC Country Director 
delivered advance copies of Morocco's 2009 indicator 
scorecard in November 5 meetings with Minister of Economic 
and General Affairs Nizar Baraka and Primature 
Secretary-General Mohamed Hajoui, and then subsequently with 
officials at the Americas' Directorate of the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs.  Baraka and Hajoui expressed appreciation 
for ongoing progress on Morocco's 2008 MCC Compact, as well 
as for advance notice of the 2009 results, but took strong 
issue with some of the indicators, particularly regarding 
"Democracy and Governance" and "Investing in People."  They 
opined that there must have been an error in the indicator on 
expenditures on primary education, and also argued that 
Morocco's continuing failure to pass the median on "civil 
liberties" and "political rights" reflects neither the 
political reforms that have occurred here in recent years nor 
the "reality" that Morocco's press is the freest in the 
region.  As in 2007, they indicated that Morocco will send a 
letter to MCC outlining its concerns, for consideration by 
the board at its December meeting.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Baraka, who played a leading role in preparing 
Morocco's responses to the scorecard in 2006 and 2007 in his 
earlier incarnation as Deputy Head of the Moroccan team that 
negotiated the Compact, expressed appreciation for advance 
notice of the results and pleasure with the improvement in 
Morocco's scores on "Economic Freedom."  (Note: Morocco 
passed four of the five categories this year, after having 
fallen short of the median on four indicators last year.) 
He and Hajoui argued that the shift shows that the data is 
starting to "catch up" with the reforms that Morocco has 
implemented in recent years.  He questioned, however, 
Morocco's score on fiscal policy, expressing surprise that an 
indicator based on IMF sources continues to score what the 
IMF has termed a "model performance" below average. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Regarding "Investing in People," Baraka also 
expressed surprise that the results deteriorated so sharply 
from last year.  He noted that there has been no shift in the 
government's commitment in the area of primary education or 
immunization, and that the GOM's own indicators show rising 
immunization rates.  He was particularly non-plussed by the 
education result, noting that the government continues to 
allocate increased resources to the sector (a 23 percent 
increase in the 2009 budget) and that this is difficult to 
reconcile with the magnitude of the drop (from the 78th to 
the 44th percentile).  Overall, Hajoui noted, 53 percent of 
the 2009 budget is devoted to "social" sectors, reflecting 
the government's overall focus on such issues.  Health 
spending is also increasing, he noted.  The two asked that 
MCC review the data, to ensure that no "methodological 
issues" clouded the result. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Though Morocco cleared the hurdle on "Ruling 
Justly," Baraka and Hajoui expressed disappointment with 
continuing low marks on "Political Rights," "Civil 
Liberties," and "Voice and Accountability."  Baraka argued 
that the scores fail to reflect the "democratic methodology" 
evident in the important political evolution that is 
occurring in Morocco, with "transparent" parliamentary 
elections in 2007 and installation of a government led by the 
winning party.  They also challenged the low scores on "civil 
liberties," arguing that "liberty of expression is a reality 
in Morocco."  This is evident in the papers every day, Hajoui 
argued, and has not been challenged by the government.  He 
argued that recent court cases against journalists that have 
sparked criticism were not initiated by the government, but 
rather were sparked by "private complaints" from individual 
citizens.  He stressed that Morocco is working with 
journalists to review the press code and take it to a "higher 
level," but that under current law "real liberty of 
expression is respected," making Morocco a "benchmark in the 
region. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Noting the declining (though still passing) score 
Morocco received on corruption, Baraka and Hajoui stressed 
that Morocco has registered important progress this year in 
addressing the problem.  They pointed to the recent 
establishment of the "Central Anti-Corruption Agency," which 
will monitor developments and lead public education campaigns 
against corruption.  They also highlighted the recent 
publication of regulations requiring government officials to 
publicly declare their assets every two years.  This newly 
implemented requirement, they noted, comes with real teeth 
and a broader scope than earlier efforts to compel such 
declarations.  Finally, Hajoui highlighted Morocco's 
 
RABAT 00001063  002 OF 002 
 
 
innovative effort, through an interministerial commission 
that he chairs, to identify all areas where current law and 
regulation gives government agencies discretionary authority. 
 The goal, he said, is to reduce the scope of such 
discretion, as it frequently gives rise to corruption. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Baraka and Hajoui noted that like last year Morocco 
will prepare a letter to the MCC before the December board 
meeting, to provide the board with additional information 
about Moroccan activities in areas where they feel the 
indicators do not adequately reflect the progress that has 
been registered.  The letter will also highlight the 
"positive dynamic" that has characterized Morocco.  In the 
later meeting at the Foreign Ministry, America's Desk 
officials, who offered less substantive comment on the 
results, noted they will work with the Primature and Economic 
Ministry to ensure that all Moroccan agencies provide input 
to the response. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Comment: Notwithstanding concerns in certain areas, 
we share the GOM's view that Morocco remains on a positive 
trajectory, even where its scores do not put it above the 
median.  Clearly work is needed in a number of social 
sectors, as the GOM's budget priorities reflect.  MCC may 
wish to review, however, the methodology on the primary 
education indicator, as the sharp decline registered there 
has provoked particular surprise in the GOM, and appears 
difficult to reconcile with what has been a steady increase 
in resources devoted to education.  End Comment. 
 
 
***************************************** 
Visit Embassy Rabat's Classified Website; 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/rabat 
***************************************** 
 
Jackson