08STATE132249
GUIDANCE: UNIIIC CONSULTATION, DECEMBER 17, 2008
Wed Dec 17 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0008
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #2249 3522120
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 172112Z DEC 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT IMMEDIATE 0000UNCLAS STATE 132249 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNSC PREL LE SY
SUBJECT: GUIDANCE: UNIIIC CONSULTATION, DECEMBER 17, 2008 
 
¶1. (SBU) This is an action message.  USUN is instructed to 
vote in favor of a two month extension of the mandate for 
the UN Independent International Investigation Commission 
(UNIIIC) as provided in the draft resolution at para 3, 
below.  In explaining the U.S. position on UNIIIC and its 
planned successor, the Special Tribunal for Lebanon, 
Mission is authorized to draw from points in para 2 below 
 
¶2. (U) Talking points. 
 
-- I would like to thank Commissioner Bellemare for his 
insightful and constructive report.  The United States 
supports the Commissioner's call for a two-month extension 
of UNIIIC to ensure a smooth transition to the 
establishment of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon pursuant 
to Resolution 1757. 
 
-- The assassination of former Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri 
on February 14, 2005 galvanized the Lebanese people to 
insist on an end to violence and foreign intervention in 
Lebanon's internal affairs.  The UN Security Council 
responded by adopting Resolution 1595 in April, 2005, 
establishing the International Independent Investigation 
Commission (UNIIIC), followed by a series of additional 
resolutions. 
 
-- Commissioner Bellemare has reported good progress with 
the investigation over the past year.  We hope the Council 
will join us in supporting this two-month extension to 
ensure that UNIIIC's efforts are properly incorporated 
into the work of the new Tribunal. 
 
-- The United States is the largest single donor to the 
Special Tribunal for Lebanon aside from Lebanon itself, 
having contributed $14 million for its start-up/first-year 
budget.  On December 8, 2008, we indicated an anticipated 
pledge of $6 million for the Tribunal's second year, 
pending Congressional authorization.  We would encourage 
other states to join in providing financial support to the 
Tribunal to ensure its effective, independent operations 
in future years. 
 
End talking points. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Begin text of draft resolution: 
 
The Security Council, 
 
Recalling all its previous relevant resolutions, in 
particular resolutions 1595 (2005), 1636 (2005), 1644 
(2005), 1664 (2006), 1686 (2006), 1748 (2007), 1757 
(2007), 1815 (2008), 1373 (2001) and 1566 (2004), 
 
Reaffirming its strongest condemnation of the 14 February 
2005 terrorist bombing, as well as of all other attacks in 
Lebanon since October 2004, and reaffirming also that 
those involved in these attacks must be held accountable 
for their crimes, 
 
Having examined the report of the International 
Independent Investigation Commission (S/2008/752) ("The 
Commission"), submitted pursuant to resolutions 1595 
(2005), 1636 (2005), 1644 (2005), 1686 (2006), 1748 (2007) 
and 1815 (2008), 
 
Taking note of the Secretary-General's announcement that 
the Special Tribunal for Lebanon (The Tribunal) is fully 
on track to commence functioning on 1 March 2009, 
 
Taking note of the Commission's request to extend its 
mandate up to 28 February 2009, so that it can continue 
its investigation without interruption and gradually 
transfer operations, staff and assets to the Hague with a 
view to completing the transition by the time the Tribunal 
starts functioning, 
 
Taking note of the letter of the Prime Minister of Lebanon 
of 4 December 2008 (S/2008/XXX, Enclosure) to the 
Secretary-General expressing the hope that the Security 
Council will respond favourably to the Commission's 
request, 
 
Commending the Commission for its extensive work and the 
progress it continues to achieve in the investigation on 
all cases within its mandate, and looking forward to 
further progress in this regard by the Commission as well 
as by the Office of the Prosecutor, once it begins to 
operate and takes over the continuation of the 
investigation into the death of former Prime Minister 
Rafiq Hariri and other cases which may be connected with 
the attack of 14 February 2005, in conformity with the 
Statute of the Tribunal, 
 
Recognizing the commitment of Member States to the work of 
the Commission and underlining the importance of the 
continuation of their full cooperation with the Commission 
and, once it begins to operate, with the Office of the 
Prosecutor, in accordance with resolution 1757 (2007), in 
order to enable effective investigations and prosecutions, 
 
¶1. Welcomes the report of the Commission; 
 
¶2. Decides to extend the mandate of the Commission until 
28 February 2009; 
 
¶3. Decides to remain seized of the matter. 
 
End draft resolution text. 
RICE