08STATE127254
RESPONSE TO TAIWAN'S REQUEST FOR IDENTIFIER
Wed Dec 03 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #7254 3381502
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 031455Z DEC 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AIT TAIPEI IMMEDIATE 3381UNCLAS STATE 127254 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TAGS
TW, UNSC 
SUBJECT: RESPONSE TO TAIWAN'S REQUEST FOR IDENTIFIER 
INFORMATION ON IRANIAN UNSCR DESIGNATED INDIVIDUALS 
 
REF: AIT TAIPEI 001618 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action request.  Please see paragraph 6. 
 
¶2. (SBU) OBJECTIVE:  In response to Taiwan,s request for 
identifier information on Iranian individuals designated in 
UN Security Council Resolutions (UNSCRs) 1737, 1747, and 
1803, Washington would like to provide USG information that 
could aid Taiwan's National Immigration Agency with 
implementation of the travel restriction provisions contained 
in these UNSCRs. 
 
¶3. (SBU) BACKGROUND: UN Security Council Resolutions 1737, 
1747, and 1803 all contain provisions regarding the travel of 
designated Iranian individuals.  UNSCR 1737 calls for states 
to exercise vigilance regarding the entry into or transit 
through their territories of any individuals (whether or not 
designated by the UN Security Council) who are engaged in, 
directly associated with, or providing support for Iran,s 
proliferation sensitive nuclear activities or development of 
nuclear weapon delivery systems.  UNSCR 1737 also requires 
states to notify the UNSC Iran Sanctions Committee of the 
entry into or transit through their territory of any of the 
12 individuals designated in that resolution.  UNSCR 1747 
strengthened these provisions by establishing a call for 
"restraint" in addition to "vigilance" and designated an 
additional 15 individuals.  UNSCR 1803 also calls for such 
vigilance and restraint and designated an additional 13 
individuals.  In addition, the Security Council in UNSCR 1803 
went further by imposing an outright travel ban on five 
individuals, listed in Annex II A. and B. of the resolution. 
These individuals were previously designated in UNSCRs 1737 
and 1747 as subject only to the &vigilance and restraint8 
provisions. 
 
¶4. (SBU) BACKGROUND CONTINUED: Overall, through the adoption 
of UNSCRs 1737, 1747, and 1803, the Council has called for 
states to "exercise vigilance and restraint" in permitting 
entry into their territories of any individual engaged in, 
directly associated with, or providing support for Iran,s 
proliferation sensitive nuclear activities or development of 
nuclear weapon delivery systems; required states to notify 
the UNSC Iran Sanctions Committee of entry granted to any of 
the 40 designated individuals; and requires states to prevent 
entry into their territory of the five designated individuals 
in UNSCR 1803.  The Council also requires that, should a 
state permit an individual subject to "vigilance and 
restraint" to enter into or transit through its territory, 
the state must notify the UNSC Iran Sanctions Committee. 
 
¶5. (SBU) BACKGROUND CONTINUED: Of the 40 designated 
individuals in UNSCRs 1737, 1747, and 1803; the United States 
government has identifier information for 17, who have 
subsequently been designated by the UnitedStates for asset 
freezes and travel restrictions. This information will be 
transmitted via email to Post. 
 
¶6. (SBU) ACTION REQUEST FOR AIT TAIPEI: Upon receipt of the 
identifier information for the 17 individuals, Post should 
submit it to the Ministry of Economic Affairs, Bureau of 
Foreign Trade (BOFT) and/or the Taiwan National Immigration 
Agency. Post should also urge both Agencies to consider 
approaching the European Union for additional identifier 
information, if they have not already done so. It should be 
noted that the United States has only been able to designate 
16 individuals thus far because we do not want to designate 
the wrong person. The USG is working diligently to find more 
identifier information and will pass it forward to Taiwan 
should we come across it 
 
¶7. (U) Post is requested to report any substantive response 
by 8 December 2008.  Jen Chalmers (ISN/CPI, 202-647-9715, 
ChalmersJA@state.gov) and Risa Mongiello (ISN/RA, 
202-736-4730, MongielloRN@state.gov) are the Department's 
POCs for this activity. 
RICE