08STATE97539
DEMARCHE ON SOUTHERN SUDAN TRADE DELEGATION
Thu Sep 11 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO1049
OO RUEHROV
DE RUEHC #7539/01 2552024
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 112020Z SEP 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUEHDS/AMEMBASSY ADDIS ABABA IMMEDIATE 5727
RUEHKM/AMEMBASSY KAMPALA IMMEDIATE 4664
RUEHNR/AMEMBASSY NAIROBI IMMEDIATE 9154
RUEHKH/AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM IMMEDIATE 6333
INFO IGAD COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO IMMEDIATE 7791
RUEHDR/AMEMBASSY DAR ES SALAAM IMMEDIATE 5097
RUEHDJ/AMEMBASSY DJIBOUTI IMMEDIATE 3998UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 STATE 097539 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
PLEASE PASS TO CONGEN JUBA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL EAID SU
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE ON SOUTHERN SUDAN TRADE DELEGATION 
 
REF: REF: STATE 90046 
 
¶1. This is an action request.  Please see para. 5. 
 
¶2. The interest of U.S. companies operating in Addis Ababa, 
Kampala, and Nairobi has been encouraging as we continue to 
plan for the first U.S. trade delegation to Juba, Sudan. 
(ref)  The participating companies represent a broad range of 
economic interests, including small scale handicraft 
industry; project management and human/financial development; 
Logistics & transport sectors, including pre-fabricated 
housing.  The purpose of this cable is to lay out details 
related to the structure of the trade delegation and 
requirements for participants, and to solicit confirmation of 
participation by companies. 
 
¶3. Details: 
 
DATE: Company representatives must arrive in Juba on Sunday, 
September 28 to commence formal delegation activities on 
Monday, September 29 given the precarious nature of flight 
schedules into Juba.  The delegation will depart Juba on 
Friday, October 3. 
 
DESTINATION:  Juba, Sudan. (Note: We are still exploring the 
possibility of taking one night to visit one other area of 
Southern Sudan, TBD.  Should the delegation travel outside of 
Juba, that transportation would be paid for by the USG; 
however, each delegate would be responsible for paying for 
their own accommodations (see below) End note). 
 
TRAVEL AND VISA ARRANGEMENTS:  Delegates are required to 
secure their own transportation to and from Juba, as well as 
a valid Sudanese visa for their stay. All participants are 
advised to apply for Sudanese visas as early as possible. 
Posts may wish to provide a "visa expedite" letter to 
participants, requesting a professional courtesy from the 
Embassy of the Republic of Sudan in their capital and 
informing them that the delegation seeks to pursue investment 
opportunities in the Sudan. 
 
ATTENDEES:  We request that participating companies limit 
their number of representatives to two (2) individuals at 
most. 
 
ACCOMMODATION:  Delegates will be responsible for paying for 
their own accommodations, which will be secured by ConGen 
Juba at an acceptable local hotel in Juba.  (Note:  ConGen 
Juba will have to pre-pay for all hotel accommodations for 
delegates, thus should a delegate ultimately not participate, 
ConGen Juba will be held responsible for paying for those 
accommodations.  We ask that this point be made clear to 
potential delegates to minimize the possibility that they 
will cancel without notice. End note.) 
 
STRUCTURE AND AGENDA ITEMS:  Approximately 29 companies thus 
far will be sending representatives to explore the business 
climate in Southern Sudan.  Though the precise agenda is 
still unfolding, the trade delegation will spend the week in 
Juba visiting the area and meeting relevant Government of 
Southern Sudan (GOSS) officials. 
 
     Juba, the developing capital of the Southern Sudan 
Region, is a dynamic hub that has been visited by several 
international trade delegations; a large German delegation is 
the most recent.  The Darfur Peace and Accountability Act of 
2006 (DPAA) substantially eased the sanctions restrictions in 
Southern Sudan, and certain activities involving US entities 
no longer require licenses.  Some of the areas to be visited 
in Juba include:  Jebel Kugur area and 19 Acre area 
(potential sites for development); All Saints Cathedral 
Area/Juba Teaching Hospital; Juba Stadium; Juba University; 
Central Business District; Juba Bridge; Juba Port on the 
Nile; Konye Konye Market (and select trade/handicraft 
locations); Grave Site of John Garang de Mabior; and World 
Bank Offices Juba. 
     The Delegation will meet with: State Governors; Members 
of the Southern Sudan Legislative Assembly who have been 
awarded constituency development funds for expenditure in 
this calendar year; Business Communities and Councilors of 
 
STATE 00097539  002 OF 002 
 
 
several states in Southern Sudan; County Commissioners; and 
the Southern Sudan investment Authority. Delegates can expect 
one-on-one time with GOSS President Salva Kiir Mayardit or 
Vice President Riek Machar, and senior members of the Council 
of Ministers, to include the Ministers of Trade, Industry, 
Presidential Affairs, Regional Cooperation, and the Southern 
Sudan Investment Authority. In addition, the delegation will 
meet with Members of the State Parliament on Constituency 
Development Fund Projects and The Wildlife Conservation 
Society on Boma National Park. 
 
GROUND TRANSPORTATION IN JUBA:  Ground Transportation in and 
around Juba will be provided by GOSS buses and Consul General 
Juba vehicles. 
 
MEDICAL COVERAGE AND COSTS:  Delegates are advised to make 
sure that their insurance provider(s) cover medical support 
flights.  Medevac to Khartoum costs approximately $1,400 on a 
commercial carrier.  The local clinic in Juba estimates the 
cost of an emergency medical evacuation to Nairobi as 
approximately $16,000. The local Juba clinic charges $150 per 
visit for medical evaluations. 
 
IMPORTANT NOTE ABOUT U.S. DOLLARS IN JUBA: U.S. dollars 
printed in 2003 or after are accepted in Juba and elsewhere 
in Southern Sudan.  Note that dollars printed before that 
year might not be accepted by all vendors due to 
counterfeiting concerns. 
 
¶4. COST BREAKDOWN TO PARTICIPANTS: 
 
     Hotel accommodation: South Sudan Hotel, $110/night, 
including breakfast, wireless internet connection, DSTV, and 
air-conditioning. 5 nights at the South Sudan hotel will be 
approximately $550 USD.  (Note: Should the delegation travel 
to Malakal as noted above, accommodations in Malakal are 
$120/night. End note.) 
     Transportation to Juba: Variable per individual 
     Food and Miscellaneous: Estimated at $75 - $100/day, 
though note that some events will already include meals 
 
¶5. ACTION REQUEST ADDIS ABABA, KAMPALA, NAIROBI:  The 
Department requests posts to secure the final confirmation of 
participation for the companies outlined below, along with 
the name of the participant. In addition, posts are requested 
to inquire with local American Chambers of Commerce, other 
American business association channels, as well as 
participating companies about the possibility of sponsoring a 
representational event at the Consulate General Compound in 
Juba during the trade delegation in an effort to defray costs 
associated with the delegation.  Specifically, U.S. 
sponsorship of an event at Juba,s conference venue in the 
amount of $2500 would provide an excellent point of entry for 
U.S. business interests to the greater Southern Sudan 
business community. Posts are requested to respond by OOB 
Eastern Standard Time on Monday, September 15 at the absolute 
latest to AF/SPG as noted below.  At present, our list of 
companies to be solidly confirmed by posts are: 
 
ADDIS ABABA: Infosys, PLC; Transtrade Ethiopia; Prosper 
International PLC; Boston Medical;Muya Ethiopia PlC; A. A. 
Bromhead & Co; Ernst & Young, LLP;  Tekur Anbesa Trading PLC; 
Teshome Babre-Mariam Bokan; WARYT Mulutila International, 
PLC. 
NAIROBI: Sara Lee; Eveready East Africa. 
KAMPALA: Motorola, Inc; FOTOGENIX Ltd; Mednet Healthcare (U) 
Ltd; World-Wide Sires Inc; Computer Frontiers International; 
Fedex; Mantrac; Service Computer Industry; UNGA (U) Ltd; 
American Procurement Co.; HERTZ; World-Wide Movers; Century 
Bottling Co. 
USA ENGAGE: Boeing. 
INDEPENDENT: Dolarian Capital Inc. 
 
¶6. Field-based points of contact for this initiative are: 
Embassy Khartoum Economic Chief John W. Struble 
(StrubleJW@state.gov) and Consulate General Juba Political 
Officer Erin Y. Tariot (ETariot@usaid.gov, 
erin.congen.juba@gmail.com). Washington based points of 
contact are: A/F SPG Desk Officers Pamela Fierst 
(fierstpd@state.gov) and Jimmy Clarke (clarkeoa@state.gov). 
RICE