08STATE101873
VOTING INSTRUCTIONS: MINURCAT RENEWAL
Wed Sep 24 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO0051
OO RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHC #1873/01 2680201
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 240154Z SEP 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 3184
INFO DARFUR COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHGI/AMEMBASSY BANGUI IMMEDIATE 1128
RUEHNJ/AMEMBASSY NDJAMENA IMMEDIATE 3893UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 STATE 101873 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPKO PREF PREL UNSC CD CT SU
SUBJECT: VOTING INSTRUCTIONS: MINURCAT RENEWAL 
 
 ¶1.  (SBU) Action Request:  USUN is instructed to vote in 
favor of and to co-sponsor the Security Council Resolution 
contained in paragraph 2 below authorizing the extension 
of the United Nations Mission in the Central African 
Republic and Chad (MINURCAT).  USUN should seek additional 
guidance if substantive changes are made to the resolution 
prior to the vote.  USUN is authorized to deliver the 
explanation of vote contained in paragraph 3 below if 
appropriate.  In the event the resolution is adopted as a 
Presidential text without explanation of vote from any 
other country, USUN should provide the points in paragraph 
3 to the press immediately following adoption of the 
resolution.  End Action Request. 
 
¶2.  (U) Begin text of draft resolution: 
 
The Security Council, 
 
Recalling its resolutions and the statements of its 
president concerning Chad, the Central African Republic 
and the subregion, including resolution 1778 (2007) and 
its resolutions 1769 (2007) and 1828 (2008), 
 
Reaffirming its commitment to the sovereignty, unity, 
territorial integrity and political independence of Chad 
and the Central African Republic, and to the cause of 
peace in the region, 
 
Reiterating its concern at the humanitarian and security 
repercussions in eastern Chad and the northeastern Central 
African Republic of the ongoing violence in Darfur, 
 
Deeply concerned at the activities of armed groups and 
other attacks in eastern Chad, the north-eastern Central 
African Republic and western Sudan which threaten the 
security of the civilian population, the conduct of 
humanitarian operations in those areas and the stability 
of those countries, and which result in serious violations 
of human rights and international humanitarian law, 
 
Stressing that a proper settlement of the Darfur issue and 
an improvement of relations between Sudan, Chad and the 
Central African Republic will contribute to long term 
peace and stability in the region, 
 
Reiterating its full support for the efforts of the 
Secretary-General and of the African Union, through their 
joint Chief Mediator Mr Djibril Yipene Bassole, to revive 
the peace process begun by the Darfur Peace Agreement, 
consolidate the ceasefire and reinforce the peacekeeping 
presence in Darfur, 
 
Reaffirming that any attempt at destabilization through 
violent means or seizing power by force is unacceptable, 
 
Reaffirming its resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) on 
women, peace and security, 1502 (2003) on the protection 
of humanitarian and United Nations personnel, and 1674 
(2006) on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, 
 
Reaffirming its resolution 1612 (2005) on children in 
armed conflict, taking note of the report of the 
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict in Chad 
S/2008/532) and the recommendations therein, and 
recalling the conclusions regarding Chad adopted by its 
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict 
S/AC.51/2007/16), 
 
Recognizing that the Governments of Chad and the Central 
African Republic bear primary responsibility for ensuring 
the security of civilians in their territories, 
 
        Bearing in mind the Convention relating to the 
Status of refugees of 28 July 1951 and its additional 
protocol of 16 December 1966, along with the 1969 
Convention of the Organization of African Unity governing 
the specific aspects of refugee problems in Africa, 
 
        Emphasizing the need to respect international 
refugee law, preserve the civilian and humanitarian nature 
of the refugee camps and internally displaced persons 
sites and prevent any recruitment of individuals, 
including children, which might be carried out in or 
around the camps by armed groups, 
 
STATE 00101873  002 OF 003 
 
 
 
        Welcoming the deployment by the European Union of 
its operation in eastern Chad and Central African Republic 
(EUFOR Chad/CAR), noting that the EU declared the initial 
operational capacity of the operation on 15 March 2008, 
and recalling that according to resolution 1778 the 
mandate of EUFOR Chad/CAR therefore runs until 15 March 
2009, 
 
        Welcoming the selection and training by MINURCAT 
of the first group of police and gendarmerie officers of 
the Detachement Integre de Securite (DIS, previously 
referred to as Police Tchadienne pour la Protection 
Humanitaire), and stressing the need to expedite the 
deployment of the DIS, 
 
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General 
S/2008/601) of 12 September 2008 and its recommendations 
on the arrangements for following up EUFOR Chad/CAR at the 
end of its mandate, 
 
Determining that the situation in the region of the border 
between the Sudan, Chad and the Central African Republic 
constitutes a threat to international peace and security, 
 
¶1. Decides to extend until 15 March 2009 the mandate of 
the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic 
and Chad (MINURCAT), as set out in resolution 1778; 
 
¶2. Calls on the Secretary-General to complete MINURCAT's 
deployment as soon as possible, and the Government of 
Chad, with the support of MINURCAT according to its 
mandate, to carry out the full deployment of the DIS 
expeditiously; 
 
        ¶3. Invites donors to continue to contribute to the 
MINURCAT trust fund, established to support the DIS; 
 
        ¶4. Expresses its intention to extend beyond the 
date referred to in paragraph 1  the multidimensional 
presence established in Chad and the Central African 
Republic to help create the security conditions conducive 
to a voluntary, secure and sustainable return of refugees 
and displaced persons and, to this end, expresses its 
intention to authorize the deployment of a United Nations 
military component to follow up EUFOR Chad/CAR in both 
Chad and the Central African Republic, taking fully into 
account the recommendations contained within the 
Secretary-General's report referred to in paragraph 6 and 
in consultation with the Governments of these countries, 
 
        ¶5. Requests the Secretary-General, in close 
cooperation with the European Union, to continue planning 
and initiate the force generation and logistical, 
administrative, financial and other necessary arrangements 
with a view to a transfer of authority, including in the 
north-eastern Central African Republic, between EUFOR and 
the UN military component referred to in paragraph 4 on 15 
March 2009, subject to a new decision of the Security 
Council; 
 
        ¶6. Encourages the Governments of Chad and the 
Central African Republic to continue to cooperate with the 
UN and the EU to facilitate the smooth transition from 
EUFOR to the United Nations military component; 
 
        ¶7. Encourages troop contributing countries to 
pledge the necessary force requirements and in particular 
the helicopters, reconnaissance units, engineers, 
logistics and medical facilities; 
 
        ¶8. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a new 
report by 15 November 2008 on the progress towards the 
full deployment of MINURCAT and the DIS and on updating 
the planning and conducting preparations referred to in 
paragraph 4 and 5, including options on the size, 
structure and mandate of the proposed UN military presence 
in the north-eastern Central African Republic to take over 
EUFOR's presence; 
 
        ¶9. Requests him to also continue to report 
regularly, and at least every three months, on the 
security and humanitarian situation, including movements 
of refugees and internally displaced persons, in eastern 
Chad, the north-eastern Central African Republic and the 
region, on progress towards the objective of helping to 
create the security conditions conducive to a voluntary, 
secure and sustainable return of refugees and displaced 
 
STATE 00101873  003 OF 003 
 
 
persons and on the implementation of the mandate of 
MINURCAT; 
 
        ¶10. Expresses its intention to adopt the decision 
referred to in paragraphs 4 and 5 by 15 December 2008; 
 
        ¶11.  Encourages the respective Governments of the 
Sudan, Chad and the Central African Republic to ensure 
that their territories are not used to undermine the 
sovereignty of others and to cooperate actively with a 
view to implementing the Dakar Accord of 13 March 2008 and 
previous agreements, and to cooperate with a view to 
putting an end to the activities of armed groups in the 
region and their attempts to seize power by force, looks 
forward to the implementation of the commitment of Sudan 
and Chad to restore diplomatic ties with a view to fully 
normalizing their relations, and welcomes the role played 
in particular by the regional Contact Group, the 
Governments of Libya and the Republic of Congo as African 
co-mediators, as well as the African Union and the United 
Nations, including through the Special Representative of 
the Secretary-General, head of MINURCAT, in support of the 
Dakar process, 
 
        ¶12.  Demands that armed groups cease violence 
immediately and urges all parties in Chad and the Central 
African Republic, respectively, to respect and implement 
the Sirte agreement of 25 October 2007 and the 
comprehensive peace agreement signed in Libreville on 21 
June 2008, 
 
        ¶13.  Encourages the authorities and political 
stakeholders in Chad and the Central African Republic to 
continue to pursue their efforts of national dialogue, 
with respect for the constitutional frameworks, noting the 
positive efforts by the Government of Gabon to support a 
national dialogue in the Central African Republic, 
emphasizes also the importance of the political agreement 
for the reinforcement of the democratic process signed in 
Ndjamena on 13 August 2007 and encourages the parties to 
proceed with its implementation. 
 
        ¶14.  Decides to remain actively seized of the 
matter. 
 
¶3.  (U) The United States welcomes the unanimous adoption 
of resolution XXXX to extend the mandate of MINURCAT for 
one year.  The vote represents the Council's support and 
respect for UN peacekeepers working to sustain stability 
and ensure the protection of all refugees and internally 
displaced persons within central Africa.  It also 
demonstrates the Council's continuing commitment to the 
full implementation of Resolution 1778 and the achievement 
of peace and security in the region. 
 
(U) The goal of this resolution is to extend the mandate 
of MINURCAT until such time as the Secretariat has 
informed the Council that a UN force is fully prepared to 
replace the existing EUFOR operation.  It is crucial that 
the mission continue in its present form until the Council 
has determined that an adequately equipped and trained 
security force is ready to assume the full 
responsibilities of providing security in the designated 
areas. 
 
(U) We commend the continued progress that has been 
achieved since the adoption of Resolution 1778 last year. 
We welcome the continuing efforts of the Central African 
Republic and Chad to strengthen the rule of law and 
protection of refugees and internally displaced persons 
within their respective borders, as well as their 
demonstrated commitment, to the achievement of the 
objectives of Resolution 1778. 
RICE