08STATE101192
INDICTMENT OF FOUR MALAYSIAN ENTITIES AND THE
Mon Sep 22 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
P 222046Z SEP 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY KUALA LUMPUR PRIORITYUNCLAS STATE 101192 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC PREL PARM IR MY
 
SUBJECT: INDICTMENT OF FOUR MALAYSIAN ENTITIES AND THE 
ADDITION OF NINE COMPANIES AND FIVE INDIVIDUALS TO THE 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ENTITY LIST 
 
¶1.  (U) This is an action request.  Please see paragraph 5. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) BACKGROUND:    On September 17, a federal grand 
jury in Miami, Florida returned a superseding indictment 
charging eight individuals and eight corporations, including 
two individuals and two corporations in Malaysia, in 
connection with their participation in conspiracies to export 
U.S. manufactured commodities to prohibited entities and to 
Iran.  Information on this indictment was passed Septel. 
Additionally, on Wednesday September 17, 2008, the U.S. 
announced the transfer of all the existing parties on the 
Mayrow General Order No. 3 to the Department of Commerce 
Entity List.  This transfer will improve the ability of 
exporters to screen potential recipients of items subject to 
the Export Administration Regulations (EAR).  Also on that 
date, the Department of Commerce announced that a significant 
number of new entities identified through its Mayrow 
investigation will be added to the Entity List.  While some 
of these entities and individuals are located in Iran, a 
number of entities are located in Malaysia.  Overall, 
entities and individuals in 13 locations will be affected. 
Consistent with our nonproliferation cooperation, we seek to 
notify Malaysia about the details of this action, and urge 
Malaysia to share information with us regarding these 
companies/ individuals. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) On September 17, Acting Assistant Secretary 
McNerney notified Charge d,Affaires Ilango Karuppannan at 
the Malaysian Embassy in Washington of Commerce,s actions 
and indicated that we would send a nonpaper with additional 
details, which is provided in para 6.  The conversation was 
positive, and the GOM committed to look into the matter.  The 
Charge requested a copy of the list of companies, which ISN 
passed to the Malaysian Embassy.  (EAP/MTS emailed this list 
to Embassy KL on September 17 and the same list is included 
in the nonpaper below.) 
 
¶4.  (SBU) On June 5, 2006, the Department of Commerce 
published Mayrow General Order No. 3 imposing licensing 
requirements on most exports and reexports of dual-use items 
to named entities.  The entities named in Mayrow General 
Order No. 3 were all affiliated with the Mayrow Trading 
Network (Mayrow) in Dubai, UAE and play a vital role in 
buying, funding, and supplying parts and knowledge to build 
IEDs and other explosive devices for use in Iraq and 
Afghanistan. The General Order was expanded on September 6, 
2006 and June 8, 2007 to cover additional entities affiliated 
with Mayrow Trading Inc., including two Malaysian entities. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) ACTION REQUEST:  Post is requested to approach 
appropriate host government officials to deliver the nonpaper 
in para 6. In doing so, posts should pursue the following 
objectives: 
 
-- Follow-up with Malaysian officials on the publication of 
additional Malaysian entities (companies and individuals) 
affiliated with Mayrow General Trading on the Department of 
Commerce Entity List. 
 
-- Urge Malaysia to share any information it has with us 
regarding these companies/ individuals. 
 
¶6.  (U) Begin U.S. non-paper: 
 
-- On September 17, a federal grand jury in Miami, Florida 
returned an indictment charging eight individuals and eight 
corporations, including two individuals resident in Malaysia 
and two corporations in Malaysia, in connection with their 
participation in conspiracies to export U.S. manufactured 
commodities to prohibited entities and to Iran. 
 
-- In addition, on Wednesday September 17, the U.S. 
Department of Commerce transferred the parties currently on 
General Order 3 (the &Mayrow General Order8) to the Entity 
List. 
 
-- Acting Assistant Secretary of State for International 
Security and Nonproliferation Patricia McNerney informed your 
Charge, in Washington of this action. 
 
-- The Entity List is a public list of end-users that the 
U.S. believes pose a risk of diverting U.S.-origin goods to 
activities detrimental to U.S. foreign or national security 
interests, such as supporting terrorism or engaging in 
WMD-related activities. 
 
-- This list informs the public about the export license 
requirements to export or reexport most items subject to the 
Department of Commerce,s export controls to the listed 
entities and therefore simplifies exporter,s screening of 
potential customers. 
 
-- We previously informed Malaysia in 2007 that Malaysian 
entities, Vast Solution Sdn Bhd and Majid Seif, were added to 
the General Order on June 8, 2007.  They will now be 
transferred to the Entity List. 
 
-- Also on Wednesday September 17, the United States imposed 
strict export licensing requirements on eight additional 
companies and four additional individuals in Malaysia.  As a 
result, a U.S. license is required for the export or 
re-export of any U.S. origin dual-use item to these listed 
persons. 
 
-- We believe these companies and individuals are associated 
with the Mayrow General Trading network and have been engaged 
in acquiring electronic components and devices capable of 
being used to construct Improvised Explosive Devices (IEDs), 
as well as other items for use in proliferation-related 
activities. 
 
-- We are taking these actions because these commodities have 
been, and may continue to be, employed in IEDs or other 
explosive devices used against Coalition Forces in Iraq and 
Afghanistan. 
 
-- U.S.-origin goods diverted to Iran via this network have 
included those controlled by the Commerce Department for 
missile technology, national security and anti-terrorism 
reasons, as well as those controlled under the International 
Traffic in Arms Regulations. 
 
-- This action will affect companies and individuals in 
thirteen countries, not just Malaysia.  We anticipate that 
these new requirements will have little or no bilateral trade 
impact. 
 
-- We encourage you to share any information you have on 
these companies/ individuals with us. 
 
-- We are providing you details on each of these companies 
and individuals for your information. 
 
-- We will provide additional information, as it becomes 
available. We hope that your government will take appropriate 
actions to curtail these proliferation activities. 
 
-- We note that having a comprehensive export control system 
would allow your government to better control these 
activities. 
 
-- Our Congress is considering draft legislation which would 
require that transshipment countries without sufficient 
export controls be placed in the Department of Commerce,s 
Country Group C as a &country of diversion concern8. This 
would mean more restricted high technology trade. 
 
-- We urge Malaysia to quickly enact and fully implement a 
comprehensive export control system.  We are ready to work 
with you and to provide any necessary assistance. 
 
-- The following companies and individuals now appear on the 
revised Entity List: 
 
Entities: 
 
¶1.    Ace Hub System: Address: No. 15, Jalan PJS 11/16, Taman 
Bandar Sunway, 46150 Petaling Jaya, Selangor, Malaysia 
 
¶2.    Analytical Solutions: Address: #GB (Ground Floor), 
Pearl Tower, O.G. Heights, Jalan Awan Cina, 58200, Kuala 
Lampur, Malaysia 
 
¶3.    Antcorp System: Address: 5-02 Wisma Pantai, Jalan Wisma 
Pantai, 12200 Butterworth, Penang, Malaysia 
 
¶4.    East Tech: Malaysia (no address available) 
 
¶5.    Eco Biochem SDN BHD: Address: No. 15, Jalan PJS 11/16, 
Taman Bandar Sunway, 46150 Petaling Jaya, Selangor D.E., 
Malaysia 
 
¶6.    Fetsco Marketing SDN BHD: Address: 97C, Jalan Kenari 
23, Puchong Jaya, Puchong, Selangor, Malaysia; and Suite D23, 
Tkt. 2, Plaze Pekeliling, Jalan Tun Razak, Kuala Lumpur, 
Wilayah Persekkutuan, Malaysia 
 
¶7.    Nexus Empire, a.k.a., Vast Solution: Address: 27-06, 
Amcorp Bldg, Jalan Persiaran Barat, Petaling Jaya, Selangor, 
Malaysia 
 
¶8.    Vast Solution Sdn Bhd: Address: 27-06 Amcorp Building, 
Jalan 18, Persiaran Barat, 46050 Petaling Jaya, Selangor, 
Malaysia 
 
¶9.    VTE Industrial Automation SDN BHD:  Address: 97C, Jalan 
Kenari 23, Puchong Jaya, Puchong, Selangor, Malaysia 
 
Individuals 
 
¶1.    Ahmed Rahzad, a.k.a. Saeb Karim:  Address: 27-06 Amcorp 
Building, Jalan 18, Persiaran Barat, Petaling Jaya, 46050 
Selangor, Malaysia 
 
Ahmed Rahzad may be associated with Vast Solutions in 
Malaysia. 
 
¶2.    Ann Teck Tong: Address: 97C, Jalan Kenari 23, Puchong 
Jaya, Puchong, Selangor, Malaysia; and Suite D23, Tkt. 2, 
Plaza Pekeliling, Jalan Tun Razak, Kuala  Lumpur, Wilayah, 
Persekkutuan, Malaysia 
 
Ann Teck Tong serves on the board of directors for Fetsco 
Marketing in Malaysia. 
 
¶3.    Brian Kaam, a.k.a., Keem Chee Mun: Address: No. 15, 
Jalan PJS 11/16, Taman Bandar Sunway, 46150 Petaling Jaya, 
Selangor, Malaysia 
 
Brian Kaam, a.k.a., Mr. Kaam Chee Mun, works for Ace Hub 
System SDN BHD and Eco Biochem SDN BHD in Malaysia. 
 
¶4.    Majid Seif, a.k.a., Mark Ong and Matti Chong:  Address: 
27-06 Amcorp Building, Jalan 18, Persiaran Barat 46050 
Petaling Jaya, Selangor, Malaysia 
 
Seif was added to EAR General Order Number 3 on June 8, 2007. 
 
¶5.    Mohd Ansari:  Address: #GB (Ground Floor), Pearl Tower, 
O.G. Heights, Jalan Awan Cina, 58200, Kuala Lampur, Malaysia 
 
Mohd Ansari has been identified as working for Antcorp System 
in Malaysia. 
 
-------------------------- 
REPORTING DEADLINE AND POC 
-------------------------- 
¶6.  (U) Post is requested to report any substantive responses 
within seven (7) days of receipt of this cable.  Lisa Meyers 
(ISN/CPI, 202-736-7939 MeyersLA@state.sgov.gov) and Daniel 
Bischof (EAP/MTS, 202-647-4932 bischofdr@state.gov) are the 
Department's POCs for this activity. 
RICE 
 
 
NNNN 
 



End Cable Text