08TELAVIV1244
RESULTS OF BLUE LANTERN LEVEL 3 PRE-LICENSE CHECK
Thu Jun 12 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0010
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #1244/01 1641232
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 121232Z JUN 08
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7078
INFO RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RUCNFB/FBI WASHDC
RHMFIUU/HQ BICE INTEL WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS TEL AVIV 001244 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR PM/DTCC - BLUE LANTERN COORDINATOR (STITZEL) 
STATE NEA/IPA (PECCIA) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC KOMC IS
SUBJECT: RESULTS OF BLUE LANTERN LEVEL 3 PRE-LICENSE CHECK 
ON APPLICATION 050093749 
 
REF: STATE 36935 
 
¶1. (SBU) Per reftel instructions, emboffs visited Bental in 
the Golan on May 22 and met with CEO Shmuel Mandel, Projects 
Manager Benny Heimann, and Marketing and Sales Manager Moshe 
Poolat.  Israeli MOD Security Directorate (DSDE/MALMAB) 
representative Kobi Fogler also attended the meeting. 
Mandel, Heimann and Poolat provided emboffs the following 
information in response to their questions: 
 
A) Bona Fides:  Bental was established in 1983 and is 
controlled in part by TAT Technologies (an Israeli public 
company traded on the NASDAQ), and in part by Kibbutz Merom, 
where it is located.  Bental employs 100-150 workers and 
manufactures and repairs motors for use in airplanes and 
vehicles, as well as in larger machines, such as CT scanners 
and industrial printers.  CEO Shmuel Mandel explained that 
Bental supplies both private corporations as well as Israel's 
aviation and defense industries (e.g., Elbit, IAI, Rafael). 
Mandel listed the Israel Ministry of Defense, IAI, and 
Kinetics (involved in the Mine Resistant Armored Truck 
(MRAT)) program as some of their larger customers. 
 
B) Technology Applications:  Mandel said most of their 
products are not/not derived from sensitive technologies.  He 
indicated that the brush DC motor with tachometer (the 
subject of the proposed, licensed transaction) is used 
"exclusively" in replacing and updating broken tachometers on 
the turret control motors of Israeli Merkava tanks.  These 
motor/tachometer units are considered to be owned by the 
Israel MOD and are stored separately from other motor parts. 
According to Mandel, the requested 47 motor/tachometer units 
should be sufficient to complete repairs as requested by the 
MOD over the course of 12-18 months, depending on demand. 
Bental stores the motors with the integrated tachometers. 
When the holdings get down to around 10 pieces, Bental will 
submit a new order for tachometers. 
 
C) Company's On-Site Security and Understanding of USML 
Restrictions:  Mandel indicated that those employees who 
handle USML controlled technologies, such as the 
motor/tachometer units, have all received security clearances 
to the confidential level.  The office is equipped with safes 
and secure areas for storage of information about the 
technologies, and the units themselves are stickered to 
indicate that they are USML-controlled.  Mandel showed 
emboffs a storage room with a locked door and separate 
storage for USML items.  Mandel explained that old and broken 
tachometers are securely disposed of per USG requirements. 
He confirmed that he and his staff are familiar with USML 
requirements and regulations, and indicated that his company 
shares U.S. interests in protecting secure technologies. 
 
D) Role of Danaher Motion/Servotronix:  Mandel explained that 
Servotronix is the Israeli subsidiary of Danaher Corporation 
in the U.S. It is Servotronix, Mandel explained, which 
completes all of the clearance forms and other paperwork for 
the purchase of USML items, which are then collected directly 
by Bental from the airport upon arrival. 
 
E) Documentation:  Mandel showed emboffs the following 
documents:  an end-user certificate from Kollmorgen to Bental 
dated May 30, 2007; and an end-used statement from the 
Israeli Ministry of Defense, signed by Amos Gilad and dated 
December 27, 2007.  Mandel also showed emboff a purchase 
order from Bental to signed by Yerach Sapojnikov and dated 
January 2, 2008.  All documents collected by emboff have been 
sent by FAX to PM/DDTC at 202-261-8198. 
 
¶2. (SBU) On June 11, emboffs visited Danaher Motion's 
officers in Petach Tikva and met with Executive Vice 
President Aviran Weisler, Application and Sales Engineer Gadi 
Hon, and Alon, a sale administrator responsible for sales to 
Bental.  MALMAB/DSDE did not have a representative present. 
Weisler indicated that he had spoken with Bental CEO Shmuel 
Mandel prior to the meeting.  Weisler, Hon and Alon provided 
emboffs the following information in response to their 
questions: 
 
A) Bona Fides:  Weisler said that Danaher Corporation in the 
U.S. has two subsidiaries in Israel:  Danaher Motion (also 
known as Servotech, Ltd.) and Kollmorgen Servotronix Ltd. 
(aka Servotronix, Ltd.).  Danaher Corporation in the U.S. is 
a USD 13 billion dollar company listed on the U.S. stock 
 
market.  Established in 1987 initially as an engineering 
company, Danaher Motion is a small part of Danaher's 
aerospace and military division, and is valued at USD 80 
million.  (Danaher's other division is the Pacific division, 
which includes Kollmorgen, and is valued at USD 600 million.) 
 Danaher Motion's principals are Dr. Ilan Cohen (manager), 
Eyal Silka and Aviram Weisler (executive vice presidents), 
Norit Palev, and Roi Ziv (operations).  Danaher Motion does 
not produce weapons systems.  Instead, it produces motors and 
drives -- some of which have dual uses.  Danaher Motion's 
suppliers in the U.S. include Inland Motors in Radford, 
Virginia and Thompson.  (Weisler noted that Kollmorgan 
Corporation -- which is listed as a subsidiary of Danaher 
Corporation, the supplier per reftel, is also known as Inland 
Motors.)  Danaher Motion is selling directly to Bental. 
Customers include companies like Applied Materials, Strong 
ADT, Advanced Dicing Technologies, HP Indigo and HP Cytex. 
Danaher's aerospace and military division (of which Danaher 
Motion is a part) does business with Israeli defense 
contractors Rafael, Elbit and IMI, and is starting to work 
with Elta.  In June 2000, Danaher acquired Kollmorgen.  In 
response to emboff's question as to why Servotronix Ltd. is 
listed as the intermediate consignee when the company is 
really Danaher Motion, Weisler replied that the person filing 
the application may have been confused as Kollmorgen 
Servotronix, Ltd. -- Danaher Motion's sister company -- is 
located in the same building as Danaher Motion.  Weisler 
stressed that Kollmorgen Servotronix Ltd. is not/not involved 
in the transaction.  Danaher Motion is located entirely in 
Israel.  It has no overseas customers, and it does not serve 
as a broker. 
 
B) Technology Applications:  In response to emboff's 
questions, Hon said that the tachometers will be used to 
provide analog feedback.  They will be integrated into a 
motor that Bental is already making.  They will then provide 
feedback with respect to yaw and pitch.  Bental's motors with 
the tachometers integrated into them will be set aside solely 
for the Israeli MOD's use.  According to Hon, it is likely 
that they will be kept in Bental's warehouse as spare parts 
for future use. 
 
C) Company's On-Site Security and Understanding of USML 
Restrictions:  Weisler said that each employee in Danaher 
Motion undergoes training on the ITAR and their obligations 
towards controlled items, including dual-use items.  He said 
that the training is coordinated by a person (Caroline; no 
further information) at Inland Motors, who is also available 
to answer any questions Danaher Motion employees have on the 
subject.  Weisler said that Caroline provides Alon guidance, 
as needed, and advised Danaher Motion to establish a 
separate, secure location for the storage of controlled 
items, should storage be required.  Weisler said that the 
Israeli MOD's Security Directorate (MALMAB/DSDE) had recently 
checked Danaher Motion's security policies and procedures and 
given them "high marks."  Regarding the transaction in 
question, Weisler said that only two people from Danaher 
Motion will handle the tachometers:  Alon and the warehouse 
manager.  Weisler said that Danaher Motion has a secure 
lock-box for controlled items, and that all items Danaher 
Motion receives, uses and sends out are tracked in a computer 
system. 
 
D) Roles of Bental and Servotronix:  In response to emboff's 
question about the role of Danaher Motion in the transaction, 
Weisler answered by describing a process whereby Danaher 
Motion has inserted itself into the transaction process that 
was previously between Bental and its U.S. suppliers. 
Weisler explained that Danaher Motion is growing and seeking 
to acquire Bental.  Regarding the transaction in question, 
Weisler said that Danaher Motion received the purchase order 
from Bental at the start.  (He added that all purchase orders 
received by Danaher Motion need to note the end-use of the 
item in question, even if the item is not sensitive.) 
Weisler continued:  Danaher Motion will receive the 
controlled items, and then turn them over immediately to 
Bental.  (He noted that Danaher Motion has a secure warehouse 
where controlled items can be kept, but stressed that Bental 
urgently desires the tachometers, and so will take them from 
Danaher Motion immediately.) 
 
E) Documentation:  When asked about the documentation package 
listed as one of the controlled items in reftel, Alon replied 
that this is a standard package that is shipped with items 
 
like the tachometers, and includes the invoice and export 
license.  At emboff's request, Hon supplied emboff with a 
copy of the March 10, 2008 cover letter from Danaher Motion 
explaining the proposed transaction.  Alon showed emboff the 
purchase order DS800052 signed by Efrat Yefet -- also an 
administrative assistant -- and introduced emboff to Yefet. 
Alon also showed emboff the end-user statement signed by 
Aviran Weisler and Eyal Silka.  When asked why there is a 
discrepancy between the license value (per reftel) of USD 
44,240 and the values listed in the other documents (e.g., 
USD 43,240 and USD 57,669), Weisler explained that this is 
because Danaher Motion requires a transaction fee.  All 
documents collected by emboff have been sent by FAX to 
PM/DDTC at 202-261-8198. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Based on the above information, emboffs believe that 
the proposed transaction in question is legitimate and that 
Bental and Danaher Motion are legitimate companies fully 
aware of their obligations towards USML items. 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
JONES