08UNVIEVIENNA666
UNODC MAJOR DONORS MEETING TACKLES UNGASS REVIEW, PIRACY
Mon Dec 22 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UNVIE
VZCZCXYZ0017
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHUNV #0666/01 3571331
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 221331Z DEC 08
FM USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8864
INFO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 1427UNCLAS UNVIE VIENNA 000666 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR KCRM UN PGOV AORC AF SW SZ GM FR CA IN IT
NO, PK, TU, UK, EWWT, MARSEC 
 
SUBJECT:  UNODC MAJOR DONORS MEETING TACKLES UNGASS REVIEW, PIRACY 
AND FUTURE FUNDING CHALLENGES 
 
REF:  A. UNVIE 00579 B.UNVIE 000659 
-------- 
SUMMARY: 
-------- 
¶1.  (SBU)INL A/S David T. Johnson led the USDEL to the UN Office on 
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) Major Donors meeting, December 5. 
Discussion with the other 20 donor countries included (1) a proposal 
for UNODC action to combat piracy off the coast of Somalia, (2) the 
funding situation of UNODC, and (3) a review of progress achieved 
since the 1998 UN General Assembly Special Session on Narcotic Drugs 
(UNGASS).  Also discussed were the status of the Independent 
Evaluation Unit (IEU) and the UNODC's partnership with INTERPOL to 
establish an anti-corruption training academy.  A/S Johnson met with 
UNODC Executive Director Antonio Maria Costa, who committed to 
ensuring the U.S. is recognized for contributions to UNODC projects 
in Central Asia.  At a dinner hosted by UNVIE Ambassador Greg 
Schulte, A/S Johnson discussed the counternarcotics situation in 
Afghanistan and underscored U.S. opposition to use of the phrase 
"harm reduction" in UNGASS review documents.  END SUMMARY. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
Major Donors: The "Watch Dog" of UNODC 
-------------------------------------- 
¶2.  (SBU)The Major Donor countries reinstituted the practice of 
holding a "closed" session, without UNODC staff, to coordinate 
messages and to discuss the future role of the Major Donors group. 
A/S Johnson used the opportunity to emphasize the importance of 
continuing Major Donor coordination.  He emphasized the need to 
schedule meetings close to other UN events, in order to ensure 
participation from capitals.  Other donors, notably Sweden and 
Norway, questioned the ability of UNODC to operate without 
sufficient and predictable (read, increased) General Purpose Funds 
(GPF, i.e., funds without earmarks), which finance administrative 
and backstopping support for implementation of UNODC technical 
assistance projects.  Germany and USDEL expressed skepticism, 
highlighting the practical difficulties in raising contributions to 
the GPF.  A/S Johnson noted that government organizations, including 
his own, are often funded by project earmarks and must use project 
support costs to finance their operations.  UNODC charges 13 percent 
in overhead to each project contribution (with the exception of some 
donors, notably the European Commission, which has secured an 
UN-wide rate of seven percent.)  These funds must be better utilized 
in order to supplement the GPF.  The UK closed the session by 
emphasizing the potential leverage that Major Donors could have in 
guiding UNODC, calling the group a "watch dog" of sorts.  The UK 
will refine its non-paper on the future of Major Donors and also 
draft a work program for the 2009 calendar year to be shared with 
other donors. 
 
------------------------- 
Funding, Funding, Funding 
------------------------- 
¶3.  (SBU)During the Major Donors session, UNODC staff at all levels, 
including Executive Director Costa, painted a dire picture of 
UNODC's funding situation.  There is a lack of GPF, while Special 
Purpose Funds (SPF, i.e., earmarked contributions) continued on an 
upward trajectory.  In Costa's view, UNODC would soon either need to 
start rejecting SPF or need to secure an increase in the UN Regular 
Budget, to provide adequate oversight of technical assistance 
activities.  UNODC specifically pointed to the 1.4 million dollar 
shortfall of the GPF for its anti-crime programs and noted that 
unless the imbalance was corrected the organization would be forced 
to cover the shortfall with the GPF intended for drug control 
programs.  UNODC also sought to provide transparency to the use of 
its GPF, by outlining the areas for which these funds were used, 
including internal evaluation, research and policy analysis, 
salaries of the Field Office Representatives and its online 
financial database (ProFI).  UNODC submitted a request for an 
additional 16 posts and 2.2 million dollars from the UN Regular 
Budget for the biennium 2010-2011, in order to cover its staffing 
and financial needs. 
 
¶4.  (SBU)Donors emphasized that other avenues could be found to 
relieve the GPF problems.  Sweden and France pointed to the 
"thematic programs" under development by UNODC, as a way to allow 
donors to "soft earmark" funding.  UNODC Director for the Division 
of Operations, Francis Maertens, identified future regional and 
thematic programs to overcome "projectitis" and focus strategic 
interventions in the areas of corruption, money laundering, human 
trafficking, migrant smuggling, trafficking of firearms, criminal 
justice reform, as well as health and human development.  Finland, 
supported by the United States, sounded an alarm over the title of 
the thematic program on "health and human development," in which the 
themes of drug demand reduction and HIV/AIDS would be examined.  The 
title obscured the role of UNODC and its mandate to tackle these 
issues.  A/S Johnson further reiterated the U.S. view that earmarked 
contributions should not be crowded out in favor of non-earmarked or 
loosely earmarked funds.  Rather, the current financial situation 
should drive UNODC, its managers and its donors to take a more 
 
entrepreneurial approach, with overhead costs tied to specific 
projects.  Germany reiterated U.S. concerns, noting that its 
government would not be increasing its contribution to the GPF in 
the immediate term.  Italy confirmed that it had decreased its 
annual GPF contribution by more than 1 million dollars.  Only the 
Netherlands announced an impending new contribution to the GPF. 
Questions also remained regarding the interplay between regional and 
thematic programs.  UNODC intends to follow up with donors. 
 
----------------------------------- 
UNGASS Review: Compromise Necessary 
----------------------------------- 
¶5.  (SBU)During a UK-hosted lunch, Sandeep Chawla, Director for the 
Division of Policy Analysis, relayed the concerns held by the 
chairman of the UN Commission on Narcotic Drugs (CND)  - that states 
had impeded progress on the negotiation of the documents (the Annex 
and Political Declaration) to be adopted at the high-level CND in 
March 2009.  Specifically, he pointed to delegates' insistence on 
re-opening conclusions agreed to by the UNGASS experts groups 
(Reftel A) and the insistence by some delegations (notably the EU) 
on inserting the phrase "harm reduction" into the texts.  Costa 
further warned of an "empty" document if progress could not be made. 
 
 
¶6.  (SBU)Switzerland, Germany and France followed UNODC's statements 
by giving an optimistic assessment and stressing that the UNGASS 
review presented an opportunity to highlight "harm reduction" and 
human rights in the outcome documents.  A/S Johnson made clear the 
U.S. strongly opposed mentioning "harm reduction" in the text of the 
UNGASS documents.  He further stressed that EU introduction of "harm 
reduction" policies - concepts not agreed to at the expert groups - 
after the November 4 deadline set by the CND Chairperson for the 
submission of new ideas into the draft Annex document, bordered on 
bad faith.  All other Member States abided by this deadline. 
Furthermore, A/S Johnson warned EU Member States not to assume that 
the new U.S. administration would reverse course on "harm reduction" 
in the run up to the March 2009 CND.  He said the EU should end 
their attempts to slow roll the negotiations.  When asked, UNODC 
indicated that the Namibian Ambassador would collate comments on the 
Political Declaration by December 15 and circulate a draft by early 
January.  EU Member States present expressed displeasure and 
insisted that the draft Political Declaration must be issued by late 
December. 
 
¶7.  (SBU)On the margins of the Major Donors meeting, the UK 
approached USDEL to note increasing tension on the issue of "harm 
reduction" and to offer to meet with UNVIE to discuss further. 
Switzerland also approached USDEL, to question the purported U.S. 
lack of support for demand reduction.  A/S Johnson reiterated that 
the U.S. very much supports demand reduction.  He explained that we 
object to the use of the term "harm reduction," because it 
encompasses objectionable policies such as heroin maintenance and 
drug injection rooms. 
 
------------------------------- 
UNODC Proposal to Combat Piracy 
------------------------------- 
¶8.  (SBU)The UNODC formally released to Major Donors its draft 
proposal to combat piracy off of the Somali Coast by facilitating 
arrests at sea by teams of "ship-riders" from nearby littoral 
states, the legal transfer of suspects, and their investigation and 
prosecution.  UNODC also shared the proposal with the Permanent 
Missions of Egypt, Kenya and Yemen, who are included as possible 
recipients of assistance.  The proposal could not be passed to 
Tanzania because Tanzania does not have permanent representation in 
Vienna.  UNODC staff asserted they could have "boots on the ground" 
in two weeks and tangible progress in six weeks thereafter.  Major 
Donors, including the United States, expressed general support for 
the UNODC initiative but there were no immediate funding 
commitments.  The UNODC proposed program would provide countries in 
the region with the tools necessary to utilize the UN Convention 
against Transnational Organized Crime to prosecute the pirates, who 
constitute an organized crime group as defined by the treaty (Reftel 
B). 
 
------------------------------- 
The Independent Evaluation Unit 
and the Anti-Corruption Academy 
------------------------------- 
¶9.  (SBU)A representative of the Independent Evaluation Unit (IEU) 
provided Major Donors with an overview of the IEU's accomplishments 
in 2008.  This included a thematic evaluation of UNODC's 
terrorism-related work and its program in Afghanistan.  Voluntary 
contributions to the IEU fell in 2008 to half their 2007 levels. 
These financial constraints caused the IEU to delay staff recruiting 
and to re-evaluate their 2009 work plan. (Note: UNODC requested UN 
Regular Budget funding for IEU staff positions for the biennium 
2010-2011. End Note.)  This tentative work plan includes an 
evaluation of UNODC's anti-corruption activities, its Colombia 
 
illicit crop monitoring survey and an annual evaluation report. 
Donors agreed that evaluations play a vital role in a well 
functioning organization.  Japan urged that the IEU report directly 
to the Executive Director, to avoid exertion of undue influence by 
branches of the organization. 
 
¶10.  (SBU)UNODC provided a brief overview of its recent agreement 
with INTERPOL and the Austrian Government to establish the 
International Anti-Corruption Academy.  This body would be the first 
institution of higher learning dedicated to the fight against 
corruption within the framework of the UN Convention against 
Corruption.  UNODC said the curriculum will be administered by full 
time staff, targeting law enforcement, judicial employees, the 
private sector and non-governmental organizations.  UNODC is 
currently approaching donors for the half million dollars in 
required start-up costs. 
 
------------------------------------- 
Meeting with Executive Director Costa 
------------------------------------- 
¶11.  (SBU)A/S Johnson and UNVIE Ambassador Schulte met with UNODC 
Executive Director Antonio Costa to compare notes in advance of the 
Major Donors meeting.  A/S Johnson showcased the 2008 U.S. 
contribution to UNODC, which grew to 26 million dollars.  In the 
U.S. view, this voluntary contribution, which includes a little over 
USD 1 million to the GPF, represented a serious commitment to the 
organization.  A/S Johnson stressed the importance of acknowledging 
donors for their contributions, citing a trend by UNODC's operations 
in Central Asia to fail to recognize U.S. funding support.  UNVIE 
Ambassador Schulte added that UNODC must also provide good 
visibility to its projects with U.S. embassies in the region due to 
the increasingly decentralized nature of bilateral assistance 
efforts.   Costa apologized if the U.S. did not receive the 
recognition it deserved, noting that the EU was particularly 
sensitive to the same issue; he said that he would address this. 
 
¶12.  (SBU)Costa and his staff asked A/S Johnson and Ambassador 
Schulte for their impressions on whether the new administration 
would reverse previous U.S. opposition to "harm reduction."  A/S 
Johnson reiterated the U.S. concern with regard to the EU push for 
the term's insertion in the UNGASS documents.  He further surmised 
that in the short-term no one should expect the U.S. to support the 
so-called harm reduction approach, given the many practices the 
phrase subsumes.  Costa opined that it would be good news if the 
U.S. does not make a fundamental policy shift on drug control. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Diverse Group Discusses Afghanistan 
 and UNGASS at UNVIE-hosted Dinner 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶13.  (SBU)UNVIE Ambassador Schulte hosted a dinner on December 4 in 
honor of A/S Johnson, inviting a diverse array of participants: 
UNODC, Canada, Germany, India, Italy, Norway, Pakistan, Sweden, 
Turkey and the United Kingdom.  The attendees undertook a roundtable 
discussion on their views with regard to the narcotics situation in 
Afghanistan.  A/S Johnson stressed the importance of coupling 
incentives and disincentives as an effective means to sustain the 
reductions in opium poppy cultivation.  To this end, Ambassador 
Schulte cited UNODC reporting, which noted that fear of eradication 
influenced farmers' decision-making.  With regard to NATO 
involvement in counternarcotics efforts in Afghanistan, the German 
representative emphatically stated that the direct involvement of 
German troops was "not possible."  A/S Johnson indicated that NATO 
engagement did not have to entail use of force but could involve 
supporting public information efforts or the disbursement of 
benefits under the Good Performers Initiative (GPI).  To this end, 
he encouraged those governments at the table to provide funding to 
the GPI.  Sweden made a commitment to take this message back to its 
capital. 
 
¶14.  (SBU)With regard to the UNGASS review process, A/S Johnson 
raised the disagreement between some "close allies" and partners 
over the phrase "harm reduction."  He expressed concern that 
relationships with the negotiating climate could be negatively 
affected at the political level if Member States did not find a 
mutually agreeable way forward.  Canada's Charge, Terry Wood, agreed 
that "harm reduction" posed a problem for his country and pointed to 
the compromise language agreed to in the 2008 UN General Assembly 
Resolution on drugs as a possible way forward.  The UK Ambassador 
Simon Smith noted that, although a solution is possible, the UK "did 
not want to move backwards."  Germany and Norway concurred with the 
UK statement.  Sweden's Ambassador Lundburg pointed to the fact that 
Sweden also does not support "harm reduction" but has managed to 
"deal" with it in the EU context.  Ambassador Lundburg further 
mentioned that there are some EU and Latin American countries that 
would like to modify the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs 
and emphasized that Sweden certainly does not want to "open up that 
Pandora's box." 
 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
¶15.  (SBU)The Major Donors meeting proved to be an important venue 
for raising the political stakes with regard to the negotiation of 
the documents to be adopted at the high-level session of the CND in 
¶2009.  A/S Johnson used the occasion to follow up on his discussions 
with the UK in Washington and the European Commission in Brussels at 
the recent U.S.-EU Drugs Troika.  Some EU delegates, notably the UK, 
seem to be prepared to begin discussions, if at a suitably high 
level, on compromise language to replace the phrase "harm 
reduction."  Germany appears more reluctant to do so.  Other 
countries, notably Canada, Pakistan and Namibia, provided strong 
support for the United States on this issue.  USDEL heard that in a 
private meeting with Costa, the Ambassador from Namibia went so far 
as to call it an "EU problem", rather than a "US problem," since 
many countries disagreed with the EU position. 
 
¶16.  (SBU)Finally, from the interventions of other donor countries, 
it does not appear that UNODC's funding structure will undergo any 
fundamental shifts in the near term.  The meeting highlighted 
UNODC's increasing frustration with relying heavily on voluntary 
contributions and with what they perceive as donor-driven priorities 
for the organization.  Nonetheless, many countries, including the 
United States, remained skeptical about the feasibility of providing 
a sizeable increase in non-earmarked contributions.  The thematic 
and regional programs afford perhaps the best approach to meet 
UNODC's desire for predictable funding.  UNVIE will work closely 
with the Department to provide feedback to UNODC on these programs 
as they are developed. 
 
¶17.  (SBU)Assistant Secretary Johnson has cleared on this cable. 
 
PYATT