09BEIRUT1250
MONITORING OF 2009 G/TIP FUND GRANTED TO
Wed Nov 25 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Beirut
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHLB #1250/01 3291618
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 251618Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIRUT
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 6100UNCLAS BEIRUT 001250 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM KTIP KWMN KCRM LE
SUBJECT: MONITORING OF 2009 G/TIP FUND GRANTED TO 
CARITAS/ICMC PROJECT 
 
REF: STATE 112705 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  On October 28, emboffs conducted a site 
visit with G/TIP visitor Rachel Yousey to the Caritas Safe 
House, which is part of the International Catholic Migration 
Commission (ICMC) and Caritas Lebanon Migrant Center's 
"Protection and Assistance for Victims of Trafficking" 
USG-funded project.  This review and evaluation of project 
results was conducted in accordance with reftel.  The Safe 
House aims to provide protection and assistance to victims of 
trafficking in Lebanon.  Caritas has been diligent in 
providing regular status updates to Post on their operations, 
progress and future plans.  End summary. 
 
SITE VISIT TO THE SAFE HOUSE 
---------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) During the site visit, emboffs discussed the project 
with Caritas' Migrant Worker's Director Najla Chahda in 
addition to social workers staying at the Safe House.  At the 
time of the visit, there were 27 domestic workers, two social 
workers and a nun living at the Safe House providing care and 
counseling 24 hours per day, seven days per week.  The Safe 
House was well-kept and neat.  According to residents who 
spoke to emboffs, Caritas provides a safe, supportive and 
caring environment.  During one in-depth interview with a 
resident, the victim explained that she had suffered severe 
abuse, including large burns from an iron on the chest and 
shoulders, and ears showing deformity from alleged beatings 
with shoes and fists at the hands of her former employer. 
She was suffering from both physical and emotional trauma 
from the experience, and in addition to medical and 
psychological care, Caritas is assisting the victim in her 
legal proceedings. 
 
OBJECTIVES AND ACCOMPLISHMENTS 
------------------------------ 
 
¶3. (SBU) During the review period from May 1 through October 
31, 2009, the Caritas Safe House rendered all services 
specified for the project.  Based on statistics provided by 
Caritas and an audit of reports by emboffs, the Safe House 
provided 38 individuals with shelter, counseling and other 
services during the period.  A total of 73 referrals were 
received from various sources, including Surete Generale 
(SG), Internal Security Forces (ISF), recruitment agencies, 
and the help hotline, as well as other embassies, consulates 
and NGOs.  Of these cases, 36 clients received medical 
assistance.  Through other telephone contacts and referrals, 
126 individuals benefited from legal assistance and 
counseling.  Repatriation assistance was provided to 33 
individuals, with employers paying in 27 cases, Caritas 
paying in five cases, and the family of the beneficiary 
paying in one case. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Another objective specified for the project during 
the rating period included the implementation of training 
programs designed to strengthen reception and detention 
capacities.  The programs included various instructional 
sessions, formal workshops and training materials for select 
ISF and SG personnel.  A study visit to the Czech Republic 
was conducted for six SG officers from July 20 to 24.  Their 
activities and training included sessions at the Refugee 
Facilities Administration, Department of Asylum and 
Migration, Ministry of Interior, the reception center at 
Prague Ruzyne Airport and two detention centers.  The 
training included review and demonstration of the procedures 
and best practices, as well as the roles and 
responsibilities, of each organization. 
 
¶5. (SBU) The Caritas Safe House and ICMC have adequately 
accomplished all objectives during the review period. 
Satisfaction with the Safe House services was rated as very 
high or excellent by clients as well as by referring 
organizations, such as SG and ISF.  During the rating period, 
Caritas reported encountering some obstacles, which were 
ultimately overcome.  One example was that personnel changes 
in SG at the "retention center" resulted in appointment of a 
new commander at the facility who was not supportive -- or 
even obstructive -- of Caritas' presence and projects in the 
retention center.  Nonetheless, Caritas succeeded in 
providing victims' services and advocating for detainees. 
Due to the organization's persistence and standards of 
professionalism, Caritas successfully appealed to higher SG 
authorities to include the recalcitrant commander in two 
training programs designed to sensitize him (and adjust his 
bureaucratic policies) on migrant and victims' issues.  When 
emboffs met with the retention center commander on October 
27, he mentioned the positive influence of the training on 
his policies and his new appreciation for the challenges in 
dealing with victims of trafficking. 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) COMMENT:  Caritas' broad knowledge in the field of 
trafficking has enabled its staff to work very efficiently. 
Additionally, Caritas has developed a good, cooperative 
relationship with the Surete Generale and now maintains a 
full-time office in the heart of the SG retention center. 
Consequently, this cooperation helped facilitate the work of 
the Caritas team and lead to better assistance and protection 
of the victims of trafficking referred by the SG.  The 
sustainability of this project remains dependent on G/TIP's 
expeditious and prompt funding mechanism.  Caritas has been 
granted approval for a 2009-2011 continuation of its Safe 
House and counseling activities and we strongly encourage 
this continued cooperation with Caritas.  Based on our 
experience and in situ observations, Caritas is a 
cost-effective and trusted steward of these project funds. 
DAUGHTON