09DOHA284
SE GRATION MEETING WITH SUDANESE PRESIDENTIAL
Thu Apr 30 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Doha
VZCZCXRO6972
PP RUEHJO
DE RUEHDO #0284/01 1200557
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 300557Z APR 09ZDF
FM AMEMBASSY DOHA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9003
INFO RUEHZO/AFRICAN UNION COLLECTIVE
RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FLUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 DOHA 000284 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM QA SU
SUBJECT: SE GRATION MEETING WITH SUDANESE PRESIDENTIAL 
ADVISER GHAZI 
 
DOHA 00000284  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
---------------- 
(SBU) KEY POINTS 
---------------- 
 
-- Dr. Ghazi Salah-Eddin, adviser to the President of Sudan, 
told the President's Special Envoy (SE) to Sudan Gration that 
Qatar and UN/African Union Mediator Djibril Bassole should 
try to achieve a cease-fire as a first step toward the 
political framework agreement. 
 
-- Further, Libya and Chad need to pressure JEM to sign on to 
a cease-fire or it will not happen. 
 
-- Salah-Eddin urged SE Gration to study the Chad situation 
very carefully, noting that President Deby feels threatened 
internally, and he recommended promoting economic projects 
and special ties to Chad that would draw in the Chadian 
rebels. 
 
-- Down the road, Salah-Eddin said, a cease-fire agreement 
must be followed by a broad-based disarmament that is 
implemented and monitored by UNAMID. 
 
-- Dr. Ghazi said the international community could assist 
with the monitoring of any Chad-Sudan agreement coming out of 
the Qatar-Libya talks. 
 
-------------- 
(SBU) COMMENTS 
-------------- 
 
-- Dr. Ghazi provided the regime's moderate views of a 
variety of issues to include making the argument for 
augmenting UNAMID's capacity and mandate if a ceasefire 
package and Darfur peace deal could be struck.  He was also 
open to non-African troops from the sub-continent if the US 
could sell it as part of an overall peace package for Darfur. 
 
 
-- With regard to the potential for JEM to attack South 
Kordofan, Ghazi reacted sharply and stated emphatically that 
the government would react strongly and without hesitation. 
 
-- SE Gration pressed Ghazi hard to endorse a May 4-5 
resumption of the Doha talks in combination with the 
Chad-Sudan talks and increased focus on Chad.  SE Gration 
noted that the combination of: (1) upcoming Chad-Sudan talks; 
(2) renewal of Doha talks between JEM, other rebel groups and 
the Government of Sudan; and (3) focus on Chad's internal 
situation and potential to support the integration of Chadian 
rebels into the government could prove to be a winning 
strategy. 
 
End Key Points and Comments. 
 
¶1. (SBU) In an April 28 meeting with Dr. Ghazi Salah-Eddin, 
Sudanese Presidential Adviser, (joined by the Sudanese 
Ambassador to Qatar, his DCM and another Sudanese official) 
told Special Envoy (SE) to Sudan Gration (joined by 
Ambassador, S/USSES Deputy Tim Shortley and P/E Chief Rice), 
that Qatar and UN/African Union Mediator Djibril Bassole 
should try to achieve a cease-fire as a first step toward a 
political framework agreement. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Chad and Libya, noted Salah-Eddin, are the keys to a 
cease-fire.  Having a cease-fire would help lay the framework 
to encourage skeptical Chadians to be more forthcoming. 
Incentives for Chad are needed, he stressed, to provide Deby 
with space to cut JEM off and to put pressure on the Justice 
and Equality Movement (JEM). 
 
¶3. (SBU) Libya and Chad need to pressure JEM, in 
Salah-Eddin's view, to sign on to a cease-fire or it will not 
happen.  The Sudanese Ambassador to Qatar agreed, noting that 
JEM is focused everything but peace to include consolidating 
their position as well as prisoner exchanges, the return of 
NGOs to Darfur, but not on improving the security 
environment.  SE Gration responded that the return of NGOs 
was largely resolved and that he would explain this in his 
upcoming meeting with JEM leader Khalil Ibrahim. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Salah-Eddin urged SE Gration to study the Chad 
situation very carefully, noting that President Deby feels 
threatened internally.  "Right now, JEM is an ally of Deby," 
and the stability of Chad and its government psychologically 
are essential for Deby.  It is vital, concluded Salah-Eddin, 
to address Deby's perceptions. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Asked how to keep JEM from expanding its reach 
 
DOHA 00000284  002 OF 002 
 
 
within Sudan to new areas (to include South Kordofan), 
Salah-Eddin recommended telling JEM "point blank" it is a red 
line that cannot be crossed.  "All of us should say it."  It 
should, he continued, be part of the discussions in Doha and 
endorsed by the international community. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Salah-Eddin encouraged SE Gration to promote 
economic projects in Chad and special ties with the Chadian 
government that would draw in the rebel groups.  He also 
noted that other Darfur rebel groups could accept a 
cease-fire without JEM's acquiescence as a means to exert 
pressure on JEM to join it. 
 
¶7. (SBU) JEM, said Salah-Eddin, needs incentives to 
participate in Qatar's Initiative, but it also "may need 
sticks if that doesn't work."  Reiterating that Deby as their 
backer is key to a solution, Salah-Eddin encouraged SE 
Gration to get at JEM through Deby. 
 
¶8. (SBU) DISARMAMENT:  Down the road, Salah-Eddin continued, 
a cease-fire agreement must be followed by disarmament, which 
also must figure in the provisions of any cease-fire.  Small 
guns, big guns, all weapons need to be taken from the 
movements when the time is right. 
 
¶9. (SBU) UNAMID:  Salah-Eddin said monitoring of the 
cease-fire must be part of any cease-fire package and be 
addressed in an context of the UNAMID mandate - to include 
bolstering its capabilities and mandate.  He cautioned, 
though, that these issues must be negotiated directly with 
Sudanese President Bashir. 
 
¶10. (SBU) EGYPT:  Asked how to approach Egypt, Salah-Eddin 
advised that SE Gration should always make a stop in Cairo 
when in the region and keep them briefed on what he is doing 
so that they will included and there are no surprises. 
 
¶11. (SBU) CHAD-SUDAN TALKS:  SE Gration discussed the 
upcoming Sudan-Chad talks with Ghazi and noted that it was 
important that the international community and the region 
work together to monitor any agreement with additional 
capacity along the Chad-Sudan border.  He stressed that the 
combination of: (1) upcoming Chad-Sudan talks; (2) renewal of 
Doha talks between JEM, other rebel groups and the Government 
of Sudan; and (3) focus on Chad's internal situation and 
potential to support the integration of Chadian rebels into 
the government could prove to be a winning strategy. 
 
¶12. (U) SE Gration has cleared this message. 
LeBaron