09DURBAN18
POLITICAL PARTIES POINT FINGERS AFTER VIOLENCE IN NONGOMA
Fri Feb 06 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Durban
VZCZCXRO4597
RR RUEHBZ RUEHJO RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHDU #0018/01 0370913
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 060913Z FEB 09
FM AMCONSUL DURBAN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1396
INFO RUCNSAD/SADC COLLECTIVE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHINGTON DC
RUEHDU/AMCONSUL DURBAN 0769UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 DURBAN 000018 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR AF/S 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV SF
SUBJECT: POLITICAL PARTIES POINT FINGERS AFTER VIOLENCE IN NONGOMA 
 
REF: A) 08 DURBAN 71; B) 08 DURBAN 69 
 
DURBAN 00000018  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: In response to violence that erupted on 
February 1 in Nongoma, northern KwaZulu Natal, where African 
National Congress (ANC) and Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP) 
supporters attended election rallies held in the same area on 
the same day, ANC and IFP representatives lashed out at one 
another but did not admit any fault.  Seven ANC members suffered 
injuries during the clashes, including an ANC Member of 
Parliament, Prince Zeblon Zulu.  Political intolerance and 
violence will be a factor in KZN during the upcoming national 
elections, and unless party leaders play a stronger role, it is 
not likely that the police and Independent Electoral Commission 
will be able to control the situation.  End summary. 
 
Historical context: Long-running Clashes 
 
¶2. (U) Political violence before 1994's first general elections 
claimed close to an estimated 20,000 lives.  Much of the 
violence occurred between ANC and IFP supporters in 
KwaZulu-Natal.  In 1994, ANC President Nelson Mandela and IFP 
Leader Prince Mangosuthu Buthelezi signed a Peace Accord, which 
led to the decline of political violence.  However, in KZN 
incidents of political intolerance and targeted political 
killings continue to take place.  In the past few weeks, the 
number of violent incidents has increased.  Six killings, 
including a blatant assassination of Chief Mbongeleni Zondi (a 
close friend and relative of ANC President Jacob Zuma) have 
taken place.  (Note: Recent revelations in the Zondi murder case 
indicate that the motive may have been related to taxi business 
rivalries rather than politics). 
 
ANC and IFP hold Election Rallies in Nongoma 
 
¶3. (U) Police had their hands full on February 1 when both the 
ANC and the IFP held election rallies in Nongoma, (a town of 
about 200,000 people in Northern Zululand), which is known to be 
a traditional stronghold of the IFP.  ANC President Jacob Zuma 
addressed the ANC rally, attended by about 3,000 supporters, 
most of whom the ANC brought in by bus.  Senior provincial ANC 
leaders including ANC Chairperson Dr. Zweli Mkhize and Premier 
Sibusiso Ndebele also came to Nongoma, in a show of ANC power. 
 
Shots Fired, Buses Stoned and Roads Blocked 
 
¶4. (SBU) ANC Member of Parliament Prince Zeblon Zulu's car came 
under gun fire as he left the ANC rally.  Prince Zulu, his son 
and daughter-in law were injured during the attack.  ANC 
Provincial Secretary Senzo Mchunu told a press conference on 
February 2 that people wearing IFP T-shirts and carrying 
traditional weapons had blocked the roads leading to the ANC 
rally venue and stoned ANC buses.  Mchunu also reported that a 
well-known IFP councilor on January 31 shot ANC local deputy 
leader Mantobela Ngcobo. Mr. Ngcobo was injured and 
hospitalized.  The IFP councilor, Jeremiah Mavundla, and his 
wife were arrested and appeared in court in connection with the 
shooting of Ngcobo and possession of an unlicensed firearm. 
 
IFP Blames Broader Intolerance 
 
¶5. (SBU) In a statement issued by the IFP on February 2, IFP 
National Organizer Albert Mncwango unequivocally condemned the 
violence in Nongoma, but did not deny that those who were 
involved in acts of political intolerance and violence in 
Nongoma were IFP members.  Mncwango also said February 1 events 
should not be viewed in isolation, but rather within a broader 
context of "ongoing political intolerance" in KZN.  Mncwango 
cited the recent killing of IFP members as an indication that 
all parties have suffered from violence.  Meanwhile, party 
leader, Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi, has not publicly criticized 
IFP members for violent acts but rather called on all party 
leaders to join him in "urging calm" and demanding that all 
party followers "absolutely eschew violence and intimidation." 
 
ANC Launches an Appeal with the IEC 
 
¶6. (U) KZN ANC Chairperson Dr. Zweli Mkhize confirmed on 
February 3 that the ANC lodged a complaint with the Independent 
Electoral Commission (IEC) about the events of Nongoma, asking 
the IEC to investigate and determine whether Nongoma will be 
conducive for a free and fair election.  IEC KZN Chief Electoral 
Officer Mawethu Mosery has confirmed receiving the ANC complaint. 
 
Analysts Call on Parties to Rein in Members 
 
¶7. (SBU) Political analysts in KZN denounced the violence in 
Nongoma and called on party leaders to rein in their members to 
prevent incidents of political intolerance and violence. 
 
DURBAN 00000018  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
Political analyst Protas Madlala accused party leaders of being 
lax in dealing with members who intimidated other supporters. 
University of KwaZulu Natal-based violence analyst and monitor, 
Mary de Haas told the Pol-Econ Assistant that she agrees with 
Madlala's views and further noted, "leaders were scared to 
alienate their supporters." De Haas also said the role of police 
in maintaining order is important and that police need to act in 
an impartial manner. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Comment: The police and IEC face a major challenge in 
dealing with party strongholds and alleged "no-go" zones in KZN 
province.  Unless the leaders of political parties take a 
stronger stance and punish members for violent acts, free and 
unhindered political activity in areas considered to be 
strongholds of one party or another will not be possible.  The 
ANC's decision to hold a rally in an area known to be a 
traditional stronghold of the IFP, where ANC support is not 
evident, appears to have been calculated and provocative, and 
may have been designed to draw attention away from its members' 
intimidation of COPE members and disruption of COPE activities. 
(ANC members have also declared the province a "no-go" zone for 
COPE, and its supporters have disrupted COPE meetings in areas 
known to be traditional strongholds of the ANC--see reftels). 
Yet despite the unwelcome reception of COPE by ANC members in 
KZN, the main contest in this province will still be between the 
ANC and IFP--so the leaders of these parties have the greatest 
role to play in condemning violence.  COPE so far appears unable 
to pose a major threat to the electoral support of both the ANC 
and the IFP in KZN. 
DERDERIAN