09HELSINKI361
PM VANHANEN SURVIVES VOTE OF NO CONFIDENCE
Fri Oct 02 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Helsinki
VZCZCXRO0050
RR RUEHAG RUEHAST RUEHDA RUEHDBU RUEHDF RUEHFL RUEHIK RUEHKW RUEHLA
RUEHLN RUEHLZ RUEHNP RUEHPOD RUEHROV RUEHSK RUEHSL RUEHSR RUEHVK
RUEHYG
DE RUEHHE #0361/01 2751245
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 021245Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY HELSINKI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5192
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HELSINKI 000361 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV FI
SUBJECT: PM VANHANEN SURVIVES VOTE OF NO CONFIDENCE 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: On October 1, the Finnish Parliament 
voted 117 to 27 to reject a vote of no confidence 
against Prime Minister Vanhanen's government.  Vanhanen 
and other Center Party members have been implicated in 
a campaign funding scandal in which they received 
large, undisclosed donations from business consultancy 
firm KMS and a government-sponsored housing 
organization Youth Foundation.  Finnish law requires 
that politicians publically disclose campaign 
contributions.  However, no penalties exist for non- 
disclosure.  There is no evidence of any quid pro quo 
between KMS, Youth Foundation and government officials, 
but the government's reputation for transparency has 
taken a hit; recent polls show a strong drop in 
confidence among the Finnish public.  Although Prime 
Minister Matti Vanhanen will remain in power, the 
Center Party is now weaker relative to its coalition 
partners.  There is speculation that he will be 
replaced as the Center Party's Chairman during the 
party's Congress scheduled for summer 2010.  A change 
to its top leadership with fresh and less tainted 
candidates could make the Center Party more competitive 
during the next general elections campaign in March 
¶2011. END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (U) On October 1, Prime Minister Vanhanen's 
government survived a vote of no confidence over a 
campaign funding scandal in which the Prime Minister 
and members of his Center party received undisclosed 
funds from business consultancy group KMS and a 
government-sponsored housing organization called Youth 
Foundation.  Parliament voted 117 to 27 to reject the 
vote of no confidence, with forty parliamentarians 
abstaining and fifteen absent. 
 
CENTER PARTY AND NATIONAL COALITION RECEIVE LARGEST 
SUMS 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶3. (U) In May 2008 the Finnish press published stories 
about illicit campaign donations made to a large number 
of parliamentary candidates in the 2007 elections.  The 
majority of the recipients were members of Prime 
Minister Vanhanen's Center Party, including the Prime 
Minister himself.  Other recipients included members of 
the National Coalition Party (NCP), as well as a small 
number of opposition Social Democrats and one member 
each from the Greens and the Swedish People's Party 
(SPP). 
 
¶4. (U) The largest source of donations came from KMS, a 
business development association founded by Finnish 
entrepreneurs.  Nova Group, a privately owned 
commercial real estate development company, channeled 
some of the largest sums via KMS, amounting to 145,000 
euros of the more than 400,000 euros which KMS 
distributed to government officials.  Nova has since 
gone into bankruptcy, and a court-appointed receiver 
has revealed that Nova's finances were shaky even as it 
made large campaign donations. 
 
¶5. (U) KMS says it paid out some 406,000 euros to 53 
candidates in the 2007 elections.  Most of the money, 
at least 260,000 euros, went to 35 candidates from 
Prime Minister Matti Vanhanen's Center Party.  Vanhanen 
himself received a contribution of 10,000 euros.  KMS 
says that 13 candidates from the other main government 
party, the conservative National Coalition, received a 
total of 112,000 euros, including Speaker of Parliament 
Sauli Niinisto and Finance Minister Jyrki Katainen. 
 
FOUNDATION DONATES FUNDS TO ITS FORMER CHAIRMAN 
VANHANEN 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶6. (U) In addition to the KMS/Nova funding, Center 
Party candidates - including the Prime Minister - also 
received contributions from Youth Foundation, an 
organization which builds housing for young people and 
receives some of its funding from a government- 
controlled gaming monopoly.  Before becoming Prime 
Minister, Vanhanen served as Youth Foundation's 
Chairman and Deputy Chairman.  Another Center Party MP 
also served as Chairman until resigning recently due to 
the scandal. 
 
¶7. (U) While candidates were required to disclose 
contributions, the law in effect at the time specified 
no penalties for failure to disclose.  A nonpartisan 
working group established in May 2008 and headed by 
former Supreme Court Judge Lauri Tarasti will soon 
publish its second review of recommendations on 
 
HELSINKI 00000361  002 OF 002 
 
 
reforming the campaign finance law.  The report is to 
address the kinds of contributions to be declared, the 
reporting mechanism, and whether campaigns should be 
funded exclusively by public money distributed equally 
to all candidates.  The first phase of Tarasti's 
working group reforms was approved and implemented in 
May 2009. 
 
FINNISH PUBLIC'S CONFIDENCE IN GOVERNMENT DROPS 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶8. (U) Currently there are no criminal investigations 
of politicians in connection with this scandal.  There 
is also no evidence of any quid pro quo between 
KMS/Nova and government officials who received 
donations.  Nonetheless, the Finnish public is upset 
that government officials have received large amounts 
of money with no accountability or transparency.  In a 
recent poll, more than a quarter of those interviewed 
said the present campaign scandal has reduced their 
enthusiasm to vote.  In addition, only 45 percent of 
those interviewed had confidence in the ability of the 
government to function and more than 40 percent said 
that it has become dysfunctional already. 
 
OTHER PARTIES NOT IMMUNE FROM CRITICISM 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶9. (U) In recent weeks, the Center Party, NCP, SDP, and 
individual politicians have been lining up to return 
campaign funds donated by KMS/Nova Group but criticism 
remains.  The Left Party and to a lesser extent the SDP 
came out looking better as they already published wide- 
ranging reports on their election financing.  However, 
each of them has been criticized in the recent past 
concerning questionable funding they received from 
labor unions. 
 
¶10. (U) The Greens, while not receiving much money 
themselves, have been criticized by some in the media 
for not speaking out strongly against their partners in 
the government, and the Green Justice Minister 
(responsible for enforcing the rules on campaign 
finance) has not taken an aggressive stance, arguing 
that the working group led by former Supreme Court 
judge Lauri Tarasti must be given time to finalize its 
report and recommendations for reform. 
 
¶11. (SBU) COMMENT: Although Prime Minister Matti 
Vanhanen will remain in power, the Center Party is now 
weaker relative to its coalition partners.  There is 
speculation that he will be replaced as the Center 
Party's Chairman during the party's Congress scheduled 
for summer 2010.  A change to its top leadership with 
fresh and less tainted candidates could make the Center 
Party more competitive during the next general 
elections campaign in March 2011. END COMMENT. 
BUTLER