09JERUSALEM1896
REQUEST FOR WAIVER AND EXCEPTIONS, AMAWI BUILDING,
Mon Oct 19 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Jerusalem
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHJM #1896/01 2920837
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 190837Z OCT 09
FM AMCONSUL JERUSALEM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6398
INFO RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 4973UNCLAS JERUSALEM 001896 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR DS/PSD, NEA/SCA/EX 
USAID FOR SEC/PSP - D. BLACKSHAW AND M/OMS - G. NAGLE 
TEL AVIV FOR SEO AND USAID 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC ABLD KPAL EAID
SUBJECT: REQUEST FOR WAIVER AND EXCEPTIONS, AMAWI BUILDING, 
JERUSALEM 
 
¶1. (SBU) Post requests that a waiver of setback and 
collocation be granted, as mandated by P.L 106-113, and 
exceptions to certain Overseas Security Policy Board (OSPB) 
physical security standards be made to permit the 
establishment of office space for the Post,s Public 
Diplomacy (PD), United States Agency for International 
Development (USAID), United States Security Coordinator 
(USSC), Bureau of International Narcotics and Law Enforcement 
Affairs (INL), and  Foreign Commercial Service (FCS) in a 
newly acquired office building (OBX),in Jerusalem. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Background Information:  With the anticipated late 
2009 relocation of ConGen Jerusalem's consular operations to 
West Jerusalem, it is a political imperative for the USG to 
maintain a presence in Palestinian East Jerusalem.  Post has 
identified one potential property that would allow this, 
located in the Sheikh Jarrah neighborhood.  An OBO and DS 
team assessed this building in October 2008 and again in 
April 2009.  Post would use this building as a Public 
Diplomacy and FCS Outreach Center, as well as for USAID, 
USSC, and INL office space. The proposed PD Outreach Center 
would be a new facility as proposed in post,s mission 
strategic plan for FY 2010.  The USAID space would house 
staff to be relocated from Tel Aviv.  Additional space in the 
new building for USSC and INL would allow for the expansion 
of their staff and programs, and would free up space at 
post,s current Lazarist building for other priority needs, 
such as space for the staff of Special Envoy Mitchell. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Description of building and lot:  The proposed 
facility is a 1,734.19 square meter building.  The building 
is a stand-alone, five-level cement structure currently 
occupied by three UN agencies and a private residence.  Four 
floors are identical, with 353 square meters per floor.  The 
top floor is 322.19 square meters.  The building is 
approximately 10 years old.  It is in the Sheikh Jarrah 
neighborhood of East Jerusalem, near the British, Spanish, 
Italian, Swedish, and Turkish Consulates General, as well as 
other well-known landmarks such as the Ambassador Hotel and 
the St. John,s Eye Hospital.  It is also less than five 
minutes driving time from both the Israeli National Police 
Headquarters for Jerusalem and the Israeli Border Police 
Headquarters. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Waivers of Setback and Collocation: 
Setback - The proposed OBX does not have the required 100 
feet of setback on all sides.  A waiver of setback is 
requested.  The available setback is as follows: 
 
¶A.  West Side:  There is a new three-story apartment building 
with below-ground parking being constructed on the northwest 
side of the building. The distance from the OBX to the 
property of the apartment building is 17.38 feet.  The entry 
by vehicles from the street to the back of these properties 
is controlled by an access gate, and therefore not easily 
accessible.  From the access gates to the OBX an additional 
100 feet is gained.  On the north-west side of the OBX is 
municipality land that has 100 feet setback from the main 
road and a fence separating the land from the road. 
 
¶B.  North Side:  Empty land that post has leased for parking 
and a CAC. OBX to perimeter fence is 27.23 feet. From the 
fence to the property line is an additional 164 feet. 
 
¶C.  East Side:  Empty Land that Post has been trying to lease 
in order to control access to the OBX.  The land cannot be 
brought under lease because of title issues.  For the same 
reason, the (alleged) owner cannot build on this land, and 
has clearly expressed to post GSO her unwillingness to sell, 
lease or consider any business transaction whatsoever that 
involves ceding control of this piece of property.  The 
property is directly in front of the OBX, and is flanked by a 
narrow access road, and had boulders (placed by proposed 
OBX,s former tenants, the UN, as vehicle barriers) across 
the street frontage and along the access road.  This access 
road will not be the main entrance to the OBX (the main 
entrance CAC and parking will be on the east side, see 
above).  RSO and GSO will continue efforts to place this 
empty lot under effective control of post, including working 
with the Municipality to obtain permission to erect barriers 
in the public right)of-way just off the property, along the 
sidewalk and access road.  From OBX to the existing fence is 
17.38 feet.  If the land is brought under effective control 
and the anti-vehicle wall is improved, as well as control of 
the road is gained another 101 feet of setback is gained. 
 
¶D.  South Side:  Two apartment-style buildings run along the 
 
west side of the building. The distance from the OBX to 
property controlled by the nearest of these buildings is 
13.12 feet.  The entry by vehicles from the street to the 
back of these properties is controlled by the residents with 
an access gate.  From the access gates to the OBX and 
additional 100 feet is gained. 
 
Collocation 
 
¶E.  A waiver of collocation is requested as USAID and FCS 
will occupy the same premises. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Exceptions to OSPB Physical Security Standards 
 
¶A. Employee parking, for approximately 25 vehicles, will be 
at least 50 feet from the office building to, to the maximum 
extent feasible. 
 
¶B.  For newly acquired buildings, a blast vulnerability study 
will be conducted:  OBO has previously conducted a blast 
vulnerability study on the OBX in the 1990s that meets this 
requirement. 
 
¶C. Exterior walls will provide 15-minute forced entry (FE) 
protection to a minimum of 16 feet above grade or accessible 
platform:  OBO performed an assessment in October 2008 and 
will meet this requirement by making any renovations 
necessary. 
 
¶D. Exterior windows will provide 15-minute forced entry (FE) 
protection to a minimum of 16 feet above grade or accessible 
platform:  OBO performed an assessment in October 2008 and 
will meet this requirement by making any renovations 
necessary. 
 
¶E.  A safe area will provide 15 - minute FE protection: OBO 
performed an assessment in October 2008 and will meet this 
requirement by making any renovations necessary. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Critical Issues 
 
¶A.  The Security Environmental Threat List (SETL), dated 
December 22nd, 2008; reports Jerusalem as HIGH for 
TRANSNATIONAL TERRORISM, CRITICAL for INDIGENOUS TERRORISM, 
and HIGH for POLIICAL VIOLENCE. 
 
¶B.  Classified information will not be handled, stored, 
processed or discussed in the proposed facility.  All 
classified operations required by PD or USAID will occur in 
the controlled access area (CAA) of the CG. 
 
¶C.  The PD staff in the proposed OBX will consist of 
approximately one direct-hire U.S. citizens and three LES 
employees.  The staff of the USAID section in the OBX 
consists of 22 employees, with at least two being direct-hire 
Americans.  The staff of the USSC will be a mix of American 
and Canadian/Britons of approximately 32 employees, with at 
least 20 being American.  The staff of the FCS is two LES. 
The staff of the INL is four Americans and eleven LES.  In 
addition approximately three LES employees of the Local Guard 
Force will occupy space in the OBX. 
 
¶D.  Post and USAID have surveyed more than three different 
proposed sites for the CG office annex.  The proposed 
location is considered the best location available because of 
its proximity to the CG, for access to CAA, and the necessity 
for frequent coordination with the Consul General and the 
RSO.  Location in East Jerusalem is optimum for needed 
representation space and outreach space to the Palestinian 
community. 
 
¶E.  Concurrence with the proposal has been received from the 
Chief of Mission and the Regional Security Officer. 
Concurrence with the collocation waiver has been requested 
from both USAID and the U.S. Commerce Department at their 
respective headquarters. 
RUBINSTEIN