09MADRID970
CONSULTATIVE PROCESS FOR MUSLIM ENGAGEMENT - MADRID
Tue Sep 29 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Madrid
VZCZCXRO6568
RR RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDBU RUEHDE RUEHDH RUEHGI RUEHIK RUEHJS RUEHKUK
RUEHLH RUEHPOD RUEHPW RUEHROV RUEHSL RUEHTRO RUEHYG
DE RUEHMD #0970/01 2720559
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 290559Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY MADRID
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1278
INFO RUCNISL/ISLAMIC COLLECTIVE
RUEHZG/NATO EU COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 MADRID 000970 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
S/P FOR G.BEHRMAN; 
EUR/WE FOR A.MCKNIGHT, S.ZERDECKI, L.MCMANIS, L.PEREZ 
EUR/PGI FOR I.WEINSTEIN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: N/A 
TAGS: EAID ECON OEXC OSCI PREL SCUL SENV SOCI TNGD SP
SUBJECT: CONSULTATIVE PROCESS FOR MUSLIM ENGAGEMENT - MADRID 
 
REF: STATE 71325 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY:  Following the President's Cairo speech to Muslims 
around the world, U.S. Mission Spain continues to engage 
Muslims as part of our outreach to Spain's growing and 
increasingly diverse immigrant and minority communities.  Our 
objective is to create a vision of mutual respect, advancement, 
collaboration, and opportunity.  The Mission pursues these 
objectives by incorporating the full range of PD resources and 
programs, including engagement activities by Mission officers, 
exchange programs, conferences, information sharing, outreach 
through and in collaboration with community organizations, and 
in personal contacts with religious and community leaders, 
NGOs, students and policy makers.  END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------- 
BACKGROUND: 
------------------------- 
¶2.  Over the past 20 years, Spain has been experiencing 
tremendous demographic changes due to a large influx of new 
immigrants. The largest immigrant populations come from 
Romania, followed by Morocco, Latin America, and sub-Saharan 
Africa.  These relatively recent arrivals now account for 
roughly 11.3 percent of Spain's population of approximately 46 
million.  The majority of immigrants have come to Spain 
principally for economic opportunity and the relatively 
generous wages, benefits, and comprehensive health and social 
safety net.  These immigrants, including Muslims, come seeking 
work, but they also bring their cultures, religions, and 
customs with them.  Spaniards had been generally tolerant of, 
and somewhat indifferent to, the new arrivals while the economy 
was booming.  But as the current economic crisis and high 
unemployment rates continue to stretch the limits of the social 
security safety net, we expect to see evidence of strained 
relations between Spaniards and immigrant communities.  Thus, 
promoting integration and respect for diversity are two 
objectives of Post's engagement strategies. 
 
¶3.  Spain's diverse and rapidly growing Muslim community - 
mostly from Morocco and Algeria, but also from Syria, Pakistan, 
and other countries - is a very new phenomenon by Western 
European standards.  In 1992, there were approximately 50,000 
Muslims in Spain, mainly Spanish converts and immigrants from 
Syria, the Palestinian territories and other Middle Eastern 
countries.  Today, official statistics put the number of 
Muslims at around 1 million (or just over two percent of the 
total population), with the majority coming from Morocco (owing 
to its close proximity and lack of economic opportunity), but 
also increasingly from Pakistan.  They, like other immigrants, 
are often sensitive about standing out, lacking in Spanish 
language skills, and frequently unaware of health, social, and 
government services available to them; therefore, they maintain 
a somewhat low profile in society.  In general, most Spanish 
Muslims, and particularly youth, do seek integration into 
Spanish society, and believe religion should not be an 
impediment to that integration. 
 
¶4.  Islam is one of the minority religious groups that signed 
bilateral agreements with the Government in 1992, recognizing 
their "deeply rooted" or notorio arraigo status. These 
agreements provide certain tax benefits and give civil validity 
to weddings performed by the religious groups. They also permit 
the religious groups to place their teachers in schools and 
chaplains in hospitals and prisons. Protestant entities signed 
the accord as the FEREDE; Jewish entities signed as the 
Federation of Jewish Communities of Spain (FCJE); and Islamic 
entities as the Islamic Commission of Spain (CIE).  The CIE is 
composed of two federations: the Spanish Federation of Islamic 
Religious Entities (FEERI) and the Union of Islamic Communities 
in Spain (UCIDE).  Despite the recognition of these and other 
religious-based groups, there is no effective, representative 
inter-faith council to coordinate, collaborate or mediate on 
religious or social issues, and there is very little 
collaborative contact between UCIDE and FEERI. 
 
------------------------------- 
THE CONSULTATIVE PROCESS 
------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  Since well before the President's Cairo speech, the Embassy 
has pursued a broad-based approach to engagement with Muslim 
communities that incorporates a multicultural vision, rooted in 
promoting integration, finding common ground, and youth 
outreach.  The Embassy has been effective in creating fora 
(such as Iftar receptions, conferences, representational 
events, community outreach and exchange programs) that involve 
the participation of Muslims and non-Muslims in an effort to 
 
MADRID 00000970  002 OF 004 
 
 
create opportunities for networking among the participants who 
otherwise might never meet or interact.  For example, the 
Embassy designed a Citizen Dialogue exchange program that 
brought four American Muslims from diverse backgrounds to Spain 
to interact with Muslim communities and youth in several 
Spanish cities.  The U.S. experience as a multi-ethnic, 
pluralistic society is a point of reference for many Europeans, 
and this program allowed us to share our own experience in 
addressing prejudice and discrimination while promoting greater 
integration of minority communities.  It also helped develop 
networks among moderate Muslim leaders. 
 
¶6.  Our information and electronic outreach programs are 
designed to disseminate information about U.S. policy, 
government, society, and values that generate interest and 
encourage recipients to participate more actively through new 
social media and old-fashioned attendance at Embassy-sponsored 
outreach activities. 
 
¶7.  The Embassy is also reaching out to the Government of 
Spain's semi-autonomous cultural institutions that promote a 
better understanding of different cultures around the world. 
One of those "Casa Arabe" (Arab House), is dedicated to 
promoting a greater understanding of Arabs and Muslims; the 
Embassy has collaborated on conferences and information 
sharing.  Shortly after the Cairo speech, the PAO met with the 
director to explore ways to expand that collaboration. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
MISSION OUTREACH AND ENGAGEMENT STRATEGIES / ACTIVITIES: 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶8.  Continuing the Consultative Process:  The President's Cairo 
speech can serve as a mile marker to demonstrate to local 
audiences that our ongoing efforts do indeed have the support 
and commitment of the highest level of the USG.  Since our 
vision of integration is highly consistent with Spanish 
national and local government priorities on promoting 
integration, we continue to find willing partners in 
government, civil society, and among disenfranchised 
communities.  For example: 
 
(A)  Community Libraries:  The Embassy's Information Resource 
Center (IRC) has been in the forefront of efforts to leverage 
Spain's public, community libraries as multi-cultural centers 
promoting community integration.  In workshops organized by the 
IRC and Spanish associations of librarians, U.S. Speakers help 
participants grapple with the day-to-day issues of greatest 
concern to immigrants, work on strategies for adapting to a new 
culture, and reinforce the importance of social dialogue. 
Participants are implementing plans to enhance the role of 
libraries as catalysts for cultural dialogue and to increase 
the availability of services in public libraries for 
immigrants, especially Muslim minorities and other marginalized 
groups.  These plans require increased direct engagement with 
those groups in order to assess their wants and needs, and 
design responses to their priority concerns. Attracting youth 
is a priority for the libraries, but also helps Post address a 
priority of promoting integration and providing alternatives to 
extremist ideologies and criminal activities.  The community 
libraries are not just venues for librarians to assist 
immigrants, but also platforms for Public Affairs cultural and 
outreach programs.  The IRC has partnered with the Goethe 
Institute, the French Institute, regional governments, NGOs, 
librarians, and cultural mediators. 
 
(B)  International Visitors Leadership Program:  Mission 
Spain's IVLP Committee continues to nominate Muslims to its 
slate of candidates each year.  Embassy Spain has benefited 
from the IVLP's "Muslim Incentive Grants" since the incentive 
program began, thereby increasing opportunities for Muslims to 
participate in the IVLP, and increasing the number of Spaniards 
from different backgrounds participating in this prestigious 
USG exchange program. The litmus test for Muslim candidates is 
the same as for any candidate:  they must have the demonstrated 
potential to be future leaders in their fields.  Our Muslim 
IVLP grants may address Muslim-specific issues, but more often 
the Committee nominates Muslim candidates to participate in 
secular Regional Programs or Multi-Regional Programs with broad- 
based participation, including non-Muslims.  Topics have 
included integration and civil rights in U.S. society, U.S. 
policy formulation, and politics and democracy in America, to 
give participants broader exposure to the diversity of the U.S. 
 
(C)  Iftar Events:  over the past few years, the Chief of 
Mission has annually hosted an Iftar dinner or reception.  This 
event has been gaining greater popularity among Post's growing 
 
MADRID 00000970  003 OF 004 
 
 
base of contacts who are Muslim and/or who are active in civil 
society, NGOs and government programs dealing with Muslims, 
minorities, or social issues.  These events demonstrate the 
importance the Embassy places on relations with Muslim leaders 
and communities and provides a forum for these diverse 
organizations to network among themselves. 
 
(D)  Islamic Websites:  Following up on a well-attended 
conference funded by S/CT in November 2008, the Mission 
continues to work with WebIslam and representatives of the 
European Media Islamic Network, whose members pledged at the 
conference "to give voice to European Muslims" and 
present "shared Islamic values, such as pluralism, social 
justice, peace, freedom of consciousness and expression, 
journalistic integrity, the promotion of civil rights, 
understanding and cooperation between cultures and religions." 
 
(E)  Conferences:  In fall 2009 Public Affairs will provide a 
grant to a young Muslim scholar to support her participation in 
a conference on promoting community integration.  Upon her 
return, she has agreed to help PA organize an outreach program 
with Muslim youth.  Post also supports conferences on counter- 
terrorism and related foreign policy issues. 
 
(F)  Exchanges:  The Embassy will continue to broaden its 
outreach to minority communities and youth through exchanges 
that focus on integration, respect, for diversity, and 
volunteerism.  The Participants in a FY-09 voluntary visitor 
program for educators, social workers, academics, immigration 
lawyers, and NGOs from Cordoba were selected for their work 
with largely Muslim immigrant communities from Northern Africa 
and the Maghreb.  Youth participants in follow-on exchanges 
were selected for their volunteerism and sensitivity towards 
immigrant communities.  The Embassy continues to engage these 
participants in follow-up activities based on the themes from 
the Cairo speech. 
 
(G)  The Embassy invited representatives of Spanish government, 
civil society, news media, NGOs, political parties to watch 
President Obama's Cairo speech on June 4 (English) and on June 
5 (Spanish).  The events provided opportunities for Muslims and 
non-Muslims to exchange ideas and impressions with each other 
and Embassy Officers.  Post continues to rely on these and 
other contacts as sounding boards on the President's Muslim 
engagement agenda. 
 
(H)  Post's "Global Conversation," seeking feedback on 
Secretary Clinton's June 15 speech at the Council on Foreign 
Relations, touched on the topic of President Obama's Cairo 
speech.  The eight guests included two Muslims, representing 
academia and politics. 
 
(I)  Misperceptions about U.S. foreign policy, counter- 
terrorism policy, and treatment of Muslims in the U.S. are not 
limited to Muslim audiences, and therefore, the Media Relations 
Office of Public Affairs, the Cultural Affairs Office, and 
Embassy Officers throughout the U.S. Mission, continue to 
engage all their contacts, especially those from the media, 
government and academia, to solicit their input on U.S. policy 
and messaging, and to correct their false stereotypes and 
misperceptions. 
 
-------------------------------- 
WHAT OUR CONTACTS ARE SAYING 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶9.  Not surprisingly, in world affairs our Muslim contacts are 
interested in Middle East Peace, concerned about the plight of 
the Palestinian people, worried about Iran's nuclear ambitions 
and nuclear proliferation, and the impact of the economic 
crisis on developing countries.  On issues closer to home, they 
are concerned with rising unemployment, economic opportunities, 
education, the impact of illegal immigration on the social 
service system, and the situation of the immigrants 
themselves.  In this respect, their concerns are very similar 
to those of most Spaniards.  Where the differences lie are in 
how they perceive themselves and their roles in Spanish 
society, and how Spanish society, which clings to a perception 
of Spanish "homogeneity," views them. 
 
¶10.  Spanish Muslims and Muslims resident in Spain appear to be 
receptive to President Obama's efforts to reach out to Muslims 
around the world.  They did not fail to see the significance of 
the President's reference to the intolerable suffering of the 
Palestinian people on the one hand; however, they also took 
note of the President's commitment to the State of Israel.  The 
nuances of U.S. Middle East policy will need to be emphasized 
 
MADRID 00000970  004 OF 004 
 
 
and clarified over time to Muslim leaders and communities here 
in Spain, who remain skeptical of the ability of the Obama 
Administration to implement change, as well as to Spaniards and 
Spanish politicians, particularly those to the left of center. 
 
------------------ 
CONCLUSIONS 
------------------ 
¶11.  In his study "Muslim Elites in Portugal and Spain," 
published in West European Politics (Vo. 32, NO.1, 55-76, 
January 2009), Andrew Gould cites Gilles Kepel:  "The large 
majority of European citizens from Muslim descent share core 
European values, but they are not spreading their views on the 
religious market of ideas as such.  This leaves that field 
rather open to people with a more radical vision."  While Spain 
boasts a vibrant democracy and a major, developed economy, the 
Embassy is concerned that a lack of leadership, collaboration, 
and social cohesion among Muslim communities (especially among 
poor, marginalized immigrants who are disproportionately and 
negatively affected by the economic crisis) creates openings 
for infiltration by extremist ideologies. 
 
¶12.  While many of the President's Cairo priorities speak to 
urgencies in countries with Muslim majorities and less- 
developed parts of the world, we see targets of opportunity to 
further promote the President's Cairo agenda through 
enhancement - and in some cases, expansion - of Post's existing 
programs in education and human development among youth, 
increased scholarship and exchange, internships, on-line 
networks, entrepreneurship and interfaith dialogue.  That is 
why Post's outreach programs will continue to promote social 
integration, moderate views, educational, exchange, and 
economic opportunities, and an understanding that U.S. and 
western society is compatible with Islam and universal values. 
 
CHACON