09RABAT854
PRIME MINISTER EMPHASIZES WESTERN SAHARA
Mon Oct 19 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Rabat
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHRB #0854/01 2921802
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 191802Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY RABAT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0754
INFO RUEHCL/AMCONSUL CASABLANCA PRIORITY 4737
RUCNMGH/MAGHREB COLLECTIVEUNCLAS RABAT 000854 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM EAID WI MO
SUBJECT: PRIME MINISTER EMPHASIZES WESTERN SAHARA 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY:  Prime Minister Abbas El Fassi 
welcomed the Ambassador to Morocco during a one-hour 
call on October 12.  El Fassi emphasized our 
excellent relations as well as Morocco's ties to 
Africa and the Arab World.  El Fassi appealed for 
U.S. support for Morocco's autonomy plan for Western 
Sahara.  The Ambassador highlighted his desire to 
build on the President's Cairo speech, the Nobel 
Peace Prize, the Free Trade Agreement (FTA) and the 
Millennium Challenge Account (MCA) Compact.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------ 
RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS 
------------------------ 
 
¶2.  (SBU) The Ambassador began his courtesy calls 
with a one-hour call on the Prime Minister on 
October 12.  The DCM was also present.  El Fassi 
emphasized our privileged relations, as exemplified 
by the FTA and the MCA Compact.  He underscored 
Morocco's choice to be allied with the United States 
both in the 1700s and after regaining its 
independence in 1956.  The Prime Minister noted that 
the 1958 Constitution guaranteed political 
pluralism.  El Fassi also pointed to Morocco's 
political and human rights advances over the last 10 
years.  Highlighting the status of women, he pointed 
to King Mohammed VI's decision to reserve places for 
women in the 2002 and 2007 parliamentary elections 
and the 2009 municipal elections.  He noted that the 
King and the Government were now focused on judicial 
reform.  In fact, he said that earlier in the 
afternoon, he had chaired a meeting to review 
ministers' prerogatives, with a view toward 
eliminating most discretionary authorities. 
 
------------------------------- 
UNIQUE IN AFRICA AND ARAB WORLD 
------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The Prime Minister then turned to 
Morocco's uniqueness in Africa and the Arab World. 
Going back and forth between Morocco's establishment 
as a state in the 700s and its changing borders, El 
Fassi noted that Morocco has existed with similar 
borders since the first Arab dynasty established 
itself over 12 centuries ago.  Following occupation 
and resistance, Morocco negotiated with France and 
Spain to reclaim its territory, with the French 
withdrawing in 1956; the Spanish ceding the north in 
1957; Spain subsequently ceding Sidi Ifni; and Spain 
ultimately returning the Western Sahara in 1975.  He 
pointed out that the world changed significantly, 
however, between 1956 and 1975.  Algeria, which had 
not existed until 1962, used those 20 years to build 
links with 20 or more like-minded one-party states 
and military dictatorships in Sub-Saharan Africa. 
Algeria persuaded those countries that the Polisario 
deserved their support and recognition. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) El Fassi emphasized that since Morocco 
withdrew from the Organization of African Unity 
(OAU) over the OAU's admission of the Sahrawi Arab 
Democratic Republic, it has courted African 
countries.  More than 8,000 Sub-Saharan African 
students are currently studying everything from 
agronomy to medicine in Morocco on full 
scholarships. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Morocco, according to El Fassi, has also 
created a unique role for itself in the Arab World. 
It is a moderate in the Arab League.  It refuses to 
deal with HAMAS.  It represents a bulwark against 
extremism. 
 
--------------------------- 
AUTONOMY FOR WESTERN SAHARA 
--------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) The Prime Minister then turned to Western 
Sahara, explaining that Morocco had developed the 
2007 autonomy plan for Western Sahara to offer an 
honorable compromise to settle the dispute.  The 
plan includes Sahrawi control over most executive, 
legislative and judicial functions.  Moreover, it is 
a serious and credible proposal.  El Fassi stressed 
that the Polisario and Algeria lacked credibility; 
one had only to look at the 3,000 people who have 
fled Tindouf since 1975, with none leaving Western 
Sahara for the camps.  The Prime Minister concluded 
 
his remarks by appealing for U.S. support for the 
autonomy plan. 
 
------------------------ 
BUILDING ON CAIRO SPEECH 
------------------------ 
 
¶7.  (SBU) The Ambassador used the remaining 15 
minutes to stress his pride in being the President's 
personal representative.  He said he looked forward 
to building on the FTA, the MCA and the President's 
Cairo speech, which had certainly contributed to the 
Nobel Committee's decision to award President Obama 
the Nobel Peace prize.  As the meeting ended, the 
Prime Minister and the Ambassador compared notes on 
their experiences as lawyers and diplomats. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) COMMENT:  While Foreign Minister Taieb 
Fassi Fihri chose to save the Western Sahara 
discussion for a subsequent meeting, Prime Minister 
El Fassi made it a central issue for the 
Ambassador's first meeting with him.  In fact, he 
subtly built his whole presentation about a changing 
world to lay the groundwork to appeal for U.S. 
support for the autonomy plan.  END COMMENT. 
 
 
KAPLAN