09STATE62134
POINTS FOR JUNE 18 UNSC DEBATE ON UNAMI
Tue Jun 16 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0002
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #2134 1690652
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 161710Z JUN 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 6534-6535
RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD IMMEDIATE 6643-6644UNCLAS STATE 062134 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
C O R R E C T E D   C O P Y (SENSITIVE CAPTION ADDED) 
 
SIPDIS - USUN FOR GERMAIN AND KUJAWINSKI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL UNSC IZ
SUBJECT: POINTS FOR JUNE 18 UNSC DEBATE ON UNAMI 
 
1.(U) This is an action request. USUN should draw from the 
points in para 2 during the open debate on UNAMI in the 
Security Council on June 18. 
 
Â¶2. (SBU) Begin Points: 
------- 
GENERAL 
------- 
 
--Mr. President, I would like to thank the 
Secretary-General for his report and the United Nations 
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) for its tireless work 
and commitment to support a more peaceful and prosperous 
Iraq. 
 
--Emboldened by our shared strategic interests - heartened 
by the service of thousands of brave Americans - and 
mindful of the future of millions of Iraqis - the United 
States remains committed and engaged in Iraq. 
 
--In accordance with the U.S-Iraq Security Agreement - 
U.S. combat troops are planning to withdraw from Iraqi 
cities, villages, and localities no later than June 30, 
2009, leading to the eventual withdrawal of all U.S. 
forces by the end of 2011. 
 
--Our drawdown and withdrawal in no way diminishes our 
long-term partnership with Iraq.  During this transition 
period, the United States is ardent in its support to the 
Iraqi people as they assume full responsibility for their 
sovereign nation. We are earnest in our efforts to build a 
strong and lasting strategic relationship with Iraq; one 
which respects the sovereignty and serves the interests of 
both countries. 
 
--As a friend and long-term partner, we will stand with 
Iraq.  We will work with the Government of Iraq to 
strengthen democratic institutions, uphold the rule of 
law, and develop peaceful and cooperative relations with 
its neighbors.  We will also encourage the international 
community to intensify its engagement with the Government 
of Iraq in order to secure and build upon Iraq's 
political, economic, and security gains. 
 
--Mr. President, the United States would like to 
acknowledge the critical role that the United Nations 
continues to play in Iraq. Under the leadership of Special 
Representative of the Secretary General Staffan de Mistura 
and at the invitation of the Government of Iraq, UNAMI 
continues to expand the presence and capacity of the UN 
throughout Iraq.  From disputed internal boundaries to 
free and fair elections - from national reconciliation to 
refugees and internally displaced persons - UNAMI 
continues to play a critical supporting role in promoting 
issues decisive to the long-term peace, security, and 
prosperity of Iraq. 
 
--On behalf of the United States, I am proud to offer our 
full support for UNAMI's mandate.  We particularly would 
like to recognize the accomplished and steadfast work of 
Special Representative Staffan de Mistura and his staff. 
The United States is greatly appreciative of your service. 
 
 
 
--In the days and months ahead, UNAMI's work will be 
especially significant. Let me take a moment to highlight 
areas where UNAMI's efforts will be most critical. 
 
--Building upon the success of January's provincial 
elections, in which a significant, inclusive, voter 
turnout and a vastly improved security climate led to the 
election of new provincial councils in 14 out of 18 
provinces, UNAMI will once again provide technical 
assistance and advice to Iraq's Independent High Electoral 
Commission in preparation for Kurdistan Regional 
Government elections in July 2009 and Iraqi parliamentary 
elections in January 2010. 
 
--UNAMI will also continue to play a crucial supporting 
role in efforts to address Iraq's disputed internal 
boundaries, particularly in promoting constructive 
dialogue regarding a mutually acceptable solution - a key 
requirement for lasting stability in Iraq. The U.S. calls 
on all relevant parties to advance this process in 
earnest. 
 
--UNAMI will also provide valuable support to the Iraqi 
Government as it facilitates the safe, voluntary, and 
orderly return of displaced Iraqis. Supporting sustainable 
and voluntary reintegration of Iraqi refugees and 
internally displaced persons is essential for the 
long-term stability of Iraq. In order to support and 
sustain returns, UNAMI is engaging with the Iraqi 
Government in an effort to provide security and access to 
housing, jobs, and basic services. We welcome additional 
efforts on this issue by the Government of Iraq. 
 
--All of us here can be proud of UNAMI's effort and 
outstanding record of accomplishments to date.  The United 
States deeply appreciates your work and looks forward to 
your continued success. 
 
--Mr. President, the United States firmly supports Iraq's 
continuing development as a sovereign, and democratic 
nation in which all communities can freely participate in 
political, social and economic life, and whose human and 
civil rights are protected - a nation at peace with 
itself, its neighbors and the wider international 
community. 
 
--The United States recognizes that regional and 
international support for Iraq is essential for continued 
progress.  We encourage all countries to assist Iraq in 
meeting its goals, and to support the Iraqi people as they 
thrive and prosper in peace. 
 
--The United States unequivocally welcomes and encourages 
UNAMI's work and expanded footprint in Iraq - and stands 
ready to assist as necessary in accordance with the 
U.S.-UN Security Agreement. We encourage all countries to 
do the same. 
 
--Thank you, Mr. President. 
 
END POINTS 
CLINTON