09STATE23254
CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION (CWC): INFORMATION
Thu Mar 12 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #3254 0711224
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 121207Z MAR 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD IMMEDIATE 0000
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON IMMEDIATE 0000
RUEHTC/AMEMBASSY THE HAGUE IMMEDIATE 0000UNCLAS STATE 023254 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
THE HAGUE FOR CWC DEL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PARM PREL CWC OPCW IZ
SUBJECT: CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION (CWC): INFORMATION 
FOR IRAQI PREPARATION FOR EC-56 (APRIL 21-24, 2009) 
 
REF: A. 2009 THE HAGUE 104 (MEETING WITH IRAQI DELEGATION) 
     ¶B. 2009 THE HAGUE 129 (MEETINGS ON IRAQ'S ACCESSION 
        ON THE MARGINS OF EC-55: FEBRUARY 17-20 
     ¶C. 2009) 
     ¶D. 2009 STATE 011851 (INFORMATION ON RECOVERED 
        CHEMICAL WEAPONS) 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action request for Embassy Baghdad, The 
Hague for the CWC Delegation and Embassy London; see 
paragraphs 6 and 7. The contents of this cable are sensitive 
but unclassified; please protect accordingly. 
 
---------- 
Background 
---------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Iraq submitted its instrument of accession to the 
Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) on January 13, 2009, and 
became a CWC State Party on February 12, 2009. We expect Iraq 
to submit its initial declaration to the Technical 
Secretariat (T.S.) of the Organization for the Prohibition of 
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) on schedule (by March 14, 2009). 
(NOTE: The non-paper below is based on the assumption that 
the Government of Iraq (GOI) will declare as a possessor 
state and provide a classified initial declaration. END NOTE) 
We also expect that Iraq,s OPCW classified initial 
declaration will be made available to other States Parties, 
on request, prior to the 56th Session of the Executive 
Council (EC-56, April 21-24, 2009). Iraqi officials in The 
Hague have indicated that Iraq plans to make a detailed 
presentation on its past CW program during the Destruction 
Informals (prior to EC-56) on April 20, 2009. Iraq may also 
make a statement during the General Debate of EC-56. These 
two occasions will be the first opportunities for Iraq to 
address the CW program of the former regime and to present a 
plan for meeting its CWC obligations. 
 
¶3. (SBU) In recent meetings with members of the U.S. 
Delegation to the CWC, Iraqi representatives have shown a 
basic understanding of the importance of their April 20, 2009 
presentation, but have not put forth a clear plan for 
ensuring adequate preparation for their EC-56 interactions or 
for the attendance and participation of Iraqi experts from 
Baghdad (Refs. A and B). Several States Parties, including 
Iran, have informally raised questions about the past program 
and are expected to engage the Iraqi delegation on specific 
issues during EC-56. While Iraq may escape scrutiny at the 
April EC, States Parties are likely to focus increasingly on 
CWC implementation in Iraq; now is the time to prepare. 
 
¶4. (SBU) One of the key areas for U.S.)Iraqi coordination in 
these discussions is the declaration and destruction of the 
pre-1991 production chemical munitions periodically recovered 
by U.S. and other Coalition Forces in Iraq since 2003. The 
security situation in Iraq dictated that destruction of these 
recovered chemical weapons (RCW) be accomplished on an 
expedited basis to ensure the safety and security of the 
Iraqi People and Coalition Forces. RCW recovered by U.S. 
Forces before February 12, 2009 will be declared by the 
United States and included in a supplement to the U.S. 
declaration, which will be submitted as soon as practical. We 
plan to present information on the U.S. supplement during the 
destruction informals before EC-56, and anticipate that the 
United Kingdom (UK) will similarly announce a supplemental 
declaration for its RCW. Declaration and destruction of RCW 
recovered by U.S. forces from February 12, 2009 forward is 
the responsibility of Iraq (Ref. C). 
 
¶5. (SBU) The United States and UK have worked closely with 
Iraq since 2005 in preparation for its CWC accession, and 
will continue to assist with Iraqi CWC implementation. Our 
goal is to meld a technically sound, functional and 
independent Iraqi CWC implementation team, both in Baghdad 
and in The Hague. The interagency has prepared a non-paper 
for the GOI that provides suggested action by the GOI in 
preparation for EC-56. Implementing these suggested actions 
will be coordinated with the UK. 
 
-------------- 
ACTION REQUEST 
-------------- 
 
¶6.  (U) The Department requests that Embassy Baghdad and the 
U.S. Delegation to the OPCW deliver the non-paper in 
paragraph 7 to Iraqi CWC National Authority representatives 
in Baghdad and to Ambassador Siamand Banaa in The Hague, 
respectively. Embassy London is requested to deliver the 
non-paper to appropriate representatives in the UK Foreign 
and Commonwealth Office. Embassy Baghdad, the CWC Delegation, 
and Embassy London should inform their UK contacts of the two 
other deliveries, and report any response to the non-paper. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Text of Non-Paper: Iraqi Preparation for EC-56 
 
The April 20, 2009, presentation during the Destruction 
Informals prior to the 56th Session of the Executive Council 
(EC-56, April 21-24, 2009) will provide the first opportunity 
for the Government of Iraq (GOI) to address the chemical 
weapons (CW) program of the former regime and to present a 
plan for meeting its Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) 
obligations. We suggest that the GOI fully utilize the 
assistance available from the Technical Secretariat (T.S.), 
United States, and United Kingdom in preparing for this 
important presentation. 
 
Several States Parties have raised questions about Iraq,s 
declaration prior to its submission, and likely will want to 
address these and other questions with the GOI delegation 
during EC-56. We suggest that Iraq ensure that appropriate 
experts from Baghdad are present during the Informals and the 
Session of EC-56, and are prepared to respond appropriately 
to States Parties, questions. 
 
Full transparency during the Informals presentation is 
essential for States Parties to understand the historical CW 
program and current conditions of the declared CW. 
Photographs and other visual documentation showing the 
conditions of the CW in storage and of the former CW 
production facilities will be helpful in conveying a clear 
understanding of the past Iraqi CW program to all States 
Parties. 
 
An important topic for the GOI informals presentation is the 
GOI plan for reporting on chemical munitions recovered from 
February 12 forward. The U.S. delegation will work with the 
Iraqi delegation to ensure that U.S., UK, and Iraqi actions 
are clearly presented. 
 
In informal discussion during EC-55, representatives of the 
Technical Secretariat indicated their willingness to meet 
with Iraqi representatives prior to EC-56 to assist in 
preparation for the GOI,s presentation during the 
destruction informals. We suggest that the GOI take full 
advantage of this opportunity by scheduling a working session 
with T.S., U.S. and UK representatives for April 16 and 17, 
2009 in The Hague. We suggest that Iraqi EC-56 delegation 
members from Baghdad arrive in The Hague on Wednesday, April 
15, 2009. 
 
Topics for discussion with the T.S. should include the 
content of the Iraqi Destruction Informals presentation, 
planning for inspections, and development of the General Plan 
for Destruction of Chemical Weapons. 
 
- We suggest that Iraqi delegation finalize the planned 
informals presentation with assistance from the T.S, UK and 
U.S. representatives. 
 
- May and June 2009 have been suggested as possible dates for 
initial inspections in Iraq. The T.S. has expressed 
uncertainty about security issues during inspections. The 
Iraqi delegation should be prepared to make a definitive 
statement about the GOI,s ability to ensure the safety and 
security of inspectors during initial and other inspection 
activities. 
 
- Developing Iraq,s plan for CW destruction will be 
unusually difficult due to practical issues and challenges 
surrounding the storage of the items. The GOI should work to 
have a preliminary plan available for discussion with T.S., 
U.S. and UK representatives for the April 16-17 working 
session in The Hague. 
 
End non-paper text. 
 
¶8.  (U) The point-of-contact for this action is Tom Ferguson, 
ISN/CB, (202-647-9650, fergusontl@state.sgov.gov). 
CLINTON