09STATE69129
THANK YOU AND FAREWELL
Thu Jul 02 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0030
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #9129 1832027
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 022004Z JUL 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS IMMEDIATE 7369UNCLAS STATE 069129 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
FROM AA/S FELTMAN TO CDA CONNELLY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: APER AMGT SY
SUBJECT: THANK YOU AND FAREWELL 
 
Maura, 
 
As you prepare to leave Damascus, I want to take this 
opportunity to thank you and the entire Mission for the 
outstanding work you have done - and will continue to do - as 
the U.S. continues to engage Syria with the goal of advancing 
peace and ensuring stability. 
 
From coordinating complex, multi-faceted visits to reporting 
cables that set the standard for analysis, insight, and 
policy prescription, Embassy Damascus continues to represent 
the best of NEA and the Department.  Under your leadership 
Embassy Damascus superbly handled a week of visits that 
included FPOTUS Carter, an eight-member CENTCOM-led 
delegation, and Special Envoy Mitchell - the most senior 
Executive Branch official to meet President Asad since 
January 2005.  I would like to specifically acknowledge the 
Management and RSO teams for their tremendous efforts during 
these visits.  I would also like to offer my personal 
appreciation for the assistance your Public Diplomacy section 
provided as we prepared our public messages.  This is just 
another example of how Post has ensured we in Washington 
recognize the importance of calibrating our statements and 
messages to the Syrian public and calling attention to the 
issues which generate press coverage and interest. 
 
As you prepare to depart, I want to note the tremendous work 
you and the entire Mission have done on two critical issues: 
advancing the new embassy compound project and addressing 
lingering issues related to the closure of the Damascus 
Community School.  I know you, the Management section, and 
others on your team have spent countless hours on these two 
critical issues.  Thank you from all of us in Washington. 
 
Finally, I just want to reiterate the value I personally and 
policy-makers throughout the interagency place on Post's 
reporting.  Your cables are timely, relevant, and inform most 
of Washington's policy discussions on Syria. I especially 
appreciate that you continue to add to the "Re-engaging 
Syria" series; "The SARG chooses hardball," "what is the U.S. 
waiting for?" and "Patience, persistence and focus will get 
us success" were especially well-written and widely read. 
 
You have also used reporting to raise awareness about issues 
that are slightly off Washington's radar, specifically Post's 
recent cable on conditions at the al-Tanf refugee camp, 
drought conditions in Syria and the UN's hope that the U.S. 
will contribute to their appeal, and possible problems with 
how democracy programming in Syria correlates with our 
current policy.  You and the entire team at Embassy Damascus 
have done an outstanding job.  We know the quality of this 
reporting will continue even after you depart. 
 
As much as I value what you have done in Damascus, I am 
looking forward to welcoming you to the NEA Front Office 
family.  We know Embassy Damascus will continue its great 
work to promote and advance U.S. interests vis--vis Syria. 
 
Best, 
 
Jeff 
CLINTON