09STATE71850
DEMARCHE: SUPPORT FOR THE LEBANESE ARMY
Fri Jul 10 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0003
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #1850 1912123
ZNR UUUUU ZZH ZDS
P 101646Z JUL 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 4493-4494
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 2414-2415
RUEHDO/AMEMBASSY DOHA PRIORITY 1039-1040
RUEHKU/AMEMBASSY KUWAIT PRIORITY 6425-6426
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 2447-2448
INFO RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 0923-0924
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 7397-7398
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITYUNCLAS STATE 071850 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
C O R R E C T E D COPY CAPTION 
 
SECDEF FOR OSD MELISSA DALTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KU LE PREL PTER QA SA AE
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE: SUPPORT FOR THE LEBANESE ARMY 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action request.  Please see paragraphs 
three through six. 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Posts are requested to seek host government 
support for the Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF) and, 
specifically, to request funding for the purchase, 
upgrade, and transfer of 56 of Jordan's U.S.-origin M60A3 
tanks to Lebanon. 
 
OBJECTIVES 
---------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Embassy Abu Dhabi is requested to pursue the 
following objectives: 
 
-- Thank the UAE for its generous support of the LAF, 
including patrol boats, Gazelle helicopters, and $17 
million for the purchase and refurbishment of the first 10 
of 66 total M60A3s from Jordan, which arrived in Lebanon 
on April 28. 
 
-- Relay strong USG support for the transfer, which we 
understand from the LAF that the UAE is considering, of 
Puma helicopters and Hawk aircraft from the UAE to 
Lebanon. 
 
-- Note that we have been unable to secure any of the $98 
million required to purchase, upgrade, and transport the 
remaining 56 M60A3s from Jordan to Lebanon, and would be 
most grateful for any further assistance from the UAE. 
 
-- Note that we are making a similar request of Kuwait, 
KSA, and Qatar and would welcome UAE support in 
encouraging Gulf neighbors to follow the UAE example of 
support for the national institutions of Lebanon. 
 
-- Explain that, despite our strong support for the M60A3 
transfer and our provision of over half a billion dollars 
in assistance to the LAF since 2005, U.S. law prevents us 
from funding the retransfer of U.S.-origin equipment such 
as the tanks. 
 
-- Assure the UAE we will coordinate a public affairs 
strategy among the UAE, Lebanon, and Jordan regarding 
provision and funding of the tanks. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Embassy Doha is requested to pursue the following 
objectives: 
 
-- Note that since 2005, the USG has provided more than 
half a billion dollars in support to the LAF. 
 
-- Note also that several of Qatar's neighbors have 
provided significant assistance, but that we are aware of 
no Qatari aid to the LAF. 
 
-- Suggest Qatar consider contributing to the $98 
million required to purchase, upgrade, and transport the 
remaining 56 of 66 M60A3s from Jordan to Lebanon as a 
gesture of both concrete Qatari support for the LAF and 
moderation in Lebanon, as well as a sign of Qatari-U.S. 
cooperation on an issue of mutual concern. 
 
-- Explain that U.S. law prevents us from funding the 
retransfer of U.S.-origin equipment such as the M60A3s, 
and that we are also requesting assistance from Saudi 
Arabia, Kuwait, and the UAE. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Embassy Kuwait is requested to pursue the 
following objective: 
 
-- Seek a response to Secretary of Defense Gates' March 2 
letter to Kuwaiti Minister of Defense al-Sabah seeking 
Kuwaiti funding for the purchase, upgrade, and transport 
of the remaining 56 of 66 M60A3s from Jordan to Lebanon. 
 
-- Reiterate our request that Kuwait provide some or all 
of the $98 million required for the remaining tanks. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Embassy Riyadh is requested to pursue the 
following objectives: 
 
-- Thank Saudi Arabia for its generous financial and 
political support to Lebanon, including to the LAF. 
 
-- Note our understanding as of late 2008 that Saudi 
Arabia is not inclined to provide further financial 
support to the LAF. 
 
-- Underscore that supporting the LAF remains a top 
priority for the Obama administration, and in 2009 alone, 
we anticipate providing over $200 million in funding, 
bringing our total assistance to the LAF since 2005 to 
more than half a billion dollars. 
 
-- Request that Saudi Arabia reconsider the USG and LAF 
request for $98 million to fund the purchase, upgrade, and 
transport of the remaining 56 M60A3s from Jordan to 
Lebanon. 
 
-- Note that the UAE funded the first 10 tanks, which were 
delivered to Lebanon on April 28, and that U.S. law 
prevents us from funding the retransfer of U.S.-origin 
equipment such as the M60A3s. 
 
REPORTING DEADLINE 
------------------ 
 
¶7. (SBU) Posts are requested to report the results of this 
demarche to NEA Lebanon Desk Officer Christine Lawson and 
NEA/ARP by Friday, July 17. 
 
BACKGROUND 
---------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) On January 14, 2009, the LAF and Jordan signed an 
agreement to refurbish, upgrade, and transfer to Lebanon 
66 of Jordan's U.S.-origin M60A3 tanks, with a package 
price of $115 million.  The USG is prohibited by law from 
funding the retransfer of U.S.-origin equipment such as 
the LAF-Jordanian deal, but has lent strong political 
backing to the transaction, and is working to drum up 
donor funding and to encourage further 
military-to-military cooperation between Lebanon and 
Jordan. 
 
¶9. (SBU) The UAE provided $17 million for the first ten 
tanks, which were delivered on April 28.  Saudi Arabia and 
Kuwait were both approached for funding on multiple 
occasions in late 2008 and early 2009.  Saudi Arabia, 
which provided $100 million to the LAF during the Nahr 
al-Barid crisis of 2007, was uninterested at the time in 
providing additional support.  Kuwait has yet to respond 
to a letter from Secretary of Defense Gates requesting 
funding for the tanks.  We have not approached Qatar to 
seek funding for the tanks, but view this request as an 
opportunity to work with Qatar on an issue of mutual concern. 
 
 
¶10. (SBU) Support for the LAF is an urgent priority after 
the March 14 coalition's win in Lebanon's June 7 
parliamentary elections.  The LAF's already urgent need 
for more training and equipment is heightened by the new 
political mandate to continue consolidating the state's 
control over Lebanese territory.  PM-designate Saad Hariri 
is already seeking a "Marshall plan" of aid for the LAF to 
chip away at Hizballah's legitimacy and prepare the army 
to confront other armed groups.  We support his plan and w 
ill continue efforts to strengthen Lebanese government 
institutions, especially its security services, as the 
best means to protect Lebanon's sovereignty and security. 
CLINTON