09UNVIEVIENNA110
Vienna Adopts International Roadmap for Fighting Drugs
Tue Mar 17 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UNVIE
VZCZCXRO1860
OO RUEHDBU RUEHKW
DE RUEHUNV #0110/01 0761522
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 171522Z MAR 09
FM USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9160
INFO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 1543
RUCNNAR/VIENNA NARCOTICS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 UNVIE VIENNA 000110 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KCRM UNODC EAID SNAR UN AF RU
 
SUBJECT: Vienna Adopts International Roadmap for Fighting Drugs 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (U) The high-level segment of United Nations Commission on 
Narcotics Drugs (CND) met March 11 and 12 in Vienna to conclude the 
review of the commitments emanating from the 1998 UNGA Special 
Session (UNGASS) on international drug control.  The Commission 
adopted a Political Declaration and Action Plan on five broad 
themes: demand reduction, supply reduction, chemical control and 
amphetamine-type stimulants (ATS), money laundering and judicial 
cooperation and eradication of illicit drug crops and alternative 
development programs. This was the result of a year-long process of 
intragovernmental meetings and working groups under the able 
leadership of CND chair Namibia.  Immediately after the adoption of 
the consensus documents, Germany made a statement on behalf of 26 
other "like-minded" countries to try and reinterpret the term 
"related support services" as "harm reduction." This was opposed by 
a number of countries including Colombia, Japan, Cuba, and Russia. 
The U.S. took the high ground emphasizing the extensive cooperation 
on drug control and underscoring that the documents say what they 
mean.  The high-level meeting also included a series of statements 
by Member States and four round table meetings that will be 
summarized in the final CND report.  Overall, the High Level Segment 
advanced our goal of projecting renewed American leadership in a 
multilateral forum. End Summary 
 
----------------------- 
High Level Participants 
----------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) Member States, many of whom were represented by 
cabinet/minister-level officials from the health and/or justice 
ministries, focused their statements on changes over the decade and 
best practices.  Bolivia was represented by president Evo Morales 
who called on the UN to "correct" the mistake of listing coca leaf 
as a controlled substance in the 1961 UN Single convention on 
narcotic drugs.  He accompanied this statement by chewing a coca 
leaf that he had brought for this purpose.  The Queen of Sweden 
attended the meetings to showcase the demand reduction work of a 
non-governmental organization, the Mentor Foundation funded by the 
World Health Organization (WHO). 
 
¶3. (U) The U.S. Statement was delivered by interim Director of ONDCP 
Edward Jurith.  It highlighted President Obama's strong commitment 
to a balanced approach to drug policy with a renewed emphasis on 
demand reduction.  This renewed approach includes a policy shift 
endorsing needle and syringe exchange programs as a part of a 
comprehensive approach to prevent the spread of HIV/AIDs among 
intravenous drug users.  His statement also highlighted scaling up 
the integration of substance abuse services including screening, 
early identification, intervention and treatment within health care 
systems, as well as alternatives to incarceration such as drug 
treatment courts and the use of anti-drug media messages was also 
highlighted.  The statement can be found at 
http://viennausmission.gov. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Broad support for the UN Conventions 
and the 1998 UNGASS commitments 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶4. (U) Chaired by the Deputy Prime Minister from Namibia, the 
high-level segment of the CND reviewed successes, limitations and 
challenges, and "the way forward" in implementing the 1998 UNGASS 
commitments in both demand reduction and supply reduction.  While 
almost every delegation reaffirmed the three UN drug control 
conventions and the continuing relevance of the 1998 UNGASS 
commitments, there was a wide-range of views of how successfully 
Member States had implemented these commitments, or how much 
progress has been made against the drug trade.  The Czech Republic, 
on behalf of the European Union, expressed three themes which were 
repeated in many, but not all, of the statements by EU members:  (1) 
member states were not able to make much progress toward achieving 
the 1998 goals because the action plan was too ambitious and lacked 
a balanced approach, focusing more on supply reduction than on 
demand reduction; (2) effective demand reduction policies should 
include, along with treatment and care, "harm reduction" practices; 
and (3) there is a need for more research data to clearly understand 
the current drug problem, and to use that data to build 
evidence-based policies with more realistic goals.  Venezuela, 
Australia, New Zealand, Switzerland all noted concern that there was 
little progress in reducing demand or supply. 
 
¶5. (U)In sharp contrast, the U.S., Colombia, Peru, Thailand, Russia, 
Laos, Vietnam, Iran, Kyrgyzstan, Mexico, Sweden, Japan, China, 
Ghana, Nigeria Pakistan, and others indicated there was substantial 
progress over the past decade.   The USDEL and others stressed that 
implementing the conventions is critical to such progress.  UNODC 
 
UNVIE VIEN 00000110  002 OF 005 
 
 
Director Costa in his speech pointed out that while there has been 
progress, it is difficult to demonstrate prevention. He delivered a 
firm rebuttal of calls for legalization. 
 
-------------------- 
Coca yes, cocaine no 
-------------------- 
 
¶6. (U) Bolivian President Evo Morales, with a theatrical gesture of 
chewing a coca leaf,  made a rambling plea to "correct an error" in 
the 1961 Single Convention that called for the elimination of coca 
leaf chewing twenty-five years after entry into force of the 
Convention. (Note: this provision applied only to countries which 
reserved the right to temporarily permit coca leaf chewing. Since 
Bolivia made no such reservation when it ratified the 1961 
Convention, it was obliged to comply. End Note.)  President Morales 
highlighted that coca is not cocaine and that the coca leaf has a 
long history of cultural use in Bolivia and Peru.  He further noted 
the need to find greater commercial uses for the coca leaf and 
thanked the EU for their financial support to the Andean region and 
to develop market uses of the coca leaf. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Broad support for Greater Demand 
Reduction; no consensus "harm reduction" 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (U) A key theme that emerged over the two-day meeting was the 
need for a broader and more comprehensive view of demand reduction 
issues-a sharp contrast from a decade ago when the debate focused on 
finding agreement on the divisive issues of  producers and consumers 
of illicit drugs.  And, while the documents from the meeting were 
later adopted by consensus, it was clear from national statements 
that there was no consensus on demand reduction policy.  The term 
"harm reduction" was a lightening rod for divisiveness throughout 
this meeting, as it had been throughout the year-long negotiations. 
The EU statement made by the Czech Presidency highlighted the need 
for greater emphasis on demand reduction programs that included 
"harm reduction."  However, there was no agreement within the EU on 
the meaning of the term.  The U.K. Member of Parliament and 
Undersecretary Alan Campbell sought to define the term as the 
provision of clean needles to injecting drug users.  The Netherlands 
indicated that injecting rooms and more lenient terms for drug users 
should be included in national policies.  Switzerland indicated that 
crime and violence had been taken off the streets with its heroin 
distribution program.  Similarly the delegates from Germany, Norway, 
Denmark, Portugal, Poland, Slovenia, and Spain made statements about 
the need to include "harm reduction" policies. 
 
¶8. (U) In sharp contrast, the Swedish minister for Health and Social 
affairs encouraged Member States to have a balanced approach that 
would include both demand and supply programs.  She underscored that 
demand reduction, not "harm reduction," should be the goal.  She 
urged Member States to seek greater funds to support programs in 
prevention and to help drug addicts recover.  Italy and the Holy See 
also made strong interventions calling for more support for demand 
reduction and for assisting chronic drug users, but rejecting the 
term "harm reduction." 
 
¶9. (U) While many of the Group of Latin American (GRULAC) countries, 
including Brazil, Mexico, Chile, Argentina, and Venezuela, indicated 
support for reducing the health and social consequences to drug 
users, they emphasized the need for a greater focus on demand 
reduction in the areas of prevention and treatment.  Against this 
backdrop, Colombia soundly rejected any use of the term "harm 
reduction" and sought to focus the meeting back on the need to 
develop sound policies to target drug use and help addicts recover. 
 
 
¶10. (U) Meanwhile, a number of countries that spoke in favor of a 
greater emphasis on demand reduction strongly opposed any references 
to the term of "harm reduction," noting that there was no consensus 
on the definition.  Russia strongly opposed it, as did Japan.  Many 
African countries spoke out about the need for all nations to 
implement the three drug conventions and opposed any references to 
this term which they noted could mean legalization.  Zambia said 
that increasing prevalence of drug use was no argument for 
legalization and noted how harmful drug use is to families and 
communities.  Zambia further implored Member States to increase 
controls over drugs before they controlled Member States. 
 
----------------------------- 
Increased Security is Crucial 
to Effective Drug Control 
----------------------------- 
 
¶11. (U) Countries including France, Iran, Pakistan, and Oman 
indicated concerns that the drug trade can threaten security and 
stability of a country.  Several countries, including Russia, France 
 
UNVIE VIEN 00000110  003.2 OF 005 
 
 
and U.K., gave statements highlighting the need for greater 
governance and rule of law to combat the drug trade.  Against this 
backdrop, Viktor Ivanov, Russia's Director of Drug Control, 
expressed concerns that opium cultivation had doubled in the last 
decade, and had become concentrated in Afghanistan.  He noted that 
current efforts in the region are not working and called for a new 
plan to increase cooperation against opium cultivation and 
trafficking in the region and to improve assessment of the extent of 
opium cultivation.  The Russian delegate further indicated that 
Russia is preparing a resolution for the General Assembly on a 
special observer council, and called for a new approach to 
Afghanistan.  (Note: USDEL will seek to clarify this "new approach" 
during the CND. End Note.)  Pakistan noted that the drug trade 
destroyed lives, and had a tremendous impact on national and 
regional stability.  He commented that Pakistan was able to make 
inroads against opium, once the government was able to get into the 
northwest area.  The Pakistani delegate also highlighted the 
importance of the Triangular Initiative among Afghanistan, Iran and 
Pakistan. 
 
¶12. (U) For its part, Colombia underscored the importance of rule of 
law to target the drug trade and to provide effective controls of 
drugs.  He said that any efforts to legalize drug use or production 
would sanction the crimes of the drug trade, including murder and 
kidnapping.  The Colombian Justice Minister indicated that 
eradication was a cornerstone of Colombian efforts.  Peru emphasized 
key alternative development successes in areas that are now secure, 
and where regional and local authorities are working together. 
Mexico stressed growing crime and highlighted increased cooperation 
with the United States under the Merida Initiative.  Chile 
highlighted the links between crime and drugs. 
 
------------------------ 
Transit Trade Increasing 
------------------------ 
 
¶13. (U) A number of delegates raised concerns that trafficking 
through their countries further undermines security.  Burkino Faso 
said that drug trafficking posed a significant danger and that drug 
abuse is now rampant throughout the country.  The Namibian Minister 
for Public Health and Security also raised concerns about the 
transit trade that was making inroads into his country.  Kenya 
indicated that the illicit transit trade has made Kenya a consumer 
country with drug abuse and HIV/AIDS both on the rise.  Iran 
indicated the need to develop better regional coordination to target 
heroin transiting the region.  Pakistan reported that it is 
virtually opium-free, but as a transit country it faces problems 
controlling the flow of drugs and trade in precursor chemicals, and 
seeks technical assistance, including equipment. 
 
------------------------------ 
Better Data needed to identify 
problems and assess progress 
------------------------------ 
 
¶14. (U) The U.K. indicated that to have any idea on the extent of 
the problem, data must be improved.  This point was further echoed 
throughout the meeting by numerous delegates.  Australia indicated 
the need to establish some type of process to better assess progress 
in the next decade.  Venezuela and Argentina also noted the need for 
better data collection efforts. 
 
------------------------- 
Greater assistance needed 
------------------------- 
 
¶15. (U) A number of countries used the high-level meeting to request 
additional assistance and to focus on the need to support the 
millennium development goals, including the elimination of poverty. 
Cuba commented that industrialized countries need to provide 
resources.  Nigeria highlighted concerns about vulnerable nations 
and those in poverty being drawn into the drug trade.  He also noted 
the remarkable progress that had been made over the decade, but 
noted that further efforts would require greater contributions from 
key consuming nations.  Pakistan called on all Member States to 
increase their technical assistance.  Peru noted that its Amazon 
region, an area three times the size of Germany, is particularly 
vulnerable.  Illicit drug cultivation has damaged the eco-system 
and, because of extreme poverty in the region, farmers will return 
to illicit cultivation of drug crops. Ghana expressed appreciation 
to the U.S. and EU for their support. Thailand offered to share its 
best practices in alternative development. 
 
------------------------------------- 
Political Declaration and Action Plan 
Adopted by Consensus 
------------------------------------- 
 
16.(SBU) Until the final moments of adoption of the documents, the 
 
UNVIE VIEN 00000110  004 OF 005 
 
 
USDEL was facing an EU push to incorporate the term "harm 
reduction," and allegations from NGO's and a few delegations that 
the U.S. was executing outdated instructions.  The U.S. policy 
change in the last few weeks of negotiations to embrace "needle 
exchange" and medication assisted therapy (MAT) while eschewing the 
term "harm reduction," left the U.S. in the middle of a sharp debate 
between European countries advocating "harm reduction" and countries 
such as Japan, Russia, Colombia and Iran that opposed the term.  The 
negotiations concluded March 12.  The USDEL supported referencing a 
UN HIV/AIDS technical guide document which includes needle exchange 
and MAT as part of a treatment program.  USDEL succeeded in 
excluding the term "harm reduction" in the concluding documents.  In 
contrast to previous years, this year's documents focus on both 
supply reduction (eradication, interdiction) and demand reduction 
and treatment services.  In the past, the focus had been largely on 
supply reduction. 
 
¶17. (U) Thanks largely to the new U.S. approach on needle exchange, 
the EU was split, with Germany, the U.K. Netherlands persistently 
pressing for "harm reduction," whereas Sweden, France and Italy were 
opposed.  The parliamentary maneuvers at the negotiations' 
conclusion, however, shifted public focus away from the relatively 
positive outcome for the talks. 
 
----------------------------- 
But Some Euros Express Regret 
----------------------------- 
 
¶18. (U) Immediately after the adoption of the documents, a group of 
like-minded countries, led by Germany, delivered a statement that 
they would interpret "related support services," a term embedded 
within the document, to mean "harm reduction."  This set off a round 
of interventions from Colombia, Russia, Cuba, and Japan, among 
others, objecting to the German move for both parliamentary and 
substantive reasons.  USDEL head INL Assistant Secretary David 
Johnson delivered a statement for the United States (text attached) 
which aimed at the high road, focusing on the consensus agreement 
and restating that the documents meant what they actually said.  In 
this way the USDEL was able to avoid leaving Colombia--a close ally 
on these issues the past ten months--exposed, but avoided making 
this a U.S. vs. Europe issue.  (Note:  The German and Swiss 
delegates privately thanked the USDEL for this after the meeting. 
End Note) 
 
------------------------- 
The Political Declaration 
and Action Plan 
------------------------- 
 
¶19. (U) The USDEL succeeded in ensuring that the a political 
declaration and 40 page action plan adopted by the high-level 
commission underscored strong support for the three drug control 
conventions and reaffirmed the 1998 commitments and projected a 
message of U.S. support for UN institutions.   Additionally the 
documents highlight the need for comprehensive evidence-based demand 
reduction programs. They also include extensive recommendations for 
Member States to scale-up programs in prevention, treatment, and 
support services.  Recommendations in supply reduction include focus 
on new areas such as the need for security, governance and rule of 
law to promote elimination of drug trafficking and illicit 
cultivation.  Also included are key commitments to advance chemical 
control, target production of amphetamine-type stimulants, promote 
judicial cooperation, counter money laundering, and other areas in 
supply reduction.  All the documents are available at www.unodc.org 
 
--------------------------- 
A/S David Johnson Statement 
--------------------------- 
 
¶20. (U) "Thank you Madame Chairwoman for giving me the floor and 
thank you for your stewardship of these entire proceedings; it's 
been quite extraordinary.  I think that in this discussion we have 
now entered into I would not want us to lose sight of the fact that 
working together we have just accomplished a great deal. We've 
adopted a document by consensus that breathes life into the treaties 
and extends the work that we do into the future and shows that all 
of us facing a global issue can work together and that we can come 
up with a series of ideas that will help all of us to address a 
scourge that we face at home and that we face abroad. And I think we 
need to reflect upon that as we discuss this terminology issue. Now, 
we've had many debates over the course of the past several weeks on 
this issue that has been brought to the fore by our colleague from 
Germany. I think we've all spoken our piece if you will and we came 
to an agreement on a document by consensus. And I think as others in 
the room have said - Colombia, Russian Federation, for example - the 
document means what it says and in the way we have agreed to it by 
consensus. Thank you Madame Chairperson." 
 
 
 
UNVIE VIEN 00000110  005 OF 005 
 
 
GPYATT