09USUNNEWYORK1146
GA PLENARY: ANNUAL DEBATE: THE SITUATION IN THE
Tue Dec 22 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO3013
RR RUEHIK
DE RUCNDT #1146/01 3561519
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 221519Z DEC 09
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7888
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE
RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVE
RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RUEHZJ/HUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL COLLECTIVE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 USUN NEW YORK 001146 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM KPAL IS
SUBJECT: GA PLENARY: ANNUAL DEBATE: THE SITUATION IN THE 
MIDDLE EAST AND THE QUESTION OF PALESTINE 
 
USUN NEW Y 00001146  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: The General Assembly met from November 30 - 
December 2 on the "Question of Palestine" and "Situation in 
the Middle East."  The debate on the Question of Palestine 
included speeches from the President of the General Assembly, 
42 countries and the Palestine Observer Mission.  Most 
Speakers condemned the situation in the Palestinian 
territories and expressed solidarity with the Palestinian 
people.  Israel noted the biased nature of the resolutions 
under this agenda item and the report by the Committee on the 
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.  Sweden, on 
behalf of the EU called for a comprehensive settlement of the 
Israel-Palestine issue.  The debate on the Situation in the 
Middle East included speeches from 12 countries.  The 
majority of the speeches attacked Israeli actions, but some 
also called for all sides to work towards peace.  Australia 
called on Hamas to end its rocket attacks on Israel and 
expressed concern about a the IAEA findings of evidence that 
there had been nuclear related activity in Syria.  The Syrian 
PermRep, in what appeared to be an unscripted right of reply, 
decried Australia's "ignorance" of the reason for the General 
Assembly debate on the Situation in the Middle East.  He said 
the debate is held to focus on Israeli occupation and 
violations carried out against the Palestinian people, and 
Israeli violations of the NPT.  Following the debate the 
General Assembly took action on six resolutions, all of which 
passed by a large margin.  On December 16 the General 
Assembly adopted the EU-drafted resolution "Assistance to the 
Palestinian People" by consensus. 
 
¶2. (SBU) PGA Treki opened the three days of debate with a 
statement noting that the Palestinian problem is the oldest 
unresolved issue before the GA.  He stated that "the fact 
that the question of Palestine is still unresolved weighs 
heavily on the UN."  Treki noted the impact of the blockade 
of the Gaza strip and the impact of "collective punishment" 
on the Palestinian people.  He said that the question of 
Palestine is at a "critical juncture" and that a sustained 
focus and reinvigoration of the peace process is needed. 
 
------------------------- 
The Question of Palestine 
------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) The Senegalese PermRep and Chairman of the Committee 
on the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, 
introduced the four draft resolutions under the agenda item 
Question of Palestine.  He stated that the situation is 
"bleak" and worsening in Gaza due to last winter's Israeli 
military offensive.  He noted that there is no support for 
settlements or Israel's claim over the whole of Jerusalem. 
Senegal's PermRep stated that the Committee supports the 
two-state solution and that "serious, honest and good-faith 
negotiations" must be held on all permanent status issues. 
The PermRep of Malta, Rapporteur of the Committee, noted that 
actions of the Israeli Defense Forces during Operation Cast 
Lead led to allegations of violations of international 
humanitarian law, and possibly "war crimes".  He also noted 
the effects of the blockade, calling it "suffocating". 
 
-------------------------------- 
The Situation in the Middle East 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) The Egyptian PermRep introduced the two draft 
resolutions under the agenda item the Situation in the Middle 
East stating that the resolutions "are aimed at expressing 
the international community's rejection of Israel's 
continuing occupation and illegal activities in the occupied 
Arab territories".  He stated that the resolution on 
Jerusalem points out settlement activities to "alter the 
geographic and demographic features of the area, essentially 
to annex it in order to consolidate an illegal occupation". 
The Egyptian PermRep explained that the draft resolution on 
the Syrian Golan calls for an end of the illegal Israeli 
occupation.  He noted that both resolutions are designed to 
get Israel to negotiate the establishment of a Palestinian 
state, end the occupation of Arab territories, and end 
"illegal practices". 
 
-------------- 
General Debate 
-------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) The Palestinian Observer statement began by noting 
that Palestinians do not have a country, half of the 
Palestinian population continues to live as refugees, and the 
other half lives under occupation.  The Palestinians noted 
 
USUN NEW Y 00001146  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
that Israel continues to deny the rights of the Palestinian 
people and "to breach international law, including 
international humanitarian law and human rights law." 
Collective punishment, in the form of closures and blockades, 
continues as does settlement building in East Jerusalem, 
according to the Palestinian Observer Mission, but the 
Palestinian leadership is making efforts towards national 
unity and towards a comprehensive peace agreement.  The 
Palestinians called on Israel to fulfill its obligations 
under the road map - including the cessation of settlement 
activities. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Israel noted that it absorbed Jewish refugees when 
the creation of Israel in 1948 led Jewish citizens to be 
expelled from Arab countries, while Arab states have not 
absorbed Palestinian refugees.  Israel stated that it wants 
to re-enter negotiations with the Palestinians and is 
"serious about its intention to pursue peace."  Israel stated 
that it "will discuss peace at any time, anywhere, and 
without preconditions."  Israel reiterated its recent 
announcement of a policy of settlement restraint that 
includes the suspension of new permits and construction in 
the West Bank for a period of ten months.  Israel opined that 
Iran is the "most dangerous threat to peace in the region," 
because it exports violence, hatred and terrorism to the 
region through its funding and supplying of Hizballah and 
Hamas. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Egypt, on behalf of the NAM, called for the 
establishment of an independent, sovereign and viable 
Palestinian state with East Jerusalem as its capital.  Egypt 
cited the "illegal settlement activities" and the excessive 
and indiscriminate use of force by Israel, as impediments to 
the peace process.  Egypt stressed that the situation in Gaza 
is "unacceptable, un-sustainable and had negative 
repercussions on all efforts to advance the peace process" 
and called on Israel to open the borders to allow 
humanitarian aid into the Gaza Strip. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Sweden, speaking on behalf of the EU, expressed 
concerned about the lack of progress in the Middle East peace 
process.  The EU called on both parties to take concrete 
measures to resume negotiations.  The EU noted concern over 
settlement activities, house demolitions and evictions in the 
occupied territories and the effects of the closures on the 
Gaza Strip.  The EU called for a halt of rocket attacks on 
Israel and the release of Gilad Shalit.  The EU stated that 
it will continue promoting Palestinian state building efforts 
and will work with the Palestinian Authority on reform.  The 
EU welcomed "the positive steps taken by the Israeli 
authorities regarding the easing of restrictions on the West 
Bank." 
 
¶9. (SBU) Other notable speeches included Venezuela, Japan and 
Canada.  Venezuela stated that the Palestinian people are 
continuing "their memorable fight against the U.S. empire, 
their lackeys and the genocidal state of Israel, which runs 
over, kills and attempts to exterminate the Palestinian 
people."  Japan called for a two-state solution and for both 
sides to fulfill responsibilities under the previous 
agreements.  Canada stated that it respects Israel's right to 
exist securely within its borders and Palestine's right to 
exist.  Canada noted, with optimism, Israel's announcement of 
a 10 month moratorium on settlements construction in the West 
Bank and condemned the sporadic rocket attacks from southern 
Lebanon and Gaza. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Australia stated that a two-state solution is the 
only possible basis for negotiations.  Australia called for 
Israel to stop settlement activities and said that the 
Palestinians must have a unified and viable entity to engage 
in negotiations.  Australia called for:  Hamas to stop 
rejecting Israel's right to exist, Hamas to end rocket 
attacks on Israel, Israel to stop responding with 
disproportionate force, and an end to arms smuggling into 
Gaza and the release of Gilad Shalit.  Australia also called 
for respect of Lebanese sovereignty and integrity, expressed 
hope that Israeli-Syrian talks would resume, and noted with 
concern IAEA reports regarding finding of "undeclared nuclear 
materials" in Syria. 
 
¶11. (SBU) Right of Reply: Lebanon, in response to Israel's 
statement, noted that Hizballah was formed because of Israeli 
occupation of Lebanese territory.  Syria, in response to 
Australia's statement, noted that Australia "missed the point 
that the discussion...is on the Israeli occupation of Arab 
territories and ways to put an end to the continued Israeli 
 
USUN NEW Y 00001146  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
aggression against the people of the area."  Syria continued 
that Australia attempted to "deflect that issue by bringing 
in issues that had no relevance to the item under 
discussion."  The Syrian PermRep, finished what appeared to 
be an unscripted reply by stating that it is Israel that has 
rejected IAEA inspections and Australia, by ignoring this 
fact, demonstrated a serious bias. 
 
¶12. (SBU) Ambassador Richard Erdman delivered the U.S. 
explanation of vote (Note: The full text can be found at 
http://usun.state.gov/briefing/statements/200 9/132978.htm). 
Vote tallies have been forwarded to IO/UNP. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Assistance to the Palestinian People 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶13. (SBU) The EU drafted resolution, Assistance to the 
Palestinian People, was adopted by consensus on December 16. 
Israel joined consensus, but delivered an explanation of 
position.  The Israeli EOP called the resolution unique 
because it is "constructive" and seeks to assist Palestinians 
by increasing economic and development capacities.  Israel 
noted "due in part to Israeli measures" economic growth in 
the West Bank stands at eight percent.  Israel expressed 
concern that the resolution, particularly phrases referring 
to assistance to the Gaza Strip, do not take Israel's 
security needs into account.  Israel called for the 
Palestinians to return to bilateral negotiations. 
 
¶14. (SBU) The Palestinian Observer Mission noted that foreign 
aid and assistance is a "lifeline" for those living under 
"occupation" and as refugees.  The Palestinian Deputy PermRep 
stated that Israeli blockade is an "obstruction of 
assistance" and that most of the aid pledged at the Sharm 
el-Sheikh conference has not yet reached Gaza.  Further the 
Palestinian statement noted that Israel's willingness to join 
the consensus on the resolution "does not absolve Israel from 
its responsibilities under international humanitarian and 
human rights law to end the blockade." 
 
RICE