09USUNNEWYORK506
SOMALIA: UNSC BACKS UK DRAFT, DEFERS UNPKO
Thu May 14 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO4840
PP RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHGI RUEHJO RUEHMA RUEHMR RUEHPA RUEHRN RUEHTRO
DE RUCNDT #0506/01 1342113
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 142113Z MAY 09
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6576
INFO RUEHZO/AFRICAN UNION COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 USUN NEW YORK 000506 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF, IO, PM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PTER PHUM MARR MOPS KPKO UNSC SO
SUBJECT: SOMALIA: UNSC BACKS UK DRAFT, DEFERS UNPKO 
 
REF: A. USUN 303 
     ¶B. USUN 502 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: Security Council members welcomed the UK's 
draft resolution on UN support to the African Union Mission 
to Somalia (AMISOM) with only a few members advocating a 
rapid transfer to a UN peacekeeping operation (UNPKO) in 
Security Council consultations on May 13.  In a briefing 
preceding consultations, the Foreign Minister of Somalia's 
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) gave an upbeat 
assessment of his government's performance in recent clashes 
in Mogadishu.  Secretariat officials also briefed on 
political developments, contingency planning for a UNPKO and 
deployment of the UN's support package to AMISOM - including 
urgent measures by the Department of Field Support (DFS) in 
recent days to resupply AMISOM with rations, trauma kits, and 
airfield equipment.  End summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) In a briefing to the Council on May 13, U/SYG for 
Political Affairs Lynn Pascoe said that the political process 
under the Djibouti Agreement meant Somalis had the "best 
chance in decades" to move beyond conflict and stabilize 
their country.  He said the SYG, through Special 
Representative Ould-Abdallah, was implementing a political 
strategy that involved returning the process to Mogadishu, 
assisting TFG outreach to outlying groups, and consolidating 
Transitional Federal Institutions.  Pascoe welcomed the April 
23 donors' conference for the TFG and AMISOM, and praised TFG 
forces for repelling what he said was an "attempted coup" by 
Hassan Dahir Aweys and al-Shabaab.  On piracy, he said that 
SRSG Ould-Abdallah was working to coordinate the activities 
of the UN system, and welcomed the establishment of the 
Contact Group on Piracy off the coast of Somalia (CGPCS). 
DPKO U/SYG Le Roy notified the Council that Indonesia had 
volunteered to take a leading role in a UNPKO in Somalia once 
conditions were established, while Pakistan had volunteered 
maritime assets and Bangladesh and Uruguay had also pledged 
troops.  He reiterated the SYG's recommendation that any move 
towards a UNPKO should be "conditions-based" and not tied to 
a rigid timetable.  Subsequent consultations between USUN 
military staff and DPKO confirmed that Indonesia's offer to 
lead a potential UNPKO was delivered verbally and was 
accompanied by a pledge of an infantry battalion, a special 
forces company and an engineering company.  Bangladesh 
offered an infantry battalion (with the caveat that it could 
not supply armored personnel carriers) and shore patrol 
craft, while Pakistan offered naval assets and Uruguay 
offered military observers and staff officers. 
 
¶3. (SBU) U/SYG for Field Support Susana Malcorra said that 
the UN trust fund, bilateral support, and the UN logistical 
support package were each critical for AMISOM's success, and 
she announced that Sierra Leone had agreed to deploy an 
infantry battalion to help AMISOM fully deploy.  She 
highlighted the challenge of coordinating donations from 
bilateral, trust fund, and UN sources, and said that the AU 
was working to map all trust fund and donor contributions to 
AMISOM in order to help avoid gaps and eliminate the 
possibility of duplication.  Malcorra said that a final draft 
of the UN's MOU with the AU over support to AMISOM would be 
sent within the week to Addis Ababa for final approval by the 
AU.  Ideally, she said that the UN would need a presence in 
Mogadishu in order to oversee support to AMISOM, but as that 
was impossible due to security concerns, DFS would pursue 
interim oversight arrangements, including through 
contractors.  Malcorra also said that since the outbreak of 
hostilities between the TFG and al-Shabaab on May 9, DFS had 
made an emergency deployment of trauma kits, rations and 
airfield equipment intended to facilitate 24-hour operation 
of the airport. 
 
¶4. (SBU) TFG Foreign Minister Mohammed Omaar thanked the SYG 
for hosting the April 23 donors' conference and for the 
recommendations in his 16 April report, which he said the TFG 
welcomed and was ready to implement.  He told the Council 
that the TFG had succeeded in holding off al-Shabaab and 
Hizbul Islam advances, and that even after their attacks 
President Sharif remained open to dialogue in the interest of 
preventing further bloodshed.  Omaar was followed by the 
Czech Republic, which on behalf of the European Union praised 
the Secretary-General's phased approach to security in 
Somalia as presenting the "best available option." 
 
SC consultations 
 
¶5. (SBU) The SC then retired to closed consultations on the 
situation in Somalia.  The UK spoke first and formally 
introduced their draft resolution on Somalia, which had been 
previously circulated to Council members on Monday.  The UK 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000506  002 OF 002 
 
 
said that conditions were not in place for a UNPKO, and that 
the last few days were especially worrying as Sheikh Aweys, 
"with the apparent support of the Eritrean government," 
attempted to overthrow the Djibouti process.  Amb Rice 
followed, condemning recent attacks against the TFG and 
Somali people, recalling Eritrea's destructive role, and 
stating U.S. support for the use of targeted sanctions to 
support the peace process.  She praised the work of AMISOM 
and said that the U.S. backs continued support to the AU 
operation as under resolution 1863.  Amb. Rice cited the 
Somali FM's estimate (septel) that 290 foreign fighters were 
present in Mogadishu, and urged Council members to give 
thought to how they could support the TFG during its time of 
crisis.  She also reminded Council members of the upcoming 
May 29 plenary meeting of the CGPCS in New York. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Burkina Faso said it fully supported the SYG's 
phased approach and was committed to supporting the AU's 
forces.  France said that it "fully backed" the UK draft 
extending UN support to an AMISOM force "of 4000-6000" but 
said that a PKO could not be seriously envisioned in the 
current circumstances.  France also announced its intention 
to train 500 TFG troops in Djibouti.  Japan said that it 
could support the UK's draft "based on the assumption we will 
go for a UNPKO" (NOTE: Japan is particularly sensitive to the 
issue of UN assessments benefiting a non-UN mission, and 
favors a UNPKO link for budgetary reasons.  End note). 
Turkey said that the SYG's "prudent, phased approach is the 
only approach we can follow" and stated its readiness to 
train TFG forces.  China said that it supported continuing 
the UN's logistical support package, to be followed by a UN 
takeover of the mission "as soon as possible."  Costa Rica 
said it supported strengthening AMISOM through the SYG's 
phased approach, including "room for a possible UNPKO" based 
on conditions on the ground and stakeholders' views.  Austria 
said it supported the UK draft "in its main lines" and 
favored strengthening AMISOM while continuing contingency 
planning for a UNPKO.  Austria said that on piracy, an 
international legal basis needed to be sought to ensure 
suspected pirates are prosecuted. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Mexico said it supported the SYG's phased approach 
and trusted the SC would approve this option, including a 
UNPKO if conditions were met.  Mexico, the chair of the 
Somalia Sanctions Committee, said it was convinced sanctions 
should contribute to the political process, and that regional 
countries needed to do more to monitor illegal arms 
shipments.  Vietnam said it was critical to maintain UN 
support to AMISOM pending a SC decision on a UNPKO.  Libya 
said that President Sharif's leadership represented the best 
chance of stabilizing Somalia, and said that the Council 
should support AMISOM now "before deploying a UNPKO, 
especially from Pakistan and Bangladesh."  Uganda said it 
supported the UK draft in principal, and urged more speed in 
the UN's response to mobilize support and coordinate 
assistance during Somalia's "moment of truth."  Croatia said 
it fully supported the UK resolution.  Russia welcomed the UK 
draft and associated itself with the SYG's recommendation for 
continued support to AMISOM.  Russia said that the prospect 
of a UNPKO depended on Somali dedication to the peace process 
and significant progress in the security situation.  On 
piracy, Russia echoed Austria, saying that it would be useful 
to develop an international mechanism for ensuring 
prosecution of suspects. 
 
¶8. (SBU) In response to a question from Austria on the 
humanitarian consequences of recent fighting in Mogadishu, 
U/SYG Pascoe cited UNHCR estimates that approximately 50,000 
IDPs had returned to Mogadishu since January 2009, and that 
approximately 17,000 had been displaced from Mogadishu during 
fighting since May 9. 
 
Rice