09USUNNEWYORK687
MONUC AT THE UN: "ZERO TOLERANCE" FOR SEXUAL
Tue Jul 14 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO7114
PP RUEHTRO
DE RUCNDT #0687/01 1951814
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 141814Z JUL 09 ZDK
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6921
INFO RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHLGB/AMEMBASSY KIGALI PRIORITY 0330
RUEHKI/AMEMBASSY KINSHASA PRIORITY 1886UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 USUN NEW YORK 000687 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL UNSC CG XA ZF RW
SUBJECT: MONUC AT THE UN: "ZERO TOLERANCE" FOR SEXUAL 
VIOLENCE IN DRC ARMY 
 
¶1. (SBU) ACTION REQUESTS: PLEASE SEE PARAGRAPHS 11 AND 12. 
 
¶2. (SBU) SUMMARY. MONUC SRSG Doss on July 10 told the 
Security Council that significant progress was being made on 
integrating the DRC army (FARDC) and combating the FDLR and 
LRA rebel groups.  He warned of an ongoing humanitarian 
crisis in eastern DRC due to FDLR reprisals.  Doss made 
another pleas for an additional 16 helicopters for MONUC and 
intelligence on the armed groups.  Doss said DRC President 
Kabila had announced a "zero tolerance" policy for the FARDC 
and that Kabila had suspended the "infamous five" (senior 
FARDC officers accused of sexual violence) from positions of 
command.  Ambassador DiCarlo noted the critical need to 
address sexual violence and the humanitarian situation in the 
east, and expressed appreciation for MONUC's innovative 
efforts to protect civilians.  The Council President (Uganda) 
delivered a press statement, proposed by Costa Rica through 
France, that expressed support for MONUC, welcomed the recent 
announcement by Congolese authorities of a "zero tolerance" 
policy on misconduct by the armed forces, and encouraged 
those authorities to take further steps in this regard.  In a 
bilateral meeting between Doss and Ambassador Rice on July 9, 
Doss asked the U.S. for real-time intelligence, especially 
information on the location of FDLR and LRA members.  He told 
Rice he has been considering including in the next MONUC 
report a suggestion that a way be found for the international 
community to provide $150 million to pay FARDC troops in the 
belief that the troops would then behave responsibly during 
the orderly drawdown of both the FARDC and MONUC.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
PROGRESS TOWARDS TROOP INTEGRATION AND AGAINST THE FDLR 
 
¶3. (SBU)  On July 10, UN Organization Mission in the 
Democratic Republic of Congo (MONUC) Special Representative 
to the Secretary General (SRSG) Alan Doss told the Security 
Council in an open session that since his last report three 
months ago, MONUC has made significant progress in two of its 
mandated tasks:  1) the integration of former rebel 
combatants into DRC's national army (FARDC) and 2) operations 
"Kimia II" to combat the Democratic Forces for the Liberation 
of Rwanda (FDLR), and Rudia II to combat the Lord's 
Resistance Army of Uganda (LRA). Doss said that the DRC is 
presently experiencing grave humanitarian consequences at the 
hands of these rebel groups. 
 
¶4. (SBU) MONUC's capacity is stretched thin, Doss stated, 
with about two-thirds of the troops in the Kivus, and another 
20 percent stationed in LRA-affected north DRC. Although he 
explained that the arrival of the additional troops mandated 
in SCR 1843 would alleviate some of the problem, the 
opposition from rebel groups remains strong. He described the 
initial success of Operation Kimia II against the FDLR in 
South Kivu, noting the rebel group has already lost some of 
its hold in certain areas and MONUC's achievement of 
repatriating 10,000 Rwandans since January 2009, 1,206 of 
whom were former combatants.  In Operation Rudia II against 
the LRA, Doss said 109 LRA members had been killed and 115 
arrested.  However, he expressed concern about the LRA's 
increased abduction of children, who are then trained as 
soldiers in order to replenish LRA's lost troops.  Doss 
repeated his request to the Council for 16 additional 
military helicopters and aerial forces needed to track and 
combat rebel groups, and specifically asked for intelligence 
from international partners on the armed groups in the DRC. 
 
"ZERO TOLERANCE" FOR SEXUAL VIOLENCE IN THE FARDC 
 
¶5. (SBU) Doss described the deepened cooperation between the 
FARDC and MONUC, particularly in addressing the scourge of 
sexual violence.  He noted that President Kabila announced a 
"zero tolerance" attitude towards FARDC soldiers accused of 
sexual violence and said Kabila was sending his Minister of 
Defense to all military commands to convey that commanders 
would be held accountable for the actions of their troops. 
Doss confirmed that Kabila had ordered the removal from 
command of the four senior FARDC officers given to the DRC 
government by the Security Council during its visit to 
Kinshasa on May 19, and that military tribunals were to be 
called to bring those four to justice (Note:  the fifth named 
officer of the "infamous five" was already in custody on 
other charges.  End Note). 
 
MONUC TO TRAIN FARDC 
 
¶6. (SBU) MONUC would train two FARDC brigades this year, Doss 
said, and an additional two in May 2010.  He thanked Tanzania 
for offering 200 trainers to help the FARDC integrate its 
diverse elements, primarily former militia members in the 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000687  002 OF 003 
 
 
east.  Doss noted that the FARDC army, with all its problems 
and abuses, was the "political price for peace," and he 
lauded the improved bilateral Rwandan/DRC relationship.  Doss 
also expressed hope for local elections to be held in early 
2010 in the DRC, but commented they would require logistical 
support from the international community. 
 
SEXUAL VIOLENCE OF GRAVE CONCERN TO THE COUNCIL 
 
¶7. (SBU) Ambassador DiCarlo, as the meeting continued in 
closed consultations, acknowledged some of the recent 
positive developments in eastern DRC, but noted the critical 
need to address the problem of sexual violence and the grave 
humanitarian situation stemming from the "Kimia II" 
operation.  She expressed appreciation for MONUC's innovative 
efforts to protect civilians, and suggested the possibility 
of replicating its successful approaches in other UN 
missions. 
 
¶8. (SBU) All Council members condemned the human rights 
abuses, humanitarian violations, sexual crimes, violence 
against women and children, and attacks on civilians by the 
FDLR and LRA.  There was widespread agreement on the need to 
end impunity for members of the FARDC as well as to promote 
regional cooperation, especially between the DRC and Rwanda. 
Finally, there was general consensus on the need to pursue a 
multidimensional--as opposed to a purely military--approach 
to security sector reform.  France called for measurable 
benchmarks with which to judge MONUC's ability to perform its 
mandate. Mexico requested additional information on MONUC's 
limitations regarding its ability to protect civilians. 
Burkina Faso encouraged greater cooperation in planning 
military operations between MONUC and the FARDC.  The UK 
suggested a "consortium of the willing" for international 
donors to assist with a coordinated program for security 
sector reform. 
 
PRESS STATEMENT ISSUED TO SUPPORT MONUC AND CONDEMN ATTACKS 
ON CIVILIANS 
 
¶9. (SBU) France, at the request of Costa Rica, tabled a press 
statement expressing, inter alia, the Council's full support 
for MONUC's efforts to protect civilians and its grave 
concern regarding targeted attacks against civilians. 
Ambassador DiCarlo expressed support for this press 
statement, but noted the need for a strong Council message of 
concern if the DRC government failed to act on its 
commitments to address sexual violence and hold the "infamous 
five" to account.  Ugandan PermRep Rugunda, as President of 
the Security Council for July, delivered the remarks to the 
press following the session. 
 
DOSS TELLS U.S. HIS PLAN TO DEAL WITH FDLR 
 
¶10. (SBU) In a bilateral meeting with Ambassador Rice on July 
9, Doss confirmed Kabila had ordered the removal of the 
"infamous five" from their positions of command.  Doss asked 
for time, until the end of July, to pressure Kabila quietly 
to hold the "five" accountable before anyone "name and shame" 
the DRC government. On the issue of how to address the FDLR, 
Doss suggested keeping them "bottled up" by using special 
operations forces and by offering incentives to those FDLR 
members not connected to the Rwandan genocide, including the 
possibility of offering DRC citizenship to those with a 
genuine claim and to resettle them elsewhere the DRC.  He 
said Rwanda could be more forthcoming in welcoming home FDLR 
members, but noted that no reports of Rwandan abuse of 
returnees had surfaced. 
 
DOSS ASKS THE U.S. FOR REAL-TIME INTELLIGENCE HELP... 
 
¶11. (SBU) Doss requested additional intelligence access from 
the U.S., especially regarding real-time position information 
for members of the LRA and FDLR.  ACTION REQUEST:  USUN seeks 
guidance from the Department regarding this request. 
 
... AND HELP IN GETTING THE 16 HELICOPTERS 
 
¶12. (SBU) In response to Ambassador Rice's question regarding 
what other nations could provide the 16 additional military 
utility helicopters authorized in SCR 1856, Doss said South 
Africa, Switzerland, Peru, Moldova, and Ukraine were 
potential donors.  ACTION REQUEST:  USUN requests that the 
Department includes these countries in its efforts to 
identify additional air support for MONUC. 
 
DOSS' IDEA TO PAY TROOPS TO DRAW FARDC DOWN 
 
¶13. (SBU) Finally, Doss said he realized that it makes little 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000687  003 OF 003 
 
 
long-term sense to maintain a massive FARDC to counter a 
total of 6,000 FDLR and LRA combatants.  He said that in the 
shorter term, however, "Kabila can't put 50,000 former FARDC 
troops on the street at once."  He said that FARDC troops 
tended to behave properly and perform professionally when 
they got paid regularly.  He said he is considering inclusion 
in the next SYG report on MONUC a suggestion that the 
international community find a way to raise the $150 million 
it would take to pay all FARDC troops for a year to ensure an 
orderly drawdown of the army and set the stage for MONUC's 
own eventual drawdown. 
RICE