09USUNNEWYORK864
UN COMMEMORATION OF 60 YEARS OF UNRWA
Wed Sep 30 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO8076
OO RUEHROV
DE RUCNDT #0864/01 2731439
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 301439Z SEP 09
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7226
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 USUN NEW YORK 000864 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PREF UNRWA KPAL IS
SUBJECT: UN COMMEMORATION OF 60 YEARS OF UNRWA 
 
REF: A. USUN 831 
     ¶B. USUN 806 
     ¶C. USUN 798 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: The commemoration of the 60th anniversary 
of the founding of United National Relief and Works Agency 
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) special 
high-level meeting of the General Assembly took place at UN 
headquarters September 24, 2009.  The event was an 
opportunity for UN member states and representatives of the 
UN community to recognize the work of UNRWA over the past six 
decades and to discuss challenges UNRWA faces in the 
implementation of its mandate.  Palestinian Authority 
President Mahmoud Abbas delivered an address focused on the 
Palestinian "right of return" as laid out in UN General 
Assembly Resolution (GA Res) 194.  UN Secretary General (SYG) 
Ban suggested that the General Assembly review UNRWA's 
budgeting, as currently only a small percentage is allocated 
from the UN regular budget with the rest provided by 
voluntary contributions.  Members of the Arab group used the 
meeting to reiterate support for right of return under GA Res 
194 and to accuse Israel of attacks targeting UNRWA. 
Portugal, current chair of the Western Europe and others 
group (WEOG), and the United States both expressed support 
for UNRWA and noted regret that Israel was denied a speaking 
role at the event.  Representatives of the five regional 
groups, the EU Presidency (Sweden), and the European 
Commission focused on commemorating UNRWA's work and the need 
to provide the agency with adequate resources.  The 
high-level speakers' event was preceeded by a panel debate 
and remarks by President of the General Assembly Dr. Ali 
Treki and UNRWA Commissioner-General Karen AbuZayd.  End 
Summary. 
 
-------------- 
Abbas' Remarks 
-------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Palestinian Authority President Abbas expressed deep 
gratitude for the support and assistance of UNRWA to 
Palestinian refugees.  He said the anniversary was a time to 
renew commitment to a "just, agreed and lasting solution to 
the plight of the Palestine refugees, in accordance with 
international law and UN resolutions."  Noting that more than 
half of the Palestinian people worldwide - 4.7 million - are 
refugees, Abbas said that "the Palestinian people remain a 
stateless and oppressed people, still suffering from the 
grave injustice inflicted upon them in the 1948 Al-Nakba." 
Praising UNRWA's assistance as invaluable, especially in 
periods of crisis, Abbas highlighted, "the brutal Israeli 
military aggression against our people in the Gaza Strip" 
adding that they "continue to suffer tremendously under the 
collective punishment of the inhuman Israeli blockade." 
Abbas accused Israel of deliberately attacking UNRWA 
facilities, "including schools where civilians were known to 
be sheltering."  While calling for a return to the peace 
process, Abbas asserted, "Israel's security is linked to our 
independence and to our security, and the continuation of the 
occupation and Al-Nakba does not bring security to anyone." 
(Comment: Abbas' mentioned GA Res 194 four times during his 
speech.  Palestinian contacts said that highlighting GA Res 
194 shows Palestinians that Abbas' remains committed to the 
"right of return."  End comment) 
 
---------------------- 
UN and UNRWA officials 
---------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU)  GA President Treki noted that the resolution that 
established UNRWA was adopted in 1949 without opposition and 
that the General Assembly offers, "near universal support for 
UNRWA's work and renewing its mandate."  (Note: While the 
U.S. fully supports UNRWA, it regularly abstains or votes 
against UNRWA-related resolutions as they contain 
politically-charged language that seeks to prejudice the 
outcome of final status negotiations.  End note.)  Treki 
praised UNRWA's local staff's "extraordinary dedication to UN 
principles, upholding humanitarian impartiality towards all 
parties to the conflict, often in the face of violence 
directly affecting their families."  Speaking off-script, 
Treki expressed hope that Palestinian refugees would be able 
to soon return to their homeland.  UNRWA Commissioner-General 
AbuZayd called for additional financial support, and 
commented, "The protracted exile of Palestine refugees and 
the dire conditions they endure, particularly in the occupied 
Palestinian territory, cannot be reconciled with State 
obligations under the United Nations Charter."  AbuZayd 
continued, "UNRWA stands ready to play its constructive and 
enabling role to ensure that the Palestine refugee voice is 
heard and that their interests and choices are reflected in 
any future agreement."  AbuZayd highlighted UNRWA's work in 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000864  002 OF 004 
 
 
providing humanitarian assistance and human development to 
members of a future Palestinian state.  SYG Ban honored the 
work of UNRWA, and suggested that the General Assembly review 
UNRWA's budgeting, as currently only a small percentage is 
allocated from the UN regular budget with the rest provided 
by voluntary contributions.  He said that the Agency is too 
important to suffer "budget crisis after budget crisis."  Ban 
expressed support for President Obama's efforts for a 
resumption of negotiations towards a two-state solution to 
the Israeli- Palestinian conflict. 
 
------------------------- 
Regional Group Statements 
------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU)  With the notable exception of Algeria, 
representatives of the five regional groups, the EU 
Presidency (Sweden), and the European Commission all 
delivered remarks focused on commemorating UNRWA's work and 
the need to provide the agency with adequate resources.  The 
Minister of Foreign Affairs of Guyana Rodrigues-Birkett, on 
behalf of the group of Latin American and Caribbean States 
(GRULAC), called UNRWA an important contribution to peace and 
stability in the region.  Japanese Foreign Minister Okada, 
speaking on behalf of the Asia Group, underlined Japan's 
contributions to UNRWA and the Palestinian people totaling to 
more than one billion dollars since 1993.  Poland's Deputy 
Foreign Minister Bernatowicz expressed the Eastern European 
Group's appreciation for UNRWA and noted that the agency has 
"evolved from a relief and resettlement organization to one 
focused on relief and development."  Portuguese Minister of 
State and Foreign Affairs Amado delivered the WEOG statement, 
which noted "The State of Israel, a concerned party, 
requested the opportunity to address you today from this 
podium.  The WEOG regrets that it was not possible to agree 
on an appropriate format for its participation."  (Note: 
Reftels describe consideration of Israel's request.  End 
note.)  The WEOG statement also called for "unimpeded access 
for humanitarian aid, including food, fuel, and humanitarian 
assistance as foreseen in Security Council Resolution 1860." 
 
¶5. (SBU) Swedish Minister for International Development 
Cooperation Carlsson, speaking on behalf of the EU 
Presidency, stressed the need for "a fair, stable and 
equitable solution to the question of Palestine refugees." 
Noting that limited access constrains UNRWA's ability to 
fulfill its mandate, she said "The EU calls for the immediate 
and unconditional opening of crossings for the flow of 
humanitarian aid, commercials goods and persons to and from 
Gaza."  Sweden said it is unsustainable that ninety percent 
of the agency's resources are provided by only fifteen 
countries.  Carlsson said that, "Respect for international 
law including international humanitarian law and human rights 
law has guided the EU's policy, not only with respect to the 
conflict between Israel and its neighbors, but also EU 
support to UNRWA."  The European Commission's Deputy Director 
General for External Relations Mingarelli said that President 
Obama's address to the UN General Assembly will allow for a 
return to negotiations.  Striking a distinctly different 
tone, Algeria's Ambassador to the U.S. Abdallah Baali, 
speaking on behalf of the Africa group, focused his remarks 
on the ongoing Israeli-Palestinian conflict.  He called for 
resolution of the Palestinian refugee issue in accordance 
with international law and the UN charter and noted "the 
right of return must be part of any fair and definitive 
settlement." 
 
--------------------- 
Arab Group Statements 
--------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) MFA Under Secretary for Multilateral Affairs of 
Saudi Arabia Prince Torki Al Kabir expressed gratitude for 
all those who had worked to mitigate the suffering of 
Palestinian refugees.  He condemned "recent aggression 
carried out by Israel on the Gaza Strip" where "the Israeli 
occupation army launched direct and deliberate strikes on the 
UNRWA buildings and facilities, ignoring the humanitarian 
help and aid provided by the agency to Palestinian refugees 
who are the victim of the Israeli brutal aggression and 
occupation."  He stated Saudi Arabia's contributions to the 
Palestinian National Authority's budget and UNRWA's budget 
from 2002-2009 totaled 734.8 million USD.  Saying that the 
international community rejects the policy of settlements and 
demands its complete cessation, including in East Jerusalem, 
he called for lifting restrictions placed on UNRWA and its 
staff and compelling Israel to exempt humanitarian assistance 
provided by UNRWA from the "exorbitant taxes" it imposes. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Naela Gabr, Deputy Foreign Minister of Egypt, said 
that UNRWA provided for the "minimum" needs of Palestinian 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000864  003 OF 004 
 
 
refugees.  She called on member states to show their support 
to the Palestinian people by increasing contributions to 
UNRWA.  Gabr noted the continued decline in humanitarian 
conditions within the Palestinian territories, compounded in 
the Gaza by the Israeli blockade.  She called the blockade a 
clear violation of international law, and said that until a 
just solution could be found in accordance with GA Res 194, 
Egypt will continue to support the work of UNRWA. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Jordanian Foreign Minister Judeh expressed strong 
support for President Obama's efforts to end settlement 
activity and for a two-state solution to the conflict.  Judeh 
urged the international community to provide financial 
support to UNRWA.  He noted that Jordan, as the country 
hosting the greatest number of Palestinian refugees, faces 
financial burdens.  He said Israel bears the historic 
responsibility for the refugee crisis, and recalled the right 
of host countries to reparations for outlays spent on refugee 
support.  Judeh criticized the suggestion that UNRWA be 
eliminated and its mandate folded into the UN High 
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).  He reiterated that a 
settlement to the conflict would need to take into 
consideration Palestinian rights, including the "right of 
return." 
 
¶9. (SBU) Lebanese Foreign Minister Fawzi Salloukh noted that 
the commemoration of UNRWA also marked 60 years of human 
suffering endured by Palestinian refugees.  He said that 
until a just resolution of the plight of refugees can be 
reached in accordance with GA Res 194, the refugees are "the 
responsibility of the whole international community."  He 
reiterated the claim that UNRWA's offices and staff have been 
targeted by the Israeli military.  Sallouk noted that even 
with Lebanon's financial resources, it tried to assist 
Palestinian refugees.  He expressed Lebanon's support for 
efforts to restart negotiations for a political solution to 
the conflict, but claimed that Israel has not been 
cooperative with efforts thus far. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Syrian Foreign Minister Walid al-Moallem said that 
the 60th anniversary of UNRWA underscored the fact that the 
Palestinian people had been suffering under great injustice 
since 1948.  He stressed that no solution to the refugee 
problem has been reached as called for by GA Res 194, and 
that Israel, "the occupying power," is only making the 
situation more difficult by curtailing access to refugees and 
continuing to build settlements.  He called for increased 
support for UNRWA, noting that Syria and other host countries 
face financial burdens from supporting the refugees.  He 
called for the establishment of a Palestinian state with East 
Jerusalem its capital and the return of the Golan Heights to 
Syria. 
 
------------ 
US Statement 
------------ 
 
¶11. (SBU) Assistant Secretary of State for the Bureau of 
Population, Refugees, and Migration Eric Schwartz, noted in 
the U.S. statement that "In light of Israel's special role in 
facilitating UNRWA's mission, we deeply regret that Israel's 
request to publicly recognize UNRWA's efforts by speaking in 
this forum was not approved."  The statement also reiterated 
strong U.S. support for UNRWA's mandate and work, including 
its contributions to the human development of the future 
Palestinian state.  A/S Schwartz remarked that the U.S. is 
UNRWA's largest bilateral donor, with over $260 million 
provided in 2009, and urged other donor governments, 
especially those from within the region, to provide 
contributions to UNRWA's General Fund.  (The full text of the 
U.S. remarks, as well as several other countries' statements, 
can be found at: 
http://www.un.org/unrwa/newyork/praises.html) . 
 
------------ 
Panel Debate 
------------ 
 
¶12. (SBU) During the panel debate, held before the high-level 
speeches, Spanish Foreign Minister Moratinos highlighted 
Spain's contributions to Palestinian refugees and said that 
the time has come to establish a Palestinian state.  UAE 
Minister of State Reem Al Hashimy called on the international 
community to force Israel to stop aggression against 
Palestinian refugee camps and remove blockades and closures, 
to reiterate the UN's responsibility towards the Palestinian 
refugees, and to double contributions to UNRWA.  UNHCR 
Antonio Guterres spoke of UNRWA's unique mandate and said 
that it "does not make sense" to merge UNRWA and UNHCR given 
the differences between the organizations' mandates. 
Guterres stated that UNRWA's work has played an important 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000864  004 OF 004 
 
 
role in showing, in a positive light, the work of the UN.  UN 
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs John Holmes 
commended the work of UNRWA and called for opening the 
crossings between Israel and Gaza and said that the provision 
of humanitarian assistance should never be subject to 
political considerations.  Rami Khouri, Director of the Issam 
Fares Institute for Public Policy at the American University 
of Beirut, called for greater understanding of the foundation 
of political Zionism, as a movement for "the opportunity to 
live a normal life" predating the Holocaust.  Drawing a 
parallel to the aspirations of the Palestinian refugees to 
live normal lives, Khouri said "they (the refugees) are not 
going away." 
 
¶13. (U) NEA DAS Connelly amnd PRM/ANE have cleared this 
message. 
RICE