10BAGHDAD74
S/GWI PROJECT PROPOSAL: WOMEN TRAFFICKING VICTIMS
Tue Jan 12 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXYZ0005
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHGB #0074/01 0120534
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 120534Z JAN 10 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6086
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDCUNCLAS BAGHDAD 000074 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWMN PREL KPAO PHUM TIP AID SGWI TRSY ODAG
OPDAT, ICITAP, NEA/1 
SUBJECT: S/GWI PROJECT PROPOSAL: WOMEN TRAFFICKING VICTIMS 
IN IRAQ 
 
REF: STATE 00132094 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Summary:  Despite the absence of comprehensive 
data, trafficking of women and girls for the purposes of 
commercial sexual exploitation and indentured servitude in 
Iraq appears to be a persistent and widespread problem.  As 
the Government of Iraq (GOI) has not taken significant steps 
to address its trafficking problem and lacks the capacity to 
provide protection and rehabilitation services to victims of 
trafficking, this responsibility has fallen to NGOs and civil 
society.  The Organization for Women's Freedom in Iraq 
(OWFI), a Baghdad-based NGO, has set up a rehabilitation and 
reintegration process to provide women and girl victims of 
trafficking the economic and educational support to leave 
their histories of abuse and exploitation behind and become 
productive members of Iraqi society.  The structured, 
sustainable, and easily measurable nature of OWFI's 
standardized 12-month reintegration program for female 
victims of trafficking lends itself to the conventions of 
S/GWI's small grants initiative.  The following funding 
request proposes that S/GWI allocate USD 100,000 in funding 
through its small grants initiative to OWFI for a 12-month 
period to support the group's work in combating the 
devastating effects of human trafficking, increasing 
awareness of human trafficking, and reducing the cultural and 
social stigmas facing female victims of trafficking and 
sexual exploitation. End summary. 
 
TRAFFICKING IN WOMEN AND GIRLS IN IRAQ 
---------------------------------------- 
 
 ¶2.  (SBU)  Iraqi women and children are trafficked within 
the country and abroad for commercial sexual exploitation. 
While there are no official figures on how many Iraqi women 
and girls have been trafficked due to the diffuse and highly 
stigmatized nature of the problem, some Baghdad-based 
activists place the figure in the tens of thousands. 
Syria, Jordan, Kuwait, Qatar, Yemen, Turkey, Iran, and United 
Arab Emirates are destination countries for these women and 
girls.  NGO contacts find that difficulties with quantifying 
the scale of the problem are compounded by a common 
understanding among traffickers that it is easier to take 
victims across borders on fake documents than to cross from 
province to province within Iraq, where there is a greater 
likelihood that victims will be recognized by relatives or 
acquaintances.  Years of instability and violence following 
the fall of the Saddam regime created a unique set of 
demographic, social, and economic problems in Iraq that have 
enabled traffickers and criminal elements to take advantage 
of the lack of police oversight and GOI capacity to target 
widows, women, and girls whose destitution and lack of access 
to basic services rendered them particularly vulnerable.  The 
stigma of compromised virginity in Iraq for female 
trafficking victims who do escape or get rescued from 
brothels, employers, or exploitative circumstances is 
significant, resulting in abandonment or violence for many 
victims at the hands of their families and communities. 
Unable and often unwilling to return to their families, women 
and girls who have been trafficked, raped, and otherwise 
abused and exploited lack a support system in Iraq.  In many 
cases, these victims require economic assistance to meet 
basic needs, as well as assistance with education and 
training, counseling, and medical care.    As the GOI has 
neither implemented legislation to prosecute and punish 
traffickers, nor taken decisive steps to protect and assist 
victims of trafficking, these individuals must rely on NGOs 
Qvictims of trafficking, these individuals must rely on NGOs 
and grassroots organizations for help.  Because prostitution 
is a crime in Iraq, some trafficking victims escape 
commercial sexual exploitation by getting arrested and 
landing in prisons and detention facilities.  The complex 
challenges facing this vulnerable community of women and 
girls requires a creative and flexible solution that exceeds 
the capacity and political will of the GOI. 
 
 
RECIPIENT ORGANIZATION AND WORK DESCRIPTION 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
 ¶3.  (SBU)   The Organization for Women's Freedom in Iraq 
(OWFI), a Baghdad-based NGO founded in 2003, assists current 
and former female prisoners and victims of trafficking, 
sexual exploitation, and abuse.   OWFI stands out as a 
well-established fixture among Iraqi NGOs in the nascent and 
rudimentary civil society that prevails in the nation's 
post-war environment.  The organization has 43 employees, of 
whom three are salaried administrators and accountants and 
the rest are volunteers.  The three salaried, administrative 
staff members are based in the greater Baghdad area, thereby 
ensuring sound technical and management capacity of the 
organization.  OWFI employees conduct visits to prisons and 
 
brothels to assist female victims of trafficking and, where 
possible, provide support to these women and oversee their 
reintegration into Iraqi society through a 12-month "host 
family" program.  Additionally, OWFI is currently providing 
subsistence assistance to approximately 20 women and girls in 
prisons and detention centers in Iraq.  OWFI president Yanar 
Mohammed conducts international outreach on a regular basis 
in Europe, the United States, and other countries in which 
large Iraqi refugee and diasporic communities reside, and a 
significant portion of OWFI's funding comes from overseas 
donors.  For security and political reasons, the organization 
does not manage a safe house or shelter of its own, instead 
relying heavily on a network of "friends," host families in 
the greater Baghdad area who receive stipends from OWFI to 
house and support women and girls who are rescued from 
brothels, detention centers, or other exploitative 
situations.  OWFI is officially registered with the Ministry 
of Planning, but receives no funds from GOI sources. 
 
 ¶4.  (SBU)  At present, OWFI is working with approximately 40 
women and girls who have been rescued from exploitative 
circumstances and placed with OWFI host families under the 
oversight of the organization's 12-month reintegration 
process.  The crux of OWFI's work revolves around guiding 
these victims, whose average age is between 15 and 20, 
through a year-long effort to rebuild their lives and prepare 
themselves to reenter Iraqi society in a safe, productive 
manner.  OWFI's system begins with an orientation process for 
a newly rescued victim, during which the organization 
introduces her to her host family and puts USD 100 towards 
buying her clothes, toiletries, and other essential items. 
The initial stage also involves assisting the victim by 
obtaining a "jensia"(identity document) for her.  This 
document is necessary for registering the individual in 
school and pursuing any future employment.  Host families 
oversee the school attendance, sustenance, and care of each 
girl in exchange for a monthly stipend of 200,000 Iraqi 
dinars (approximately  USD 173) per month.  OWFI also 
provides a USD 100 monthly allowance to each girl to use for 
her expenses, or to save for future use.  A thrice yearly 
clothing allowance of USD 400 is also provided to each 
program participant.  The yearly cost to OWFI for each female 
victim it guides through its 12-month program is USD 4500. 
By associating a tangible, monetary value to steps forward on 
education and employment, the OWFI program has created an 
incentive-based assistance program that provides the 
financial wherewithal to find a way forward without turning 
back to a life of exploitation and abuse, in the process 
increasing the opportunity cost of recidivism.  In order to 
guarantee that its funding is used appropriately and to help 
these women and girls troubleshoot the challenges they are 
likely to face during their year-long reintegration, OWFI 
conducts regular, unannounced home visits to each girl and 
host family throughout the process. 
 
 
PROPOSED BUDGET FOR OWFI SMALL GRANT 
------------------------------------- 
 
 ¶5.  (SBU)  While the OWFI's 12-month reintegration process 
for victims of trafficking and sexual exploitation is not a 
conventional project, it is a well-established process that 
lends itself well to S/GWI's small grants initiative.  All 
OWFI funding currently goes towards sustaining the 
organization's assistance mechanism for women and girl 
victims in OWFI host families, prisons, and detention 
Qvictims in OWFI host families, prisons, and detention 
centers.  The organization now seeks to enhance efforts 
toward two key priorities: increasing emphasis on education 
and training programs for victims and initiate an educational 
campaign raising awareness of the TIP problem in Iraq. 
 
 ¶6.  (SBU)  Embassy Baghdad's Political and Rule of Law 
sections propose a USD 100,000 funding request for OWFI, 
disseminated over a 12-month period: USD 45,000 to assist the 
organization with funding its core reintegration process for 
10 Iraqi women and girls, USD 10,000 for an assistance fund 
for women and girl trafficking victims in prison, and the 
remaining USD 45,000 to initiate formal programming on 
gender-based violence and further develop educational 
opportunities and training mechanisms for women and girls who 
receive OWFI support.  The first USD 45,000 allocation will 
help a fraction of the total number of victims the 
organization is currently assisting, but this level of USG 
support would free up other OWFI funds for use on longer-term 
projects.  This would enable the organization to divert some 
of its energies away from fundraising and towards the 
effective planning, allocation, and oversight of programs, 
including the effective use of the other USD 45,000 towards 
the creation of sustainable educational mechanisms and 
training on gender based violence. 
 
 
 
 ¶7.  (SBU)   This second allocation of USD 45,000 for the 
establishment of long-term education and training mechanisms 
and programming on gender-based violence will be broken down 
into the following budget items: USD 13,000 for the creation 
of an education and training program to assist women who 
successfully complete the OWFI's 12-month reintegration 
process, USD 13,000 for the creation and execution of an 
awareness campaign about gender-based violence and its links 
to human trafficking in Iraq; USD 13,000 for a year's salary 
for one Iraqi program manager to administer these two 
programs over the funding period; USD 5,000 for one scanner, 
one laptop computer, and several digital cameras to assist 
OWFI and program participants with documenting and collecting 
information that will assist the NGO with overseeing its 
grant and sending evidence of appropriate funding use to 
Embassy Baghdad's grant officer and grant representative; and 
USD 1,000 for the production of printed materials, including 
brochures to promote OWFI's campaign against gender-based 
violence and human trafficking. 
 
 ¶8.  (SBU)   The USD 10,000 prison assistance fund will be 
used on an ad hoc, case-by-case basis to assist with 
emergency medical treatment, medication, and other essential 
expenses for female trafficking victims who have been 
arrested or detained on prostitution charges.  The addition 
of these components to OWFI's portfolio of services for 
female victims of trafficking will contribute to a more 
robust support system for women in Iraq, a group that 
continues to be marginalized and vulnerable. 
 
GRANT MANAGEMENT, OVERSIGHT, & SUSTAINABILITY 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
 ¶9.  (SBU)   Embassy Baghdad's Office of the Rule of Law 
Coordinator has experience with the management and oversight 
of grants to Iraqi entities and is poised to work with OWFI 
to oversee the dissemination and appropriate use of funds 
over the proposed 12-month funding period.  An ROL advisor 
will serve as the grant representative for this project. 
Embassy Baghdad's TIP reporting officer will assist with this 
project, and will work with the grant representative and OWFI 
personnel on the set up of the funding arrangement and the 
allocation of funds towards particular components of the 
proposal.  OWFI staff have agreed to comply with USG-proposed 
oversight mechanisms for the funding period, including site 
visits by the grant officer and grant representatives, 
receipts for equipment expenditures, correspondence from 
program participants, and photographic evidence of project 
outcomes.  The grant officer and grant representative will 
also work with OWFI to ensure that OWFI provides adequate 
assurances for future funding for the proposed education and 
gender-based violence components are secured by OWFI to 
guarantee the sustainability of the project. 
 
 
IMPACTS ON THE BROADER IRAQI COMMUNITY 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶10.  (SBU)   This proposed funding for OWFI's assistance to 
Iraqi women and girl trafficking victims complements Embassy 
Baghdad's engagement with the GOI on initiatives related to 
capacity building, education, economic growth, and women's 
issues.  Both the root causes and the devastating effects of 
human trafficking touch each of these areas.  Due to the 
GOI's lack of capacity and political will to enforce 
substantive penalties for trafficking or to assist victims, 
further engagement with non-governmental entities is 
necessary to make initial progress on this issue.  While 
organizations like OWFI operate on a small scale, these 
Qorganizations like OWFI operate on a small scale, these 
entities form the only safety net available to female 
trafficking victims who escape or are rescued from cycles of 
entrenched poverty, abuse, and exploitation.  Efforts such as 
S/GWI's small grants initiative demonstrate USG support for 
these essential, if micro-level, efforts.  As this proposal 
marks the first anti-trafficking grant proposal initiated by 
Embassy Baghdad, it is a milestone in proposing a way forward 
in addressing a complex and serious problem that has hitherto 
received little attention in Iraq. 
 
 
¶11.  (SBU)   Until the GOI addresses Iraq's trafficking 
problem through legislation and protections for trafficking 
victims, Iraqi civil society will drive the effort to raise 
awareness of and make progress on combating human 
trafficking.  While USD 45,000 of the proposed USD 100,000 
funding amount will go toward to basic care and sustenance of 
female trafficking victims, this investment will pay 
dividends in raising awareness of the problem and creating a 
 
group of future advocates for OWFI's work and for the 
importance of women's education and empowerment.  Just as 
trafficking for the purposes of sexual exploitation in Iraq 
thrives because of a highly developed network of smugglers, 
document forgers, limited border security, and other criminal 
organizations, the work of OWFI and other like-minded efforts 
strives to combat trafficking by similarly creating a network 
of advocates, activists, host families, and former 
trafficking victims who can lend their experiences and 
efforts to helping other women and girls out of desperate 
circumstances and raising the awareness of TIP within the 
Iraqi public. 
HILL