10MADRID183
TENTH ANNUAL TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS (TIP) REPORT FOR SPAIN
Tue Feb 16 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Madrid
VZCZCXRO4695
RR RUEHIK
DE RUEHMD #0183/01 0471612
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 161612Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY MADRID
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1946
INFO RUEHBK/AMEMBASSY BANGKOK 0139
RUEHLA/AMCONSUL BARCELONA 4368
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 0764
RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA 0037
RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA 0018
RUEHBM/AMEMBASSY BUCHAREST 1426
RUCNCLC/CHILD LABOR COLLECTIVE
RHEFHLC/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHINGTON DC
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDC
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RUCNOSC/ORG FOR SECURITY CO OP IN EUR COLLECTIVE
RUEHOS/AMCONSUL LAGOS 0003
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 0996
RUEHSF/AMEMBASSY SOFIA 0743UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 16 MADRID 000183 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP (Jennifer Donnelly), G (Laura Pena), EUR/PGI 
(Jody Buckneberg) EUR/WE (Alex McKnight, Stacie Zerdecki) INL, DRL, 
PRM 
DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS TO USAID 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: N/A 
TAGS: KTIP KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD ASEC PREF ELAB KMCA
SP 
SUBJECT: TENTH ANNUAL TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS (TIP) REPORT FOR SPAIN 
 
REF: STATE 2094 
09 MADRID 1101 
 
MADRID 00000183  001.3 OF 016 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Pursuant to Ref A, the following is input from Embassy 
Madrid and CG Barcelona for the tenth annual Trafficking in Persons 
(TIP) Report.  Post will need to supply an update cable to 
incorporate additional legal and judicial statistics.  Embassy POC 
is POLOFF Hugh Clifton, Tel. (34) 91-587-2294, fax (34) 91-587-2391. 
 POL/MGT Officer Darby Parliament is the POC at the Consulate 
General in Barcelona: Tel. (34)93-280-2227, fax (34)93-205-7764. 
 
Staff hours spent in preparation of this report are as follows: 
POLITICAL COUNSELOR, FS-O1: 1 HOUR 
POLITICAL OFFICER, FS-04: 65 HOURS 
POLITICAL SPECIALIST, LES-10: 25 HOURS 
CONSULATE POLITICAL/MGMT OFFICER, FS-03: 10 HOURS 
CONSULATE POLITICAL SPECIALIST, LES-10: 10 HOURS 
 
//OVERVIEW// 
 
¶2. (SBU) Spain maintains an active set of political, legal and 
social mechanisms to combat trafficking in persons (TIP).  The 
Spanish government (GOS) places a high priority on fighting TIP and 
coordinates this fight with national and international law 
enforcement, regional and local governments, and non-governmental 
organizations (NGOs).  During the reporting period, Spain undertook 
a broad array of measures to assist trafficking victims, take down 
trafficking networks, prosecute perpetrators, prevent future 
trafficking, and reduce the demand for commercial sex acts.  Spain's 
efforts were highlighted by the multi-faceted implementation of the 
government's ambitious, three-year, 61-point plan to combat TIP for 
the purposes of sexual exploitation, which was approved in December 
2008 and came into force in January 2009.  The GOS has strict rules 
on the books for Spanish nationals caught participating in 
international child sex tourism, and Spanish peacekeepers deployed 
abroad receive anti-TIP training through participation in 
multilateral efforts.  The GOS is firmly committed to combating TIP 
and undertook a series of concrete actions in 2009 to carry out this 
political will.  Post firmly believes that the GOS's efforts during 
2009 merit Spain's continued inclusion in the Tier 1 category of 
countries combating TIP. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Spain remains both a transit and destination country for 
internationally trafficked persons, primarily women between the ages 
of 18 to 25 trafficked for prostitution.  Spain is generally not a 
country of origin for trafficking.  Statistical data and information 
on Spanish government efforts to combat TIP come from the Ministry 
of Interior, which includes the Spanish National Police (SNP) and 
the Civil Guard (GC), the Spanish national courts, and NGOs. 
 
//STATISTICS AND DATA// 
 
¶4. (SBU) Post fully expects the SNP once again to furnish us with a 
restricted internal report that provides detailed information on TIP 
enforcement trends, including TIP-related arrests and the number of 
trafficking victims identified during the reporting period.  Post 
will provide this information septel.  The GOS continues to 
distinguish between trafficking crimes and migrant smuggling, and 
government statistics and information clearly reflect this 
distinction. 
 
//SPAIN'S TIP SITUATION// 
 
¶5. (SBU) Checklist 25 A.  Statistical data and information on 
Spanish government efforts to combat TIP come from the Ministry of 
Interior - which includes the Spanish National Police (SNP) and the 
Civil Guard (GC) as well as the Ministry of Justice, the Spanish 
national courts, and NGOs.  The Spanish Network Against TIP, a 
coalition of more than 20 diverse and active NGOs, claims that there 
 
MADRID 00000183  002.3 OF 016 
 
 
are at least 50,000 people in Spain who are victims of TIP.  Spanish 
security services dispute this number as too large, although they do 
not offer their own estimates.  The GC reported in 2008 that 90 
percent of TIP victims in Spain are foreign nationals.  As in 
previous years, information on specific TIP-related investigations, 
convictions and sentencing was available through an on-line 
subscription to the Spanish affiliate of WESTLAW (www.westlaw.es), 
whose database includes data on a sub-set - but not all - of Spanish 
TIP-related prosecutions.  The Prosecutor's Office has made 
commendable progress in normalizing the compilation of its 
TIP-related judicial statistics and the Organized Crime Intelligence 
Center (CICO) is making solid progress in its one-stop shop database 
on TIP-related law enforcement data. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Checklist 25 B - D.  Spain continues to be both a 
destination and transit country for trafficked persons for the 
purposes of sexual exploitation, and to a lesser degree, forced 
labor.  Spain is generally not a country of origin for trafficking 
and the MFA informed Post that it knew of no such cases during 2009. 
 Trafficking in women and girls is mostly for sexual exploitation 
and prostitution.  According to Spanish law enforcement and NGOs, 
trafficked women traditionally have been 18 to 25 years of age, with 
some girls as young as 16.  Women were trafficked primarily from 
Eastern Europe (Romania and Russia), Latin America (Brazil and 
Colombia), and sub-Saharan Africa (Nigeria).  Data published by the 
Spanish media in May 2009 indicates that various regions in Spain 
favor women from one country or another, revealing geographical 
preference has a hand in the market.  For example, in Cantabria, 90 
percent are Brazilian; in Girona, the vast majority is from Romania. 
 Project Esperanza ("Project Hope"), one of the leading anti-TIP 
NGOs, has told Post that Romanian TIP victims form the largest 
victim group by nationality in Spain while Chinese TIP victims are a 
very small community in Spain. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Checklist 25 E.  In Spain, trafficking networks take a 
variety of forms and operate under diverse conditions, making them 
difficult to control.  The SNP's UCRIF unit publicly has noted that 
the traffickers can be run by a couple, a gang of friends, or by 
massive, highly structured groups that operate across borders as 
multinational operations.  In recent years, law enforcement 
authorities and NGOs have seen increasing incidents of victims being 
trafficked by individuals and smaller groups of traffickers. 
Proyecto Esperanza in 2009 reported that traffickers are most often 
groups of delinquents or organized crime groups and less often 
smaller groups of two to four people who are less organized and have 
fewer infrastructures at their disposal.  The Spanish chapter of 
Save the Children continues to indicate to Post that there have been 
numerous instances of minors - especially from Romania - being 
trafficked into Spain and forced to beg in the streets for money. 
Methods used by traffickers to maintain control of their victims 
have included physical abuse, forced use of drugs, withholding of 
travel documents, and threats to the victim's family, although now 
traffickers also threaten the victims with informing their families 
about what they do if they do not pay what they "owe" them. 
Traffickers also lured some victims from other regions by using 
violence, intimidation, coercion and deceit.  Other methods utilized 
include abuse of a position of authority or by taking advantage of a 
victim's needs or vulnerabilities.  Often, trafficked victims are 
lured by false promises of employment in service industries and 
agriculture, but then forced them into prostitution upon their 
arrival.  The media reported that criminal networks often lured 
their victims by using travel agencies and newspaper advertisements 
in their home countries that promised assured employment in Spain. 
In the case of Romanian organized networks, women were typically 
forced into prostitution. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Continue Checklist 25 E.  In 2009 Spain confronted several 
instances of voodoo as a method of intimidation for Nigerian TIP 
victims who were being sexually exploited.  Police in May discovered 
 
MADRID 00000183  003.3 OF 016 
 
 
an extensive human trafficking network of women in Seville brought 
from Nigeria and forced into prostitution in Spain where they were 
deterred from escape by threats of voodoo curses.  Before departing 
from Nigeria, they were taken to the shrine of a voodoo priest who 
took pieces of their fingernails and hair and performed a ritual in 
which he made the women swear they would not reveal the identity of 
their captors.  An SNP Inspector involved in the case assured Post 
that the woman who brought the trafficking network to the attention 
of authorities received victim assistance.  In August, Spanish 
authorities - working with German counterparts - disrupted a network 
of traffickers that brought women against their will from Nigeria to 
Germany via Spain, using false documentation to facilitate their 
entrance and employing voodoo as a vehicle of intimidation to force 
them into prostitution. 
 
//SETTING THE SCENE FOR SPAIN'S ANTI-TIP EFFORTS// 
 
¶9. (SBU) Checklist 26 A.  Spain acknowledges that it has a serious 
trafficking problem and government officials at the highest levels 
addressed the problem of trafficking during the reporting period and 
pledged to continue the anti-TIP fight.  Spain maintains an active 
set of political, legal and social mechanisms to combat TIP and 
coordinates this fight with national and international law 
enforcement, regional and local governments, and NGOs.  Spain has a 
multi-disciplinary approach to fighting trafficking and includes 
NGOs and relevant agencies in each case. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Checklist 26 B.  The GOS in 2008 created a Ministry of 
Equality in part to oversee the final stages of the formulation of 
and the implementation of the government's long awaited anti-TIP 
plan.  Spain's anti-TIP working group - now under the day-to-day 
management of the Ministry of Equality, which reports to the Office 
of the First Vice President - includes the Ministries of Interior, 
Justice, Labor, and Foreign Affairs.  The Ministry of Interior 
continues to coordinate day-to-day law enforcement efforts to combat 
trafficking and the SNP has a special unit, the Immigration Networks 
and Falsified Documents Unit (UCRIF), which covers TIP-related 
issues.  The UCRIF intelligence unit analyzes statistical data and 
trends, while coordinating efforts and sharing data with the GC and 
Interpol.  Regional offices of the SNP conduct quarterly reviews to 
set goals for combating trafficking and to assess progress in 
meeting these goals from the previous quarter. 
 
¶11. (SBU) Checklist 26 C-D.  While funding could always be 
increased, Spain treats TIP efforts as a priority and has funded its 
three-year national anti-TIP action plan with 44 million euros 
(roughly $61 million dollars).  In a December 2009 report, the 
Office of the Special Representative and Coordinator for Combating 
Trafficking in Human Beings at the Organization for Security and 
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) praised Spain for providing this 
"substantial" budget.  We have no evidence that there is any 
TIP-related corruption in Spain's government.  GOS efforts over the 
past year to implement its national action plan against TIP have 
allowed it to systematically monitor its anti-trafficking efforts on 
all fronts.  The GOS has shared its assessments with relevant NGOs 
in Spain, and also international organizations such as the OSCE. 
 
¶12. (SBU) Checklist 26 E.  All immigrants in Spain (whether legal or 
illegal) are obliged to register in the census, in order to have 
access to social services.  The census reflects country of origin, 
birth date, age, and sex. 
 
¶13. (SBU) Checklist 26 F. - The GOS has shown itself to be capable 
of gathering the data required for an in-depth assessment of 
TIP-related law enforcement efforts.  Post points to the new 
database created and maintained by CICO and the statistics assembled 
by the Prosecutor's office. 
 
//INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION OF TRAFFICKERS// 
 
MADRID 00000183  004.3 OF 016 
 
 
 
¶14. (SBU) Checklist 27 A.  Spain has specific laws to prohibit 
trafficking in persons and other activities related to sexual and 
labor exploitation.  These laws are applied in practice and are 
adequate to cover the full scope of trafficking offenses. 
Legislation implemented since 2007 includes a law to allow Spanish 
judges and prosecutors to pursue suspected TIP mafias outside 
Spanish borders.  Previously, these Spanish officials did not have 
extra-territorial jurisdiction to follow these cases, but the new 
law modified the Organic Law of Judicial Power and incorporated 
"trafficking in persons and illegal immigration" into the category 
of crimes of "universal jurisdiction," along with terrorism, 
genocide, prostitution, and drug trafficking.  Additionally, the 
Spanish Congress approved in late 2007 a change of the Spanish Penal 
Code to allow the pursuit of ships believed to be transporting 
trafficked persons or illegal immigrants, even if they are not in 
Spanish waters, and even if the ship's final destination is another 
EU country. 
 
¶15. (SBU) Continue Checklist 27 A.  Article 318 of Spain's criminal 
and penal code is the main piece of legislation that penalizes 
trafficking in persons.  In the legislation, trafficking in human 
beings and trafficking in children are distinct crimes.  Different 
paragraphs in Spain's Criminal Code penalize activities related to 
trafficking as it is defined in the Palermo Protocol.  This 
includes, for both adults and children, crimes of sexual 
exploitation, labor exploitation, and slavery or practices similar 
to slavery, and domestic servitude.  Spain also has legal provisions 
addressing the protection and assistance of victims, protection and 
assistance of witnesses, special measures for protection and 
assistance to children, residence permits for victims of 
trafficking, and compensation of victims.  There are several other 
penal codes related to trafficking in persons, including: Article 
312, Crimes Against the Rights of Foreigners; Article 313, Crimes 
Involving Forced Labor; and the "Ley Organica" (Organic Law for 
measures related to citizen security, domestic violence and the 
social integration of the foreigner). 
 
¶16. (SBU) Continue Checklist 27 A.  Illegal immigrants who are 
forced into prostitution are covered by the recently approved Alien 
Law of November 2009, which established a reflection period of at 
least 30 days for them to decide whether or not they will cooperate 
with the GOS.  In the meantime they will benefit from housing, 
protection, medical and psychological assistance, free legal 
assistance, interpretation services, and some financial assistance. 
The Law provides that they will not be deported if they cooperate 
with the authorities in the investigation against their exploiters, 
giving them in exchange a residency and work permit, or helping them 
to return to their countries if so they wish.  GOS officials 
emphasize to Post that - just as Spanish citizens who are TIP 
victims domestically within Spain - Romanian and Bulgarian victims 
are exempt from the new law establishing a reflection period of at 
least 30 days to decide whether they would like to cooperate with 
police.  As EU citizens, they now enjoy freedom of movement and the 
right to work in all other EU member states and face no deadline by 
which to denounce their captors and can claim their right to social 
services or to cooperate with authorities at any time. 
 
¶17. (SBU) Continue Checklist 27 A.  The Council of Ministers, the 
Zapatero Administration's Cabinet, on November 13, 2009 approved a 
new draft Penal Code to be sent to Congress for debate and approval. 
 Post understands that the draft has the support of all political 
parties in Congress and is expected to be approved during 2010.  The 
bill establishes trafficking in persons as its own crime, separate 
from illegal immigration.   The crime will be punished with 5-8 
years imprisonment, which can be increased if there are aggravating 
circumstances.  People subject to this punishment are those who 
recruit, transport, shelter, threaten, lie to, or abuse a national 
or foreign victim with any of the following goals: 
 
MADRID 00000183  005.3 OF 016 
 
 
 
* Exploitation of his/her labor or services, slavery or similar 
practices 
* Sexual exploitation, including pornography 
* Trafficking in and/or extraction of human organs 
 
¶18. (SBU) Continue Checklist 27 A.  Prostitution and the procurement 
of prostitutes are decriminalized in Spain, but forcing others into 
prostitution and organizing prostitution rings are crimes. 
Furthermore, it is illegal for anyone to profit from the 
prostitution of another.  Spanish law makes it illegal for pimps or 
brothels to receive money from the prostitute's activities, even if 
the prostitute consents. Spanish law prohibits the involvement of 
minors (under the age of 18) in prostitution.  The activities of the 
prostitute are not criminalized, but the activities of the brothel 
owner/operator, clients, pimps, and enforcers are criminalized. 
Spain continues to review its laws regarding prostitution.  Spain's 
central government remains the principal authority for 
anti-trafficking enforcement while leaving the legal status of 
prostitution to Spain's 17 regional governments. 
 
¶19. (SBU) Checklist 27 B.  Spanish criminal law was amended in 
September 2003 to adapt Spanish legislation to that of other 
European Union countries.  This amendment raised the penalty for the 
crime of trafficking in persons for sexual exploitation to a minimum 
of five years in prison and a maximum of 10 (previous sentencing 
guidelines ran from 2-4 years behind bars).  Sentencing guidelines 
in convictions for encouraging, favoring, or facilitating the 
trafficking of persons from, in transit, or destined for Spain for 
the purpose of sexual exploitation are subject to imprisonment of 
5-10 years, with an increase to 12-15 years if trafficking is 
carried out with violence, intimidation, deceit or abuse of the 
victim.  Spanish courts at all levels use a combination of available 
penal codes in prosecuting crimes related to trafficking in persons 
to ensure a conviction because of a frequent lack of testimony from 
victims. 
 
¶20. (SBU) Article one (13) of the above mentioned law modifies 
Article 318 bis. of the Penal Code: 
-- Four to eight years in prison for a person who, directly or 
indirectly, promotes or facilitates the illegal trafficking of 
people or illegal immigration from, in transit within, or with a 
destination of, Spain. 
-- If the human trafficking is for sexual exploitation, the prison 
sentences range from 5-10 years. 
-- If the person committing the crime uses his/her position of 
authority to facilitate the trafficking, or if he/she is a public 
servant, the penalty will be 6-12 years. 
-- In the event the victim of the crime is under age or has his/her 
life put in danger, or if the criminal belongs to an organized crime 
or trafficking ring, then the sentences applied will be on the 
higher scale. 
 
¶21. (SBU) While Article 318 has been designed as the primary statute 
in TIP cases, the Network highlights that prosecutors in many 
instances charge TIP defendants with violation of Article 188 of the 
Penal Code instead.  Article 188 covers forced prostitution and 
profiting from the prostitution of another person and carries a 
lesser penalty of 2-4 years. 
 
¶22. (SBU) Spanish judges often combine a trafficking sentence with a 
sentence for crimes involving theft, illegal detention, forgery of 
documents, or extortion.  When a defendant is convicted of an 
additional crime two separate sentences must be served.  Once 
sentenced, prisoners generally serve 75 percent of their sentence 
before being eligible for parole.  A Spanish Supreme Court judge 
ruled in 2006 that each request for a reduction in sentence for good 
behavior must be applied to each sentence individually, meaning it 
is now much more difficult for criminals prosecuted on multiple 
 
MADRID 00000183  006.3 OF 016 
 
 
counts related to trafficking to see parole. 
 
¶23. (SBU) Checklist 27 C.  Article 313 and the Organic Law 11/2003 
cover forced labor.  The sentencing guidelines are 4-8 years in 
prison for the person who, directly or indirectly, promotes or 
facilitates human trafficking from, in transit within, or to Spain. 
The GOS worked diligently on a companion strategy, its National Plan 
against Forced Labor throughout 2009 and it is nearly complete, 
according to MFA sources in early February 2010. 
 
¶24. (SBU) Checklist 27 D.  The penalty for rape is 6-12 years in 
prison, increasing to a possible 15 years with aggravating 
circumstances.  The penalty for forcible sexual assault is 1-4 years 
in prison, 4-10 years with aggravating circumstances.  Prescribed 
penalties for encouraging, favoring, or facilitating the trafficking 
of persons from, in transit within, or to Spain for the purpose of 
sexual exploitation or forced labor now stand at 5-10 years, with a 
possible 12-15 years with aggravating circumstances. 
 
¶25. (SBU) The GOS has ratified all of the mentioned instruments, and 
the dates of ratification are: 
-- ILO Convention 182 (April 2, 2001) 
-- ILO Convention 29 (August 29, 1932) 
-- ILO Convention 105 (November 6, 1967) 
-- Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child 
(December 18, 2001) 
-- Protocol to Prevent, Suppress, and Punish Trafficking in Persons, 
Especially Women and Children (March 1, 2002) 
The Council of Europe's Convention to Fight Trafficking in Persons 
entered into force in Spain on August 1, 2009, becoming the first 
"legally binding international instrument" that addresses this 
problem in a comprehensive manner.  It provides for a period of at 
least 30 days for victims to consider whether they wish to cooperate 
with authorities as well as receive medical and psychological 
assistance and the right to compensation. 
 
¶26. (SBU) Checklist 27 E.  The Embassy engaged with relevant Spanish 
authorities to reinforce the importance of law enforcement and 
judicial statistics.  Our contacts in the SNP, GC, and Ministries of 
Interior and Justice facilitated our access to prosecution data. 
Spanish authorities track TIP cases separately from illegal 
immigration and false documentation.  Under Spanish labor laws, the 
government treats as traffickers and criminally prosecutes employers 
who confiscate workers' passports and use physical or sexual abuse 
to keep workers in a state of service.  Traffickers serve an average 
of 75 percent of their sentence before being eligible for parole, 
but Spanish penal law limits the number of traffickers who receive 
early parole. 
 
¶27. (SBU) Continue Checklist 27 E.  For the first time, the State's 
Office of the Prosecutor has included in its annual Memoir, specific 
information about the number of accusations issued, as well as about 
the number of victims involved, and the number of people accused. 
The Special Prosecutor for TIP crimes has informed the Embassy that 
in 2008 his office started 21 cases of sexual exploitation, 
affecting 104 victims, and 57 defendants.  Final data for 2009 
should be available in October 2010.  Additional information on 
specific TIP-related investigations, convictions and sentencing in 
Spain was available on-line through a subscription service to the 
Spanish affiliate of WESTLAW (www.westlaw.es).  In 2009, our best, 
preliminary information indicates the government prosecuted 86 
people in 26 cases regarding trafficking and secured 60 convictions 
with an average sentence of more than seven and a half years.  Sixty 
percent of those convicted received a sentence of greater than 4 
years while all of the 60 convictions we found were for sentences of 
1 year or more.  Fifty-eight percent of the 60 convictions received 
a fine. 
 
¶28. (SBU) Checklist 27 F.  The GOS provides specialized 
 
MADRID 00000183  007.3 OF 016 
 
 
anti-trafficking training to law enforcement agencies.  Training is 
provided to new recruits at the SNP academy in Avila, which offers a 
general version of TIP awareness during basic training and then 
offers a more detailed version for Inspectors and sub-Inspectors. 
NGOs continue to remain active in helping law enforcement agencies 
devise specialized training curriculum for officers who will be 
working trafficking cases.  Officials from Proyecto Esperanza and 
other NGOs participated throughout the reporting period, at the 
invitation of the SNP, in a "Specialized Course on Trafficking in 
Persons Investigations."  NGOs continue to tell us the SNP are 
increasingly sensitized to and trained for the special demands of 
TIP investigations.  During an Embassy-hosted DVC between Spanish 
TIP officials and G/TIP Ambassador Luis CdeBaca (Ref B), an 
SNP/UCRIF Inspector remarked that - compared to even five years ago 
- he personally sees considerably more TIP awareness within the 
police force.  The Office of the Prosecutor works closely with the 
Spanish Network Against Trafficking in Persons.  On January 18, 
2010, the Office of the Prosecutor in Galicia and the Autonomous 
Government of Galicia signed an agreement establishing a pilot 
project in which a regional prosecutor would work with NGOs to help 
TIP victims overcome their fears and self-identify themselves to 
authorities as TIP victims.  The project also establishes a 
wide-ranging program of victim assistance to help them.  Spanish 
prosecutors inform Post that, if the results in Galicia are 
successful, the central government's intention is to have all of 
Spain's autonomous communities create similar programs. 
 
¶29. (SBU) Checklist 27 G.  The GOS has bilateral accords with 
several countries that are major sources of TIP victims in Spain, 
and the GOS regularly cooperates in the investigation and 
prosecution of trafficking cases. 
 
¶30. (SBU) Checklist 27 H-J.  The GOS can extradite persons charged 
with trafficking, including its own nationals, but there have been 
no instances during the reporting period of the GOS extraditing 
Spanish nationals charged with TIP offenses.  The GOS also has 
bilateral agreements with TIP source countries to extradite persons 
who are charged with trafficking.  Spanish officials from the 
President on down are committed to fighting TIP, and we have no 
evidence of any Spanish government involvement in or tolerance of 
human trafficking. 
 
¶31. (SBU) Continue Checklist 27 H-J.  There was an isolated incident 
of corruption in the greater Barcelona area in March 2009 in which a 
UCRIF Inspector, Jose Javier Martin Puyal, allegedly was caught 
attempting to bribe a brothel owner 3,000 euros (roughly USD $4,175) 
in exchange for turning a blind eye to alleged trafficking for the 
purposes of forced prostitution.  The ensuing investigation revealed 
the alleged involvement of 15 individuals including police, 
ex-police, business owners and lawyers.  Contacts in the Ministry of 
Interior tell Post that while the Spanish judicial system presumes 
the innocence of the accused, Martin Puyal is in preventative 
custody in jail while two other SNP officials are out on bail.  The 
SNP has suspended the employment and salary of each of the three 
officials as they await trial. 
 
¶32. (SBU) Checklist 27 L-M.  The GOS is aware of the requirements of 
the 2005 Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act (TVPRA) 
for countries that contribute troops to international peacekeeping 
efforts.  Our Spanish military contacts tell us that as part of 
their pre-deployment training, Spanish government troops receive TIP 
awareness training.  We have no information of any Spanish nationals 
deployed abroad engaging in or facilitating severe forms of 
trafficking.  Neither Post nor the Spanish MFA were aware of any 
reports in 2009 suggesting that Spanish nationals traveled abroad on 
child sex tourism.  Spain's child sexual abuse laws do have 
extraterritorial coverage and thus Spanish nationals could be 
prosecuted and convicted for acts committed in known child sex 
tourism destinations.  In 2009, Spain completed its second Action 
 
MADRID 00000183  008.3 OF 016 
 
 
Plan against Child Sexual Exploitation, the most recent of which 
covered 2006-09.  Save the Children informs Post that there will be 
a third three-year Action Plan that is currently being drafted. 
 
//PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS// 
 
¶33. (SBU) Checklist 28 A.  As part of the implementation of the 
National Plan, which was officially approved in December 2008 and 
came in to force in January 2009, the Ministry of Equality in July 
convened the inaugural session of the Social Forum against the 
Trafficking in Persons for the Purposes of Sexual Exploitation.  As 
of February 2010, the Forum - comprised of the inter-ministerial 
group, NGOs and regional and municipal government officials - has 
met twice to discuss TIP issues.  As evidence that the government 
incorporates the feedback provided by the NGOs in the Forum, a 
working committee has been established to investigate labor 
exploitation of minors, according to MFA officials. 
 
¶34. (SBU) Continue Checklist 28 A.  TIP victims - as well as those 
of domestic violence - can call 016, toll-free nationwide, to 
receive 24-hour assistance from the Ministry of Labor and Social 
Affairs.  Operators speak Castilian Spanish, Catalan, Galician, 
Basque, English and French.  The Women's Institute, an autonomous 
entity affiliated with the Ministry of Equality, also offers a phone 
number for sexually exploited female TIP victims:  900 191 010. 
 
¶35. (SBU) Continue Checklist 28 A.  The GOS sends victims to NGOs, 
which provide temporary shelter and access to legal, medical, and 
psychological services.  The victims are provided legal protection 
and temporary or permanent residency status if they cooperate with 
the GOS in going after the traffickers.  Regional and local 
governments also provided victim assistance through NGOs.  Medical 
attention, including emergency care, is provided through the 
national health care system.  Project Esperanza and Save the 
Children inform Post they are unaware of any specialized victim 
protection services offered by the GOS to child victims or males who 
are forced labor trafficking victims. 
 
¶36. (SBU) Continue Checklist 28 A.  Two regional governments signed 
agreements to guarantee the comprehensive protection of victims who 
collaborate in the prosecution of organized crime networks that 
engage in TIP.  As mentioned in Paragraph 28, Alberto Nunez Feijoo, 
the President of the Autonomous Community of Galicia, and the 
region's chief prosecutor on January 18, 2010 signed a Protocol on 
the Adoption of Measures of Prevention, Investigation and Treatment 
of Female Trafficking Victims for the Purposes of Sexual 
Exploitation.  Three weeks earlier, Esperanza Aguirre, President of 
the Autonomous Community of Madrid signed a similar accord with the 
chief prosecutor in that region, although the Madrid version 
addressed all kinds of victims of violence, not just TIP victims. 
 
¶37. (SBU) Continue Checklist 28 B.  Spain has several victim care 
facilities which are accessible to trafficking victims, and most are 
run under the auspices of a network of anti-TIP NGOs with funding 
provided by the government and private sources.  As Spanish 
nationals are rarely if ever trafficking victims, the vast majority 
of the assistance is provided to foreign trafficking victims. 
Article 59 of Spain's immigration law paved the way for recognizing 
the rights of those victims who have reported a crime and have 
collaborated effectively with police and legal authorities in the 
breaking up of TIP networks.  The law establishes a legal mechanism 
for victims of trafficking to either obtain work and residence 
permits to remain in Spain, as well as welfare benefits or to obtain 
funding to return to their countries of origin. 
 
¶38. (SBU) Continue Checklist 28 B.  The National Action Plan calls 
for increases across the board in the support the government will 
provide to anti-TIP NGOs.  As part of the implementation of the 
National Plan to Combat TIP for the purposes of Sexual Exploitation, 
 
MADRID 00000183  009.3 OF 016 
 
 
the Council of Ministers in March approved the allotment of two 
million euros (roughly USD $2.78 million) toward the creation of a 
TIP victim assistance fund.  This money will cover the costs 
associated with specific programs (medical, legal, and 
psychological) for TIP victims and the will support the actions of 
NGOs who work in support of combating TIP.  The money will be 
allotted to help NGOs improve the quality of care and protection 
that victims - including those in the country illegally - receive. 
The funds are also designed to improve victim's security and to 
prevent their exploiters' from influencing their testimony. 
 
¶39. (SBU) Continue Checklist 28 B.  Because Spain's central 
government has devolved funding for social issues to the regional 
level, the bulk of funding to protect TIP victims derives from the 
autonomous regional governments.  To use Proyecto Esperanza as an 
example, the regional government in 2009 provided 373,655 euros 
(approximately USD 520,000).  At the national level, the Ministry of 
Education, Social Policy and Sports provided 72,340 euros (just over 
USD $100,000) while the Ministry of Equality provided 61,395 euros 
(roughly USD $85,000).  The Madrid municipal government gave 20,000 
euros (roughly USD 27,800).  The level of funding from the regional 
and national governments was higher than in 2008, as was Proyecto 
Esperanza's overall budget. 
 
¶40. (SBU) Checklist 28 C.  The government funds NGOs to provide 
shelter, counseling, legal and psychological assistance, job 
training, placement and reinsertion services, and assistance in 
obtaining visas that are available for those who testify against 
traffickers.  NGOs submit annual grant proposals to the government 
to furnish services to victims.  In addition to a number of women 
who remained in its shelters since 2008, Proyecto Esperanza took in 
47 new victims in 2009.  Of the 47, 17 were from Africa, 14 were 
from Eastern Europe, eight were from Latin America and seven were 
from Asia.  This breakdown by nationality shows a strong increase in 
the proportion of African (primarily Nigerian) and Asian (mostly 
Thai) TIP victims.  Thirteen were between 18-21 years old and 
another 13 were 22-25 years old.  Nine victims were ages 26-30, 
seven were older than age 30, four victims' ages were unknown and 
one claimed to be a minor but was judged by the GOS to be an adult. 
Among the 47 new cases, 27 cooperated with authorities by denouncing 
the trafficking networks that had exploited them.  Fifteen of the 47 
returned to their country of origin after receiving victim 
assistance. 
 
¶41. (SBU) Checklist 28 D-E.  The GOS provides residence permits to 
those victims who provide information essential to the investigation 
and prosecution of traffickers.  The law permits trafficking victims 
to remain in the country if they agree to testify against the 
perpetrators.  Spain has a witness-protection law that allows a 
witness to remain anonymous.  After legal proceedings conclude, 
victims are given the option of remaining in the country or 
returning to their countries of origin.  Victims are encouraged to 
help police investigate trafficking cases and to testify against 
traffickers. 
 
¶42. (SBU) Checklist 28 F-H.  Spain's new plan to combat TIP formally 
establishes the referral of TIP victims to NGOs, although in 
practice, victims were already being referred directly by Spanish 
law enforcement to anti-TIP NGOs, who are then able to provide both 
short- and long-term care.  In July 2009, the Office of the Attorney 
General in Spain released its annual report for 2008, in which it 
reported that the SNP and the GC disrupted 263 TIP networks and 
related services and attended 1,618 victims.  Spanish authorities 
tell us they are working on a mechanism for screening trafficking 
victims among persons involved in the decriminalized commercial sex 
trade.  Post fully expects the SNP once again to furnish us with a 
restricted internal report that provides detailed information on TIP 
enforcement trends, including TIP-related arrests and the number of 
trafficking victims identified during the reporting period.  Post 
 
MADRID 00000183  010.3 OF 016 
 
 
will provide this information septel. 
 
¶43. (SBU) Checklist 28 I.  The GOS makes every effort to respect the 
rights of TIP victims, and TIP and prostitution victims are not 
considered criminals and do not go to jail.  They are sent to NGOs 
that ensure proper care is provided to them.  In the past, at least 
some TIP victims who refused to testify against the perpetrators 
were jailed and deported as illegal aliens, but our contacts tell us 
that is not routine.  If victims are in serious danger they may even 
be provided with a new identity in order to help ensure protection. 
 
¶44. (SBU) Checklist 28 I.  The Ministry of Interior (MOI) is 
reconsidering the way it handles TIP victims, according to Spanish 
press reports in January 2010.  Until now, both traffickers and 
victims were arrested at the same time, and on occasion they were 
initially taken to the same Police facilities, where the traffickers 
threatened the victims into not cooperating with authorities.  The 
Police authorities have started working on a "best practices" code 
for which they have requested the cooperation of police agents who 
investigate these crimes.  The Ministry's intention is to increase - 
by the end of 2011 - the number of arrests of traffickers by eight 
percent and to double the financial investigations of the criminal 
networks.  Also by the end of 2011, all police agents in charge of 
investigations - including those participating in peacekeeping 
operations - will have received specific training on TIP.   The MOI 
also will increase by five percent its workforce in the fight 
against TIP, and would like for all victims who report these crimes 
to have their situation regularized in Spain as soon as possible, 
for which the MOI will propose to reduce the waiting time down to 
four days for these women to receive the residency permits.  Before 
the end of 2010, the police are supposed to release a brochure in 
several languages about the rights of the TIP victims, as well as 
the assistance they may be able to obtain. 
 
¶45. (SBU) Checklist 28 J.  The GOS encourages victims to assist in 
the investigation and prosecution of traffickers and provides 
residence permits to those victims who provide information essential 
to the investigation and prosecution of traffickers.  The law 
permits trafficking victims to remain in the country if they agree 
to testify against the perpetrators.  Spain has a witness-protection 
law that allows a witness to remain anonymous.  After legal 
proceedings conclude, victims are given the option of remaining in 
the country or returning to their countries of origin.  Victims are 
encouraged to help police investigate trafficking cases and to 
testify against traffickers.  Proyecto Esperanza notes that, 
traditionally, victims who cooperate receive a residency permit 
valid for one year, which is renewable for a two-year period if the 
victim obtains a legal job.  At this point, to destigmitize victims, 
they are asking for the renewal not as TIP victims but as any other 
immigrant would do.  If the victim can secure a second renewal for a 
total of five years, then the permit is for permanent residency. 
Consequently, victims who change their minds about collaborating can 
reconsider at any of these junctures.  If the victims opt not to 
cooperate and wish to return to their country of origin, the GOS 
will work with them on an assisted return. 
 
¶46. (SBU) Continue Checklist 28 J.  A high-profile incident 
involving alleged trafficking in persons for the purposes of forced 
labor occurred in Barcelona in June 2009.  In Catalonia's largest 
law enforcement operation to date, 750 agents of the Mossos 
d'Esquadra (Catalonia's regional police force) searched 72 
establishments and apartments with the objective of detaining the 
individuals in charge of taking advantage of hundreds of fellow 
Chinese immigrants' labor in exchange for very low salaries.  The 
raid, known as Operation Wei, was directed at identifying the 
leaders of the exploitation network and their connections to the 
Chinese mafia.  Most of the alleged victims of the operation were 
Chinese immigrants subjected to unhealthy working conditions 
including long work shifts and being made to sleep in the workshops. 
 
MADRID 00000183  011.3 OF 016 
 
 
 A thorough investigation by the U.S. Consulate in Barcelona 
revealed that the Mossos and two human rights NGOs considered the 
matter a labor rights issue rather than a trafficking issue.  The 
detained individuals were suspected of violating workers' rights, a 
crime that is subject to two to five years in prison.  None of the 
450 workers self-identified themselves as trafficking victims who 
were being exploited, explaining instead that their culture did not 
object to the long hours and the working conditions they 
experienced.  According to the NGO Accem, most of the workers were 
in Spain legally. 
 
¶47. (SBU) Checklist 28 K-L.  The GOS continued to fund and encourage 
NGOs to provide specialized training for government officials in 
recognizing trafficking and providing assistance to trafficked 
victims.  During the reporting period, this training took place in 
the cities of Madrid and Merida and the region of Extremadura and 
has been ongoing in recent years.  Training continues to be 
available for immigration officials and social service providers. 
NGOs remained active in helping law enforcement agencies devise 
specialized training curriculum for officers who will be working 
trafficking cases.  Proyecto Esperanza officials provided separate, 
specialized TIP training workshops and roundtables for the SNP, the 
GC, the Bar Association of Madrid, and others in 2009.  Spain is 
generally not a source country for trafficking, and our contacts in 
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs are not aware of any Spanish 
nationals abroad who are either victims of trafficking or who have 
participated in or facilitated severe forms of trafficking.  If such 
cases do arise, the GOS tells us they would provide medical aid, 
shelter and financial help to its repatriated nationals.  Our MFA 
contacts further confirm that Spain provides training on protection 
and assistance to TIP victims to its embassies and consulates 
abroad. 
 
¶48. (SBU) Checklist 28 M.  The Spanish Network against Trafficking 
in Persons formed in 2006 to increase the effectiveness and 
efficiency of its work with trafficking victims.  The Network is 
currently made up of more than 20 NGOs, including Proyecto 
Esperanza, the Association for the Prevention, Reintegration and 
Attention of Prostituted Women (APRAMP), Accem, and the Spanish 
chapters of Save the Children, Red Cross and Women's Link Worldwide. 
 The Network is committed to "prevent, identify, assist, protect and 
ensure the healing of trafficking victims in Spain."  In February 
2009, it publicly presented its "Basic Guide to Identify and Protect 
Trafficking in Persons victims" to help identify TIP victims.  The 
Embassy maintains very close contacts with Spain's anti-TIP network 
and one of its senior coordinators has participated in the 
Department's International Visitor's Program.  The Spanish 
government contracts with and subsidizes NGOs and other programs 
that provide shelter and vital services for trafficking victims and 
witnesses, to include protection, housing, and counseling.  Several 
NGOs operated shelters in Madrid and Barcelona, provided assistance 
with medical and legal services, and acted as liaison with law 
enforcement for victims who chose to testify against traffickers. 
Some of these NGOs have a housing and reinsertion program for 
victims of trafficking and smuggling who wish to remain in Spain and 
will help women apply for residence visas.  These NGOs received many 
referrals directly from police.  The Catalonian regional and 
municipal government contracted with Caritas, other NGOs, and 
sometimes religious organizations for the same services.  Spanish 
NGOs in Madrid receive funding at the federal level (Ministry of 
Labor and Social Services), regional level (Madrid province) and 
city level (Madrid City). 
 
¶49. (SBU) Continue Checklist 28 M.  Madrid-based Proyecto Esperanza 
held a conference on December 2, 2009 to mark its 10th anniversary, 
during which time it has aided 520 female human trafficking victims 
from 25 nationalities.  Proyecto Esperanza provides a 24-hour phone 
number (607 54 25 15) for TIP victims, but the money is not 
specifically earmarked for this purpose and Proyecto Esperanza 
 
MADRID 00000183  012.3 OF 016 
 
 
informs Post that the NGO does not consider this to be a national 
hotline. 
 
¶50. (SBU) Checklist 28 M.  The SNP also provides possible TIP 
victims with sturdy, laminated business cards from APRAMP, in 
partnership with the Ministry of Labor and Immigration.  These cards 
notify potential victims of their rights and inform them how to seek 
a variety of available assistance, including lodging, medical 
treatment, job search assistance, and administrative help.  The 
APRAMP phone number on these cards is listed as 609 589 479. 
 
//PREVENTION// 
 
¶51. (SBU) Checklist 29 A.  In fulfillment of objectives called for 
in its national action plan against TIP for the purposes of sexual 
exploitation, Spain in October 2009 began a broad variety of 
anti-trafficking information campaigns.  The efforts were so 
sustained and high profile that Post would find it extraordinarily 
difficult to attempt to gauge the cumulative size of the audience 
reached.  In addition to the public seeing the various flyers, 
banners, exhibits and other displays, these initiatives were 
extensively covered in the print, broadcast and Internet-based 
media. 
 
¶52. (SBU) Continue Checklist 29 A.  The Ministry of Equality in 
October - timed to coincide with the European day against 
Trafficking - sponsored a photographic exhibit entitled "Don't be an 
accomplice" to build awareness of TIP and to decrease demand for 
sexual exploitation.  The Minister of Equality made a public call 
for no one to be an accomplice in the trafficking of women and 
girls, whether in their capture, the advertisement of their sexual 
exploitation, or a client of their forced services. 
 
¶53. (SBU) Continue Checklist 29 A.  The Ministry of Equality in 
November began to distribute more than five million beer coasters to 
bars, cafeterias, restaurants, and nighttime leisure locations 
belonging to the Spanish Youth Hostel Network (FEHR), which has a 
membership of 350,000 establishments.  On one side of the coaster is 
the slogan "No to Sexual Exploitation" and on the other is one of 
four different messages, each aimed at building awareness among men 
who pay for sexual services, highlighting that the majority of women 
who work as prostitutes are sexually exploited by organized crime 
networks. 
 
¶54. (SBU) Continue Checklist 29 A.  The Ministry of Equality in 
December teamed with British actress Emma Thompson to launch an 
interactive art exhibit, entitled "The Journey," in Retiro Park 
(Madrid's equivalent to New York's Central Park) to build awareness 
of organized crime networks that that traffic in women for the 
purposes of sexual exploitation.  This effort was co-sponsored by 
the Region of Madrid, the City of Madrid, and The Network. 
According to Proyecto Esperanza, the exhibition had 4,000 visitors. 
 
 
¶55. (SBU) Continue Checklist 29 A.  Local governments, notably those 
in Spain's largest cities of Madrid, Barcelona, and Seville 
continued efforts to discourage prostitution (please see paragraphs 
59-63 for a more detailed discussion of GOS efforts to reduce 
demand).  The Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs and the Ministry 
of Equality in November and December funded and co-sponsored a 
series of documentary films on TIP for the purposes of sexual 
exploitation.  The films were shown in Barcelona, Bilbao, Madrid and 
Toledo.  A different documentary was presented in four successive 
weekends. 
 
¶56. (SBU) Checklist 29 B.  During the reporting period, the Spanish 
government continued to monitor immigration and emigration patterns 
for evidence of trafficking, and law enforcement agencies screened 
for potential trafficking victims at Spain's air and seaports, and 
 
MADRID 00000183  013.3 OF 016 
 
 
along its border with France.  An ongoing trend is the increasing 
frequency of individual traffickers deceiving their victims by 
establishing a relationship with them by pretending they were their 
boyfriends or by capitalizing on a pre-existing relationship as a 
family friend.  The trafficker and victim arrived in Spain legally 
and with legal passports, and once inside the country the trafficker 
would send his victim into a trafficking network. 
 
¶57. (SBU) Checklist 29 C.  Spain's formal inter-agency mechanism for 
coordination and communication is the anti-TIP working group, 
established in 2006 by Spanish First Vice President Maria Teresa 
Fernandez de la Vega.  Working-level officials in the Ministry of 
Equality now oversee this group and are in frequent contact with the 
Embassy. 
 
¶58. (SBU) Checklist 29 D.  As has been detailed, virtually all of 
Spain's anti-TIP efforts were in fulfillment of the 2009-2012 plan 
to combat TIP for the purposes of sexual exploitation, which 
provides a broad policy framework to combat TIP with a three-pronged 
focus:  victim assistance, fighting against trafficking networks, 
and information campaigns to build public awareness.  VP de la Vega 
tasked the Ministries of Equality, Interior, Justice, Labor, Foreign 
Affairs, and Education to produce a comprehensive plan to combat 
trafficking in persons, which was made approved by the Council of 
Ministers on December 12, 2008.  The GOS shared early drafts of the 
TIP plan with Eva Biaudet, the OSCE's then special representative on 
TIP, and with relevant Spanish NGOs for review and comment.  To 
re-cap, the plan specifically establishes: 
-  A reflection period of at least 30 days for TIP victims who are 
in the country illegally to decide whether or not they will 
cooperate with the GOS.  In the meantime they will benefit from 
housing, protection, medical and psychological assistance, free 
legal assistance, interpretation services, and some financial 
assistance. 
-  "Cautionary" confiscation of traffickers' assets at the beginning 
of the process, although only a condemnatory sentence would make the 
seizure firm. 
- Creation of a fund with the assets confiscated from the mafias to 
attend victims and to strengthen police actions. 
-  Creation of units to attend victims, as well as the creation of 
shelter centers with integral attention programs. 
-  Use of biometric identifiers in visas and residency permits. 
-  A new control mechanism in ports, airports, and other 
transportation means to identify possible cases of trafficking. 
-  Research about the consequences of trafficking activities on 
their victims, and ways to help them. 
-  Information campaigns addressed to travel agencies, and 
organizers of events involving large crowds. 
-  Creation of a Forum Against Trafficking made of public 
institutions, NGOs, and others. 
-  Creation of an inter-ministerial Coordinating Group to follow up 
the Plan (Ministries of Equality, Foreign Affairs, Justice, 
Interior, Education, Social) which was established in January 2009. 
 
¶59. (SBU) Checklist 29 E.  At the national and local levels, Spain 
instituted a variety of measures to reduce the demand for commercial 
sex acts, including a number of measures discussed in Paragraph 55 
in response to Checklist 29A.  As part of this effort, the central 
government undertook a campaign throughout 2009 to pressure 
newspapers not to publish classified ads that publicize fairly 
explicit services offered by prostitutes, many of whom are thought 
to be TIP victims.  The Minister of Equality met with the editors of 
several newspapers and the First Vice President met with the 
Federation of Spanish Journalists to discuss the issue.  Several 
NGOs and civic society leaders supported this effort by accusing 
numerous Spanish newspapers of hypocrisy because they tout an 
editorial line that condemns TIP for the purposes of sexual 
exploitation while earning millions of dollars per year for 
publishing these ads.  El Pais, Spain's leading daily publishes the 
 
MADRID 00000183  014.3 OF 016 
 
 
greatest amount of these ads, which reportedly generates about five 
million euros (nearly USD $7 million) worth of income per year.  The 
government's efforts secured a victory in December 2009, when 
conservative newspaper La Razon, Spain's fifth-leading daily, with 
187,000 daily readers, banned classified ads publicizing commercial 
sexual services. 
 
¶60. (SBU) Continue Checklist 29 E.  In August, El Pais's publication 
of graphic photos of prostitutes practicing sex in the streets of 
downtown Barcelona sparked a national debate on how best to address 
prostitution and curb demand.  On September 22, 2009 the national 
Congress overwhelmingly rejected a proposal to regulate 
prostitution.  Most political parties in Congress indicated that it 
does not make sense to talk about the legalization or prohibition of 
prostitution, arguing instead that the only option is to fight the 
mafias that exploit women.  Media reports and government officials 
regularly suggested that 90 percent of prostitutes in Spain are 
sexually exploited and engage in prostitution against their will. 
 
¶61. (SBU) Continue Checklist 29 E.  In the absence of national 
legislation on the issue, the municipal governments of Spain's 
largest cities took differing measures.  As mentioned in Paragraph 
54 in answer to Checklist 29A, Madrid's city hall co-sponsored the 
exhibQion entitled "The Journey" to dissuade potential clients of 
prostitutes.  Madrid also increased police pressure, although 
neighbors continue reporting about the presence of prostitutes and 
their pimps in the streets.  These actions built upon efforts in 
2007, when 31 video cameras were installed in one of the city's 
largest parks, where prostitutes often gathered at night, and in 
2008, when another 30 cameras were installed in Madrid's downtown 
streets. 
 
¶62. (SBU) Continue Checklist 29 E.  Barcelona Mayor Jordi Hereu 
sought national and/or regional legislation that could help 
municipalities to control prostitution in public areas, going beyond 
the debate about legalizing or not prostitution.  In the meantime, 
Barcelona increased the number of municipal police in the streets, 
and started campaigns discouraging men to seek those services in the 
public areas. 
 
¶63. (SBU) Continue Checklist 29 E.  Seville, Spain's fourth largest 
city, in November 2009 unveiled a five-year, Integrated Plan Against 
TIP, Prostitution and Other Forms of Sexual Exploitation.  The plan 
will run during 2010-2015 and has a budget of 500,000 euros (roughly 
USD $700,000).  The city hall emphasizes that its plan is a 
victim-centered approach that will fine clients up to 3,000 euros 
(roughly USD $4,175) for having sex with prostitutes in the streets. 
 Fees collected will be applied toward social programs.  As a 
further part of its efforts to curb demand, Seville in September 
began a public awareness campaign entitled, "Paying for Sex is 
Investing in Violence," which is a follow-up to last year's 
campaign, entitled, "Are you worth so little that you have to pay 
for it?".  This year's campaign has a budget of approximately 15,000 
euros (nearly USD $21,000). 
 
¶64. (SBU) Checklist 29 F.  The Spanish government has strict rules 
on the books for Spanish nationals caught participating in 
international child sex tourism.  The MFA informed Post it had seen 
no information in 2009 regarding Spanish nationals have traveled 
abroad on child sex tourism.  Spain's child sexual abuse laws do 
have extraterritorial coverage and thus Spanish nationals could be 
prosecuted and convicted for acts committed in known child sex 
tourism destinations.  GOS officials tell Post that the Ministry of 
Industry, Tourism and Commerce in 2009 partnered with the World 
Tourist Organization to discourage child sex tourism.  The GOS also 
maintained a website, www.NoHayExcusas.org, from a former campaign 
with UNICEF to warn potential child sex tourists that they may feel 
a sensation of legal immunity when they are abroad in places such as 
Asia or Latin America, but that Spanish law would still apply to 
 
MADRID 00000183  015.3 OF 016 
 
 
them upon their return.  When Mission Madrid receives information on 
pedophiles and sexual predators, this information is then included 
in the Consular Lookout and Support System. 
 
¶65. (SBU) Continue Checklist 29 F.  The new Penal Code currently 
being debated by Congress and expected to be approved in 2010 will 
include the crime "abuse of and sexual attack on minors," with jail 
sentences that range from 3-6 years (the current penalties are from 
1-3 years). If violence is involved, the penalty will be from 5-10 
years in jail.  The penalty for sexual relations with a minor will 
be 8-12 years in jail if violence is not involved, or from 12-15 
years if violence is involved. 
 
¶66. (SBU) Continue Checklist 29 F.  This new Penal Code also will 
establish as a crime the recruiting of minors for pornographic 
shows, profiting from minors' participation in pornographic shows, 
or supplying children for use in pornography.  Jail sentences for 
those promoting the prostitution of minors will be of 1-5 years 
(currently 1-4 years), and if the minor is under 13 years old, the 
sentence will be of 4-6 years.  Recruiting minors for their 
prostitution will be punished with 4-6 years of jail, and if the 
minor is under 13 years old, the sentence will be from 5-10 years. 
Recruiting of minors for pornographic shows will be punished with 
1-5 years in jail (currently 1-4 years), and if the victim is under 
13, the sentence will be from 5-9 years (currently 4-8 years).  The 
new code also will punish prostitution clients for engaging in 
sexual relations with a minor or a person with disabilities. 
 
¶67. (SBU) Checklist 29 G.  We have no information on any Spanish 
military officials deployed abroad engaging in or facilitating forms 
of trafficking, or exploiting victims of such trafficking.  On 
February 6, 2009, the GOS approved a royal decree with a new ethics 
code for the Spanish Armed Forces, which among other things, obliges 
the military to protect the defenseless, such as women and children, 
from prostitution or sexual violence.  Post understands that 
peacekeepers are included among the Spanish military who receive 
pre-deployment trafficking awareness training. 
 
//PARTNERSHIPS// 
 
¶68. (SBU) Checklist 30 A.  As this cable has detailed, Spain's 
central government throughout 2009 partnered with foreign countries, 
regional governments within Spain, city halls, NGOs, civil society, 
and multilateral organizations. 
 
¶69. (SBU) Continue Checklist 30 A.  According to press reports, 
representatives of every political party in the Spanish Congress of 
Deputies created a working group in November to combine forces to 
help make the battle against TIP a Europe-wide priority.  Socialist 
Deputy Carmen Calvo, the chairwoman of the Equality Committee who 
led the initiative, publicly stated that Spain wanted to use its 
stint as rotating President of the European Union (EU) during 
January-June 2010 to advance new legislation against TIP within the 
EU, to foster closer anti-TIP cooperation by police among 
member-states, and to build public awareness of the issue among the 
European public. 
 
¶70. (SBU) Continue Checklist 30 A.  Spain in December 2009 received 
a positive assessment in the OSCE's annual report on combating TIP. 
The Office of the Special Representative (SR) and Coordinator for 
Combating Trafficking in Human Beings praised Spain for undertaking 
"important initiatives and concrete and substantial steps in 
compliance with the recommendations" which the SR previously 
provided for Spain.  The OSCE commended Spain for, among other 
things, the establishment of a broad, multi-disciplinary 
consultative forum with civil society and Spain's ratification of 
the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in 
Human Beings, which went into force in Spain in August 2009. 
 
 
MADRID 00000183  016.3 OF 016 
 
 
¶71. (SBU) Continue Checklist 30 A.  Post does not have access to an 
advance copy of the soon-to-be-published OSCE report specifically on 
TIP in Spain, in response to Madrid's invitation in 2007 for the 
OSCE to perform a peer review of the TIP situation in Spain and 
Spanish efforts to address it.  An MFA official who has read the 
roughly 100-page draft report describes it as "fair" and suggests 
the "tone is perfect."  Our MFA contact also reveals that the report 
commends the Spanish government's openness and cooperation with the 
OSCE. 
 
¶72. (SBU) Continue Checklist 30 A.  In October Spanish TIP officials 
from the Office of the First Vice President, the Ministry of 
Interior, the SNP, the Prosecutor's office, and CICO participated in 
a DVC with G/TIP Ambassador CdeBaca.  As noted in Ref B, the Spanish 
reacted positively to suggestions that the USG and Spain explore 
ways to partner our anti-TIP programs in third-countries to 
eliminate duplication of effort while also playing to each other's 
strengths.  Spain cooperates with the governments of trafficking 
victims' countries of origin.  A Ministry of Equality official 
informs Post that Spain is especially active in working Latin 
American governments.  During the most recent reporting period, 
Spanish officials worked with Brazil, Colombia, Uruguay, and Central 
America.  Spain cooperates with Romania and Bulgaria - as countries 
of origin for TIP victims - through the European Union. 
 
¶73.  (SBU) Checklist 30 B.  Specifically, Spain offers developmental 
aid through its USAID-equivalent, police cooperation and training 
courses on how to combat trafficking in persons. 
 
CHACON