10MOSCOW353
Meeting Between the Russian Federal Drug Control Service
Thu Feb 18 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Moscow
VZCZCXRO6667
RR RUEHDBU
DE RUEHMO #0353/01 0491234
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 181234Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY MOSCOW
TO RUEABND/DEA HQS WASHDC
RUEHBUL/AMEMBASSY KABUL 0718
INFO RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 3711
RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD 2771
RUEHDBU/AMEMBASSY DUSHANBE 0117
RUEHNT/AMEMBASSY TASHKENTUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 MOSCOW 000353 
 
DEA SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
POST FOR DEA ONLY 
AMEMBASSY KABUL FOR DEA RD MARSAC, ARD BISHOP, SA DILLINGER, FIM 
HENDERSON 
AMEMBASSY ANKARA FOR DEA RD DESTITO, FIM LOGUE 
AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD FOR DEA ARD DUDLEY 
AMEMBASSY DUSHANBE FOR DEA CA CALDWELL 
AMEMBASSY TASHKENT FOR DEA CA MELINK 
DEA HQS FOR OGE/MENDOSA, SCHRETTNER 
DEA HQS FOR OSE/DISANTO, YASEVICH, SANCHEZ 
DEA HQS FOR NCT/CASTO 
DEA HQS FOR NCTE/UPP 
DEA HGS FOR NCI/BORDER 
DEA HQS FOR NCIE/LEHRER 
DEA HQS FOR SARI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DEAX
 
SUBJECT: Meeting Between the Russian Federal Drug Control Service 
(FSKN) and the Afghan Counter Narcotics Police To Discuss Counter 
Narcotics Issues Related to Russia-Afghanistan; GFXI-10-0003/FSKN 
 
CCX: GFXI-10-9123/Afghanistan 
 
REF A: DEA Moscow CO TWX #00165 dated January 25, 2010 
 
1.(SBU) Summary: On February 11, 2010, the DEA Moscow CO and Kabul 
CO organized a meeting between the Russian Federal Drug Control 
Service (FSKN) and the Afghan Counter Narcotics Police to discuss 
counter narcotics issues related to Russia-Afghanistan. The 
following topics were discussed: exchanging drug intelligence more 
frequently between the FSKN and Afghan Counter Narcotics Police, 
identifying the top 10 Afghan traffickers who are responsible for 
sending opiate shipments to Russia via the Northern Route, the 
possibilities of conducting International Controlled Deliveries 
(ICDs) from Afghanistan to Russia, the possibilities of posting 
additional FSKN liaison officers in the northern provinces of 
Afghanistan, and organizing case coordination meetings between 
Russia, Afghanistan, DEA, and Central Asian countries to target 
Northern Route Drug Trafficking Organizations (DTOs) more 
effectively. End Summary. 
 
2.(SBU) Following the DEA Mid East Region's mini IDEC conference, 
which was held in Bucharest, Romania the DEA Moscow CO and Kabul CO 
organized a meeting on February 11, 2010, between the FSKN and the 
Afghan Counter Narcotics Police to discuss counter narcotics issues 
related to Russia-Afghanistan. The following individuals 
participated in the meeting: FSKN General Alexander Kirushev, First 
Deputy Head of Operations, FSKN Colonel Alexey Milovanov [FSKN 
liaison officer posted to Kabul, Afghanistan], FSKN Major Inga 
Mayke, Deputy Head of Enforcement, and Afghan Colonel Asadullah 
Babakarkhel, Commander of the Afghan Counter Narcotics Police. Also 
in attendance from the DEA were ARD John Dudley, Moscow CO CA 
Michael Nowacoski, and Kabul CO Acting GS Kelly Dillinger. 
 
3.(SBU) General Kirushev began the discussions by explaining that 
Russia's main drug threat stems from Afghanistan and that 
approximately 90% of all the drug addicts in Russia are abusing 
Afghan opiates. General Kirushev described the Afghan drug threat as 
not only a threat for both Russia and Afghanistan but also a threat 
for numerous other countries, including the United States. 
 
4.(SBU) General Kirushev stated that approximately one year ago, the 
Russian and Afghan governments signed a Memorandum of Understanding 
(MOU) to exchange drug intelligence and to conduct joint narcotics 
operations between their countries. As a result of this, the FSKN 
posted Colonel Milovanov as FSKN's liaison officer in Afghanistan. 
 
5.(SBU) It is understood that since a majority of all the Afghan 
opiate shipments that are sent from Afghanistan to Russia transit 
through Central Asia (commonly referred to as the Northern Route), 
direct cooperation between the FSKN and Afghan Counter Narcotics 
Police may be difficult. Both the FSKN and the Afghan Counter 
Narcotics Police would like to utilize the DEA as a "common friend" 
to increase cooperation between each other in conducting joint 
investigations. 
 
6.(SBU) Colonel Babakarkhel stated that approximately 60% of all 
Afghan opiates are transported to Russia via the Northern Route, and 
that this amount will probably increase due to the construction of a 
new highway leading into Tajikistan from Northern Afghanistan. 
 
7.(SBU) General Kirushev and Colonel Babakarkhel both agreed that a 
way to increase cooperation between each country was to exchange 
drug intelligence more frequently between each agency. 
 
8.(SBU) As a first step, General Kirushev provided Colonel 
Babakarkhel with two referral letters that identified individuals 
who may be involved in narcotics trafficking. In the first referral 
letter, the FSKN alleged that the following individuals may be 
involved in orchestrating the production and smuggling of Afghan 
opiates to Russia via Central Asian countries located along the 
 
MOSCOW 00000353  002 OF 005 
 
 
Northern Route: 
 
Najib LNU; identified as an organizer of drug smuggling routes out 
of Tajikistan. Utilizes the following Tajik telephone numbers: 
992-919-966622 and 992-919-940008. 
 
Taj Mohammad; identified as a drug recipient based in Tajikistan. 
Utilizes Tajik telephone number 992-919-966833. 
 
Nematullah LNU; identified as a drug recipient based in Tajikistan. 
Utilizes Tajik telephone number 992-919-235219. 
 
Abdul WOZUZ; identified as an organizer of drug shipments from 
Afghanistan to Tajikistan. Utilizes Tajik telephone number 
992-919-326298. 
 
Jamal LNU; identified as an organizer of drug smuggling routes out 
of Tajikistan. Utilizes Tajik telephone number 992-919-335674. 
 
Aminullah LNU; identified as a drug distributor based in Tajikistan. 
Utilizes Tajik telephone number 992-919-225788. 
 
Abdulkhak LNU; identified as an organizer of drug shipments from 
Afghanistan to Tajikistan. Utilizes Tajik telephone number 
992-919-64569. 
 
Abdulmatin LNU; identified as a drug distributor based in 
Tajikistan. Utilizes Tajik telephone number 992-919-60773. 
 
Kurbon LNU; identified as an organizer of drug shipments from 
Afghanistan to Tajikistan. Utilizes Tajik telephone number 
992-919-60712. 
 
Shavgiz LNU; identified as an organizer of smuggling routes out of 
Tajikistan. Utilizes Tajik telephone number 992-919-40088. 
 
Mirzamin LNU; identified as a drug distributor based in Tajikistan. 
Utilizes Tajik telephone number 992-919-40889. 
 
Wahed LNU; identified as an organizer of drug shipments to 
Kazakhstan. Utilizes Tajik telephone number 992-919-40765. 
 
Hamed LNU; identified as an organizer of drug shipments from 
Afghanistan to Tajikistan. Utilizes Tajik telephone number 
992-919-40765. 
 
Navid LNU; identified as an organizer of drug shipments from 
Afghanistan to Tajikistan. Utilizes Tajik telephone number 
992-919-51123. 
 
Khan Zaman; identified as an organizer of drug shipments to 
Kazakhstan. Utilizes Tajik telephone number 992-919-50101. 
 
Agent's Note: The Moscow CO has submitted the above mentioned Tajik 
telephone numbers to SOD for further analysis via the DARTS system. 
The Moscow CO will verify with the FSKN if this information has 
already been shared with the Tajik Drug Control Agency (DCA). If 
not, the Moscow CO will request the Dushanbe CO to pass this 
information to the Tajik DCA for further investigation. 
 
9.(SBU) The second referral letter from the FSKN alleged that the 
following individuals are also involved in orchestrating the 
production and smuggling of Afghan opiates to Russia via Central 
Asian countries located along the Northern Route: 
 
Madad DJAN; identified as a drug lab owner in Nangarhar Province. 
Utilizes Afghan telephone number 93-799002726. 
 
Nur RAHMAN; identified as the owner of multiple drug labs in 
Nangarhar Province. Utilizes Afghan telephone number 93-775329432. 
 
MOSCOW 00000353  003 OF 005 
 
 
 
Gol BASHAR; identified as a drug distributor in Kabul.  Utilizes 
Afghan telephone number 93-706099066. 
 
Abdul VALI; identified as the owner of multiple drug labs in Takhar 
Province. Utilizes Afghan telephone number 93-79692478. 
 
Haji RAHMAN; identified as a manager of a drug distribution network 
in Helmand Province. Utilizes Afghan telephone number 93-796104853. 
 
Haji HAKIM; identified as a transporter of narcotics to Tajikistan. 
Utilizes Afghan telephone number 93-795796028. 
 
Abdul DJABBAR; reportedly distributes drugs from Afghanistan to 
Tajikistan. Utilizes Afghan telephone number 93-79377492. 
 
Ali KHAIDAR; identified as a heroin distributor in Kabul.  Utilizes 
Afghan telephone number 93-707412360. 
 
"Maftun" LNU; identified as the owner of several drug labs in Kabul. 
Utilizes Afghan telephone number 93-798212789. 
 
Haji RAKHIMULLA; identified as the owner of several large drug labs 
in Helmand Province. Utilizes Afghan telephone number 93-799379939. 
 
Haji HIKMATULLA; identified as a drug distributor based in Takhar 
Province. Utilizes Afghan telephone number 93-799204751. 
 
Agent's Note: On January 15, 2010, the FSKN provided the above 
mentioned information to the Moscow CO. For further details 
reference is made to REF A. The Moscow CO previously passed the 
above mentioned information to the Kabul CO for further 
investigation and submitted the above Afghan telephone numbers to 
SOD for further analysis. These names and telephone numbers have 
already been indexed. 
 
10.(SBU) General Kirushev and Colonel Babakarkhel discussed the 
possibilities of the Afghan Counter Narcotics Police providing the 
identity of the top ten Afghan traffickers who are responsible for 
organizing shipments of Afghan opiates to Russia via the Northern 
Route in order that these individuals/DTOs could be more effectively 
targeted by Russian, Afghan, DEA, and Central Asian counterparts. 
The FSKN also requested the Afghan Counter Narcotics Police to share 
Central Asian telephone numbers, particularly Tajik telephone 
numbers that are identified in on-going investigations. The FSKN 
would then run these Central Asian telephone numbers in their own 
databases in an attempt to identify any contacts/connections to 
Russia. 
 
11.(SBU) The FSKN inquired about the possibility of conducting 
International Controlled Deliveries (ICDs) from Afghanistan to 
Russia. It was learned that Afghan laws would permit ICDs to Russia. 
One possible way to generate direct ICDs to Russia would be focusing 
on the direct flights that operate between Kabul and Moscow. It was 
explained that the Kabul CO is attempting to initiate a new Afghan 
Airport Task Force Group with the Afghan Counter Narcotics Police, 
which could then be utilized in targeting the direct Kabul-Moscow 
flights for opiate shipments bound for Russia. 
 
12.(SBU) In an effort to target Northern Route DTOs, Colonel 
Babakarkhel asked about the possibilities of the FSKN posting 
additional FSKN liaison officers in the northern provinces of 
Afghanistan. General Kirushev stated that he would pass this request 
to FSKN Director Viktor Ivanov. 
 
13.(SBU) General Kirushev and Colonel Babakarkhel both agreed that 
case coordination meetings between Russia, Afghanistan, DEA, and 
Central Asian countries should be held more frequently and that the 
first meeting should occur after the IDEC Conference, scheduled for 
late April 2010 in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. General Kirushev offered 
 
MOSCOW 00000353  004 OF 005 
 
 
to research the date and venue for this first meeting. 
 
14.(SBU) Acting GS Dillinger briefed the FSKN on DEA's and the 
Afghan Counter Narcotics Police's operations and capabilities. It 
was explained that the Afghan Counter Narcotics Police consists of 
the Sensitive Investigation Unit (SIU) and the National Interdiction 
Unit (NIU). 
 
15.(SBU) The SIU consists of approximately 50 Afghan officers, which 
should be increased to approximately 100 Afghan officers by the end 
of 2010. Approximately 15 DEA agents support the SIU. The NIU 
consists of approximately 250 Afghan officers, which should be 
increased to 500 Afghan officers by the end of 2010. 
 
16.(SBU) It was further explained that the DEA has approximately 5 
agents posted in the Northern Afghan provinces, 6 agents posted in 
the Southern Afghan Provinces, 7 agents posted in the Eastern Afghan 
provinces, and 7 agents posted in the Western Afghan provinces. 
 
17.(SBU) Acting GS Dillinger also provided a briefing on the Afghan 
Finance Threat Center (AFTC), the Foreign-deployed Advisory Support 
Teams (FAST), the Afghan telephonic intercept program, and the Major 
Crime Task Force. 
 
¶18. (SBU) ACTION REQUEST FOR THE KABUL CO: 
 
Please request the Afghan Counter Narcotics Police to conduct 
background/criminal checks on the individuals that are identified in 
paragraph #8 in an attempt to verify if these individuals are 
involved in narcotics trafficking. Additionally, please run the 
Tajik telephones that are identified in paragraph #8 to determine if 
these telephone numbers are associated with any prior or current 
narcotics investigations conducted by the Kabul CO and Afghan 
counterparts. 
 
Please request the Afghan Counter Narcotics Police to identify the 
top 10 Afghan traffickers who are responsible for organizing 
shipments of Afghan opiates to Russia via the Northern Route so that 
these individuals/DTOs can be more effectively targeted by Russian, 
Afghan, DEA, and Central Asian counterparts. 
 
Please request the Afghan Counter Narcotics Police to share Central 
Asian telephone numbers that are identified in on-going 
investigations so that these telephone numbers can be checked in 
FSKN's databases in an attempt to identify any contacts to Russia. 
 
19.(SBU) This cable was prepared by CA Michael Nowacoski in lieu of 
a DEA-6 per DEA Agent's Manual Section 6242.11. Please direct any 
questions or comments to CA Michael Nowacoski at 7-495-728-5218 or 
by Firebird e-mail. Please note that Moscow CO is 8 hours ahead of 
Eastern Standard Time. 
 
INDEXING 
 
¶1. Najib LNU - NADDIS Negative. Further identified as a male; 
Telephone Numbers: 992-919-966622 and 992-919-940008. 
Remarks: Identified as an organizer of drug smuggling routes out of 
Tajikistan. 
 
¶2. Taj Mohammad - NADDIS Negative. Further identified as a male; 
Telephone Number: 992-919-966833; Remarks: Identified as a drug 
recipient based in Tajikistan. 
 
¶3. Nematullah LNU - NADDIS Negative. Further identified as male; 
Telephone Number: 992-919-235219; Remarks: Identified as a drug 
recipient based in Tajikistan. 
 
¶4. WOZUZ, Abdul - NADDIS Negative. Further identified as a male; 
Telephone Numbers: 992-919-326298; Remarks: Identified as an 
organizer of drug shipments from Afghanistan to Tajikistan. 
 
MOSCOW 00000353  005 OF 005 
 
 
 
¶5. Jamal LNU - NADDIS Negative. Further identified as a male; 
Telephone Numbers: 992-919-335674; Remarks: Identified as an 
organizer of drug smuggling routes out of Tajikistan. 
 
¶6. Aminullah LNU - NADDIS Negative. Further identified as a male; 
Telephone Number: 992-919-225788; Remarks: Identified as a drug 
distributor based in Tajikistan. 
 
¶7. Abdulkhak LNU - NADDIS Negative. Further identified as a male; 
Telephone Number: 992-919-64569; Remarks: Identified as an organizer 
of drug shipments from Afghanistan to Tajikistan. 
 
¶8. Abdulmatin LNU - NADDIS Negative. Further identified as a male; 
Telephone Number: 992-919-60773. Remarks: Identified as a drug 
distributor based in Tajikistan. 
 
¶9. Kurbon LNU - NADDIS Negative. Further identified as a male; 
Telephone Number: 992-919-60712; Remarks: Identified as an organizer 
of drug shipments from Afghanistan to Tajikistan. 
 
¶10. Shavgiz LNU - NADDIS Negative. Further identified as a male; 
Telephone Number: 992-919-40088; Remarks: Identified as an organizer 
of smuggling routes out of Tajikistan. 
 
¶11. Mirzamin LNU - NADDIS Negative. Further identified as a male; 
Telephone Number: 992-919-40889; Remarks: Identified as a drug 
distributor based in Tajikistan. 
 
¶12. Wahed LNU - NADDIS Negative. Further identified as a male; 
Telephone Number: 992-919-40765; Remarks: Identified as an organizer 
of drug shipments to Kazakhstan. 
 
¶13. Hamed LNU - NADDIS Negative. Further identified as a male; 
Telephone Number: 992-919-40765; Remarks: Identified as an organizer 
of drug shipments from Afghanistan to Tajikistan. 
 
¶14. Navid LNU - NADDIS Negative. Further identified as a male; 
Telephone Number: 992-919-51123; Remarks: Identified as an organizer 
of drug shipments from Afghanistan to Tajikistan. 
 
¶15. Zaman, Khan - NADDIS Negative. Further identified as a male; 
Telephone Number: 992-919-50101; Remarks: Identified as an organizer 
of drug shipments to Kazakhstan. 
 
BERYLE