10PARIS175
FRANCE BLUE LANTERN BROKER INQUIRY OF REGISTERED BROKER
Tue Feb 16 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Paris
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHFR #0175/01 0470945
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 160945Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8312
INFO RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDCUNCLAS PARIS 000175 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR PM/DTCC - BLUE LANTERN COORDINATOR RACHEAL-THERESE S. 
JOUBERT-LIN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC FR
SUBJECT: FRANCE BLUE LANTERN BROKER INQUIRY OF REGISTERED BROKER 
JENOPTEC - CASE NO. K-1120 
 
REF: STATE 099490 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED - NOT FOR INTERNET DISTRIBUTION 
 
¶1. (SBU) Econoff contacted French company JENOPTEC regarding 
JENOPTEC's bona fides and registered broker activities under Case NO. 
K-1120 (ref). JENOPTEC CEO Gerard Nobili and Stephane Hostyn, Chief 
of Production, confirmed that JENOPTEC employs 47 people, including 
company executives, administrators, manufacturers and engineers. 
Nobili said that he created and established JENOPTEC in October 1986 
and began business transactions in January 1987.  JENOPTEC's profit 
in 1987 was USD 1 million and has now risen to about seven million 
euros annually. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Nobili and Hostyn described JENOPTEC as the official French 
representative of ITT Night Vision of Roanoke, Virginia.  JENOPTEC's 
relationship with ITT Night Vision includes the purchasing of Gentry 
tubes and night vision goggles for use by French Ministry of Defense 
(MOD) military and special forces units heading to the war in 
Afghanistan.  (Note: Gentry tubes are the image intensifier for the 
night vision goggles and make the goggles more effective at night. 
End note.) Hostyn said that JENOPTEC helps in the adaptation-design 
for modifying the night vision goggles for French use. French helmet 
specifications for helicopter pilots, fighter pilots, and military 
units differ from those in the United States. JENOPTEC will create an 
interface adapter that makes ITT night vision goggles usable in 
French helmets. JENOPTEC also buys Gentry tubes from ITT Night Vision 
and sells them to French MOD, SAGEM and THALES. JANOPTEC also helps 
with the maintenance of the Gentry tubes and the night vision goggles 
when they break or are operating poorly. SAGEM and THALES are 
responsible for putting the ITT night vision goggles and Gentry tubes 
into the French helmets. 
 
¶3. (SBU) JANOPTEC also conducts business with Insight Technology of 
Londonderry, New Hampshire.  JANOPTEC's business relationship 
includes French special weapons and tactics (SWAT) teams and the 
French Gendarmerie.  JANOPTEC purchases "aiming systems" which 
include advanced laser illuminators and light bulbs for placement on 
French SWAT teams and French Gendarmerie weapons.  JANOPTEC purchases 
the "aiming systems" and then they are provided to the various SWAT 
and Gendarmerie units around France. 
 
¶4. (SBU) JANOPTEC purchased two electronics companies, DIVILEC and 
RECALL SYSTEMS based in France, and has a manufacturing facility in 
Normandy, France which builds printed circuit boards, and fiber optic 
broadcast cable for High Definition (HD) conversion for television 
broadcasts. Nobili confirmed that this part of his business does not 
involve controlled, dual-use, military items that would be covered by 
U.S. export controls. 
 
¶5. (SBU) JANOPTEC understands the restrictions on USML items and 
Hostyn indicated that all their export authorizations and end-user 
agreements have to be cleared with French MOD on French MOD 
letterhead.  Hostyn described a close relationship existed between 
French MOD and U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) regarding the night 
vision googles and their exportation to France. Hostyn added that any 
problems or questions they have related to export authorization are 
worked directly through JANOPTEC's legal Department in conjunction 
with ITT's legal department in Roanoke. Subsequently, ITT legal will 
work with DOS and DOD personnel to ensure JANOPTEC's licenses are 
accurate, current, and working within the confines of the U.S. export 
licensing agreement. 
 
Hostyn said they are well known and respected in the industry because 
they deal with solid U.S. companies and import sound U.S. USML 
products safely. JANOPTEC indicated that all precautions have been 
implemented to ensure that JANOPTEC has the physical infrastructure 
in place to handle and store USML items. Econoff was able to see the 
safe and security system that JANOPTEC uses to store night vision 
goggles. JANOPTEC's facilities are well protected as evidenced by 
their installation of a security system monitored by French 
authorities. Hostyn stated that usually they only receive 30 night 
vision goggles per shipment. The aiming systems from Insight 
Technology and the Gentry tubes from ITT are normally sent directly 
to the French MOD. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Post concludes that JANOPTEC is an active business operating 
at the location indicated under its authorization address (ref). 
JANOPTEC understands the laws and regulations governing the handling 
and sale of USML items between France and the United States.  Econoff 
saw no indications that JANOPTEC misrepresents its export authority. 
JANOPTEC said it is respected in the industry for its transparency 
and does not conduct business with disreputable buyers in USML 
import/export transactions. Hostyn stressed that JANOPTEC often 
receives faxes from unknown businesses inquiring about possible 
business relationships which JANOPTEC disregards.  Econoff saw no 
 
evidence or derogatory information that suggests BDSI has dealt or 
currently deals with disreputable businesses regarding USML 
import/export transactions. 
 
RIVKIN