10SOFIA123
BULGARIA: 2010 ANTI-TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS (TIP) REPORT
Mon Feb 22 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Sofia
VZCZCXRO9766
PP RUEHIK
DE RUEHSF #0123/01 0531526
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 221526Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY SOFIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6725
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DC
RUEAHLC/HOMELAND SECURITY CENTER WASHINGTON DC
RUEAUSA/LABOR DEPT WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 SOFIA 000123 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP (Hall), INL, DRL, PRM, EUR/PGI, EUR/SCE 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM KCRM KWMN SMIG KFRD ASEC PREF ELAB BU
SUBJECT: BULGARIA: 2010 ANTI-TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS (TIP) REPORT 
 
REF: STATE 2731 
 
SOFIA 00000123  001.2 OF 007 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  Bulgaria is primarily a point of origin and 
transit, and to a lesser degree destination for human trafficking. 
The government continued its energetic anti-trafficking prevention 
campaign and stepped up efforts in the area of victim protection. 
It also passed legislation to increase punishments for traffickers 
and introduced penalties for the clients of minor prostitutes and 
trafficking victims.  The new government has actively pursued 
high-profile cases against corrupt officials, including former 
ministers and agency heads.  It fired several police officers 
accused of aiding traffickers and arrested a high-level Interior 
Ministry official in charge of migration policy for helping 
trafficking groups obtain fake documents.  The court sentenced two 
elected local government officials charged with leading a 
trafficking criminal network. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Primary point of contact on trafficking is Political 
Officer XXXXXXXXXXXX.  Approximately 100 hours of staff time were 
required for the completion of this report.  END SUMMARY. 
 
REPORTING QUESTIONS 
------------------- 
 
¶25. (U) BULGARIA'S TIP SITUATION: 
 
-- A. Several agencies, including the Prosecution Service, the 
Ministry of Interior, the Ministry of Justice, and the Ministry of 
Labor and Social Policy maintain information about trafficking 
trends, criminal proceedings, traffickers and victims.  The National 
Commission for combating trafficking in human beings (the 
Commission) collects and summarizes all government-generated data, 
which is generally inclusive and reliable.  The International 
Organization for Migration (IOM) and NGOs also compile data on the 
destination, source points, and recruitment methods compiled from 
trafficking victims that they have assisted. 
 
-- B. Bulgaria continues to be primarily an origin point for 
trafficking of women and children, mostly for purposes of commercial 
sexual exploitation.  To a lesser extent it is a transit and 
destination point for sexual exploitation of foreign victims of 
trafficking.  Bulgarians are also subjected to trafficking 
conditions within the country.  Internal trafficking, particularly 
to resort areas, is primarily for sexual exploitation, and victims 
are often later trafficked to Western Europe.  The ratio between 
external and internal trafficking for sexual exploitation is almost 
equal.  Bulgarian victims of sexual exploitation are traditionally 
recruited from several regions of the country: victims from Sliven, 
in southeast Bulgaria, are primarily trafficked to Belgium and the 
Netherlands; victims from Plovdiv and Pazardzhik, in central 
Bulgaria, are mostly trafficked to France, Austria, and Italy; 
victims from northeast Bulgaria are mostly trafficked to Germany, 
Czech Republic, and the Scandinavian countries; victims from 
Blagoevgrad, in southwest Bulgaria, are usually trafficked to 
Greece, Italy, and Spain.  Bulgarian victims are also trafficked to 
Poland, Switzerland, Finland, Turkey, Cyprus and Macedonia.  NGOs 
report few recent cases of Bulgarian victims trafficked outside 
Europe, primarily to the U.S. and South Africa.  Law enforcement 
officials report that more than 80 percent of the trafficking 
investigations involve sexual exploitation.  However, Greece, Italy, 
Spain and Great Britain are known also as destinations for labor 
trafficking of Bulgarian victims. 
 
-- C. Victims are subject to forced prostitution, physical and 
psychological abuse. They are frequently limited in their movement 
and face punishments for failing to comply with the traffickers' 
rules.  Victims are also deprived of their identity documents and 
are controlled through threats against their relatives.  Some 
victims are forced to pay large debts or are sold to other 
traffickers.  Occasionally, in order to keep them dependent, victims 
are given drugs, mostly heroin. 
 
-- D. The most vulnerable populations for human trafficking are 
young women between the ages of 18 and 24, low income or unemployed 
persons, and those with less education and problematic family 
relations.  According to NGO estimates, Roma account for 
approximately 15 percent of victims. Roma children are more 
vulnerable to being trafficked for begging and delinquency and Roma 
women are vulnerable to being trafficked for sexual exploitation. 
NGOs report that female students, particularly from high-schools or 
universities specializing in dance, have recently become more 
vulnerable to trafficking. 
 
-- E. Law enforcement and NGOs identify four types of traffickers: 
freelancers, independent pimps (who usually control 2 to 5 victims), 
partner associations (typically comprised of 2 to 9 traffickers who 
control up to 7 victims each), and organized crime networks. 
Freelancers and independent pimps have limited access to territories 
outside Bulgaria, while partner associations and OC groups largely 
control the international trafficking.  Bulgarian victims are lured 
by promises of profitable work, often through close friends, 
acquaintances, or boyfriends.  In some cases victims are recruited 
through false job offers for receptionists, waitresses, models or au 
pairs. Some victims directly approach the traffickers and 
voluntarily accept to work as companions but are later exploited. 
Occasionally victims are kidnapped, forced to pay back unreasonable 
debts, or are sold by their relatives.  Both Bulgarian and foreign 
trafficking victims generally use genuine rather than forged 
documents and cross borders legally.  Victims are also moved 
frequently from one place to another, avoiding detection by 
authorities for undocumented stays.  Children trafficked abroad 
generally travel with the full consent of their parents as required 
by Bulgarian border control. 
 
¶26. (U) SETTING THE SCENE FOR THE GOVERNMENT'S ANTI-TIP 
EFFORTS: 
 
-- A. The government acknowledges that human trafficking is a 
problem in the country. 
 
-- B. The Commission, which by law is comprised of deputy 
ministerial level representatives of different agencies, serves as 
the focal point for coordinating the government's anti-trafficking 
efforts.  The Commission is supported in its efforts by six local 
commissions, which are located in regions identified as major source 
or destination points for trafficking.  In 2009, the Commission 
continued its energetic prevention campaign and stepped up efforts 
in the area of victim protection.  On the prosecution front, the 
Ministry of Interior and the Prosecution Service maintained high 
rates of investigations against sex and labor traffickers. 
 
 
-- C. The government's challenges to combat trafficking include an 
overly formalistic judicial process, inadequate compensation for 
government officials, and lingering public corruption.  Different 
agencies within the Ministry of Interior have the authority to 
investigate trafficking cases.  Some of the agencies' local branches 
lack sufficient expertise or administrative capacity to handle 
complex investigations.  Additionally, the lack of a centralized 
approach in investigating organized crime groups sometimes allows 
the groups' leaders to conceal their criminal activities by 
sacrificing low to mid-level accomplices. 
 
-- D. The Commission regularly collects data from all relevant 
agencies to refine its prevention campaigns and training programs. 
The National Commission publishes an annual report of the 
government's anti-trafficking efforts and hosts a quarterly meeting 
with international donors and local NGOs.  These quarterly meetings 
provide a forum for sharing accomplishments and coordinating 
efforts. 
 
-- E. The government has a reliable system for birth registration. 
Regardless of ethnicity or social status, Bulgarian women have 
traditionally chosen to give birth at hospitals providing 
specialized medical care.  According to latest studies 99.4 percent 
of all births take place at hospitals and are registered immediately 
thereafter.  In 2009, the government continued to implement measures 
in order to meet EU Schengen requirements.  As part of this effort, 
starting March 2010 the government will begin to re-register 
citizens, which is necessary for the issuance of new identity 
documents containing biometric data on all Bulgarian nationals. 
 
-- F. The government generally has the capabilities to gather data 
for law enforcement assessment.  However, the lack of a systematic 
approach and modern equipment as well as the poor administrative 
capacity, especially at local level, are challenges acknowledged by 
the government.  In part to overcome these challenges, the 
government establishment permanently functioning task forces in 
2009, comprised of vetted law enforcement officers and prosecutors. 
These task forces are already running at full speed and target 
organized crime in a more systematic manner. 
 
¶27. (U) INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION OF TRAFFICKERS: 
 
-- A. Section IX of Bulgaria's Criminal Code, which was adopted in 
2002, specifically prohibits trafficking for both sexual and labor 
exploitation.  The law covers internal and transnational forms of 
trafficking.  The victims' consent is not defense to trafficking 
charges under Bulgarian law, even when the victim is an adult. 
Amendments adopted in April 2009 increased punishments for 
traffickers.  More specifically the government significantly 
increased fines for traffickers and increased the minimum time of 
imprisonment for internal trafficking.  The law also increased the 
maximum prison sentence for international traffickers, repeat 
offenders, and organized crime group members.  Changes to the law 
introduced specific penalties for the clients of minor prostitutes 
and for those who use trafficking victims for sexual abuse, forced 
labor, organ removal or servitude.  The Criminal Code also punishes 
rape, slavery, forced prostitution and activities related to 
prostitution.  Trafficking is among the offenses covered by the 2005 
Asset Forfeiture Law, which allows for confiscation of illegally 
acquired property.  Victims of trafficking can also sue for civil 
damages.  The exact text of section IX, article 159 is included 
below. 
 
TRAFFICKING IN PEOPLE 
Art. 159a. 
 
(1) A person who gathers, transports, hides or receives individuals 
or groups of people in order to be used for vicious practice, 
involuntary servitude, seizure of body organs or to be kept under 
compulsory submission regardless of their consent, shall be punished 
by imprisonment of two to eight years and a fine from three thousand 
to twelve thousand levs. 
(2) When the act under para 1 is committed: 
       ¶1. regarding a person under eighteen years of age; 
       ¶2. by compulsion or by deceiving the person; 
       ¶3. by kidnapping or illegal deprivation of freedom; 
       ¶4. by using a state of dependence; 
       ¶5. by malfeasance; 
       ¶6. by promising, providing or obtaining benefit, 
the punishment shall be imprisonment of three to ten years and a 
fine from ten thousand to twenty thousand levs. 
(3) In case the act under para 1 has been committed with regards to 
a pregnant woman with the purpose of selling the child, the 
punishment shall be imprisonment of three to fifteen years and a 
fine of twenty thousand to fifty thousand levs. 
 
INTERNATIONAL TRAFFICKING 
Art. 159b 
 
A person who gathers, transports, hides or receives individuals or 
groups of people and transfers them through the border of the 
country with the purpose under art. 159a, para 1 shall be punished 
by imprisonment of three to twelve years and a fine from ten 
thousand to twenty thousand levs. 
(2) If the act under para 1 is committed under the conditions of 
art. 159a, para 2 and 3 the punishment shall be imprisonment of five 
to twelve years and a fine from twenty thousand to fifty thousand 
levs. 
 
CLIENTS OF TRAFFICKING VICTIMS 
Art. 159c. 
 
Whoever uses a person, victim of traffic of people, for acts of 
debauchery, for forced labor, for deprivation of corporal organs or 
to be kept in forced obedience regardless of his consent shall be 
punished by imprisonment from three to ten years and fine from ten 
thousand to twenty thousand levs. 
 
REPEAT OFFENDERS AND ORGANIZED CRIME GROUP 
Art. 159d. 
 
When the act under art. 159a - 159c represents a dangerous 
recidivism or it has been committed by an errand or in fulfillment 
of a decision of an organized criminal group the punishment shall be 
imprisonment of five to fifteen years and a fine from twenty to one 
hundred thousand levs, as the court can also rule confiscation of a 
part or of the entire property of the offender. 
 
-- B-C. All forms of human trafficking are equally penalized, 
regardless of the form of exploitation.  The punishment for 
trafficking in persons is two to eight years in prison and fines up 
to approximately USD 8,800 (BGN 12,000).  If aggravated 
circumstances exist -- e.g., a minor or kidnapping was involved -- 
penalties increase to three to ten years in prison and fines of up 
to approximately USD 14,700 (BGN 20,000).  Penalties for trafficking 
persons across borders increased to three to 12 years imprisonment 
and fines of up to approximately USD 14,700 (BGN 20,000).  The same 
increased punishment is provided for trafficking of pregnant women 
for the purpose of baby selling.  If the act of trafficking is 
carried out in connection with an organized crime group or 
constituted a serious repeat offense, penalties increase to five to 
15 years imprisonment with fines of up to approximately USD 74,000 
(BGN 100,000) and the possibility of forfeiture of assets.  Labor 
recruiters and employers who falsely entice workers or forcibly hold 
them in the destination countries can be punished with up to ten 
years imprisonment. 

-- D. Sentences for rape range between two and eight years 
imprisonment; sentences increase to between three and ten years if 
the perpetrator is a repeat offender, or if the victim is underage 
or a close relative.  In cases where rape results in serious bodily 
injury or suicide of the victim, sentences range between ten and 20 
years. 
 
-- E. In 2009, the prosecution service investigated a total of 226 
trafficking cases, 21 of which involved forced labor. Of the 226 
cases, 95 were from previous years and 131 were launched in 2009. 
Of the 131 newly launched investigations, 122 of them concerned 
trafficking for sexual exploitation and nine dealt with labor 
exploitation.  In 2009, prosecutors filed indictments against two 
labor traffickers, including one foreigner, and 79 sex traffickers, 
including 2 foreigners.  A total of 97 persons were convicted on 
trafficking charges.  Of the 97, 94 were sentenced for trafficking 
for sexual exploitation and three for labor exploitation.  Fourteen 
people were convicted based on a new provision which criminalized 
the use of trafficking victims for sexual abuse.  Fifty-one of the 
traffickers received effective sentences, 45 received suspended 
sentences and one was sentenced to probation.  Thirty-seven 
traffickers received fines in addition to their sentences. 
Offenders convicted of trafficking generally served the full 
sentences mandated by the court.  In some of the cases, the 
prosecutors pressed multiple charges against the perpetrators, and 
where there was not sufficient evidence to prove the trafficking 
charges, the perpetrators were prosecuted for enticement into 
prostitution.  In January 2010, the police arrested six people for 
sexually abusing 12 boys ages 12 to 16 years who were recruited 
through the Internet.  The investigation is ongoing. 
 
-- F. The government and NGOs trained law enforcement officers on 
investigating trafficking and differentiating between trafficking 
victims and offenders.  As part of its regular curriculum, the 
National Institute of Justice, the government's magistrates' 
training institution, trained 34 judges and 19 prosecutors on 
organized crime issues, including human trafficking and trans-border 
crimes.  The International Organization for Migration (IOM) trained 
60 Bulgarian labor inspectors on issues such as trafficking victim 
identification, sectors most vulnerable to trafficking exploitation, 
protection mechanisms, and penalization of violators.  IOM also 
trained 60 law enforcement officers on trafficking victim 
identification and referral and migration management. 
 
-- G. The Bulgarian government cooperated with other governments in 
the investigation and prosecution of trafficking cases.  The MOI 
Border Police unit cooperated with counterparts in Poland, Great 
Britain, Belgium and Greece.  The MOI anti-organized crime unit held 
17 joint investigations targeting human traffickers with law 
enforcement from Austria, Germany, France, Belgium, the Netherlands, 
Italy and Great Britain. 
 
-- H. Bulgarian law allows extradition of both foreign nationals and 
Bulgarian citizens.  In 2009, the government initiated 33 
extradition cases on trafficking charges.  Of them, four were 
against foreigners and 33 against Bulgarian nationals. 
 
-- I. Corruption is by far Bulgaria's biggest challenge with 
numerous allegations of government officials providing "no look" 
protection to organized crime figures, including traffickers.  The 
new government, which won the July 2009 elections on an 
anti-corruption platform, has made strides against corrupt 
practices, including launching investigations against four former 
ministers and several other high-level officials.  The new 
government also replaced 26 of the 28 regional police chiefs and 
established permanently functioning joint police-prosecutors 
investigative teams targeting major organized crime figures. 
 
-- J. In 2008 police arrested 24 members of an organized crime group 
involved in human trafficking and money laundering in the coastal 
city of Varna.  Three of the group's members were elected government 
officials and served on the city council at the time of their 
arrest.  In June 2009 two of the municipal councilors, a father and 
a son, plea bargained and received a three-year and one-year 
effective sentences, which they are currently serving.  A total of 
19 members of the group plea bargained and received reduced 
sentences.  The trial is ongoing against one municipal councilor and 
four members of the group, who refused to plea-bargain. 
Additionally, nine out of eleven officers of the local 
anti-organized crime unit in Vratsa were dismissed from office on 
suspicion of aiding a trafficking group.  In February, the 
government arrested the Head of the Migration unit within the 
Interior Ministry for reportedly aiding a criminal group in securing 
Bulgarian identity documents for foreigners smuggled in Bulgaria. 
 
-- K. Reporting not applicable to Bulgaria 
 
-- L. Bulgaria does not have an identified child sex tourism 
problem.  However, resort areas along the Black sea coast and border 
towns, especially with Greece, are destination points for internal 
sexual exploitation.  Trafficking victims in these areas are often 
young girls between 14 and 18, who are considered children under 
Bulgarian law.  The Prosecution service identified 18 children 
victims of sexual exploitation in 2009.  In October 2009 the court 
sentenced an Australian pedophile to five years and six months 
imprisonment.  The Australian was arrested in November 2008 for 
performing acts of debauchery with three Bulgarian minors in the 
coastal city of Varna and videotaping them.  A Bulgarian national 
was also sentenced to nine months imprisonment for aiding the 
Australian to get in contact with the victims.  In March 2009, 
prosecutors filed in court an indictment against an Italian national 
accused of pedophilia.  The trial against him is ongoing.  In 
September 2009, police arrested a German pensioner who was 
videotaping naked Bulgarian minors of Roma origin who were between 
four and eight years old for an Internet pedophile forum.  The 
investigation against the German is ongoing as is the investigation 
against national of Great Britain who was arrested on charges of 
pedophilia in December 2009.  Bulgarian Criminal Code has 
extraterritorial coverage and Bulgarian nationals are punishable for 
child abuse abroad. 
 
¶28. (U) PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS: 
 
-- A. The government provides victims with shelter, counseling, 
medical, and legal assistance, consistent with its laws. 
 
-- B-C. Bulgaria has six state-run children's shelters and one 
adults' shelter which are accessible to victims of trafficking. 
Additionally several NGO's, including Animus (Sofia), Samaritans 
(Stara Zagora), SOS Families at Risk (Varna), Diva (Plovdiv), Open 
Door (Pleven), and Demetra (Burgas) have care facilities and offer 
legal, medical and psychological service to victims of trafficking. 
The Government rents facilities to NGOs, at below market rates and 
provides police protection for NGO-operated safe houses.  Several 
local governments, including in Varna and Pazardzhik, outsource 
provision of social services to NGOs by allocating them premises and 
funding.  Each of the six children's shelters offers psychological 
and medical assistance to victims and has the capacity to shelter 
ten kids between ages six and 18 years for a period of up to six 
months.  The government provides an annual state allowance of 7,750 
($5,000) BGN/year per child.  NGOs and government agencies do not 
distinguish between foreign and Bulgarian citizens in providing 
assistance to trafficking victims.  The Commission is finalizing 
standards for minimum care that all facilities should offer to 
trafficking victims. 
 
-- D. The 2003 Anti-Trafficking Act created a special immigration 
status for foreign trafficking victims who cooperate in trafficking 
investigations.  The status provides for full residency and 
employment rights until the end of criminal proceedings.  For 
foreign citizen victims who choose not to cooperate in trafficking 
investigations, the GOB provides ten days plus one month for 
recovery before they are returned to their country of origin.  The 
recovery period for foreign citizen child victims is ten days plus 
two months. 
 
-- E. The government shelters children victims of trafficking for a 
period of up to six months.  The shelter's social workers seek to 
ensure the safe return of the children to their biological families 
after this period expires and, whenever necessary, to find them 
accommodation in a specialized institution or a foster family. 
 
-- F. The government has an institutionalized referral process for 
children victims of trafficking and law enforcement routinely 
referred children victims to the six state-run shelters.  Law 
enforcement referred adult victims to NGOs.  In 2009, the Commission 
continued to work with NGOs in a multinational project funded by the 
Dutch government to develop a transnational referral mechanism.  The 
Commission is currently finalizing a set of standard operative 
procedures under this mechanism. 
 
-- G. In 2009, the government identified 289 victims of trafficking, 
of which 44 were minors.  Of the children victims, 40 were sexually 
exploited and four were labor exploited.  All children victims 
received government-funded assistance.  Of the adult victims, 213 
were women and 32 were male.  Of the 32 men, 28 were victims of 
labor exploitation and five men were sexually exploited. 202 women 
were victims of sexual exploitation and 11 were labor exploited.  In 
2009, IOM assisted 47 victims of trafficking, two of whom were 
foreign nationals.  Forty of the assisted were victims of sexual 
exploitation and seven were victims of labor exploitation.  Animus 
NGO assisted 45 adult victims referred by law enforcement or their 
sister organizations throughout Europe. 
 
-- H. Bulgarian law enforcement, particularly border police, have 
been trained on victim identification and have a system for 
screening potential victims. Prostitution is not specifically 
legalized in Bulgaria. 
 
-- I. NGOs reported that victims' rights were respected, according 
to international norms.  Victims were generally not detained, fined, 
or prosecuted for minor offenses with one notable exception 
involving two Moldovan women who received a six month suspended 
sentence for illegal border crossing.  The two were meanwhile 
referred to IOM for assistance but the charges against them were not 
dropped. 
 
-- J. The government encourages victims to assist in the 
investigation and prosecution of trafficking cases and provides 
special status for foreign citizen victims who cooperate.  Victims 
can also file civil suits for material and moral damages suffered 
and generally victims have unimpeded access to such redress.  Victim 
witnesses are permitted to obtain other employment or leave the 
country pending trial proceedings. Trafficking victims who have not 
been compensated through judicial process can seek redress for 
material damages from a special government fund.  The fund is 
operated by a National Council under the Ministry of Justice which 
allocates compensations from BGN 250 (approximately USD 170) to BGN 
5,000 (approximately USD 3,520) to victims of a specified list of 
crimes, including trafficking. 

-- K. The government provides training for government officials on 
identifying and assisting trafficking victims.  In 2009, experts of 
the Commission made presentations to Border police, school teachers, 
and social workers at the children shelters. The Police Academy 
under the Ministry of Interior has included human trafficking course 
in its standard curriculum for police officers.  The Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs Diplomatic Institute includes a module on 
trafficking in its courses for junior diplomats and consular 
officers as well as officers from the Ministry of Defense, the 
General Staff, and the Military Academy.  The officers posted to 
Bulgarian embassies and consulates are taught how to recognize 
trafficking victims and how to refer victims to NGOs for legal, 
medical and psychological assistance.  In 2009, the IOM helped 
repatriate and provided social assistance to three adults and three 
children who were victims of labor exploitation in Spain.  All of 
the victims were referred to IOM by the Bulgarian embassy in Madrid. 
 
 
-- L. The Government provides medical aid, shelter, psychological, 
and reintegration assistance, as well as education to children 
victims of trafficking.  It refers repatriated adult trafficking 
victims to NGOs for legal, medical and psychological aid.  The 
Anti-Trafficking Act provides for repatriated Bulgarian trafficking 
victims to receive the same assistance and care as trafficking 
victims identified within the country. 
 
-- M. The IOM and NGOs, including Animus, Nadia Center Foundation, 
Samaritans, Diva, and SOS Families at Risk provided medical, legal, 
psychological and reintegration assistance to trafficking victims. 
IOM and NGOs report strong cooperation with Government officials, on 
a national and local level.  The government supported and protected 
organization conducting awareness/prevention campaigns. 
 
¶29. (U) PREVENTION: 
 
-- A. In 2009, the government organized and/or supported numerous 
public awareness programs on national and local level.  In October 
2009, the Commission launched an Open Door campaign by opening its 
office to students every Friday.  In 2009, the Commission hosted 350 
students who received information brochures and participated in 
video screenings and discussions.  The Commission also organized a 
student contest for trafficking awareness presenting 50 awards for 
anti-trafficking illustrations and 30 awards for best essays.  The 
local commission in Varna, in partnership with an employment agency 
and local universities, organized a prevention campaign against 
labor exploitation titled "Where are you travelling?".  Experts at 
the local commission in Burgas held discussions with students.  The 
local commission in Sliven held a charity concert under the slogan 
"There is always a choice" and organized in partnership with the 
local theater a prevention campaign for the visitors of the autumn 
theater festival.  The government also opened three information 
centers under the local commissions in Varna, Burgas and 
Pazardzhik. 
 
-- B. The National Border Police actively monitors airports and land 
border crossings for evidence of trafficking in persons. However, 
effective monitoring of immigration and emigration patterns is 
hampered by visa-free travel between Bulgaria and its neighbors. 
 
-- C. The Commission is a multi-agency body specifically tasked with 
coordinating Bulgaria's anti-trafficking efforts.  The Commission's 
secretariat ensures effective communication between the various 
agencies represented on the Commission and serves as the main point 
of contact for international and local partners on trafficking 
issues.  Under the leadership of the Commission's secretariat, an 
expert advisory group, with representatives from all member 
agencies, meets regularly to address operational issues.  The 
Commission's secretariat also hosts quarterly meetings of a 
coordination group, comprised of international donors and NGO 
representatives, to advance anti-trafficking efforts. 
 
-- D. The government adopts annually a plan of action for combating 
human trafficking. The 2009 plan was approved by the Council of 
Ministers in April 2009.  It was developed in consultation with all 
relevant government agencies, as well as NGOs and the IOM. 
 
-- E-F. In April 2009, the government introduced penalties for the 
clients of children prostitutes and also criminalized the use of 
trafficking victims for sexual abuse.  The government sentenced six 
persons under these new provisions.  As described above, Bulgarian 
Criminal Code has extraterritorial coverage and applies to Bulgarian 
clients of minor prostitutes abroad. 
 
¶30. (U) PARTNERSHIPS 
 
-- A.  In 2009, the Bulgarian government cooperated with the 
Norwegian government under a joint police cooperation project aimed 
at increasing police capacity to handle trafficking cases. The 
government also implemented a bilateral police project with the 
Dutch government. 
 
-- B.  Bulgaria is one of four source countries, along with Albania, 
Macedonia and Romania, which implements a project aimed at 
developing a transnational referral mechanism for trafficking 
victims.  The project also promotes sharing of best practices among 
the eight cooperating countries. 
 
WARLICK