04OTTAWA2940
BLUE LANTERN CHECK ON COMPANY REGISTERED AS BROKER
Tue Nov 02 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ottawa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS OTTAWA 002940 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR PM/DTCC (ANNA MAGOULAS) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC KOMC CA
SUBJECT: BLUE LANTERN CHECK ON COMPANY REGISTERED AS BROKER 
UNDER ITAR 129 
 
REF: STATE 229023 
 
¶1.  (U) Embassy Econoff contacted the Diamondback Chemical 
Company, Inc., on November 1 and conducted a telephone 
interview with Mr. John "Al" MacGregor, Vice President of 
Diamondback.  MacGregor was forthcoming and said that 
Diamondback is eager to disclose any information required by 
the ITAR 129 registration process. 
 
¶2.  (U) According to Mr. MacGregor, Diamondback, formerly 
named IMR Powder, is located in Mississauga, Ontario, a city 
of about 300,000 southwest of Toronto.  MacGregor confirmed 
Diamondback's headquarters address as that given in reftel: 
6733 Mississauga Road, Suite 306, Mississauga, Ontario, L5N 
6J5.  MacGregor said the company's main business activities 
are the manufacture of gunpowder and the loading of small 
arms ammunition.  Remington, Federal, and Winchester are some 
its major clients in the United States.  It also sells to 
NATO.  A subsidiary Diamondback company, Nitro-Chem 
Corporation, produces ammonium nitrate for use in the 
construction industry as well as nitroglycerin for medical 
heart patches. 
 
¶3.  (U) MacGregor said that Diamondback holds all requisite 
permits and licenses regarding the manufacture and export of 
its products.  He added that Diamondback has a registered 
sales office in New York that obtains approvals for its 
export sales to the United States. 
 
¶4.  (U) Please advise if additional information is required 
regarding Diamondback. 
 
Visit Canada's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/ottawa 
 
CELLUCCI