05OTTAWA2112
U.S. EMBASSY OTTAWA RECEIVED DIP NOTE #JLAB-0107
Tue Jul 12 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ottawa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS OTTAWA 002112 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PLEASE PASS TO WHA/CAN; EB/TPP/MTA; WHA/MEX 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD CA MX
SUBJECT: U.S. EMBASSY OTTAWA RECEIVED DIP NOTE #JLAB-0107 
FROM MFA JULY 11, 2005 
 
 ¶1.  On July 11, 2005 the U.S. Embassy Ottawa received 
DipNote #JLAB-0107 from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 
Ottawa, Canada.  The original is being sent to WHA/CAN. 
 
¶2.  Begin text of note: 
 
The Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade 
presents its compliments to the Embassy of the United States 
of America and has the honour to refer to the Exchange of 
Letters constituting and Agreement between the Government of 
Canada and the Government of the United States of America 
concerning certain additions to the special provisions 
contained in Appendix 6 of Annex 300-B of the North American 
Free Trade Agreement ("NAFTA"), done at Washington on 27 
November 2002, at Mexico on 27 November 2002 and at Ottawa on 
3 December 2002, signed in Washington on 19 May and in Ottawa 
on 28 June 2005. 
 
The Department has the honour to confirm that the Government 
of Canada has completed the procedures required by law to 
bring this Agreement into force.  The Department has the 
further honour to confirm that the Agreement entered into 
force for Canada, pursuant to the provisions of the Exchange 
of Letters, on July1, 2005. 
 
The Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade 
avails itself of the opportunity to renew to the Embassy of 
the United States of America the assurances of its highest 
consideration. 
 
End text of note. 
 
Visit Canada's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/ottawa 
 
DICKSON