05OTTAWA1175
CANADA: RESPONSE TO DEMARCHE ON COMMUNITY OF
Tue Apr 19 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ottawa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

191240Z Apr 05UNCLAS OTTAWA 001175 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM PREL CA
SUBJECT: CANADA: RESPONSE TO DEMARCHE ON COMMUNITY OF 
DEMOCRACIES 
 
REF: STATE 066782 
 
¶1.  Poloff delivered reftel demarche concerning the upcoming 
April 28-30 Community of Democracies (CD) Ministerial in 
Santiago to Jessica Blitt, Policy Advisor in the 
Peacebuilding and Human Security Division at Foreign Affairs 
Canada (FAC), on April 13.  Blitt said that FAC was still 
considering the delegation it would send to this conference, 
but she indicated that it was highly unlikely that Foreign 
Minister Pettigrew would attend.  (NOTE: There is widespread 
speculation in the media that the minority Liberal government 
may fall at any point, and members of the cabinet are staying 
close to Ottawa, in the event that a confidence vote is 
called in Parliament.  END NOTE.) 
 
¶2.  Continuing, Blitt said that FAC has yet to develop any 
specific proposals for the CD Ministerial, in part because 
they view the proposed agenda as somewhat sketchy.  However, 
she reiterated that Canada will be an active participant 
during the conference, and will seek to follow-up with other 
countries on specific proposals that are presented. 
 
Visit Canada's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/ottawa 
 
DICKSON