07OTTAWA1334
CANADA'S NEW FOREST COMMUNITIES PROGRAM
Wed Jul 11 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ottawa
VZCZCXRO9870
PP RUEHGA RUEHHA RUEHQU RUEHVC
DE RUEHOT #1334/01 1922114
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 112114Z JUL 07
FM AMEMBASSY OTTAWA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6116
INFO RUCNCAN/ALL CANADIAN POSTS COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDC PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 OTTAWA 001334 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAN AND EEB/BTA 
STATE PASS USTR FOR MELLE AND SULLIVAN 
USDOC FOR JIM TERPSTRA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD EAGR CA
SUBJECT: CANADA'S NEW FOREST COMMUNITIES PROGRAM 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  The Harper government's newly announced 
Forest Communities Program (FCP) is designed to help 
communities adapt to economic changes in Canada's forestry 
sector.  The C$25 million, five-year program will fund sites 
across Canada and encourage community-level partnerships to 
take advantage of emerging economic opportunities.  Comment: 
The FCP bears investigation to see if it runs afoul of the 
anti-circumvention provisions of the Softwood Lumber 
Agreement such as several existing provincial and federal 
assistance programs for the forestry sector may already do 
so.  Please give the Embassy instructions if you want us to 
raise specific questions on the FCP with the Canadian 
Government.  End Comment and Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) During a July 7 visit to Nova Scotia, Foreign Minister 
MacKay unveiled the GOC's new Forest Communities Program 
(FCP) to help communities develop stable local economies as 
they deal with the impact of economic challenges facing 
Canada's distressed forest sector due to rising energy costs, 
a strong Canadian dollar, new international competition, and 
reduced timber supplies.  MacKay said that the program is 
designed to foster collaborative community efforts to help 
communities take advantage of new economic opportunities from 
foreign resources. 
 
¶3. (U) The C$25 million, five-year program will fund 11 FCP 
sites across Canada.  Each year, the funding will support 
community-level partnerships and national partnership 
activities and operations.  Natural Resources Canada (NRCan) 
will negotiate funding terms and conditions with the 11 
successful FCP applicants. 
 
¶4. (U) The FCP is based on Canada's Model Forest Program, 
which began in 1992 and ends this year.  According to the 
NRCan press release, the FCP will encourage the development 
of knowledge, information tools and best practices to help 
forest communities meet the challenges of transition in the 
forest sector.  The program will help communities to 
capitalize on emerging resource-based economic opportunities. 
 The FCP, the press release continued, will foster new 
approaches to accommodate competing land uses, establish 
demonstration projects for innovative forest management 
approaches, and create community ventures based on new types 
of forest products.  These solutions will be shared with 
other foreign communities across Canada and internationally 
through the Canadian Model Forest network, the International 
Model Forest Network and similar organizations. 
 
¶5. (U) Environment Canada has supplied sketchy public 
information on the parameters of the 11 initial FCP program 
sites, which may help Washington agencies get a handle on the 
program: 
 
British Columbia 
---------------- 
 
¶1. Ecotrust (Vancouver Island - Clayaquot Sound) 
 
This partnership involves the Nuu-chah-nulth First Nations 
and Ecotrust Canada.  It intends to create economic 
opportunities for the forest-dependent communities of the 
Clayoquot Sound Biosphere Reserve, while protecting ecosystem 
integrity. 
 
¶2. The Integrated Resources Management Partnership of 
Northern British Columbia (Prince George) 
 
Building on the past success of the McGregor Model Forest, 
this expanded partnership will help forest-based communities 
in northern BC to diversify their economies and address the 
many forest management issues in the region. 
 
Saskatchewan 
------------ 
 
¶3. Prince Albert Model Forest (Prince Albert) 
 
The Prince Albert Model Forest will develop new approaches to 
QThe Prince Albert Model Forest will develop new approaches to 
capacity building in resource-based communities and 
facilitate cross-sector relationships involving forestry, 
agriculture, and the rapidly developing mining and energy 
sectors of Saskatchewan. 
 
Manitoba 
-------- 
 
¶4. Manitoba Model Forest (Pine Falls) 
 
OTTAWA 00001334  002 OF 003 
 
 
 
The Manitoba Model Forest is developing new partnerships with 
the forest industry, forest-based communities and the 
Assembly of Manitoba Chiefs.  The Model Forest is seeking new 
opportunities for communities to participate in informed 
decision-making about landscape management and to develop 
alternative uses of forest resources. 
 
Ontario 
------- 
 
¶5. Northeast Superior Forest Community (Chapleau) 
 
This partnership will bring new economic dynamics to 
forest-based communities in Northern Ontario.  Several 
communities will work together on common economic objectives 
with an emphasis on developing economic opportunities 
involving non-timber values of the forest.  The Northeast 
Superior Forest Community also intends to use technology to 
stimulate economic and educational activities. 
 
¶6. Eastern Ontario Model Forest (Kemptville) 
 
Located near Ottawa, the Eastern Ontario Model Forest has a 
unique opportunity to demonstrate to national audiences the 
importance of forests and forestry to Canada's rural 
communities.  The partnership is well-positioned to address 
the challenges facing rural and urban forests, including 
planning issues and economic diversification. 
 
Quebec 
------ 
 
¶7. Hautes Laurentides (Mont Laurier) 
 
This partnership brings together a diverse group of interests 
to challenge the current economic realities of the forestry 
industry in rural Quebec.  Hautes Laurentides will encourage 
community development through improved forest management and 
explore new opportunities for recreational tourism. 
 
¶8. Montagnais du Lac-St-Jean (Saguenay) 
 
The Lac St-Jean region of Quebec has proposed a new 
partnership of communities, including First Nations, to seek 
new opportunities for the forest industry and economic 
development.  The main emphasis will be on workforce training 
to ensure the long-term sustainability of the region's 
communities. 
 
New Brunswick 
------------- 
 
¶9. Fundy Model Forest (Sussex) 
 
With an emphasis on innovation, the Fundy Model Forest will 
advance the sustainable development of private forests and 
public forests in New Brunswick.  It will encourage the 
development of community capacity to adjust to changes in the 
forest economy and promote diversification into the 
bio-economy. 
 
Nova Scotia and Prince Edward Island 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶10. Nova Forest Alliance 
 
The Alliance represents four distinct forest areas in Nova 
Scotia and Prince Edward Island.  This unique partnership 
involves private landowners, First Nations, the forest and 
tourism industries, and the governments of Nova Scotia, PEI, 
and Canada.  The Nova Forest Alliance will address the 
long-term utilization of the region's forest resources and 
the potential for additional social, environmental, and 
economic benefits. 
 
Newfoundland and Labrador 
------------------------- 
 
¶11.  The Western Newfoundland Model Forest (Corner Brook) 
 
The Western Newfoundland Model Forest will be expanding its 
work with communities in watershed management and other 
emerging issues facing the forest sector.  It has expanded 
its partnership to include an area in Labrador where it will 
use its expertise to address some of the major social, 
economic and environmental stresses in Innu communities. 
 
OTTAWA 00001334  003 OF 003 
 
 
This part of the program will provide an excellent 
opportunity to demonstrate technology transfer and the 
sharing of knowledge. 
 
Visit our shared North American Partnership blog (Canada & Mexico) at 
http://www.intelink.gov/communities/state/nap 
 
DICKSON