08AITTAIPEI1544
MEDIA REACTION: U.S. AND CROSS-STRAIT RELATIONS
Fri Oct 31 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0009
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1544/01 3050959
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 310959Z OCT 08
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0238
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 8689
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0136UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001544 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S. AND CROSS-STRAIT RELATIONS 
 
Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused October 31 
news coverage on the detention of former National Security Council 
Secretary-General Chiou I-jen Thursday for alleged embezzlement of 
government diplomatic funds; for the upcoming visit to Taiwan by 
China's Association for Relations across the Taiwan Strait (ARATS) 
Chairman Chen Yunlin and the planned talks between ARATS and 
Taiwan's Straits Exchange Foundation; and on the new lottery winners 
in Taiwan Thursday.  In terms of editorials and commentaries, an 
editorial in the mass-circulation "Apple Daily" hailed President Ma 
Ying-jeou's "general orientation which upholds peaceful interaction 
across the Taiwan Strait," calling it a move that is "most welcomed 
by the United States and will not irritate China."  An editorial in 
the pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times," however, 
scorned President Ma's selection of former Vice President Lien Chan 
as Taiwan's envoy to the APEC summit.  The article said "one could 
even suggest that Lien was perhaps Beijing's -- and not Taipei's -- 
choice."  End summary. 
 
A) "Arrangement Should Be Made for [DPP] Chairperson Tsai Ing-wen to 
Meet with [ARATS Chairman] Chen Yunlin" 
 
The mass-circulation "Apple Daily" [circulation: 500,000] 
editorialized (10/31): 
 
"... Relations across the Taiwan Strait should have moved from 
confrontation to harmony since China's relations with the United 
States have improved.  Interactions between Beijing and Washington 
have accelerated in the wake of the terrorist attacks on September 
11, 2001; the [current] financial tsunami has all the more 
highlighted the intimate interdependent relationship between the two 
countries in terms of trade and finances.  At this moment, the 
United States is keen to see cross-Strait relations thawing, so that 
they will not sabotage its grand global strategy. 
 
"As a result, it is the most sensible course on which Taiwan's grand 
strategy is moving, along with the international trend, from 
pro-U.S. and anti-communist to the direction of pro-U.S. and 
befriending China.  Such a direction, which is most welcomed by the 
United States and will not irritate China, is the best status for 
Taiwan.  President Ma's general orientation, which upholds peaceful 
interaction across the Taiwan Strait, is absolutely accurate and 
should be given full support. 
 
"Current cross-Strait relations are at their most harmonious state 
in the past 16 years.  [China's Association for Relations across the 
Taiwan Strait Chairman] Chen Yunlin's attitude also demonstrated his 
respect for Taiwan's status and for the Taiwan people, so there is 
no reason why [Taiwan] should object to his visit.  The 
establishment of a friendly relationship requires fine and subtle 
engineering, and systematized and regular negotiations between 
officials [of both sides] are a necessary means to facilitate 
bilateral relations.  Chen's visit [to Taiwan] is the necessary and 
only way [for both sides] to construct a negotiation platform.  The 
Taiwan government should make the best preparations it can [for 
Chen's upcoming visit] in an attempt to stabilize cross-Strait 
relations and eliminate miscalculation and accidental eruption of 
hostilities. ..." 
 
B) "Mr. Lien Goes to Lima via Beijing" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] editorialized (10/31): 
 
"The Presidential Office announced with much fanfare on Wednesday 
that former Chinese Nationalist Party (KMT) chairman Lien Chan would 
represent President Ma Ying-jeou at the APEC leaders summit in Peru 
next month.  The trumpets were out because, as a former vice 
president, Lien will be the highest-ranking former official to 
represent Taiwan at the annual forum. ...  In selecting Lien, the 
Presidential Office clearly resorted to the safest option, as there 
was little chance that China would reject him given his 
Machiavellian past.  Lien is China's man. He has shown on many 
occasions in the past that he is all too willing to toe the line of 
Beijing's united-front policy and denigrate Taiwan's sovereignty. It 
was Lien who put Taiwan's sovereignty on its current slippery slope 
when in 2005 he undermined the authority of the Chen government by 
traveling to China and meeting Chinese officials. ... 
 
"One could even suggest that Lien was perhaps Beijing's - and not 
Taipei's - choice. Given the shady communication channels that exist 
between the KMT and the Chinese Communist Party, it would not be 
surprising if the two parties reached a secret deal on Taipei's 
representation. ...  Lien's attendance in Lima will no doubt be spun 
as the latest indicator of China's benevolence, but in reality most 
people couldn't care less who represents Ma at this inconsequential 
annual gabfest.  They care more about Taiwan's entry to the WHO or 
the UN, goals that look like a lost cause following China's outright 
dismissal of Ma's 'pragmatic' UN bid last month.  The Ma 
administration may have perfected the art of taking China's snubs 
 
and spinning them in a positive fashion, but as last Saturday's 
600,000-strong anti-government protest showed, people's reserves of 
goodwill for Ma and his cross-strait strategy are at a critical 
low." 
 
YOUNG