08BEIJING3836
October 7 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: TAIWAN ARMS SALES, SIX-PARTY
Tue Oct 07 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO0074
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #3836/01 2811000
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 071000Z OCT 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0314
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 003836 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV EAGR PHUM PTER CH KN JP KS TW
 
SUBJECT: October 7 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: TAIWAN ARMS SALES, SIX-PARTY 
TALKS, FINANCIAL CRISIS, GUANTANAMO UIGHURS, KOREAN SEA INCIDENTS, 
DALAI LAMA NEGOTIATIONS, MILK CRISIS 
 
¶1.  Key points at the October 7 afternoon MFA press briefing were: 
 
-- The United States' arms sale to Taiwan has "contaminated the 
atmosphere" of U.S.-China relations, "gravely jeopardized China's 
security" and "created obstacles to exchanges and cooperation" with 
the United States. 
 
--"The Six-Party talks have already made much progress and have the 
opportunity to make more." 
 
-- China is ready to "work with the international community and 
maintain cooperation and communication" to handle the financial 
crisis. 
 
-- China urges the United States to repatriate the Chinese citizens 
held at Guantanamo "sooner rather than later." 
 
-- The spokesperson acknowledged a "series of sea incidents" off the 
Korean Peninsula. 
 
-- The spokesperson had no information about a date for the next 
round of talks with the Dalai Lama. 
 
-- The Chinese government "at all levels" has taken the milk crisis 
seriously. 
 
-- China's "door is always open" and China will continue to 
facilitate the work of reporters. 
 
-- Although the spokesperson did not confirm the exact time for a 
meeting between Japanese Prime Minister Taro Aso and Hu Jintao on 
the margins of ASEM, he did say that Aso is welcome to visit China. 
 
Taiwan Arms Sale 
---------------- 
 
¶2. At the October 7 regular MFA pres briefing, spokesperson Qin 
Gang said that the United States "ignored China's strong opposition" 
when it decided to sell weapons to Taiwan.  The decision has 
"contaminated the atmosphere" of relations, "gravely jeopardized 
China's security" and "created obstacles to exchanges and 
cooperation" with the United States.  Qin responded directly to a 
statement made by a U.S. Defense Department spokesperson which 
referenced the Taiwan Relations Act (TRA).  Qin said that the TRA 
"runs against the three communiques between the United States and 
China and international norms."  The United States "has no right to 
place its domestic law over international law," said Qin.  Qin said 
that the Defense Department spokesperson's characterization of 
China's military strength as a destabilizing force is "a fallacy." 
China follows "a path of peaceful development" and is a force for 
peace in the world which does not seek hegemony over other nations. 
China "urges the United States to honor its commitment to the three 
communiques, drop the weapons sale and end military relations with 
Taiwan in order to avoid damaging China-U.S. relations and 
cross-Strait peace."  Asked whether the sale would affect 
China-Taiwan relations, Qin referred the reporter to the State 
Council's Taiwan Affairs Office.  Qin referred a question about how 
long the sale would affect U.S.-China relations to the Ministry of 
National Defense. 
 
Six-Party Talks 
---------------- 
 
¶3. Asked whether the Six-Party Talks have achieved a "breakthrough," 
Qin responded saying "the Six-Party talks have already made much 
progress and have the opportunity to make more."  Qin confirmed that 
A/S Christopher Hill briefed VFM Wu Dawei on Hill's visit to North 
Korea.  Qin said that Hill had "long and substantive" talks while in 
North Korea.  China would like to see all parties communicate to 
"fulfill the second phase of action at an early date." 
 
Financial Crisis 
---------------- 
 
¶4. The current financial crisis is "not the problem of one country" 
and the international community should "join hands" to deal with the 
issue.  China is ready to "work with the international community and 
maintain cooperation and communication" to handle the crisis. China 
has not discussed an Asian summit on the financial crisis with Japan 
or Korea; however the three countries should continue their close 
coordination and communication. 
 
Guantanamo Uighurs 
----------------- 
 
¶5. Qin said "there are some Chinese terror suspects in Guantanamo" 
prisons who are "members of the East Turkestan Islamic Movement" and 
should be "handed over to China."  Terror is "a shared threat" and 
there "should not be double standards."  China urges the United 
State to repatriate these terrorists "sooner rather than later." 
 
BEIJING 00003836  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
Sea Accidents 
------------- 
 
¶6. Asked to respond to reports that North Korean ships fired on a 
Chinese fishing vessel, wounding its captain and that in a separate 
incident South Korean officials have arrested 11 Chinese citizens 
for killing a Coast Guard official, Qin said that there have been "a 
series of recent sea incidents which China takes seriously." 
Without specifying whether the incident involved North or South 
Korean vessels, Qin confirmed that a Chinese fishing boat in the 
Yellow Sea suffered a collision resulting in the captain being 
wounded.  The captain has received medical treatment and is 
recovering.  Qin went on to say that China will "keep communicating 
with the relevant country to conduct an investigation" of the 
incident.  Referring to a separate incident, Qin noted that China 
also expresses regret over the death of a South Korean Coast Guard 
official and will communicate with the ROK regarding the 
investigation. 
 
Negotiations with the Dalai Lama 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶7. Asked whether China and the Dalai Lama would hold another round 
of negotiations soon, Qin said that the relevant central government 
department will announce any information on negotiations.  Qin said 
that "the Dalai" must make steps to meet the central government's 
requirements. 
 
Milk Crisis 
----------- 
 
¶8. Asked for updated figures on the number of babies sickened by 
contaminated milk powder, Qin Gang said that the Chinese government 
at all levels has taken the milk crisis seriously.  After the 
problem was discovered, parents were encouraged to have their 
infants examined.  Treatment for contaminated milk related illness 
is free. 
 
Olympic Reporting Rules 
----------------------- 
 
¶9. China's policy of reform and opening will continue even though 
the Olympics have ended said Qin in response to a question about the 
upcoming expiration of Olympic reporting rules.  China's "door is 
always open" and China will continue to facilitate the work of 
reporters, said Qin. 
 
New Japanese Prime Minister Visit To China 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶10. Japanese Prime Minister Taro Aso is welcome to visit China at a 
time convenient for the two countries, said Qin.  China and Japan 
are "major neighbors" and "China attaches great importance to 
relations," said Qin.  The spokesperson did not confirm the exact 
time for a meeting between Japanese Prime Minister Taro Aso and Hu 
Jintao on the margins of ASEM. 
 
Nobel Prize 
----------- 
 
¶11. Asked for China's position on the Nobel Peace Prize, Qin said 
that many of the award's recipients worked toward world peace and 
the betterment of mankind, however, "others have not followed Mr. 
Nobel's original intentions."  "The prize should be given to the 
right person," said Qin. 
 
SARS a Biological Weapon? 
------------------------- 
 
¶12. Asked to respond to a report that SARS is actually a Chinese 
biological weapon, Qin asked who had written such an "irresponsible" 
report. 
 
PICCUTA