08DUBLIN568
GOVERNMENT OF IRELAND COUNSELS PATIENCE IN DEALING
Wed Oct 15 00:00:00 +0200 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Dublin
VZCZCXRO5980
RR RUEHAG RUEHROV
DE RUEHDL #0568/01 2890854
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 150854Z OCT 08
FM AMEMBASSY DUBLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9506
INFO RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES
RUEHBL/AMCONSUL BELFAST 0808C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 DUBLIN 000568 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/14/2018 
TAGS: PGOV PREL UK EI
SUBJECT: GOVERNMENT OF IRELAND COUNSELS PATIENCE IN DEALING 
WITH NORTHERN IRELAND 
 
DUBLIN 00000568  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
Classified By: Charge Robert J. Faucher; Reasons 1.4 (B) and (D). 
 
 ------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  (C) EUR/WE Office Director Pamela Spratlen reviewed the 
Northern Ireland peace process with senior Irish government 
officials in the Department of Foreign Affairs, the 
Department of Justice, Equality and Law Reform, and the 
Office of the Taoiseach (Prime Minister), October 7-8.  Each 
government official voiced the opinion that the current 
stalemate in Northern Ireland over the devolution of policing 
and justice is likely to be resolved eventually, though it 
will take time.  In the meantime, they counsel patience by 
all parties and suggest that the U.S. continue to employ 
measures that have worked well in the past: wise counsel 
(e.g., through the Special Envoy), program support (e.g., the 
May 2008 investment conference), and access to the U.S. and 
its leaders (e.g., participation in St. Patrick's Day events 
at the White House).  End summary. 
 
¶2.  (C) Spratlen discussed the Northern Ireland peace process 
with Rory Montgomery, Political Director, Department of 
Foreign Affairs, Sean Aylward, Secretary General, Department 
of Justice, Equality and Law Reform, and Maire Flanagan, 
Assistant Principal Officer, Northern Ireland Division, 
Office of the Taoiseach (Prime Minister).  The Irish 
Government believes a fundamental change has occurred in 
Northern Ireland and there will be no going back to the 
violence of the Troubles, according to Montgomery.  However, 
he said, there continues to be an underlying inability of 
political leaders in the North, as well as many citizens 
there, to overcome the emotional baggage and lack of trust 
wrought by 30 years of conflict, especially since Sinn Fein 
and the DUP represent factions of Northern Ireland's society 
that were formerly among the most partisan and violent. 
While Sinn Fein seems to have brought the republican 
community along with them into the peace process, Montgomery 
sees the unionists as more fragmented and thinks that current 
unionist leader Peter Robinson is finding it difficult to 
firmly grasp his leadership mantle.  Robinson is constantly 
looking over his shoulder at his political competitors in 
Montgomery's view. 
 
¶3.  (C) Montgomery was confident that the devolution of 
policing and justice, the current crisis of the moment, would 
be resolved eventually, though not until well into 2009.  In 
the meantime, he said, the Irish Government would continue to 
impress upon Sinn Fein the need to be patient and not provoke 
the unionist community.  At the same time, Montgomery said, 
the Irish would continue to insist that unionist leaders 
educate their constituents and better prepare them for full 
power sharing with Sinn Fein in the Northern Ireland 
Assembly.  In many respects, said Montgomery (who has 
unionist relatives in the North), the fundamentals for peace 
are firmly in place and unionist communities are changing 
their views of political, economic, and cultural cooperation 
with Sinn Fein faster than their politicians.  He noted, 
however, that people in the North are becoming increasingly 
disenchanted with the Northern Ireland Assembly, which they 
see as not delivering on its promises over the past 17 
months.  In the meantime, he said, dissident republican 
activity is worrisome. 
 
¶4.  (C) Montgomery said that a U.S. withdrawal from the 
process at this point would be premature.  He stated that 
there is still an important role for the U.S. as an honest 
broker who is willing to talk with, and encourage, the 
political leaders of the North. 
 
¶5.  (C) Describing the Northern Ireland administration as a 
"daily miracle," Aylward noted how remarkable it was that the 
two former deadly foes were able to come together to form a 
government in May 2007, the current "stasis" in governance in 
the North notwithstanding.  He described DUP leader Peter 
Robinson as lacking the clout of former leader Ian Paisley in 
being able to bring disparate elements of the unionist 
community together, characterizing Robinson as a man who is 
trying to get up the nerve to jump in the face of small 
groups of hardline unionist "bigots," who are "difficult to 
cajole or persuade" and are just waiting for an excuse to try 
to drag Robinson down.  Aylward predicted that the issue of 
devolution of policing and justice would be resolved in due 
course, though it might take a long time.  In the interim, he 
said, patience would be required, adding that there was no 
button the U.S. ) or the Irish - could press to speed up the 
process. 
 
¶6.  (C) Flanagan expressed appreciation for the U.S. role in 
the Northern Ireland peace process and also counseled 
 
DUBLIN 00000568  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
patience in dealing with the current stalemate in relations 
between Sinn Fein and the DUP.  She noted that the DUP is not 
yet prepared to discuss the devolution of policing and 
justice, Sinn Fein's sine qua non, within the executive 
committee, while Sinn Fein refuses to participate in an 
executive committee meeting until the devolution of policing 
and justice is on the agenda. 
 
--------------------------- 
How the U.S. Can Contribute 
--------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (C) In addition to exercising patience, our contacts 
urged that the U.S. continue to employ measures that have 
worked well in the past: wise counsel (e.g., through the 
Special Envoy), program support (e.g., the May 2008 
investment conference), and access to the U.S. and its 
leaders (e.g., participation in St. Patrick's Day events at 
the White House and continued issuance of visa waivers to 
Sinn Fein leaders who would otherwise be ineligible to travel 
to the U.S.). 
 
¶8.  (U) This report has been cleared by EUR/WE Director 
Pamela Spratlen. 
FAUCHER