04MADRID4774
SPAIN: 2004 ANNUAL TERRORISM REPORT
Mon Dec 20 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Madrid
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 MADRID 004774 
 
SIPDIS 
 
S/CT FOR JOHN KINCANNON AND KIERSTEN MCCUTCHAN 
DEPARTMENT PASS TO TTIC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER ASEC SP
SUBJECT: SPAIN: 2004 ANNUAL TERRORISM REPORT 
 
REF: A) STATE 245841 B) STATE 259427 
 
¶1. Per Ref A instructions, the following is the 2004 
terrorism report submission for Spain. 
 
¶2. Spain is a strong ally in the war on terrorism, 
authorizing the use of military bases to support Operation 
Enduring Freedom and sending troops to Afghanistan to provide 
added security during that country,s national elections. 
Spain suffered a massive terrorist attack in March, when 
Islamic extremists detonated explosives on commuter trains in 
Madrid killing 190 and wounding hundreds of others.  Spain 
scored significant successes in its decades-long effort to 
eliminate the Basque Fatherland and Liberty (ETA) terrorist 
group, in part through increased police cooperation with 
France. 
 
On the morning of March 11, terrorists detonated ten bombs on 
commuter trains in Madrid, including five near Atocha, the 
city,s biggest train station, killing 190 and wounding 
hundreds more.  After initially suspecting ETA involvement, 
police quickly discovered that Islamic extremists associated 
with the "Moroccan Islamic Combat Group" (GICM) and Algerian 
terrorist organizations were the actual perpetrators of the 
attacks.  On April 2, authorities discovered an explosive 
device under the high-speed railway connecting Madrid and 
Seville.  The bomb, which was of a material similar to that 
used in the commuter train bombings, failed to detonate for 
unexplained reasons.  On April 3, seven suspects sought by 
the police in connection with the March 11 attacks detonated 
explosives in an apartment in a Madrid suburb in order to 
avoid arrest by the police.  All seven suspects and one 
police officer were killed in the explosion. 
Authorities are holding 19 suspects in connection with the 
March 11 bombings, pending trial on charges of murder and/or 
belonging to a terrorist organization.   In November, a 
Spanish judge issued the first sentence in the case, 
sentencing a 16-year-old male to six years in a juvenile 
prison facility and five years probation for helping the 
conspirators obtain the explosives.  Spanish police are 
investigating a further 20 individuals for possible links to 
the bombing perpetrators. 
 
¶3. //A. GOS SUPPORT FOR THE GLOBAL COALITION AGAINST 
TERRORISM// 
 
Spain has continued to authorize the use of its military 
bases at Rota and Moron in support of military operations in 
Afghanistan.  Spain provided military support to Operation 
Enduring Freedom and ISAF, and supported the reconstruction 
of Afghanistan with humanitarian and developmental 
assistance. Spain doubled its military contingent in 
Afghanistan from 500 to over 1,000 to provide added 
protection during national elections.  On December 17, 
Attorney General Ashcroft visited Spain to sign the bilateral 
instruments to the U.S.-EU Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty and 
Extradition Agreement, deepening bilateral judicial 
cooperation.  Attorney General Ashcroft met with Spain,s 
Minister of Justice and Minister of the Interior to discuss 
increased cooperation on terrorism investigations.  During 
the year, the FBI and the Department of Justice worked with 
the Spanish National Court to assist in investigations and 
prosecutions of Al-Qaida suspects. 
 
Spain has requested talks with the U.S. on the possible 
formation of a joint counterterrorism investigative unit, 
similar to a unit Spain has developed with France.    U.S. 
agencies, including the Department of State, are reviewing 
the proposal. 
 
//B. COUNTERTERRORISM ACTIONS// 
 
Spanish authorities continued their strong cooperation with 
the United States on counterterrorism, primarily by sharing 
law enforcement information on suspected terrorist 
organizations and by supporting efforts to rebuild 
Afghanistan.  Since the September 11 attacks, Spain has 
arrested over 100 persons suspected of links to Al-Qaida. 
 
-- In May, a Spanish judge ordered the detention of three 
Algerian nationals and one Spanish national for their ties to 
an al-Qaida cell in Hamburg, Germany.  The four detainees 
were believed to be planning attacks against commuters in the 
Paris metro system similar to the March 11 Madrid bombings. 
 
-- In September, A Spanish judge filed additional charges 
against March 11 bombing suspect Jamal Zougam for having 
collaborated with jailed Al-Qaida financier and cell leader 
Imad Eddin Barakat Yarkas. 
 
//C. LAW ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS// 
 
Law enforcement officials moved aggressively in the wake of 
the March 11 bombings, arresting over 50 suspects, holding 19 
for trial, and continuing investigations of a further 20 
suspects.  Spain successfully requested the temporary 
transfer from Italy of alleged March 11 organizer Rabei Osman 
El Sayed to be interrogated regarding his role in the 
attacks.  Spain and France launched a joint counterterrorism 
investigative team focused on ETA and Islamic terrorist 
groups, augmenting an earlier agreement that allowed police 
to work on counterterrorism investigations in each other,s 
countries.  This increased cooperation helped France and 
Spain carry out a major series of arrests of ETA organizers 
in October, including the capture of ETA leaders Mikel Antza 
and Soledad Iparragirre in France. 
 
During the year, Spain also signed or added to bilateral 
counterterrorism agreements with the UK, Sweden, Portugal, 
and Austria. 
 
On May 10, Spain and Morocco agreed to establish a mechanism 
to share information on suspected terrorists in both 
countries.  In September Spain and Morocco formed a judicial 
cooperation group to advise their governments on how to 
improve cooperation on terrorism-related crimes. 
 
On December 17, Spanish police arrested Moroccan national 
Hassan El Haski and three other members of the Moroccan 
Islamic Combat Group in the Canary Islands on charges of 
participating in the March 11 train bombings and membership 
in a terrorist group.  The four suspected terrorists had fled 
Belgium and France and gone to Spain to avoid arrest. 
 
//D. JUDICIAL RESPONSE// 
 
Spanish authorities have reacted vigorously to impede and 
disrupt suspected terrorist activities in areas under their 
jurisdiction and to cooperate with other countries in 
terrorism investigations.  In 2003, Spanish authorities 
provided significant information in response to U.S. requests 
for information concerning the activities of Mohamed Atta in 
Spain prior to the September 11 attacks.  On December 17, 
Attorney General Ashcroft visited Spain to sign the bilateral 
protocols to the U.S.-EU Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty and 
Extradition Agreement, instruments that will improve judicial 
cooperation, including on terrorism cases. 
 
In addition to the arrests carried out following the March 11 
attacks, a Spanish judge ordered the arrest of more than 35 
suspected extremists charged with plotting bomb attacks 
against Spain,s High Court, the headquarters of the 
opposition Popular Party (PP), Madrid,s largest soccer 
stadium, an office building, and other landmarks.  Several of 
the suspects arrested in this sweep were reportedly common 
criminals recruited in prison to perform suicide attacks. 
Spain requested the extradition from Switzerland of Mohamed 
Achraf, the alleged ringleader of this terrorist conspiracy. 
Spain provided information to Swiss authorities that allowed 
them to elevate the charges against Achraf, who was being 
held on immigration violations. 
 
In 2003, Spain requested the transfer of Hamed Abdelrahman 
Ahmed from U.S. detention at Guantanamo Naval Base, where he 
had been held as an enemy combatant following his capture 
with Taliban forces in Afghanistan.  Ahmed was transferred to 
Spain on February 13 and jailed on charges of maintaining 
links to Al-Qaida.  In July, Judge Baltasar Garzon released 
Ahmed on bail pending further investigation.  Spain is 
seeking the transfer of an additional three enemy combatants 
being held in Guantanamo. 
 
Spain successfully sought the temporary transfer from Italy 
of Rabei Osman El Sayed, allegedly among the key organizers 
of the March 11 attacks, on murder and terrorism charges.  El 
Sayed was transferred to Spanish custody for six months 
beginning on December 7. 
 
-- Impediments to Extradition.  Spain supports the EU 
consensus opposing extradition to the U.S. if the prisoner 
will be subject to the death penalty.  A U.S. request for 
extradition of terrorist suspects to military tribunals would 
also pose problems for the Spanish judiciary.  In practice, 
extradition to the U.S. is possible once Spanish concerns 
regarding the application of the death penalty are resolved 
by prior agreement with U.S. authorities. 
 
//E. LAW ENFORCEMENT CAPABILITIES// 
 
Law enforcement agencies have the authority to intercept 
wire, oral, and electronic communications, when authorized to 
do so by an investigating magistrate.  Law enforcement 
officials may initiate terrorist investigations based on 
intelligence information.  Intercepted information collected 
via authorized methods may be used in court, but since court 
testimony is available to the public, the authorities are 
reluctant to release such information for fear of 
compromising sources and methods.  Spanish police have good 
capability for collecting forensic data, such as photographs 
and fingerprints. 
 
//F. INVESTIGATIONS OF TERRORIST INCIDENTS// 
 
Spain is a leading proponent within the EU of increased 
cooperation on terrorism investigations.  Spanish judicial 
and police officials work closely with U.S. authorities in 
cases of possible bilateral interest.  In May, Spain signed 
an agreement with Morocco to increase cooperation on border 
security in the Straits of Gibraltar, in part to reinforce 
bilateral counterterrorism efforts.  Spain worked closely 
with the U.S. to meet new passport security requirements for 
its nationals. 
 
//G. MAJOR COUNTERTERRORISM EFFORTS// 
 
Within the EU, Spain remains a strong proponent of 
international cooperation against terrorism.  In April, Spain 
joined other EU members in updating and reaffirming the EU 
list of terrorist organizations and terrorist suspects, which 
includes ETA and ETA-affiliated political organizations, as 
well as 19 ETA members currently being sought by Spanish 
authorities. 
 
The government maintains several websites dealing with 
terrorism.  Government sites include: 
 
-- Ministry of the Interior:  www.mir.es/oris/index.htm 
 
-- Civil Guard:  www.guardiacivil.org/terrorismo/index.jsp 
 
-- National Police:  www.mir.es/policia/linea/ter prin.htm 
 
//I. EFFORTS TO COMBAT EXTREMIST IDEOLOGY// 
 
After more than 30 years of fighting against ETA terrorism, 
both the government and civil society remain focused on 
political violence in the Basque Region.  The March 11 
attacks came as a shock to Spanish society since most 
observers believed that there was very little tension or 
extremist organization within Spain,s growing Muslim 
immigrant community.  Even after the March 11 attacks, 
anti-violence campaigns remain focused on ETA. 
 
Civil society efforts to fight violence in the Basque Region 
are extremely well developed and include organizations such 
as "Gesto Por la Paz8 (Gesture for Peace ) www.gesto.org) 
and the 'Asociacion de Victimas del Terrorismo" (Association 
of Victims of Terrorism).  The victims of the March 11 
attacks borrowed from the experience of ETA victims and have 
formed their own organization, whose leaders testified before 
the Parliamentary commission investigating the train 
bombings.  The government is supportive of such citizen 
efforts, encouraging their participation in public events and 
placing links to their organizations on government websites. 
 
//J. WHERE GOVERNMENT HAS DEPLOYED MILITARY FORCES// 
 
Spain deployed over 1,000 troops in Afghanistan during 2004 
to participate in Operation Enduring Freedom and ISAF and to 
provide additional security during Afghanistan,s national 
elections.  In 2003, Spain deployed 1,300 troops to southern 
Iraq as part of the Coalition Forces, but the ruling 
Socialist Government withdrew those forces following its 
electoral victory in March. 
 
//K. MAJOR CHANGES IN STANCE TOWARDS TERRORISM// 
 
As a long-time victim of ETA violence and a recent victim of 
a massive Islamic terrorist attack, Spain places combating 
terrorism as one of its highest priorities, both in domestic 
affairs and in foreign relations.  There were massive 
demonstrations against terrorism following the March 11 train 
bombings, similar to demonstrations following some 
high-profile ETA terrorist attacks in recent years.  Spain is 
a proponent of vigorous international judicial cooperation 
against terrorism, a position that enjoys strong public 
support.  There is significantly less public support for 
military action against terrorism, though the government has 
underscored its commitment to support operations in 
Afghanistan. 
 
//L.  PUBLIC ATTITUDES TOWARDS TERRORISM 
 
See K 
//M. SUPPORT FOR TERRORIST GROUPS// 
 
Spain does not harbor or support any terrorist organizations. 
 
//N. PUBLIC SUPPORT FOR STATE SPONSOR OF TERRORISM// 
 
Spain has not supported any of the state sponsors of 
terrorism on a terrorism-related issue. 
 
//O. STATUS OF TERRORIST ACTIVITY 
 
Several terrorist organizations are active in Spain, 
including Al-Qaida, the Moroccan Islamic Combat Group (GICM), 
and ETA.  The Government has virtually eliminated the 
domestic terrorist organization First of October Anti-Fascist 
Resistance Group (GRAPO). 
 
Spain enforces the EU ban on 36 domestic and international 
terrorist organizations.  Spain continues to maintain a "Law 
of Political Parties," which established a judicial process 
to de-legalize political parties that provide concrete 
support for terrorist groups.  The main organization affected 
by this law is the ETA-affiliated group Batasuna, which was 
ordered to disband and barred from the political process. 
 
//P. AREAS WHERE TERRORISTS ARE FREE TO OPERATE// 
 
The Spanish Government maintains effective state control 
throughout its territory. 
 
//Q. MAJOR CT DEVELOPMENTS// 
 
On the morning of March 11, terrorists detonated ten bombs on 
commuter trains in Madrid, including five near Atocha, the 
city,s biggest train station, killing 190 and wounding 
hundreds more.  After initially suspecting ETA involvement, 
police quickly discovered that Islamic extremists associated 
with the "Moroccan Islamic Combat Group" (GICM) and Algerian 
terrorist organizations were the actual perpetrators of the 
attacks.  On April 2, authorities discovered an explosive 
device under the high-speed railway connecting Madrid and 
Seville.  The bomb, which was of a material similar to that 
used in the commuter train bombings, failed to detonate for 
unexplained reasons.  On April 3, seven suspects sought by 
the police in connection with the March 11 attacks detonated 
explosives in an apartment in a Madrid suburb in order to 
avoid arrest by the police.  All seven suspects and one 
police officer were killed in the explosion. 
Authorities are holding 19 suspects in connection with the 
March 11 bombings, pending trial on charges of murder and/or 
belonging to a terrorist organization.   In November, a 
Spanish judge issued the first sentence in the case, 
sentencing a 16-year-old male to six years in a juvenile 
prison facility and five years probation for helping the 
conspirators obtain the explosives.  Spanish police are 
investigating a further 20 individuals for possible links to 
the bombing perpetrators. 
 
In addition to investigating the March 11 bombings, Spanish 
police acted against other international terrorist 
organizations operating in Spain, including: 
 
-- The "NOVA I" and "NOVA II" police operations in November 
to disrupt efforts by Islamic extremists to bomb Spain,s 
High Court, the headquarters of the opposition Popular Party, 
Madrid,s largest soccer stadium, a major office building, 
and other landmarks.   Over 35 suspects were arrested and the 
investigation remained open as of the end of the year. 
Several of the suspects arrested in this sweep were 
reportedly common criminals recruited in prison to perform 
suicide attacks.  Spain requested the extradition from 
Switzerland of Mohamed Achraf, the alleged ringleader of this 
terrorist conspiracy.  Spain provided information to Swiss 
authorities that allowed them to elevate the charges against 
Achraf, who was being held on immigration violations. 
 
-- In May, a Spanish judge ordered the detention of three 
Algerian nationals and one Spanish national for their ties to 
an al-Qaida cell in Hamburg, Germany.  The four detainees 
were believed to be planning attacks against commuters in the 
Paris metro system similar to the March 11 Madrid bombings. 
 
-- Police in Barcelona arrested ten Pakistani nationals 
suspected of providing logistical and financial support to 
Islamic extremist groups outside of Spain, including members 
of Al-Qaida and the killers of U.S. journalist Daniel Pearl. 
 
-- In November, a judge ordered the detention of an 
Al-Jazeera television network journalist with alleged ties to 
the Spain-based Al-Qaida network of Imad Eddin Barakat 
Yarkas.  The journalist had been released on bail in 2003 for 
health reasons. 
 
-- In December, police arrested three Algerian nationals, 
Abdelkader Lebik, Ibdallah Ibn Moutalib Kaddouri, and Brahim 
Amman, for involvement with the Catalan-based "Protectors of 
the Salafist Current," a radical Islamic cell largely 
dismantled in 2003. 
 
Separately, ETA continued its bombing campaign, even as the 
police scored significant successes against the organization 
that included the capture of 76 ETA members during the year. 
ETA-related developments included: 
 
-- In February, Spanish police arrested two ETA members 
driving a van carrying 500 kilograms of explosives, allegedly 
intended for attacks in Madrid. 
 
-- Spain,s assistance to French authorities in an 
investigation that led to the October 3 arrest of ETA leaders 
Mikel Antza and Soledad Iparragirre.  Antza was the top ETA 
organizer at the time of his arrest and Iparragirre was 
sought in connection with 14 murders and was believed to be 
leading ETA,s extortion operations. 
 
-- ETA carried out a series of bombings of tourist sites 
during the summer tourist season.  The bombings did not 
result in any significant injuries. 
 
-- ETA detonated 12 bombs on December 3 and 6 in Madrid and 
eight other cities, resulting in minor injuries to about a 
dozen people.  Most observers interpreted the December 
bombings as ETA,s response to police successes during the 
year that had decimated the organization,s logistical arm. 
 
 
¶4. Embassy point of contact for this report and for other 
terrorism-related issues is political officer Ricardo Zuniga 
(zunigarf@state.gov, 34-91-587-2386). 
MANZANARES