04MADRID2903
ANDALUSIAN FIRES RAVAGE 35,000 ACRES
Thu Jul 29 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Madrid
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

291654Z Jul 04UNCLAS MADRID 002903 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO EPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EAID SENV PGOV EU SP
SUBJECT: ANDALUSIAN FIRES RAVAGE 35,000 ACRES 
 
REF: LISBON 01196 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY:  Since July 27, forest fires have raged out of 
control and burned more than 35,000 acres in the Andalusian 
provinces of Huelva and Sevilla.  Authorities have evacuated 
more than 1,160 people from the surrounding areas affected by 
the flames.  The 2004 fire season may be one of the worst in 
recent years, as to date 40% more lands have been destroyed 
by fire this year than in 2003.  These fires continue to 
threaten environmentally sensitive ecological reserves and 
forest lands in the region.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  The largest forest fire in Andalusia in the past five 
years, which started on July 27, has devastated approximately 
35,000 acres in the region.  Authorities have determined that 
the blaze began when garbage container fires went out of 
control and ignited surrounding brush.  The fires have cut 
through various national parks and wildlife reserves in the 
Andalusian provinces of Huelva and Sevilla and have caused 
the evacuation of more than 1,160 people from small towns 
located in the path of the fire.  Evacuated towns include 
Monte Sorromero, Las Delgadas, El Madrono, El Alamo, Minas de 
Riotinto, and Berrocal.  The only known deaths from the fires 
occurred on July 27 when smoke overwhelmed a married couple 
as they drove through the area near the start of the blazes. 
 
¶3.  Approximately 250 fire fighters joined 15 fire trucks, 12 
planes, 19 helicopters, and police and fire fighters from the 
province of Huelva in fighting the Andalusian blazes.  Other 
smaller fires in the northern regions of Galicia, 
Castilla-Leon, and Asturias, accompanied by the Andalusian 
fires threaten to make this one of the worst fire seasons in 
recent history.  Forest fires this year have already burned 
40% more acreage than last year, comparing year to year 
figures.  The Ministry of the Environment reports that humans 
provoke 80-90% of forest fires in Spain, as is the case in 
the Andalusian fires. 
 
¶4.  On Wednesday the Minister of the Environment, Cristina 
Narbona, called for zero tolerance against individuals who 
cause forest fires, and made a plea to the people of Spain to 
be more careful when burning fields and with campfires.  She 
was concerned with the loss of vegetation and wildlife in the 
very sensitive Coto Nacional de Pata del Caballo ecological 
reserve.  Flames threatened the reserve on the afternoon of 
July 28, closing in from five different hot points, which 
made combating the flames extremely difficult for fire 
fighters.  The fires in Andalusia continue threatening other 
environmentally sensitive areas such as La Sierra de San 
Pedro (which sustained heavily damaged by forest fires last 
summer) and El Castillo de las Guardas Nature Reserves. 
 
¶5.  COMMENT:  Thus far, the GOS seems fully capable of 
handling fire fighting efforts.  Unlike the Portugese 
Government, the GOS has made no request for outside 
assistance of which we are aware. 
MANZANARES