04MADRID1140
SPAIN COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR STAFFDEL EFFORD
Mon Apr 05 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Madrid
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MADRID 001140 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR H:DELORES PARKS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OREP AMGT ASEC AFIN SP
SUBJECT: SPAIN COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR STAFFDEL EFFORD 
 
REF: STATE 73851 
 
¶1.  Embassy welcomes and grants country clearance to Staffdel 
Efford members, Richard Efford, Professional Staff Member, 
House Appropriations Committee (HAC), Cheryle Tucker, Leigha 
¶M. Shaw, Michael Malone and John Blazey, also from HAC, to 
travel to Madrid and Barcelona, April 11-18.  The purpose of 
the visit is to review fuel cell bus programs, including 
hydrogen generation facilities and fueling stations, and to 
receive briefings on the Talgo Passenger Rail system. 
 
¶2.  Control officer for this visit is Economic Officer Aaron 
Jensen who can be reached at:  Office PH: (34) 91-587-2384; 
Cell: (34) 676-007-799; e-mail: jensenaw@state.gov; Fax: (34) 
91-587-2292. Information about hotel reservations will be 
sent septel. 
 
¶3.  Visitors are reminded that bearers of diplomatic and 
official passports coming to Spain on official business need 
to obtain a Spanish visa prior to arrival in Spain. 
 
¶4.  THREAT ASSESSMENT: 
 
In general, Spain is safe.  However, Madrid, Barcelona and 
other large cities in Spain -- including resort/convention 
areas such as Benidorm -- attract a large number of criminals 
and pickpockets and frequent incidents of crime of 
opportunity against the unwary do occur.  Carry only 
essential items including a photocopy of your passport's 
photo page.  Visitors can protect themselves against crime by 
being street-smart, alert and aware of their surroundings. 
In the event you are victimized by crime, or experience any 
security-related incident, please contact the Embassy's 
Regional Security Office at 91-587-2550 or after hours at 
91-587-2355.  Official visitors to the Embassy in Madrid or 
the Consulate General in Barcelona are encouraged to receive 
a security briefing from the RSO office at their earliest 
convenience.  Additional information regarding safety and 
security in Spain is available on the U.S. Department of 
State's website (http://www.state.gov) and the U.S. Embassy's 
website (www.embusa.es). 
 
Travelers are encouraged to review the most recent Worldwide 
Caution issued by the Department of State.  As the Department 
of State continues to develop information on any potential 
security threats to Americans overseas, it shares credible 
threat information through its Consular Information Program 
documents, available on the Internet at 
http://travel/state.gov.  In addition to information on the 
Internet, U.S. travelers can hear recorded information by 
calling the Department of State in Washington, D.C. at 
202-647-5225 from their touch-tone telephone, or receive 
information by automated telefax by dialing 202-647-3000 from 
their fax machine. 
MANZANARES