04MADRID990
COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR STAFFDEL BASSETT
Tue Mar 23 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Madrid
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MADRID 000990 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OREP AMGT ASEC AFIN UK GM SP
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR STAFFDEL BASSETT 
 
REF: STATE 62032 
 
¶1.  Embassy welcomes and grants country clearance to Brant 
Bassett, Professional Staff Member House Permanent Select 
Committee on Intelligence (HPSCI), to travel to Spain for the 
period March 24-26 on matters of concern to the Committee. 
 
¶2.  Embassy Control Officer for this visit is ORA Management 
Officer Rose Cookman, Telephone: (34) 91-587-2373 (office), 
(34) 91-562-1536 (home), and (34) 680-371-943 (cell).  Hotel 
reservations have been made for the nights of March 24 and 25 
at the Hotel Melia Galgos, Claudio Coello, 139, 28006 Madrid, 
Telephone: (34) 91-562-6600, Fax: (34) 91-562-7519.  Room 
rate per night (double for single use): EU165.85/$206.00 (VAT 
included).  Breakfast buffet per person: EU18.19/$22.60 (VAT 
included).  The current Madrid per diem is Lodging $227/M&IE 
$116.  Embassy regrets all Motor Pool resources will be 
dedicated to the SecState visit on March 24 and recommends 
Mr. Bassett take a taxi from the airport in to central Madrid 
on arrival.  The approximate cost will be EU20.  On arrival 
at the hotel, Mr. Bassett should call Embassy Control Officer 
on 91-587-2373 to arrange for delivery of per diem and 
Embassy welcome kit to the hotel. 
 
¶3.  Visitors are reminded that bearers of diplomatic and 
official passports coming to Spain on official business need 
to obtain a Spanish visa prior to arrival in Spain. 
 
 
¶4.  THREAT ASSESSMENT: 
 
In general, Spain is safe.  However, Madrid and other large 
cities in Spain -- including resort/convention areas such as 
Benidorm -- attract a large number of criminals and 
pick-pockets and frequent incidents of crimes of opportunity 
against the unwary do occur.  Carry only essential items, 
including a photocopy of your passport's photo page. 
Visitors can protect themselves from crime by being 
street-smart, alert, and aware of their surroundings.  In the 
event you are victimized by crime, or experience any other 
security-related incident, please contact the Embassy's 
Regional Security Office at 91-587-2550, or after hours at 
91-587-2355.  Official visitors to the Embassy in Madrid or 
the Consulate General in Barcelona are encouraged to receive 
a security briefing from the RSO office at their earliest 
convenience.  Additional information regarding safety and 
security in Spain is available on the U.S. Department of 
State's website (http://www.state.gov), and the U.S. 
Embassy's website (www.embusa.es). 
 
Travelers are encouraged to review the most recent Worldwide 
Caution issued by the Department of State.  As the Department 
of State continues to develop information on any potential 
security threats to Americans overseas, it shares credible 
threat information through its Consular Information Program 
documents, available on the Internet at 
http://travel/state.gov.  In addition to information on the 
Internet, U.S. travelers can hear recorded information by 
calling the Department of State in Washington, D.C. at 
202-647-5225 from their touch-tone telephone, or receive 
information by automated telefax by dialing 202-647-3000 from 
their fax machine. 
ARGYROS