04MADRID770
DRAFT REVISION OF CONSULAR INFORMATION SHEET FOR
Fri Mar 05 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Madrid
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 MADRID 000770 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR CA/OCS/ACS/EUR - STEVE SENA 
 
E.O.  12958: N/A 
TAGS: CASC CMGT ASEC SP
SUBJECT: DRAFT REVISION OF CONSULAR INFORMATION SHEET FOR 
SPAIN AND ANDORRA 
 
¶1.  UPDATE OF CONSULAR INFORMATION SHEET FOR SPAIN AND 
ANDORRA: 
 
¶2.  COUNTRY DESCRIPTIONS: Spain and Andorra are both highly 
developed and stable democracies with modern economies. 
Spain is a member of the European Union. Additional 
information on Spain may be obtained from the Tourist Office 
of Spain (http://www.okspain.org), telephone (212) 265-8822, 
or via the Internet at http://www.okspain.org. The website 
of the Spanish Embassy in the United States is 
http://www.spainemb.org. Additional information on Andorra 
may be obtained from the Andorran Mission to the U.N., 2 
U.N. Plaza, 25th Floor, New York, New York 10018, telephone 
(212) 750-8064 or via the Internet at http://www.andorra.ad. 
 
¶3.  ENTRY REQUIREMENTS: A passport is required for both 
countries, but a visa is not required for tourist or 
business stays up to 90 days. Individuals who enter Spain or 
Andorra without a visa are not authorized to work. American 
citizens planning to study in Spain should be aware that 
Spanish immigration regulations require applications for 
student visas to be submitted 60 days before anticipated 
travel to Spain. 
 
¶4.  In an effort to prevent international child abduction, 
many governments have initiated procedures at entry/exit 
points. These often include requiring documentary evidence 
of relationship and permission for the child's travel from 
the parent(s) or legal guardian not present. Having such 
documentation on hand, even if not required, may facilitate 
entry/departure. 
 
¶5. For further information concerning entry requirements for 
Spain, travelers should contact the Embassy of Spain at 2375 
Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington, D.C. 20037, telephone 
(202) 728-2330, or the nearest Spanish consulate in Boston, 
Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, New Orleans, New York, 
San Francisco, or San Juan. Spanish government websites with 
information about entry requirements (in Spanish) can be 
found at www.mae.es and www.mir.es. For further information 
on entry requirements to Andorra, travelers should contact 
the Andorran Mission to the U.N., 2 U.N. Plaza, 25th floor, 
New York, NY 10018, telephone (212) 750-8064 or via the 
Internet at http://www.andorra.ad. 
 
¶6.  DUAL NATIONALITY: In addition to being subject to all 
Spanish or Andorran laws affecting U.S. citizens, dual 
nationals may also be subject to other laws that impose 
special obligations on their citizens. For additional 
information, please see the Consular Affairs Internet home 
page at http://travel.state.gov/dualnationality.html for our 
Dual Nationality flyer. 
 
¶7.  SAFETY AND SECURITY: Spain and Andorra share with the 
rest of the world an increased threat of international 
terrorist incidents. The ETA terrorist organization remains 
active in Spain. ETA attacks historically have been directed 
against the police, military, local politicians, and other 
Spanish government targets. However, in February 2004, ETA 
reiterated its intention to target Spanish tourist areas, 
advising that foreign nationals could be among the victims. 
Since 2000, ETA attacks have resulted in over two dozen 
fatalities and numerous injuries. In 2003, ETA activity 
included a thwarted attempt to bomb a train loaded with pre- 
holiday travelers. In 2001 2002, and 2003, ETA attacks 
included a number of car-bomb incidents, some occurring in 
areas frequented by tourists, including the Madrid and 
Malaga airports. While there were no tourist fatalities from 
these incidents, there have been a number of injuries. U.S. 
tourists traveling to Spain should remain vigilant, exercise 
caution, monitor local developments, and avoid 
demonstrations and other potentially violent situations. 
For the latest security information, Americans traveling 
abroad should regularly monitor the Department's Internet 
web site at http://travel.state.gov where the current 
Worldwide Caution Public Announcement, Travel Warnings and 
Public Announcements can be found. 
 
¶8.  CRIME: While most of Spain has a moderate rate of crime 
and most of the estimated one million American tourists have 
trouble free visits to Spain each year, street crimes 
against tourists occur in the principal tourist areas. 
Madrid and Barcelona, in particular, report incidents of 
muggings and violent attacks, and older tourists and Asian 
Americans seem to be particularly at risk. Criminals 
frequent tourist areas and major attractions such as 
museums, monuments, restaurants, outdoor cafes, Internet 
cafes, hotel lobbies, beach resorts, city buses, subways, 
trains, train stations, airports, and ATM machines. 
 
¶9.  In Barcelona, a number of attacks have been reported on 
Las Ramblas, near the Picasso Museum, in the Gothic Quarter, 
in Parc Gell, in Plaza Real and on Montjuic. In Madrid, 
incidents have been reported in  major tourist areas, 
including  the area near the Prado Museum, near Atocha train 
station, in Retiro Park, in areas of old Madrid including 
Sol and the El Rastro flea market, near the Royal Palace and 
in Plaza Mayor. 
 
¶10.  Travelers should remain alert to their personal 
security and exercise caution. Travelers are encouraged to 
carry limited cash, one credit card, and a copy of their 
passport; leaving extra cash, credit cards, passports and 
personal documents in a safe location. When carrying 
documents, credit cards or cash, you are encouraged to 
secure them in a hard-to-reach place and not to carry all 
valuables together in a purse or backpack. 
 
¶11.  Crimes occur at all times of day and night and to 
people of all ages.  Thieves often work in teams or pairs. 
In most cases, one person distracts a victim while the 
accomplice performs the robbery. For example, someone might 
wave a map in your face and ask for directions or 
"inadvertently" spill something on you. While your attention 
is diverted, an accomplice makes off with the valuables. 
Thieves may drop coins or keys at your feet to distract you 
and try to take your belongings while you are trying to 
help.  Attacks are sometimes initiated from behind, with the 
victim being grabbed around the neck and choked by one 
assailant while others rifle through or grab the belongings. 
Some attacks have been so violent that victims have needed 
medical attention. A group of assailants may surround the 
victim in a crowded popular tourist area or on public 
transportation, and only after the group has departed does 
the person discover he/she has been robbed. Purse-snatchers 
may grab purses or wallets and run away, or immediately pass 
the stolen item to an accomplice. A passenger on a passing 
motorcycle sometimes robs pedestrians. There have been 
reports of thieves posing as plainclothes police officers 
sometimes beckoning to pedestrians from cars and sometimes 
confronting them on the street and asking for documents. 
American citizens are encouraged to deal with uniformed law 
enforcement personnel only. 
 
¶10.  Theft from vehicles is also common. Items high in value 
like luggage, cameras, laptop computers, or briefcases are 
often stolen from cars. Travelers are advised not to leave 
valuables in parked cars, and to keep doors locked, windows 
rolled up and valuables out of sight when driving. "Good 
Samaritan" scams are unfortunately common, where a passing 
car or "helpful" stranger will attempt to divert the 
driver's attention by indicating there is a flat tire or 
mechanical problem. When the driver stops to check the 
vehicle, the "Good Samaritan" will appear to help the driver 
and passengers while the accomplice steals from the unlocked 
car. Drivers should be cautious about accepting help from 
anyone other than a uniformed Spanish police officer or 
Civil Guard. 
 
¶11.  While the incidence of rape and sexual assault is 
statistically very low, attacks do occur. Americans should 
not lower their personal security awareness because they are 
on holiday. Spanish authorities have warned of availability 
of so-called "date-rape" drugs and other drugs, including 
"GBH" and liquid ecstasy. 
 
¶12.  A number of American citizens have been victims of 
lottery or advance fee scams in which a person is lured to 
Spain to finalize a financial transaction. Often the victims 
are initially contacted via internet or fax and informed 
they have won the Spanish Lottery (El Gordo), inherited 
money from a distant relative, or are needed to assist in a 
major financial transaction from one country to another. For 
more information, please see the information sheet on the 
Bureau of Consular Affairs website at 
http://travel.state.gov/scams.html. 
 
¶13. Andorra has a low rate of crime. 
 
¶14. The loss or theft abroad of a U.S. passport should be 
reported immediately to the local police and to the nearest 
U.S. Embassy or Consulate. The Spanish government has a 
system for foreigners to file police reports by telephone 
with an English speaker, this must be followed up by a trip 
to a police substation to sign the form and obtain a copy. 
If you are the victim of a crime while overseas, in addition 
to reporting to local police, please contact the nearest 
U.S. Embassy or Consulate for assistance. The 
Embassy/Consulate staff can, for example, assist you to find 
appropriate medical care, to contact family members or 
friends and explain how funds could be transferred. Although 
the investigation and prosecution of the crime is solely the 
responsibility of local authorities, consular officers can 
help you to understand the local criminal justice process 
and to find an attorney if needed. 
 
¶15. U.S. citizens may refer to the Department of State's 
pamphlet, "A Safe Trip Abroad," for ways to promote a 
trouble-free journey. The pamphlet is available by mail from 
the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing 
Office, Washington, D.C. 20402, via the Internet at 
http://www.access.gpo.gov/su_docs, or via the Bureau of 
Consular Affairs home page at http://travel.state.gov. 
 
¶16. MEDICAL FACILITIES AND INSURANCE: Good medical care is 
available in both Spain and Andorra. The Department of State 
strongly urges Americans to consult with their medical 
insurance companies prior to traveling abroad to confirm 
whether their policy applies overseas and if it will cover 
emergency expenses such as a medical evacuation. U.S. 
medical insurance plans seldom cover health costs incurred 
outside the United States unless supplemental coverage is 
purchased. Further, U.S. Medicare and Medicaid programs do 
not provide payment for medical services outside the United 
States. However, many travel agents and private companies 
offer insurance plans that will cover health care expenses 
incurred overseas, including emergency services such as 
medical evacuations. 
 
¶17. When making a decision regarding health insurance, 
Americans should consider that many foreign doctors and 
hospitals require payment in cash prior to providing service 
and that a medical evacuation to the United States may cost 
well in excess of $50,000. Uninsured travelers who require 
medical care overseas often face extreme difficulties, 
whereas travelers who have purchased overseas medical 
insurance have found it to be life saving when a medical 
emergency has occurred. When consulting with your insurer 
prior to your trip, please ascertain whether payment will be 
made to the overseas healthcare provider or if you will be 
reimbursed later for expenses that you incur. Some insurance 
policies also include coverage for psychiatric treatment and 
for disposition of remains in the event of death. 
 
¶18. Useful information on medical emergencies abroad, 
including overseas insurance programs, is provided in the 
Department of State's Bureau of Consular Affairs brochure, 
"Medical Information for Americans Traveling Abroad," 
available via the Bureau of Consular Affairs home page or 
auto fax (202) 647-3000. 
 
¶19. OTHER HEALTH INFORMATION: Information on vaccinations 
and other health precautions, such as safe food and water 
precautions and insect-bite protection, may be obtained from 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's hotline for 
international travelers at 1-877-FYI-TRIP (1-877-394-8747); 
fax 1-888-CDC-FAXX (1-888-232-3299), or via the CDC's 
Internet site at http://www.cdc.gov/travel. For information 
about outbreaks of infectious diseases abroad consult the 
World Health Organization's website at 
http://www.who.int/en. Further health information for 
travelers is available at http://www.who.int/iht. 
 
¶20. TRAFFIC SAFETY AND ROAD CONDITIONS: While in a foreign 
country, U.S. citizens may encounter road conditions that 
differ significantly from those in the United States. The 
information below concerning Spain and Andorra is provided 
for general reference only, and it may not be totally 
accurate in a particular location or circumstance. 
Safety of Public Transportation: Good 
Urban Road Conditions/Maintenance: Excellent 
Rural Road Conditions/Maintenance: Good 
Availability of Roadside Assistance: Good 
 
¶21. Traffic in Madrid and Barcelona is faster-paced than in 
U.S. cities and can be unnerving due to unfamiliar signs or 
motorbikes weaving between traffic lanes. Drivers should 
always obey the closest traffic light, as there are separate 
pedestrian lights in the city. Drivers should be alert when 
driving at night in urban areas, due to the possibility of 
encountering drivers or pedestrians under the influence of 
alcohol. Night driving in isolated rural areas can be 
dangerous, because of farm animals and poorly marked roads. 
Rural traffic is generally heavier in July and August as 
well as during the Christmas and Easter seasons. New traffic 
regulations went into effect in Spain as of January 30, 
¶2004.  of particular note is the prohibition on the the use 
of a mobile phone without a hands-free device while driving 
a car.  There is a fine of approximately 150 euros for 
violation of this regulation and loss of driving privileges. 
Pedestrians should use designated crossing areas when 
crossing streets and obey traffic lights. 
 
¶22. Public transportation in large cities is generally 
excellent. All major cities have metered taxis, and extra 
charges must be posted in the vehicle. Travelers are advised 
to use clearly identified cabs only and to ensure that taxi 
drivers always switch on the meter. A green light on the 
roof indicates that the taxi is available. Rail service is 
comfortable and reliable, but varies in quality and speed. 
Intercity buses are usually comfortable and inexpensive. 
 
¶23. For additional general information about road safety, 
including links to foreign government sites, please see the 
Department of State Bureau of Consular Affairs home page at 
http://travel.state.gov/road_safety.html. For specific 
information concerning Spanish driving permits, vehicle 
inspection, road tax and mandatory insurance, please contact 
the Spanish National Tourist Organization offices in New 
York via the Internet at www.okspain.org. For information 
about driving in Andorra refer to the Andorran website at 
http://www.andorra.ad.htm. 
 
 
¶24.  AVIATION SECURITY OVERSIGHT: The U.S. Transportation 
Security Administration (TSA) has assessed the Government of 
Spain's Civil Aviation Authority as Category A -- in 
compliance with international aviation security standards 
for oversight of Spain's air carrier and airport operations. 
For further information, travelers may contact the TSA in 
the United Sates ,at 1-866-289-9673 or email TellTSA 
  (TellTSA@tsa.dot.gov) or visit 
the TSAs Internet website   at 
http://www.tsa.gov/public. 
 
 
¶25. The U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) separately assesses 
some foreign air carriers for suitability as official 
providers of air services. For information regarding the DOD 
policy on specific carriers, travelers may contact the DOD 
at telephone (618) 229-4801. 
 
¶26. CUSTOMS REGULATIONS: It is advisable to contact the 
Embassy of Spain in Washington, D.C., or one of Spain's 
consulates in the United States for specific information 
regarding customs requirements. This is especially important 
if you are attempting to send any medications to Spain 
through postal channels. Spain's customs authorities 
encourage the use of an ATA (Admission Temporaire/Temporary 
Admission) Carnet for the temporary admission of 
professional equipment, commercial samples, and/or goods for 
exhibitions and fair purposes. ATA Carnet Headquarters, 
located at the U.S. Council for International Business, 1212 
Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10036, issues and 
guarantees the ATA Carnet in the United States. For 
additional information, please call (212) 354-4480, or send 
an e-mail to atacarnet@uscib.org, or visit www.uscib.org for 
details. 
 
¶27. CRIMINAL PENALTIES: While in a foreign country, a U.S. 
citizen is subject to that country's laws and regulations, 
which sometimes differ significantly from those in the 
United States and may not afford the protections available 
to the individual under U.S. law. Penalties for breaking the 
law can be more severe than in the United States for similar 
offenses. Persons violating Spanish law, even unknowingly, 
may be expelled, arrested or imprisoned. Penalties for 
possession, use or trafficking in illegal drugs in Spain are 
strict, and convicted offenders can expect jail sentences 
and fines. The Madrid City and Balearics Regional 
Governments have banned the consumption of alcohol in the 
street, other than in registered street cafes and bars. 
Visitors to Madrid, Mallorca, Ibiza and Menorca should be 
aware that failure to respect this law might result in the 
imposition of fines. 
 
¶28.  CHILDREN'S ISSUES: For information on international 
adoption of children and international parental child 
abduction, please refer to our Internet site at 
http://travel.state.gov/children's_issues.htm l or telephone 
1-888-407-4747. 
 
¶29.  REGISTRATION/EMBASSY AND CONSULATE LOCATIONS: 
Americans living in or visiting Spain or Andorra are 
encouraged to register at the Consular Section of the U.S. 
Embassy in Madrid or at the U.S. Consulate General in 
Barcelona, where they may obtain updated information on 
travel and security within Spain or Andorra. 
 
¶30. The U.S. Embassy in Madrid, Spain, is located at Serrano 
75; telephone (34)(91) 587-2200, and fax (34)(91) 587-2303. 
U.S. citizens who register in the Consular Section at the 
U.S. Embassy, Consulate General, or Consular Agency listed 
below can obtain updated information on travel and security 
within Spain or Andorra. Additional information is available 
through the U.S. Embassy's Internet homepage at 
http://www.embusa.es/indexbis.html. 
 
¶31. The U.S. Consulate in Barcelona is located at Paseo 
Reina Elisenda 23-25; telephone (34)(93) 280-2227 and fax 
(34)(93) 205-5206. Visitors to Barcelona can access 
additional information from the Consulate General's web page 
at http://www.embusa.es/barcelonaen.html 
 
¶32. There are six Consular Agencies in Spain, which provide 
limited services to American Citizens, but are not 
authorized to issue passports. 
Fuengirola near Malaga, at Avenida Juan Gomez Juanito #8, 
Edificio Lucia 1C, 29640, Fuengirola, telephone (34)(952) 
474-891 and fax (34)(952) 465-189, hours 10:00 a.m. to 1:00 
p.m.; 
 
La Coruna, at Canton Grande 6, telephone (34)(981) 213-233 
and fax (34)(981 22 88 08), hours 10:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m.; 
 
Las Palmas, at Edificio Arca, Calle Los Martinez de Escobar 
3, Oficina 7, telephone (34)(928) 222-552 and fax (34)(928) 
225-863, hours 10:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m.; 
 
Palma de Mallorca, Edificio Reina Constanza, Porto Pi, 8, 9- 
D, 07015 Palma de Mallorca, Spain. Telephone (34)(971) 40- 
3707 or 40-3905 and fax (34)(971) 40-3971. Hours 10:30 a.m. 
to 1:30 p.m.; 
 
Seville, at Paseo de Las Delicias 7, telephone (34)(954) 231- 
885 and fax (34)(954) 232-040, hours 8:30 a.m. to 1:30 p.m.; 
 
Valencia, at Doctor Romagosa #1, 2-J, 46002, Valencia 
telephone (34)(96)-351-6973 and fax (34)(96) 352-9565, hours 
10:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. 
For Andorra, please contact the U.S. Consulate in Barcelona. 
 
                          * * * * * 
¶33. This replaces the Consular Information Sheet dated 
February 25, 2002 to update sections on Country Description, 
Entry Requirements, Dual Nationality, Safety and Security, 
Crime, Other Health Information, Traffic Safety and Road 
Conditions, Criminal Penalties and Registration/Embassy and 
Consulate Locations. 
Return to Consular Information Sheets and Travel Warnings 
Page 
 
ARGYROS