05MADRID1859
SPAIN: ETA ATTACKS AFTER ZAPATERO PROPOSES PEACE
Mon May 16 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Madrid
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

161543Z May 05UNCLAS MADRID 001859 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT PASS TO EUR/WE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PGOV SP
SUBJECT: SPAIN: ETA ATTACKS AFTER ZAPATERO PROPOSES PEACE 
TALKS 
 
 
¶1. On May 15, four small bombs, each containing approximately 
four pounds of explosives, exploded in the Basque region of 
Spain,  The bombings, attributed to the Basque Fatherland and 
Liberty (ETA) terrorist group, took place near four 
industrial centers in the Guipuzcoa region of the Basque 
country, prompting some experts to speculate that the bombs 
were related to the "revolutionary tax" that ETA extorts from 
Basque businesses.  These attacks were unusual in that ETA 
did not follow the organization's recent practice of 
providing advance warning of bombings.  There were no 
fatalities, though several individuals were reportedly 
affected by fumes released from containers damaged by one of 
the blasts. 
 
¶2. These bombings come just days after the Zapatero 
government's May 13 request for Parliamentary support for 
direct peace talks between the government and ETA if the 
terrorist group agrees to abandon the armed struggle. 
Several political parties, including the moderate Basque 
Nationalist Party (PNV), have announced that they will 
support Zapatero's initiative during a May 17 Parliamentary 
debate on the issue.  Only the Popular Party (PP) has 
directly attacked the proposal, denouncing it as dangerous 
and likely to encourage ETA to demonstrate that it remains a 
viable military force.  PP leader Mariano Rajoy suggested 
that the talks would violate the anti-terrorism pact entered 
into between the PP and the Socialists during the Aznar 
government, and could signal the end of the accord.  Embassy 
will report septel on the results of the May 17 debate and on 
the implications for the future of Socialist-PP cooperation 
against terrorism. 
 
//COMMENT// 
 
¶3. The lack of advance communication of the bombings could 
indicate a breakdown in ETA discipline in the wake of 
numerous recent arrests, but, given the commercial targets, 
could also be a stern sign by the terrorists that they intend 
to continue enforcing their extortion of Basque businesses. 
Despite the attacks, Zapatero continues to have the support 
of all political parties except the PP on his proposal to 
open talks with ETA provided it abandon armed conflict. 
NEALON