05MADRID3671
MUSLIM OUTREACH PROGRAM: EMBASSY MADRID HOSTS ITS
Wed Oct 19 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Madrid
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MADRID 003671 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR EUR/WE - CLEMENTS AND HALL 
FOR EUR/PPD - WALKER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KPAO KISL SP
SUBJECT: MUSLIM OUTREACH PROGRAM: EMBASSY MADRID HOSTS ITS 
FIRST IFTAR 
 
 
¶1. Summary. As part of its Muslim Outreach program, Embassy 
Madrid held its first Embassy Iftar on the evening of October 
13 in the Ambassador's residence.  Approximately fifty guests 
attended, including leaders of Spanish Islamic organizations, 
mosques, and immigrant associations, as well as foreign 
diplomats and Spanish government officials. In his remarks, 
the Ambassador expressed his desire to learn more about Islam 
and the Muslim community in Spain, and spoke of the many 
values that Muslims and Americans of all religious beliefs 
share. He concluded by reading President Bush's Ramadan 
message. The event was extremely well received. Both 
long-time Embassy contacts and new invitees praised the 
initiative and the respect and sensitivity it demonstrated. 
The event also received positive press coverage, including in 
a key Muslim community website and in the prominent Spanish 
language daily El Pais. End Summary. 
 
¶2. The Ambassador hosted Embassy Madrid's first iftar the 
evening of October 13. Leaders of Spanish Muslim 
organizations from Madrid, Cordoba, Seville and Barcelona 
attended, as did members of the diplomatic corps (including 
the Moroccan, Lebanese, Iraqi and Arab League Ambassadors), 
journalists, and a representative of the Spanish Ministry of 
Justice's Office of Religious Affairs. In all, approximately 
fifty guests were present. 
 
¶3. The imam from Spain's largest mosque at the Islamic 
Cultural Center in Madrid (the M-30 mosque), Imam Moneir 
Mahmoud Aly El Messery, performed the call to prayer at 
sundown. As guests finished their first course of the 
traditional Moroccan iftar (500,000 of the at least 600,000 
Muslims in Spain are of Moroccan origin), the Ambassador gave 
his remarks, speaking about America's Muslim population, 
about what Americans of all faiths have in common with 
Muslims, and about how much there is to learn about each 
other. He expressed the Embassy's desire to learn more about 
the Muslim community in Spain and to collaborate on projects 
to build mutual understanding. 
 
¶4. The reaction of the guests was excellent. Invitees 
repeatedly told the Ambassador and Embassy attendees how 
delighted and surprised they were by the invitation and 
pleased with the initiative. The Ambassador received a gift 
of thanks from the Islamic Commission of Spain: a 
Spanish-language Qur'an, accompanied by a letter addressed to 
President Bush from Mansur Escudero, Secretary General of the 
Commission (to be reported septel) Escudero, one of the most 
prominent Muslim leaders in Spain, issued a fatwa against 
Usama bin Laden on March 11, 2005 on the one-year anniversary 
of the Madrid train bombings of 2004. 
 
¶5. Press coverage after the event was also positive. The 
daily El Pais carried a piece quoting the Ambassador's 
speech, "The United States is proud of its Muslim citizens," 
and describing the event in some detail. Webislam, the 
Spanish-language Islamic web portal usually critical of the 
US, covered the event positively, mentioning the details 
attended to at the dinner, such as halal food and setting 
aside a prayer room. The publishers also posted the text of 
the Ambassador's speech on the site. 
 
¶6. Comment. The iftar was a significant element in Embassy 
Madrid,s on-going Muslim Outeach plan. It follows on 
the Ambassador's recent visit to the main mosque in Madrid, 
known as the &M-30 mosque8 and its Muslim center and 
school; speeches on religious tolerance, noting the 
distinction between Islamic fanatisicm/terrorism and the 
Muslim faith; a luncheon for Muslim Ambassadors; and events 
earlier in the year for which Public Affairs brought American 
Muslim speakers to speak to the community in Spain and to 
meet senior Muslim leaders. Post also identified several 
Muslim community members for our 2005 International Visitor 
program and has already begun looking closely for potential 
candidates for next year. Post looks forward solidifying 
relationships with the many new contacts we made at this 
event, and we will continue our collaboration with our 
longstanding contacts in the community. End comment. 
AGUIRRE