06MADRID2233
SPAIN COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR NASA, DELEGATION
Thu Sep 07 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Madrid
VZCZCXYZ0011
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMD #2233 2500907
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 070907Z SEP 06
FM AMEMBASSY MADRID
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 0675UNCLAS MADRID 002233 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/WE 
STATE PASS TO NASA/OER: DPLENTY, DPLENTY1@HQ.NASA.GOV 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TSPA OTRA SP
SUBJECT: SPAIN COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR NASA, DELEGATION 
 
REF: SECSTATE 145923 
 
¶1.  Embassy grants country clearance to NASA Headquarters 
Senior Delegation, Michael Griffin, William Gerstenmaier, 
Michael O'Brien, Michael Wholley, David Mould, John Hairston, 
Douglas Cooke, Dean Acosta, Gilbert Kirkham, Jefrey Volosin, 
Jennifer Troxell, Garvey Mcintosh, and Donald Miller to 
travel to Valencia, Spain from September 28 to October 8, 
¶2006.  The purpose of this visit is to participate in 
meetings and official activities at the International 
Astronautical Congress. 
 
¶2.  Post is coordinating hotel reservations, and ground 
transportation with Dr. Donald Miller, NASA European 
Representative, as requested in reftel.  Embassy awaits fund 
cite. 
 
¶3.  Visitors are reminded that bearers of diplomatic and 
official passports coming to Spain on official business need 
to obtain a Spanish visa prior to arrival to Spain. 
 
¶4.  THREAT ASSESSMENT: 
 
In general, Spain is safe.  However, Madrid, Barcelona and 
other large cities in Spain -- including resort/convention 
areas such as Benidorm -- attract a large number of criminals 
and pickpockets and frequent incidents of crime of 
opportunity against the unwary do occur.  Carry only 
essential items including a photocopy of your passport's 
photo page.  Visitors can protect themselves against crime by 
being street-smart, alert and aware of their surroundings. 
In the event you are victimized by crime, or experience any 
security-related incident, please contact the Embassy's 
Regional Security Office at 91-587-2550 or after hours at 
91-587-2355.  Official visitors to the Embassy in Madrid or 
the Consulate General in Barcelona are encouraged to receive 
a security briefing from the RSO office at their earliest 
convenience.  Additional information regarding safety and 
security in Spain is available on the U.S. Department of 
State's website (www.embusa.es). 
 
Travelers are encouraged to review the most recent Worldwide 
Caution issued by the Department of State. As the Department 
of State continues to develop information on any potential 
security threats to Americans overseas, it shares credible 
threat information through its Consular Information Program 
documents, available on the Internet at 
http://travel/state.gov.  In addition to information on the 
Internet, U.S. travelers can hear recorded information by 
calling the Department of State in Washington, D.C. at 
202-647-5225 from their touch-tone telephone, or receive 
information by automated telefax by dialing 202-647-3000 from 
their fax machine. 
AGUIRRE