06MADRID2818
SPAIN COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR U.S. SECURITIES &
Fri Nov 03 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Madrid
VZCZCXYZ0002
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMD #2818 3071625
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 031625Z NOV 06
FM AMEMBASSY MADRID
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 1238UNCLAS MADRID 002818 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/WE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN OTRA SP
SUBJECT: SPAIN COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR U.S. SECURITIES & 
EXCHANGE COMMISSION OFFICIALS 
 
REF: SECSTATE 182250 
 
¶1.  Embassy grants country clearance to U.S. Securities & 
Exchange Commission officers Deborah Tarasevich, Branch 
Chief, Devon Brown, Senior Counsel, Colin Rand, Accountant, 
and Anthony Barone, Special Counsel, to travel to Madrid, 
Spain on November 06 to November 10.  The purpose of this 
visit is to meet with Spanish criminal authorities to review 
seized documents and computer files for criminal 
investigation. 
 
¶2.  Post understands that no assistance is required. 
 
¶3.  Visitors are reminded that bearers of diplomatic and 
official passports coming to Spain on official business need 
to obtain a Spanish visa prior to arrival to Spain. 
 
¶4.  THREAT ASSESSMENT: 
 
In general, Spain is safe.  However, Madrid, Barcelona and 
other large cities in Spain -- including resort/convention 
areas such as Benidorm -- attract a large number of criminals 
and pickpockets and frequent incidents of crime of 
opportunity against the unwary do occur.  Carry only 
essential items including a photocopy of your passport's 
photo page.  Visitors can protect themselves against crime by 
being street-smart, alert and aware of their surroundings. 
In the event you are victimized by crime, or experience any 
security-related incident, please contact the Embassy's 
Regional Security Office at 91-587-2550 or after hours at 
91-587-2355.  Official visitors to the Embassy in Madrid or 
the Consulate General in Barcelona are encouraged to receive 
a security briefing from the RSO office at their earliest 
convenience.  Additional information regarding safety and 
security in Spain is available on the U.S. Department of 
State's website (www.embusa.es). 
 
Travelers are encouraged to review the most recent Worldwide 
Caution issued by the Department of State. As the Department 
of State continues to develop information on any potential 
security threats to Americans overseas, it shares credible 
threat information through its Consular Information Program 
documents, available on the Internet at 
http://travel/state.gov.  In addition to information on the 
Internet, U.S. travelers can hear recorded information by 
calling the Department of State in Washington, D.C. at 
202-647-5225 from their touch-tone telephone, or receive 
information by automated telefax by dialing 202-647-3000 from 
their fax machine. 
AGUIRRE