06PARIS2522
MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Iran China Israel Suicide
Tue Apr 18 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 002522 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR; IIP/RW; IIP/RNY; BBG/VOA; IIP/WEU; AF/PA; 
EUR/WE /P/SP; D/C (MCCOO); EUR/PA; INR/P; INR/EUC; PM; OSC ISA 
FOR ILN; NEA; WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC/WEUROPE; DOC FOR ITA/EUR/FR 
AND PASS USTR/PA; USINCEUR FOR PAO; NATO/PA; MOSCOW/PA; 
ROME/PA. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR FR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Iran China Israel Suicide 
Bomb Attack 
PARIS - Tuesday, April 18, 2006 
 
 
(A) SUBJECTS COVERED IN TODAY'S REPORT: 
 
Iran 
China 
Israel Suicide Bomb Attack 
 
B) SUMMARY OF COVERAGE: 
 
Yesterday's suicide bomb attack in Tel Aviv and Iran's growing 
nuclear threat are today's major international stories, while 
the growing oil crisis is a lead story in today's economic and 
electronic press, as well as the front page story in Le 
Parisien. 
 
Hu Jintao's visit to Washington is front-paged in Le Monde, 
which analyzes what President Bush expects from China, 
especially on the Iran nuclear issue. Le Figaro interviews 
Taiwan's President Chen Sui-bian who says: "China has not 
given up on using force against Taiwan." (See Part C) 
 
Liberation devotes its lead to "Iran's Enriched Threat" noting 
that "the verbal escalation continues between Tehran and 
Washington, which has not given up on a military option." The 
editorial is entitled "A narrow Path." (See Part C) A separate 
analysis in Liberation by Jean-Dominique Merchet asks "What if 
Washington Attacked?" and quotes a Pentagon official who 
supposedly said: "The White House believes that the only way 
to deal with the problem is to change Iran's power structure, 
and that means a war." But the article notes that the quote, 
reported by Seymour Hersh of the New Yorker, was denied by the 
White House. Laurent Mauriac in yet another article reports 
that although Washington is working with the UNSC to resolve 
the Iranian crisis, other means are being explored: Richard 
Lugar is mentioned as having called for direct negotiations 
with Tehran. 
 
The suicide attack in Tel Aviv for which Islamic Jihad has 
claimed responsibility is the lead story in Le Figaro, which 
calls the attack `carnage,' noting that the attack was 
perpetrated during the Jewish Passover holiday. A separate 
report is entitled "Anarchy Takes Over in Gaza" (See Part C) 
 
Le Figaro and the electronic media report that Moussaoui's 
defense will try to prove he suffers from schizophrenia "in 
order to save him from the death penalty," but a decision 
which goes "against the defendant himself." 
 
La Croix's Gilles Biassette drafts a portrait of "John 
Batiste, a General at War Against Rumsfeld" and reports on 
what he calls "a rebellion of the Generals." Biassette also 
notes "President Bush's total support for Rumsfeld." 
 
La Croix reports that the U.S. "which is very active in Sudan, 
wants to avoid a new regional crisis and is weighing heavily 
on President Idriss Deby, who after Washington's request, gave 
up expelling the 20 000 Sudanese refugees living on the Chad 
border. The U.S. involvement has, for the moment, proven a 
success." 
 
(C) SUPPORTING TEXT/BLOCK QUOTES: 
 
Iran 
 
"A Narrow Path" 
Pierre Haski in left-of-center Liberation (04/18): "Who today 
could keep Iran from becoming a nuclear power? Apparently, no 
one. This at least is the answer given by the Iranians 
themselves, whose escalation leaves no doubt as to their 
intentions. To reach their goal, the Iranians have the 
technology, the financial means, the political will and mostly 
an obvious feeling of impunity. Iran does not believe in a 
military threat from the U.S., mired as it is in Iraq., has 
nothing to fear from sanctions by the international community, 
because of China's benevolence, and is counting on the world's 
oil needs. This triple equation gives the Mullahs a feeling of 
power. In a world where the Americans have accepted Israel's 
nuclear armament, have recently signed an agreement with India 
and have shown their inability to bring North Korea to reason, 
the Iranian Mullahs do not see how they could be stopped. This 
is why those who in Washington are raising their voices in 
favor of a dialogue with Tehran are not necessarily the less 
credible of the lot. And while dialogue offers a narrow way, 
alternative options remain meager." 
 
China 
 
"Between China and the U.S., Explanations at a Summit" 
Corine Lesnes in left-of-center Le Monde (04/18): "On the 
Chinese side, it is a state visit; on the U.S. side, it is 
more of a working visit. At a time when disenchantment with 
China is running high in Congress over the Yuan and China's 
military spending, Washington is not in the mood to give Hu- 
Jintao the red carpet treatment. The visit will coincide with 
a visit to Moscow of the UNSC members to discuss the Iranian 
crisis. Clearly, a positive sign from Beijing on this issue 
would be most welcome in the eyes of American diplomacy. To 
this end the U.S. will try to convince Hu-Jintao that a 
nuclear Iran will represent a factor of destabilization in 
Asia." 
 
"Taiwan: A Major Headache in the Big Game Between Beijing and 
Washington" 
Jean-Jacques Mevel in right-of-center Le Figaro (04/18): 
"Taiwan continues to poison the already complicated relations 
between the reigning super-power, the U.S. and the aspiring 
one, China. Taiwan's fate will be at the center of the talks 
between President Bush and Hu-Jintao, who is hoping that the 
U.S. President will be able to tone down President Chen's 
ambitions of independence. But it is doubtful that President 
Bush will make the public announcement his Chinese guest is 
hoping for. Washington's stance in the straight is one of 
double deterrence: keep Chen Sui-bian from making any overt 
gestures of independence, while keeping Hu-Jintao and his men 
from attacking and taking Taiwan by force." 
 
Israel Suicide Bomb Attack 
 
"Renewed Carnage in Tel Aviv" 
Marc Henry in right-of-center Le Figaro (04/18): "According to 
Ehoud Olmert, the moment chosen by the suicide bomber was not 
a coincidence: during the Passover holidays and on the 
inaugural session of the newly elected Knesset. The question 
is how far can Olmert go in order to contain the escalating 
violence. His margin of maneuver is narrow, considering he has 
already implemented a number of financial and trade sanctions. 
in Gaza. He can hardly do more, short of occupying anew part 
of the Gaza strip that was evacuated last month, an idea put 
forward by military high officials. But a major unknown 
remains how Israel plans to deal with Hamas: Israel's Defense 
Minister Mofaz has warned that not a single Hamas leader, 
including Ismael Haniyeh, will enjoy the slightest immunity." 
STAPLETON