06SANAA1185
COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR USUN POLOFF DAVID
Sat Apr 29 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Sanaa
VZCZCXYZ0002
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHYN #1185/01 1190910
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 290910Z APR 06
FM AMEMBASSY SANAA
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 0025
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3715UNCLAS SANAA 001185 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AMGT OTRA
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR USUN POLOFF DAVID 
TESSLER FROM MAY 2 TO 4, 2006 
 
REF: USUN NEW YORK 00848 
 
¶1.  Embassy Sanaa grants country clearance and welcomes the 
visit of PolOff David Tessler from May 2 to 4, 2006 to 
participate in the visit of Ambassador Cesar Mayoral, the 
Argentine Permanent Representative to the UN and Chariman of 
the UN Security Council's Sanctions Committee.  Security 
Clearance information is on file. 
 
¶2.  Point of Contact for the visit will be Joy Hood who can 
be contacted at all times through the Embassy at (967) (1) 
755-2236 or via cell phone (967) 1-73322-8058.  The number 
for emergencies only is (967) (1) 755-2170 (Post One). 
 
¶3.  Reservations: Movenpick requested through USUN 
 
¶4.   Visas:  All travelers must obtain a Yemeni entry visa 
prior to their arrival.  This is a matter of the utmost 
importance, and is the responsibility of the traveler.  NO, 
repeat, NO airport visas will be issued.  Please note:  there 
should be NO Pakistani or Afghan visas in your passport.  If 
you must travel on a passport with these visas, please notify 
Post in advance so we can make arrangements to facilitate 
your transit through immigration; otherwise, you may be 
detained for a period at immigration. 
 
¶5.   Work Hours:  Embassy Sanaa's normal workweek is Saturday 
through Wednesday; office hours are 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. 
 
¶6.  Crime Situation in Yemen:  The incidence of street crime 
is very low throughout Yemen, and violent crimes against 
foreigners are rare.  However, kidnappings by tribes continue 
to be a threat to foreigners visiting Yemen.  Because of 
recent terrorist threats against U.S. interests on the 
Arabian Peninsula and the increased tensions in the entire 
Gulf region, the Embassy advises all visitors to remain 
vigilant with regard to their personal security and to 
exercise caution.  Avoid large crowds and gatherings, 
maintain a low profile, and vary routes and times of all 
required travel.  Travelers should read the latest Consular 
Information Sheet, which describes current conditions. 
 
¶7.  Money:  THERE ARE FEW ATMS IN COUNTRY, AND ACCEPTANCE OF 
CREDIT CARDS IS LIMITED ) BRING CASH.  TDY cash advances 
should be taken prior to travel to Yemen ) Embassy does not 
issue cash advances for TDY personnel.  Embassy offers 
check-cashing service and will cash personal checks of 
official travelers.  Cashier will exchange dollars for Yemeni 
Riyals.  Many local merchants and businesses accept U.S. 
currency for purchases.  The current exchange rate is YR 196 
to USD 1. 
 
¶8.  Weather:  The weather in Sanaa is generally warm during 
the day, and a sweater may be necessary at night.  Weather in 
Aden and along the Red Sea coast is normally very hot and 
humid.  Business suits are preferred for meetings with Yemeni 
officials.  All clothing should be modest and conservative. 
 
¶9.  Health Precautions:  Bring at least a 3-month supply of 
medications.  Practice food and water precautions as in other 
developing nations.  Begin immunization for hepatitis A and 
B, rabies, typhoid, tetanus, and polio prior to departure. 
Yellow fever vaccination is required if entering from a 
country at risk.  If you spend more than a few days outside 
Sanaa, malaria prophylaxis may be required and you will be 
required to have G6PD blood testing.  Local hospital care may 
be required for emergencies.  Local medical providers expect 
immediate cash payment.  Be prepared to pay several hundred 
dollars and the rest prior to departure from Yemen.  While 
you will be provided documentation of medical care rendered 
to give to your insurance providers, it is your 
responsibility to recover funds from your agency or insurance 
plan.  The cost of evacuation can cost up to $100,000. 
Emergency Air Evacuations for other than MSGs, Seabees, DOS 
direct hires, and DOD staff require an obligated fund site 
PRIOR to the evacuation.  Travelers should contact their 
administrative offices before departure to obtain this 
information.  Out of country hospitalization for non-DOD and 
non-DOS direct hires require an obligated fund site to cover 
the hospitalization PRIOR to the hospitalization.  Travelers 
should contact their administrative offices before departure 
to obtain this information.  Each traveler should check in 
with the Medical Unit for a short medical briefing as soon as 
possible after arrival.  Individuals with sickle cell trait 
should carefully consider the altitude of this post before 
applying for assignment here.  Short-term (TDY) assignments 
carry an added risk because of the lack of time for 
acclimatization.  Dehydration and stress from exercise or 
illness compound the basic risks of high altitude.  For more 
information, contact your health unit or the medical 
clearances section of the Offices of Medical Services. 
 
¶10.  Special Restrictions:  The Republic of Yemen prohibits 
the import of sexually oriented material, weapons, and 
alcohol; videocassettes are also likely to be confiscated. 
Photography of military installations, individuals in 
uniform, government buildings and industrial facilities are 
strictly forbidden.  Photography of Yemenis, especially 
women, should be done only after receiving explicit 
permission.  We repeat -- All baggage, including those 
belonging to diplomats, is subject to x-ray and hand search 
upon arrival in Yemen. 
 
¶11.  Travel Restrictions:  Travel outside Sanaa will only 
occur with COM/RSO approval. 
Krajeski