07MOSCOW3976
EXTRANCHECK: POST-SHIPMENT VERIFICATION:
Tue Aug 14 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Moscow
VZCZCXYZ0009
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMO #3976/01 2261331
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 141331Z AUG 07
FM AMEMBASSY MOSCOW
TO RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC PRIORITY
INFO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2915
RHMFIUU/US CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS MOSCOW 003976 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USDOC FOR 532/OEA/MHAMES/DMUSLU 
USDOC FOR 3150/USFCS/OIO/CEENIS/MCOSTA 
USDOC FOR 532/OEE/MO'BRIEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BEXP ETRD ETTC RS
SUBJECT: EXTRANCHECK: POST-SHIPMENT VERIFICATION: 
JOINT INSTITUTE FOR NUCLEAR RESEARCH, MOSCOW, RUSSIA, 
LICENSE NO. NLR 
 
REFTEL: USDOC 05565 
 
¶1. Unauthorized disclosure of the information provided 
below is prohibited by Section 12C of the Export 
Administration Act. 
 
¶2. Reftel 1 requested a Post-shipment verification to 
determine the legitimacy and reliability of the end- 
user, Joint Institute for Nuclear Research, Dubna, 
Moscow Oblast, Russia. The company is listed on BIS 
license application: NLR as the ultimate consignee of 
physical analysis equipment, 1, multimode V 
application module-ready SPM system, ECCN: EAR99. The 
licensee is Intertech Corporation, 3 Commerce Drive, 
Atkinson, NH 03811. NOTE: The actual end user of the 
equipment is Energomashtechnika - Russian Academy of 
Sciences Prokhorov General Physics Institute, located 
at 38 Vavilov St. Moscow, Russia 119991. The Institute 
was the subject of PLC D317180 reported as favorable 
by FCS in 04 MOSCOW 06622 sent on May 14, 2004 and of 
PLC D332439 reported as favorable by ECO Moscow in 05 
MOSCOW 06594 sent on June 7, 2005. END NOTE. 
 
¶3. On August 10, 2007, Export Control Attache Donald 
Pearce and FSN Natalya Shipitsina conducted the 
requested post-shipment verification with 
Energomashtechnika, Russian Academy of Sciences- 
Prokhorov General Physics Institute (RAS-PGPI) Moscow, 
Russia. The export control team met with Victor 
Appolonov, high power laser dept., Academician of the 
Russian Aacademy of Natural Sciences and General 
Director of Energomashtechnika. 
 
¶4. Energomashtechnika is a commercial venture 
established in 1993 by the High Power Lasers 
Department of the RAS-PGPI to provide operating funds 
for the Department.  The company specializes in 
research, development and production of high power 
lasers for the metallurgical industry, heavy equipment 
manufacturing, medical and scientific research, 
emergency services, and environmental protection. The 
company has worked with 55 universities, research 
centers and commercial organizations since 1993 from 
France, Germany, United Kingdom, Japan, Singapore, 
Canada and the United States.  A complete list of 
lasers produced, major partners and other company 
information is available at the Energomashtechnika 
website at http://www.gpi.ru/hpl/.  Energomashtechnika 
employs 40 at its laboratory located in the RAS-PGPI 
building in Moscow. 
 
¶5. The equipment in reftel will be principally used in 
a research and development project to increase the 
efficiency of photo detectors, laser diodes, and 
similar sensors.  The current designs of these devices 
provide a 15-20% threshold of sensitivity, limiting 
their ability to be used in commercial applications. 
The research aims to improve the sensitivity, allowing 
for more efficient use in solar energy and laser 
projects.  Direct access to the equipment will be 
limited, however other researchers from organizations 
such as the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research, 
Moscow State University, and other academicians may 
submit data or request experiments to be performed in 
the lab on their behalf. 
 
¶6. The project is currently on hold pending the 
completion of the laboratory space at the facility. 
The devices in reftel are being stored, crated as 
shipped, in the lobby of the building.  The team 
examined the packing marks and bills of lading, which 
match the information provided in reftel. 
Energomashtechnika took delivery of the crates last 
week, as the shipment was delayed in customs for 
nearly three months.  Access to the lobby is limited 
to those with official business and authorized 
visitors, however the equipment will remain sealed and 
crated to prevent damage or pilferage. 
 
¶7. The room designated for the laboratory currently 
houses several obsolete devices, which will be 
disassembled and moved to storage.  The devices in 
reftel will be assembled by representatives of 
Intertech, with a target timeframe of September 2007. 
Dr. Appolonov will be personally responsible for the 
equipment, and is familiar with U.S. export controls 
 
 
and the destination control requirements of this 
shipment.  Only three persons will have regular access 
to the room: a trained equipment operator, a research 
scientist and a statistician.  Due to the sensitivity 
of the equipment, no other personnel will be 
authorized to utilize or access the equipment. The 
room will be secured with a cipher lock system, and 
protected by an electronic security alarm system.  The 
building is guarded at all times by campus security 
officers.  Annual audits of all major equipment are 
conducted by the RAS as required under Russian law. 
 
¶8. Recommendations: Post recommends 
Energomashtechnika, Russian Academy of Sciences 
Prokhorov General Physics Institute Moscow, Russia as 
reliable recipients of sensitive U.S. origin 
commodities. 
 (FCS MOSCOW/SBOZEK/DPEARCE) 
BURNS