07MOSCOW3592
EXTRANCHECK: PRE-LICENSE CHECK: MICRAN,
Mon Jul 23 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Moscow
VZCZCXYZ0005
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMO #3592/01 2041143
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 231143Z JUL 07
FM AMEMBASSY MOSCOW
TO RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC PRIORITY
INFO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2301
RUEAORC/USCBP WASHDC
RHMFIUU/HQ BICE WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS MOSCOW 003592 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USDOC FOR 532/OEA/MHAMES/LRITTER 
USDOC FOR 3150/USFCS/OIO/CEENIS/MCOSTA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BEXP ETRD ETTC RS
SUBJECT: EXTRANCHECK: PRE-LICENSE CHECK: MICRAN, 
TOMSK, RUSSIA, (A) D371541 AND (B) D371543 
 
REFTEL: 1) USDOC 03693, 2) 05 USDOC 02247, 3) 06 
 
MOSCOW 01138 
 
¶1. Unauthorized disclosure of the information provided 
below is prohibited by Section 12C of the Export 
Administration Act. 
 
¶2. Reftel 1 requested a Pre-license check to determine 
the legitimacy and reliability of the end-user, (A) 
and (B) Micran, Tomsk, Russia. The company is listed 
on BIS license applications (A) D371541 and (B) 
D371543 as the ultimate consignee of (A) 200 
semiconductors, 12-bit, 210msps adc and (B) 
semiconductor, 16-bit, 130msps adc. These items are 
controlled for national security and nuclear non- 
proliferation reasons under ECCN 3A001. The licensee 
is (A) and (B) Fintronic OY, Ruosilantie 14B, 
Helsinki, Finland. 
 
¶3. On July 19, 2007, Export Control Attache Donald 
Pearce and FSN Natalya Shipitsina conducted a pre- 
license check at the offices of Research and 
Production company Micran, 47 Vershinina st., Tomsk, 
Russia. The export control team met with , Evgeny 
Andronov, Head of Test and Measurement Department and 
Vladimir Dotsenko, Research and Development Department 
Chief. 
 
¶4. NOTE: Micran was the subject of reftel 2, 
requesting PSVs on licenses D319612, D328807, D306056, 
and D313397.  ECO Moscow conducted the PSV on December 
21, 2005, reported as favorable in reftel 3. END NOTE. 
 
¶5. Micran was founded in 1991 by a group of eight 
scientists to seek opportunities in the microwave 
engineering and production sector. The company is 
privately held by these individuals, and is registered 
as a closed joint stock company.  Micran produces and 
develops equipment for the microwave electronics 
industry, including radio links, telecommunications 
products and high-frequency radio measurement 
equipment.  Micran is responsible for 50% of Russian 
domestic production of microwave radio links, 
operating in frequency bands from 150Mhz to 40Ghz. 
Micran currently employs around 500 (NOTE: this is up 
from 300 in 2005 END NOTE) at its headquarters and 
fabrication facilities in Tomsk, and has a small 
representative office in Moscow.  Mr. Andronov reports 
that Micran is hoping to build a second production 
facility in Tomsk. 
 
¶6. The Linear Technology Co. ADCs in reftel 1 will be 
used in the production of radio relay and testing 
equipment.  The 200 12-bit, 210msps ADCs described in 
D371541 will be used in the Modem-01 128QAM-Modem/IF 
board, utilized in the MD1-6 access module of the MIC- 
RL4-40 SDH Microwave Digital Radio Relay System.  The 
Modem-01 provided analog to digital data signal 
conversion using an international protocol for use 
worldwide.  The 40 16-bit, 130msps ADCs will be used 
in the production of Vector/Scalar Network Analysis 
equipment and Spectrum Analysis devices.  These 
devices are currently in development, and have not yet 
been certified for sale.  The units will be used in 
house for testing, and upon certification, will be 
added to the sales inventory.  Mr. Dotsenko 
anticipates the need for additional orders of the ADCs 
when the products are type certified. 
 
¶7. Mr. Andronov stated that Micran is not a military 
contractor, and that the commodities in reftel will 
not be used in military projects. While Micran does 
not contract for military production, it does supply 
equipment and specialty design services for other 
Russian firms, which may or may not be involved in 
military contract work.  Major clients of Micran 
include Svyazinvest, which owns a sizeable majority of 
public communications equipment infrastructure in 
Russia, the oil and gas industry, and the mobile 
telephone carriers of Russia and the Commonwealth of 
Independent States. 
 
¶8. Prior to installation into equipment, the ADCs will 
be placed in a locked storage room.  The building uses 
a proximity card access system with integrated video 
monitoring, which prevents unauthorized access.  A log 
system is utilized for inventory control, and Micran 
 
has had no thefts.  In addition to the electronic 
system, Micran has uniformed security personnel at the 
premesis 24 hours a day, seven days a week.  Mr. 
Andronov and Mr. Dotsenko are familiar with U.S. and 
Russian export controls, and are aware of the general 
conditions of these types of licenses. 
 
¶9. Recommendations: Post recommends Micran, Tomsk, 
Russia, as a reliable recipient of sensitive U.S. 
origin commodities. It is requested that post be 
notified of final disposition of the application, and 
of any shipments for this organization in order to 
conduct appropriate FCS follow-up and statistical 
reporting. 
(FCS MOSCOW/SBOZEK/DPEARCE) 
BURNS