07MOSCOW5148
EXTRANCHECK: PRE-LICENSE CHECK: SRI
Thu Oct 25 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Moscow
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMO #5148/01 2981212
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 251212Z OCT 07
FM AMEMBASSY MOSCOW
TO RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC PRIORITY
INFO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4835
RHMFIUU/US CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS MOSCOW 005148 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USDOC FOR 532/OEA/MHAMES/LRITTER 
USDOC FOR 3150/USFCS/OIO/CEENIS/MCOSTA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BEXP ETRD ETTC RS
SUBJECT: EXTRANCHECK: PRE-LICENSE CHECK: SRI 
BIOMEDICINSKOY KHIMII IM. V.N. OREKHOVICHA RAMN, 
MOSCOW, RUSSIA, LICENSE NO. D382923 
 
REFTEL: USDOC 08772 
 
 
¶1. Unauthorized disclosure of the information provided 
below is prohibited by Section 12C of the Export 
Administration Act. 
 
¶2. Reftel requested a Pre-license check to determine 
the legitimacy and reliability of the end-user, SRI 
Biomedicinskoy Khimii im. V.N.Orekhovicha, Moscow, 
Russia. The company is listed on BIS license 
application D382923 as the ultimate consignee of an 
acrylic glove box chamber with airlock door. These 
items are controlled for chemical or biological 
warfare, anti-terrorism reasons under ECCN 2B352. The 
licensee is Plas-Labs Inc., 401 E. North st., Lansing, 
MI 48906. 
 
¶3. On October 19, 2007, Export Control Attache Peter 
Liston, Export Control Attache Donald Pearce, and FSN 
Natalya Shipitsina conducted the requested pre-license 
check at the offices of SRI Biomedicinskoy Khimii im. 
V.N.Orekhovicha, 10, Pogodinskaya st., Moscow, Russia. 
The export control team met with Alexander I. 
Archakov, Director, Full member of RAMS, Prof. 
 
¶4. Institute of Biomedical Chemistry RAMS is a 
structural subdivision of Russian Academy of Medical 
Sciences. Staff consists of more than 200 research 
associates, including 2 Full Members of RAMS, 7 
Professors, 72 Candidates and 30 Doctors of Science. 
There are 3 departments and 8 research laboratories at 
the Institute. 
 
The basic research and development activity of the 
Institute is carried out in accordance with research 
priority directions approved by Medico-Biological 
Sciences Committee of RAMS. They are: 
 
- study of genetic, molecular, biochemical, 
physiological and morphological principals of vital 
activity to prevent diseases and renew unsound 
functions; 
- study of pharmacological regulation in normal and 
pathology. New drug design and computer modeling. 
 
Institute of Biomedical Chemistry RAMS is one of the 
leading subdivisions of RAMS on fundamental directions 
of present-day biomedical science such as 
bioinformatics, proteomics, nanotechnologies. 
 
The most significant scientific and practical 
achievements of the Institute are: development of 
hepatoprotector "Phosphogliv", revealing of 
oncomarkers at the initial stage of oncological 
diseases, creation of express-diagnosis method of 
acute viral hepatitis, creation of vaccine prototype 
against hepatitis C. 
 
The Institute is large complex with multi-layered 
security.  It is located within a fenced-in compound, 
with 24 hour manned security. 
 
The export control team was given a tour of the 
facility and the lab area where the acrylic glove box 
chamber with airlock door will be located.  The lab 
where the glove box will be located is a single entry 
lab room with a dead-bolt locking system that only 4 
staff members have keys and access.  The building 
where the glove box will be housed appears to be in 
the process of a security upgrade, with electronic 
card-key access system being recently installed on 
some lab doors. 
 
¶5. ECO NOTE: During the PLC at SRI Biomedicinskoy 
Khimii im., the ECO team discovered that Alexander I. 
Archakov, the point of contact for the glove box, had 
been declared permanently ineligible to visit the 
United States by the U.S. Consulate in Moscow on or 
about March 2007 under section 212(a)(3)(A)(ii) of the 
Immigration and Naturalization Act, which prohibits 
issuance of a visa to any alien who seeks to enter the 
United States to engage in any unlawful activity. 
 
On October 22, 2007, Export Control Attache Liston 
confirmed with the U.S. Consulate in Moscow that 
Alexander I. Archekov had been denied a tourist visa 
 
 
on his last three (3) attempts to obtain one. 
 
¶6. Recommendations: Post recommends against issuing 
this license at this time to SRI Biomedicinskoy Khimii 
im. V.N.Orekhovicha, Moscow, Russia, as reliable 
recipients of sensitive U.S. origin commodities for 
the reason stated above.  Post suggests that HQ 
explores with State the reason Alexander I Archekov 
has been declared permanently ineligible to receive a 
U.S. visa. It is requested that post be notified of 
final disposition of the application, and of any 
shipments for this organization in order to conduct 
appropriate FCS follow-up and statistical reporting. 
(FCS MOSCOW/SBOZEK/PLISTON) 
BURNS