09MOSCOW2838
MEETING OF DOE/ROSATOM CIVIL NUCLEAR ENERGY EXPERTS IN
Fri Nov 20 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Moscow
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMO #2838/01 3241500
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 201500Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY MOSCOW
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5458
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHDCUNCLAS MOSCOW 002838 
 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENGR EU KNNP IAEA RU KU NO AE SW
SUBJECT: MEETING OF DOE/ROSATOM CIVIL NUCLEAR ENERGY EXPERTS IN 
MOSCOW, RUSSIA FROM NOVEMBER 17-18, 2009 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED - Please protect accordingly 
 
¶1. (SBU) On November 17 and 18, 2009, U.S. Department of Energy 
(DOE) representatives met with technical experts from the Russian 
State Corporation for Atomic Energy (Rosatom) to discuss next steps 
in meeting the timelines for preparing a "60 Day Study" to identify 
specific areas for civil nuclear energy cooperation.  The sides 
agreed on a draft Charter to guide preparation of the Study (see 
para 3) and drafted a detailed list of specific activities to 
consider for inclusion in the Study itself.   The group identified 
three key elements for civil nuclear cooperation: Reactor 
Demonstration Projects, R&D for Innovative Nuclear Energy Technology 
Options, and Global Civil Nuclear Energy Framework Development.  The 
Russian team lead, Dr. Rachkov, was well prepared with detailed 
technical proposals and experts from both Rosatom and the relevant 
institutes at the table.  Dr. Zrodnikov, the Director of the 
Institute of Physics and Power Engineering (IPPE), was the main 
technical spokesman outlining the potential areas of cooperation. 
Rosatom agreed to the draft Charter language with minimal comments, 
and most of the effort went into the specific areas of potential 
cooperation.  In addition to the draft Charter, a list of U.S. (see 
para 4) and Russian (see para 5) attendees is attached. 
 
¶2. (SBU) BACKGROUND: At the July 6, 2009 Presidential Summit in 
Moscow, the U.S. and Russian Presidents agreed to create a Bilateral 
Presidential Commission, which includes a Working Group on Nuclear 
Energy and Nuclear Security co-chaired by Deputy Secretary of Energy 
Poneman and Rosatom Director General Kiriyenko.  The Working Group 
met on September 28-29, 2009 in Washington, DC, and developed an 
Action Plan which, among other things, outlined next steps for 
U.S.-Russia bilateral civil nuclear energy cooperation. The "60 Day 
Study" mentioned above is one of the deliverables in the Action 
Plan. END BACKGROUND. 
 
¶3. (SBU) BEGIN TEXT OF DRAFT CHARTER: 
 
DRAFT CHARTER 
U.S.-RUSSIA BILATERAL CIVIL NUCLEAR ENERGY COOPERATION 
 
"60-DAY STUDY" 
 
NOVEMBER 1, 2009 
 
BACKGROUND: 
The Joint Statement by President Barack Obama of the United States 
of America and President Dimitry Medvedev of the Russian Federation 
on Nuclear Cooperation, issued July 6, 2009, notes that the U.S. and 
Russia share a common vision of the "growth of clean, safe, secure, 
and affordable nuclear energy for peaceful purposes."  The joint 
statement expresses U.S. and Russian intent to work to bring into 
force the bilateral Agreement Between the Government of the United 
States of America and the Government of the Russian Federation for 
Cooperation in the Field of Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy and 
notes the potential for the two countries to work together on 
development of innovative nuclear energy systems. 
 
The two presidents agreed to create a Bilateral Presidential 
Commission with several supporting working groups, including a 
Working Group on Nuclear Energy and Nuclear Security co-chaired by 
Deputy Secretary of Energy Daniel Poneman and Rosatom Director 
General Sergei Kiriyenko. 
 
At their first meeting on September 29 and 30, 2009, the co-chairs 
directed experts to complete a study of the possible areas for 
cooperation in the civil nuclear energy arena.  (Reference: 
Poneman-Kiriyenko Working Group on Nuclear Energy and Nuclear 
Security, U.S.-Russia Bilateral Presidential Commission, September 
29, 2009, Action Plan.) 
 
 
OBJECTIVE OF THE "60-DAY STUDY": 
 
The objective of the "60-Day Study" is to identify technical focus 
areas, initial activities, and mechanisms for cooperation, and to 
develop a U.S.-Russia Bilateral Civil Nuclear Energy Cooperation 
Action Plan.  This plan is to be used as a basis for initiating and 
sustaining cooperative activities supporting the safe, secure, and 
peaceful use of nuclear energy and commercially attractive 
cradle-to-grave fuel services for countries that are building 
nuclear reactors for peaceful civilian use.  (These two areas are 
described in Sections XII and XIII of the September 29, 2009 Action 
Plan). 
 
 
ELEMENTS AND TIMELINE: 
 
> The members of the "60-Day Study" team include U.S. and Russian 
experts.  A list of the study team members is to be determined and 
shared in November, 2009. 
 
> The results of the "60-Day Study" are to be documented in a 
U.S.-Russia Bilateral Civil Nuclear Energy Cooperation Action Plan. 
The Action Plan should be structured to include: 
 
- Introduction - Background and civil nuclear energy cooperation 
goals and long-term objectives. 
 
- Focus areas - Describe a set of possible research and development 
topics and demonstration projects with objectives of cooperation in 
the specific focus areas. 
 
- Approach - The Action Plan should list joint activities for 
near-term cooperation in each focus area that could be initiated 
prior to the Agreement between the Government of the United States 
of America and the Government of the Russian Federation for 
Cooperation in the Field of Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy (123 
Agreement) enters into force (Phase I); and activities for 
cooperation in each focus area that could be initiated once the 123 
Agreement enters into force (Phase II) and any associated 
implementing arrangements, to be elaborated if needed (Phase II). 
 
- Legal Framework - A description of legal framework providing the 
basis for cooperation in the Phase 1 and Phase II plans (including 
identification of the source of provisions governing, for example, 
the protection and allocation of intellectual property, access to 
U.S. and Russian facilities, export control, liability, and the 
exchange of information, if required). 
 
- Next Steps - A description and timeline of activities required to 
begin implementation of the cooperation identified in Phase I and 
Phase II plans; and a description of the organizational structure 
established to implement these activities. 
 
Focus areas include the following areas identified by the Co-Chairs 
of the Sub-  Working Group on Civil Nuclear Energy cooperation: 
sustaining existing nuclear infrastructure; advanced reactor R&D, 
including reactor facilities for small- and medium-capacity nuclear 
power stations, reactor facilities with on-site nuclear fuel cycle; 
high-temperature gas-cooled reactors; development of new types of 
reactor fuel and materials, including dense fuel for fast reactors; 
low waste technologies for processing nuclear fuel from fast 
reactors and R&D in the area of waste management; development of a 
multi-purpose, next generation fast research reactor; creation of 
modern codes to support licensing of fast reactors by regulators of 
both countries; commercial applications of advanced  reactors; and 
other possible areas of mutual interest. 
 
The Action Plan is to be prepared in Russian and English. 
 
 
DELIVERABLES: 
 
> A U.S.-Russia Bilateral Civil Nuclear Energy Cooperation Action 
Plan is to be submitted to, and approved by, the U.S. and Russian 
Co-chairs of the Sub-Working Group on Civil Nuclear Energy 
cooperation (Dr. Lyons and Dr.  Rachkov) in January 2010. 
 
> A status report of the cooperation based on the U.S.-Russia 
Bilateral Civil Nuclear Energy Cooperation Action Plan is to be 
provided to the Working Group on Nuclear Energy and Nuclear Security 
in March 2010. 
 
_______________________                _______________________ 
Dr. Peter Lyons                         Dr. Valery I. Rachkov 
U.S. DOE                                    Rosatom 
 
END TEXT 
 
¶4. LIST OF U.S. ATTENDEES: 
 
Robert Boudreau, Director, International Nuclear Energy Policy and 
Cooperation, Office of Corporate and Global Partnership Development, 
U.S. Department of Energy 
 
John Herczeg, Senior Advisor, Office of Nuclear Energy, U.S. 
Department of Energy 
 
Sara Scott, Program Director, Civil Nuclear Programs, Los Alamos 
National Laboratory 
 
Liliya Petrachenkova, DOE Contractor 
 
 
¶5. LIST OF RUSSIAN ATTENDEES: 
 
Valery I. Rachkov, Head of the Russian subgroup of experts, 
Director, Department of Scientific Policy, Rosatom State Atomic 
Energy Corporation 
 
Anatoly. V. Zrodnikov, Director, Institute of Physics and Power 
 
Engineering (IPPE), Obninsk 
 
Leonid A. Bolshov, Director, Nuclear Safety Institute of the Russian 
Academy of Sciences 
 
Yuri, G. Dragunov, Director, Research and Development Institute of 
Power Engineering (NIKIET) 
 
Mikhail V. Kormilitsyn, Director for Separations, Research Institute 
of Atomic Reactors (RIAR), Dimitrovgrad 
 
Igor A. Shkabura, Deputy Director, Bochvar Research Institute of 
Inorganic Materials (NIINM) 
 
Nikolay N. Ponomarev-Stepnoi, Vice President, Kurchatov Institute 
 
Aleksandr V. Bakmetyev, Deputy Director, Afrikantov OKB Mechanical 
Engineering (OKBM), Nizhniy Novgorod 
 
Aleksandr N. Andrianov, Advisor, Department of Scientific Policy, 
Rosatom State Atomic Energy Corporation 
 
Yuri N. Busurin, Chief of Division, Department of International 
Cooperation, Rosatom State Atomic Energy Corporation 
 
Vladimir P. Kuchinov, Advisor to the Director General, Rosatom State 
Atomic Energy Corporation 
 
Alla K. Strelkova, Department of International Cooperation, Rosatom 
State Atomic Energy Corporation 
 
Yuri S. Cherepnin, Director of R&D, Research and Development 
Institute of Power Engineering (NIKIET) 
 
Aleksandr N. Chebeskov, Institute of Physics and Power Engineering 
(IPPE), Obninsk 
 
Vladimir S. Kagramanyan, Institute of Physics and Power Engineering 
(IPPE), Obninsk 
 
 
BEYRLE