10ABIDJAN53
Report on Child Labor and Forced Labor
Wed Feb 03 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Abidjan
VZCZCXRO5269
RR RUEHMA RUEHPA
DE RUEHAB #0053/01 0341503
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 031502Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY ABIDJAN
TO RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHINGTON DC
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0084
INFO ECOWAS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 10 ABIDJAN 000053 
 
SIPDIS 
DOL/ILAB FOR LAYLA STROTKAMP, RACHEL RIGBY, AND TINA MCCARTER 
DRL/ILCSR FOR SARAH MORGAN 
G/TIP FOR LUIS CDEBACA. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB EAGR EIND ETRD ECON PHUM SOCI KTIP IV
SUBJECT: Report on Child Labor and Forced Labor 
 
REF: A) 09 STATE 131997; B) 08 STATE 43120; C) 08 ABIDJAN 366 
D) 09 ABIDJAN 36; E) 09 ABIDJAN 457 
 
¶1.  In response to ref A and in accordance with the Trafficking 
Victims Protection Reauthorization Act (TVPRA) of 2005 and the 
Trade and Development Act (TDA) of 2000, post provides the 
following information on child labor and forced labor in Cote 
d'Ivoire. 
 
 
 
--------- 
 
TVPRA 
 
--------- 
 
 
 
¶2. In a June 2008 response to  the Department's request for 
information related to the TVPRA (ref B), post reported on relevant 
labor issues in the production of a number of commodities:  cocoa, 
coffee, rubber, palm oil, commercial fruit (primarily bananas, 
pineapples, and papayas), rice, cotton, diamonds, gold, and fish 
(ref C).  Subsequently, post submitted additional information 
related to labor in gold mining (ref D). 
 
 
 
¶3. In September 2009, the Department of Labor's Bureau of 
International Labor Affairs (ILAB) placed Ivoirian cocoa and coffee 
appear on the TVPRA list.  Therefore, per ref A instructions, this 
cable does not address labor issues in the cocoa or coffee sector 
as they relate to TVPRA. 
 
 
 
¶4. In order to develop more information on other Ivoirian goods 
that post believes might be produced by forced labor or child labor 
in violation of international standards, post consulted with 
representatives of the following organizations:  the International 
Labor Organization's International Program on the Elimination of 
Child Labor (ILO-IPEC), the International Organization for 
Migration (IOM), Save the Children UK, the International Cocoa 
Initiative Foundation (ICI), the Ministry of Agriculture, and the 
Payson Center for International Development at Tulane University 
(which, under a U.S. Department of Labor contract, researches and 
reports on child-labor issues in the Ivoirian and Ghanaian cocoa 
sectors) 
 
 
 
¶5. Based on these discussions, post does not believe there have 
been any significant changes in labor practices or government 
response to them since post's submission of ref C in June 2008. 
Additionally, we are unaware of any publications or studies of 
child labor or forced labor in the production of any Ivoirian 
commodities--with the exception of cocoa-- since 2007.  In fact, 
there is a general dearth of information on labor practices in any 
sector of the Ivoirian economy other than cocoa. 
 
 
 
----- 
 
TDA 
 
----- 
 
 
 
¶6. In response to ref A, post provides the following information 
with regard to TDA.  Post's responses are keyed to ref A outline. 
 
 
 
2A) PREVALENCE AND SECTORAL DISTRIBUTION OF EXPLOITIVE CHILD LABOR: 
 
 
 
¶1.       In what sectors (not related to the production of goods) 
were children involved in exploitive labor (such as domestic 
 
ABIDJAN 00000053  002 OF 010 
 
 
service, street vending, and/or child prostitution)? 
 
 
 
Children worked in the informal sector as apprentices, laborers, 
shoe shiners, porters, street vendors, and car washers or watchers. 
Boys were sometimes employed to assist with trash collection and 
removal, and young girls were commonly employed as domestic 
servants in private homes.  There were reports that some minors 
engaged in child prostitution for survival. 
 
 
 
¶2.       Since DOL uses standardized data in its reporting, Posts 
are not requested to obtain child labor or education statistics. 
However, Posts are requested to determine if the government 
collected or published data on exploitive child labor during the 
period, and, if so, whether the government would provide the data 
set to DOL for further analysis. 
 
 
 
The Ministry of Labor is currently compiling data collected by the 
Ivoirian National Institute of Statistics for a report it will 
publish on all activities implemented by the government, NGOs, and 
other partners on child trafficking and child labor for the 
2000-2009 period.  The report will also feature recommendations for 
2010-2013.  Ministry of Labor representatives had not yet decided 
on whether the data set would be shared with outside partners; 
however, in the past, official reports have been made available to 
interested parties. 
 
 
 
2B) LAWS AND REGULATIONS: Please answer the following questions 
using the standards provided in paras 27 and 28. Please note that, 
with the exception of newly enacted laws, DOL is not requesting 
information on the laws and regulations themselves (in most cases 
DOL already has these), but rather 
 
for post's analysis and evaluation of adequacy, improvement over 
time, and gaps. This is a key change from DOL taskings in previous 
years. 
 
 
 
¶1.       What new laws or regulations were enacted in regard to 
exploitive child labor over the past year? If applicable, were the 
changes improvements in the legal and regulatory framework? 
 
 
 
There were no new laws or regulations enacted in regard to 
exploitive child labor over the past year. 
 
 
 
¶2.       Based on the standards in paras 27 and 28, was the 
country/territory's legal and regulatory framework adequate for 
addressing exploitive child labor? Examples of indicators of an 
inadequate framework include instances in which children have been 
found working in hazardous conditions, but the sector in which they 
were working is exempted from minimum age laws; cases in which boys 
are being exploited as prostitutes, but the law only prohibits 
female prostitution; or cases in which there are prohibitions 
against exploitive child labor, but penalties are too weak to serve 
as deterrents. 
 
 
 
The country's legal and regulatory framework is inadequate for 
addressing exploitive child labor, as there are no specific laws 
which prohibit child trafficking or the worst forms of child labor. 
A draft law intended to prohibit these abuses was submitted to the 
National Assembly for adoption in April 2002.  However, the law was 
not adopted before a failed coup d'etat-turned-rebellion split the 
country in half in September 2002.  The draft bill continues to 
remain stalled at the Council of Ministers, which must review it 
before the National Assembly votes on it; furthermore, the National 
Assembly's mandate expired in 2005. 
 
 
 
2C) INSTITUTIONS AND MECHANISMS FOR ENFORCEMENT- hazardous child 
labor and forced child labor: Posts are requested to answer the 
 
ABIDJAN 00000053  003 OF 010 
 
 
following questions for both hazardous child labor and forced child 
labor (see definitions, paras 24 and 25). Posts are requested to 
respond with two distinct sections (i.e., Post should answer all 
questions one time for "hazardous child labor" and one time for 
"forced child labor"). Responses regarding hazardous child labor 
should be entitled "2C, Section I: Hazardous child labor," with 
responses numbered 1-14. Responses regarding forced child labor 
should be entitled "2C, Section II: Forced Child Labor," with 
responses numbered 1-14. If information about enforcement 
activities is from a period other than 2009, please indicate the 
time period to which the data refers. In cases where information is 
not available, please indicate whether the government does not 
collect/maintain the information or whether information is 
maintained but the government was unwilling to provide it. 
 
 
 
¶1.       What agency or agencies was/were responsible for the 
enforcement of laws relating to hazardous child/forced child labor? 
 
 
 
 
The Ministry of Justice and the Ministry of Interior are the two 
primary ministries responsible for enforcing laws related to 
hazardous and forced child labor. 
 
 
 
¶2.       If multiple agencies were responsible for enforcement, 
were there mechanisms for exchanging information? Assess their 
effectiveness. 
 
 
 
Both the Ministry of Justice and the Ministry of Interior are 
members of the National Committee against Trafficking and 
Exploitation of Children, which was created in 2000 and serves as a 
coordinating body among the nine ministries working on enforcing 
child protection measures, including protecting children from 
hazardous labor and forced labor.  As many of these ministries have 
their own cell or office dedicated to combating the worst forms of 
child labor and child trafficking, they tend to work on projects 
within their own ministry, rather than taking them to the National 
Committee for inter-ministry action.  The National Committee is 
currently suffering from a lack of strong leadership: despite its 
mandate to meet a minimum of three times per calendar year, the 
committee has not met since June 2008. 
 
 
 
¶3.       Did the country/territory maintain a mechanism for making 
complaints about hazardous and forced child labor violations? If 
so, how many complaints were received in the reporting period? 
 
 
 
Legally established companies may raise issues of child labor with 
government inspectors when they visit - usually once per year. 
There are no labor inspectors solely dedicated to addressing child 
labor. 
 
 
 
¶4.       What amount of funding was provided to agencies 
responsible for inspections? Was this amount adequate? Did 
inspectors have sufficient office facilities, transportation, fuel, 
and other necessities to carry out inspections? 
 
 
 
The Ministry of Labor spent 92 million CFA (approximately $204,000) 
on inspections in 2009.  Ministry of Labor representatives reported 
that the amount was inadequate: many inspectors did not have a 
means of transportation they could use to visit inspection sites. 
Out of 29 inspection offices, only 10 had vehicles.  Sometimes, 
these vehicles could not be used, because no money was budgeted for 
fuel.  Office facilities in the government-controlled south were in 
disrepair; many offices in the former rebel zone (which is still de 
facto controlled by the Forces Nouvelles) need to be rebuilt. 
 
 
 
¶5.       How many inspectors did the government employ? Was the 
number of inspectors adequate? 
 
ABIDJAN 00000053  004 OF 010 
 
 
The government employs 200 inspectors, all of whom report to the 
Ministry of Labor.  Although regional labor inspectors routinely 
visit legally established companies at least once a year, no labor 
inspectors are solely dedicated to addressing child labor. 
 
 
 
¶6.        How many inspections involving child labor were carried 
out? If possible, please provide breakdown of complaint-driven 
versus random, government-initiated inspections. Were inspections 
carried out in sectors in which children work? Was the number of 
inspections adequate? 
 
 
 
In 2009, 1,549 inspections were carried out.  With the exception of 
agro-industry, no inspections were specifically carried out in the 
agricultural sector, a sector which is reportedly the most likely 
to employ child labor.  In all of these inspections, the child 
labor aspect was considered. 
 
 
 
¶7.       How many children were removed/assisted as a result of 
inspections? Were these children actually provided or referred for 
services as a result (as opposed to simply fired)? 
 
 
 
The Ministry of Labor did not have statistics on how many children 
were removed and/or assisted as a result of labor inspections. 
Ministry representatives said that some children working as 
domestic servants were removed from employment by labor inspectors 
and referred for services.  In these cases, the Ministry of Labor 
reported that these children also received compensation for their 
work. 
 
 
 
¶8.       How many child labor cases or "prosecutions" were opened? 
 
 
 
 
The Ministry of Justice does not maintain any statistics on legal 
cases. 
 
 
 
¶9.       How many child labor cases were closed or resolved? 
 
 
 
Please see Question 8. 
 
 
 
¶10.    How many violations were found or "convictions" reached? 
 
 
 
Please see Question 8. 
 
 
 
¶11.   What is the average length of time it took to resolve child 
labor cases? 
 
 
 
As Cote d'Ivoire has no law penalizing either hazardous or forced 
child labor, there is no history of cases available to determine an 
average length of time in which child labor cases were resolved. 
 
 
 
¶12.   In cases in which violations were found, were penalties 
actually applied, either through fines paid or jail sentence 
served? Did such sentences meet penalties established in the law? 
 
ABIDJAN 00000053  005 OF 010 
 
 
Please see Question 11. 
 
 
 
¶13.    Did the experience regarding questions 7 through 10 above 
reflect a commitment to combat exploitive child labor? 
 
 
 
Cote d'Ivoire has prepared a draft law intended to prohibit the 
worst forms of child labor, including hazardous labor and forced 
labor, which it submitted to the National Assembly  for adoption in 
April 2002.  The draft bill continues to remain stalled at the 
Council of Ministers. 
 
 
 
¶14.    Did government offer any training for investigators or 
others responsible for enforcement? If so, what (if any) impact 
have these trainings had? 
 
 
 
Although the Ministry of Family ordinarily works with international 
NGOs to provide training on trafficking  to police, this year, 
there were no training sessions for law enforcement.  The 
International Cocoa Initiative paired with the Ministry of Justice 
to train 25  judges on prosecuting traffickers in March of 2009. 
 
 
 
2D) INSTITUTIONAL MECHANISMS FOR EFFECTIVE ENFORCEMENT- child 
trafficking, commercial sexual exploitation of children, use of 
children in illicit activities: Because agencies responsible for 
enforcement of other worst forms of child labor are usually police 
units, Ministries of Justice or related Ministries rather than 
labor inspectorates, Posts are requested to answer questions 1-13 
below for child trafficking; commercial sexual exploitation of 
children (CSEC) - such as prostitution, pornography, etc.; and the 
use of children in illicit activities. Posts are requested to 
respond with three distinct sections (i.e. Post should answer all 
questions one time for "child trafficking," one time for "CSEC," 
and one time for "the use of children in illicit activities (use of 
children).") Each section should be entitled as follows and include 
responses to each question: "2D, Section I: Child trafficking," 
responses 1-13; "2D, Section II: Commercial Sexual Exploitation of 
Children," responses 1-13, and "2D, Section III: Use of Children in 
Illicit Activities," responses 1-13. 
 
 
 
Note that all answers below are provided for trafficking cases 
only.  Cote d'Ivoire, which has spotty law enforcement statistics, 
only keeps some statistics on trafficking cases. CSEC and children 
in illicit activities are not categories that the government uses 
or keeps statistics on. 
 
 
 
¶1.       Did the country/territory have agencies or personnel 
dedicated to enforcement of child trafficking/CSEC/use of children 
in illicit activities? How many investigators/social 
workers/dedicated police officers did the government employ to 
conduct investigations? If there were no dedicated agencies or 
personnel, provide an estimate of the number of people who were 
responsible for such investigations. Was the number of 
investigators adequate? 
 
 
 
Cote d'Ivoire's Ministry of Interior operates an Anti-Trafficking 
Unit within the National Police.  There is no cell specifically 
dedicated to CSEC or children in illicit activities.   Within the 
Anti-Trafficking Unit, there are four full-time police officers and 
one police chief who investigate cases. The police are assisted by 
two social workers. The police chief of the Anti-Trafficking Unit 
said neither the number of investigations, nor the number of 
personnel is adequate to properly investigate cases.  He believes 
that a minimum of 25 staff members should be dedicated to 
anti-trafficking efforts. 
 
 
 
¶2.        How much funding was provided to agencies responsible for 
investigating child trafficking/CSEC/use of children in illicit 
 
ABIDJAN 00000053  006 OF 010 
 
 
activities? Was this amount adequate? Did investigators have 
sufficient office facilities, transportation, fuel, and other 
necessities to carry out investigations? 
 
 
 
In 2009, the Anti-Trafficking Unit received approximately 8,000 
Euros in funding from Interpol to carry out an anti-trafficking 
raid in the southwest of the country.  However, the money barely 
covered necessities such as transportation arrangements for the 
police squad and food for the children who were intercepted during 
the raid. Investigators had no office facilities, computers, 
printers, cameras, vehicles or fuel to properly conduct the raid. 
The office received no other funds in 2009. 
 
 
 
¶3.       Did the country/territory maintain a hotline or other 
mechanism for reporting child trafficking/CSEC/use of children in 
illicit activities violations? If so, how many complaints were 
received in the reporting period? 
 
 
 
No official government hotline exists to report cases of child 
trafficking/CSEC/or use of children in illicit activities.  Only 
the Abidjan branch of the International Catholic Office for 
Children (BICE), an international NGO headquartered in Europe, 
operates a free hotline the public can call to report cases of 
child abuse. 
 
 
 
¶4.       How many investigations were opened in regard to child 
trafficking/CSEC/use of children in illicit activities? Was the 
number of investigations adequate? 
 
 
 
The Anti-Trafficking Unit reported 19 trafficking cases in 2009. 
Only two of these cases were referred to the Ministry of Justice. 
Police commonly state that the number of investigations is 
inadequate, and they could catch more traffickers if more staff and 
resources were made available. 
 
 
 
¶5.       How many children were rescued as a result? 
 
 
 
Four children suspected of being trafficked were intercepted by 
police in June 2009 and referred to BICE for care and repatriation. 
Twenty children suspected of being trafficked were rescued in the 
June 2009 Interpol-funded raid. Fifteen of these children were 
referred to the German development agency GTZ; five were reunited 
with their parents. 
 
 
 
¶6.        How many arrests were made or other kinds of prosecutions 
carried out? 
 
 
 
According to the Anti-Trafficking Unit, police arrested 19 persons 
in conjunction with trafficking-related cases and two people were 
sentenced to jail. 
 
 
 
¶7.        How many cases were closed or resolved? 
 
 
 
Currently, post is not aware of any closed or resolved cases. 
 
 
 
¶8.        How many convictions? 
 
 
 
Post was not able to obtain any statistics on convictions before 
the February 1 deadline for this report, as the Ministry of Justice 
 
ABIDJAN 00000053  007 OF 010 
 
 
must call all 25 legal jurisdictions and ask them to review all 
2009 legal case files for trafficking cases. We are following up on 
the two traffickers reportedly sentenced to jail time. 
 
 
 
¶9.       Did sentences imposed meet standards established in the 
legal framework? 
 
 
 
Not applicable. There is no law prohibiting trafficking or child 
labor. 
 
 
 
¶10.   Were sentences imposed actually served? 
 
 
 
Not applicable. 
 
 
 
¶11.   What is the average length of time it takes to resolve cases 
of child trafficking/CSEC/use of children in illicit activities? 
 
 
 
As Cote d'Ivoire has no law penalizing child trafficking, there is 
no history of cases available to determine an average length of 
time in which these cases were resolved. 
 
 
 
¶12.   Did the government offer any training for investigators or 
others responsible for enforcement of child trafficking/CSEC/use of 
children in illicit activities? If so, what was the impact (if any) 
of these trainings? 
 
 
 
On June 12 and 13, the government conducted an evaluation workshop 
on child trafficking and the worst forms of child labor for defense 
and security forces working at checkpoints in Daloa, Dimbokro, 
Divo, Gagnoa, Guiglo, San Pedro, and Yamoussoukro. 
 
 
 
¶13.   If the country/territory experienced armed conflict during 
the reporting period or in the recent past involving the use of 
child soldiers, what actions were taken to penalize those 
responsible? Were these actions adequate or meaningful given the 
situation? 
 
 
 
Not applicable.  In 2007, Cote d'Ivoire was removed from the list 
of countries featured in the UN Secretary General's Report on 
Children in Armed Conflict. 
 
 
 
2E) GOVERNMENT POLICIES ON CHILD LABOR: 
 
 
 
¶1.       Did the government have a policy or plan that specifically 
addresses exploitive child labor? Please describe. 
 
 
 
The Ivoirian government adopted the National Action Plan against 
Child Trafficking and the Worst Forms of Child Labor in September 
¶2007.  Developed by the Ministry of Family and the Ministry of 
Labor, the National Action Plan is based on five key objectives: a) 
reinforcing the judicial and legal mechanisms related to 
trafficking and the worst forms of child labor; b) conducting a 
series of studies to determine the extent and nature of the 
problem; c) reinforcing and improving prevention activities; d) 
improving the reinsertion and repatriation of child victims; and e) 
reinforcing human, material, and financial resources dedicated to 
combating the worst forms of child labor and child trafficking. 
 
ABIDJAN 00000053  008 OF 010 
 
 
¶2.       Did the country/territory incorporate exploitive child 
labor specifically as an issue to be addressed in poverty 
reduction, development, educational or other social policies, such 
as Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers, etc? Please describe. 
 
 
 
The January 2009 Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) for Cote 
d'Ivoire discusses four priority areas the government needs to 
address in order to reduce poverty.  Under the third priority, 
"well-being for all," the PRSP recommended improvements in the 
protection and re-integration of vulnerable children, including 
those who are victims of child labor, exploitation, and trafficking 
and encouraged the government to provide the necessary financial 
resources to implement the National Action Plan. 
 
 
 
¶3.       Did the government provide funding to the plans described 
above? Please describe the amount and whether it was sufficient to 
carry out the planned activities. 
 
 
 
The National Action Plan calls for 3,490,000,000 FCFA 
(approximately $7.75 million) in funds to implement its objectives. 
However, the government has not yet made this money available to 
implementing partners so that work can begin. 
 
 
 
¶4.       Did the government provide non-monetary support to child 
labor plans? Please describe. 
 
 
 
The government was heavily reliant for NGOs for training and 
expertise and provided little non-monetary support, with the 
exception of staff time, to child labor plans. 
 
 
 
¶5.       Provide any additional information about the status and 
effectiveness of the government's policies or plans during the 
reporting period in regard to exploitive child labor. 
 
 
 
In 2009, the government continued existing programs against 
exploitive child labor.  Additionally, it launched a program to 
remediate child labor in the cocoa sector (ref E). 
 
 
 
¶6.       Did the government participate in any commissions or task 
forces regarding exploitive child labor? Was the commission active 
and/or effective? 
 
 
 
In 2009 the GOCI joined with the Government of Ghana to create a 
joint working group to address child labor in the cocoa sector. 
The group has made progress in addressing technical and statistical 
issues with regard to measurement of the problem. 
 
 
 
¶7.       Did the government sign a bilateral, regional or 
international agreement to combat trafficking? 
 
 
 
In July 2005, Cote d'Ivoire signed the Multilateral Cooperation 
Agreement to Combat Child Trafficking in West Africa with nine 
other countries in the region.  The agreement calls for 
cross-border cooperation in the investigation of child trafficking 
networks and the prosecution of traffickers. 
 
 
 
2F) SOCIAL PROGRAMS TO ELIMINATE OR PREVENT CHILD LABOR: 
 
ABIDJAN 00000053  009 OF 010 
 
 
¶1.       Did the government implement any programs specifically to 
address the worst forms of child labor? Please describe. (Please 
note that DOL will not consider anti-poverty, education or other 
general child welfare programs to be addressing exploitive child 
labor unless they have a child labor component.) 
 
 
 
Yes, the GOCI launched its child-labor remediation program in the 
cocoa sector.  Under this program, the GOCI provides a package of 
services and infrastructure improvements to targeted villages in 
the cocoa-growing regions of the country.  GOCI officials report 
that they have begun work in ten cocoa villages and intend to 
complete work in an additional 20 villages in the near term. 
 
 
 
¶2.       Did the country/territory incorporate child labor 
specifically as an issue to be addressed in poverty reduction, 
development, educational or other social programs, such as 
conditional cash transfer programs or eligibility for school meals, 
etc? Please describe. 
 
 
 
Post is not aware of any such efforts. 
 
 
 
¶3.       Did the government provide funding to the programs 
described above? Please describe amount and whether it was 
sufficient to carry out the planned activities. 
 
 
 
The GOCI used funding from taxes and fees on cocoa exports to fund 
the child-labor eradication program in the cocoa sector.  The 
package of services and infrastructure services in each village is 
valued at approximately USD 60,000.  GOCI officials have assured 
post that funding is available for the 30 villages that have been 
selected for the program to date. 
 
 
 
¶4.       Did the government provide non-monetary support to child 
labor programs? Please describe. 
 
 
 
The GOCI has devoted a great deal of staff time to the cocoa 
child-labor issues, in accordance with the Harkin-Engel Protocol. 
 
 
 
¶5.       Provide any additional information about the status and 
effectiveness of the government's activities during the reporting 
period in relation to the programs described above. If the programs 
involved government provision of social services to children at 
risk of or involved in exploitive child labor, please describe and 
assess the effectiveness of these services. 
 
 
 
Post has no information on the effectiveness of the cocoa 
child-labor remediation plan. 
 
 
 
¶6.       If the government signed one or more bilateral, regional 
or international agreement/s to combat trafficking, what steps did 
it take to implement such agreement/s? Did the agreement/s result 
in tangible improvements? If so, please describe. 
 
 
 
Under the 2005 Multilateral Cooperation Agreement to Combat Child 
Trafficking in West Africa, the Ivoirian government pledged itself 
to a number of anti-trafficking resolutions agreed to by all nine 
signatory West African nations.  However, most of the pledges 
remain unimplemented.  As NGOs often point out, the Ivoirian 
government is quick to ratify agreements, but extremely slow to 
apply international standards.   The resulting gap between 
international norms and the national reality is a source of serious 
human rights violations, according to the 2008 Annual Human Rights 
Report prepared by the National Human Rights Commission of Cote 
 
ABIDJAN 00000053  010 OF 010 
 
 
d'Ivoire. 
 
 
 
2G) CONTINUAL PROGRESS: 
 
 
 
¶1. Considering the information provided to the questions above, 
please provide an assessment of whether, overall, the government 
made progress in regard to combating exploitive child labor during 
the reporting period. In making this assessment, please indicate 
whether there has been an increase or decrease from previous years 
in inspections/investigations, prosecutions, and convictions; 
funding for child labor elimination policies and programs; and any 
other relevant indicators of government commitment. 
 
 
 
The GOCI's new cocoa child-labor remediation program is a 
significant step forward.  It represents a clear plan to address 
this important, high-visibility issue.  Given the GOCI's difficult 
fiscal situation and the priority the GOCI is placing on holding 
presidential elections, however, the Government's ability to fund 
programs for the protection of vulnerable children is limited. 
However, the GOCI has partnered with GTZ, UNICEF, other 
international organizations, and the private sector to address 
child-labor issues and to provide more services for vulnerable 
children. 
STANLEY