04FRANKFURT9221
SEIZURE BY CBP OF SIX CONTAINERS FROM
Wed Oct 27 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Frankfurt
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 009221 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PASS YEREVAN//RSO 
 
PASS USCBP//TEXTILE ENFORCEMENT OPER DIV//JANET LABUDA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC ECON EAID ETRD AM
SUBJECT: SEIZURE BY CBP OF SIX CONTAINERS FROM 
ARMENIA; MEETINGS WITH ARMENIAN OFFICIALS 
 
REF: CABLE DTD 09/01/2004 FROM AMEMBASSY YEREVAN TO DHS 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  Six containers with textiles 
represented as being made in Armenia were detained over 
the three month period of July, August, and September by 
Customs and Border Protection (CBP) due to concerns 
related to the country of origin.  Contact with officials 
at CBP Headquarters, Washington, D.C., revealed that a 
decision was made to exclude all six containers. 
Subsequent to the exclusion, the importer of record 
indicated that the goods were going to be exported out of 
the U.S. 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
¶2. (SBU) On September 21 through September 24, 2004, 
Deputy Attach James Ink, Immigration and Customs 
Enforcement (ICE), Department of Homeland Security (DHS), 
American Consulate Frankfurt, travelled to Armenia to 
discuss the six containers as well as to meet with 
officials of the Armenian government in order to discuss 
the role of the ICE Attach and areas of mutual interest. 
Accompanying Deputy Attach Ink were two ICE agents from 
the RAC Laredo Office who travelled to Armenia pursuant 
to an investigation that was separate from the seizure of 
the six containers. 
 
ACTIONS ON THE CONTAINERS 
 
¶3.   (SBU) Information from CBP HQ regarding the six 
containers revealed no certificate of origin was ever 
submitted with the entry.  The country where a factory 
claims that the goods were made normally issues a 
certificate of origin.  While a certificate of origin may 
have been prepared and shown to local officials, none was as 
provided to CBP officials. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Information from CBP HQ regarding the six 
containers also revealed that when the Armenian 
exporter/producer completed the textile declaration, 
there was strong indication that he was receiving 
component parts from China and assembling them in 
Armenia.  However, when the importer submitted the 
textile declaration he submitted a single country of 
origin declaration, which stated that the fabric was 
produced in Armenia and any cutting and assembling was 
done in Armenia, contradicting the original information. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Also according to CBP HQ, a request by CBP to 
the exporter/producer for production records, covering 
both cutting and assembly records, was never complied 
with. 
 
ACTIONS OF ICE AGENTS PETERS AND SILVA 
 
¶6.    (SBU) While in country ICE special agents Andrew 
Peters and Jose Silva, both from the RAC/Laredo Office, 
conducted interviews related to an investigation that did 
not involve the detention of the six containers by CBP. 
As discussed at the meeting with the Ambassador and 
several members of the Embassy staff on 09/23/04, 
information relating to the investigation being conducted 
by special agents Peters and Silva should not be 
discussed or disseminated outside the Embassy, or to 
anyone other than those individuals with a need to know. 
 
MEETINGS WITH ARMENIAN OFFICIALS 
 
¶7. (SBU) Separate from the above situation, Deputy 
Attach Ink met with representatives of the Ministry of 
National Security, Customs State Committee, and the 
Ministry of Trade and Economic Development.  At all three 
meetings William Mayer, Senior EXBS Program Advisor, and 
Susanna Toroyan, also with the EXBS Program, assisted 
Deputy Attach Ink. 
 
¶8. (SBU) During the meetings, Deputy Attach Ink advised 
of the role of ICE and DHS, and of the desire ICE had in 
working with the Armenian Government on areas of mutual 
interest.  Additionally, the topics of ICE/DHS sponsored 
training opportunities, a Customs Mutual Assistance ce 
Agreement, and bilateral agreements were discussed and 
met with favorable responses from representatives of all 
three offices mentioned in paragraph 7 above. 
 
ASSISTANCE RECEIVED FROM U.S. EMBASSY 
 
¶9. (SBU) The ICE Attach Frankfurt appreciates the 
assistance given by the Embassy staff in preparation of, 
during, and after this trip.  Special thanks to Justin 
Otto, Terry Cobble and Christy Brown of the RSO's Office, 
and William Mayer and Susanna Toroyan, EXBS. 
 
BODDE