06RECIFE40
SWEETER ENERGY? NORTHEAST HOPES FOR ETHANOL
Mon Mar 13 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Recife
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS RECIFE 000040 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/BSC, EPSC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR ENRG BR
SUBJECT: SWEETER ENERGY? NORTHEAST HOPES FOR ETHANOL 
 
¶1.  Summary: Sugar has dominated Brazil's Northeast for 
centuries, but the boom in ethanol production for fuel has yet 
to fire up their economy. Only 15 percent of Brazil's ethanol 
comes from the Northeast compared to 85 percent from the South, 
even though the harvest seasons are complementary and costs may 
be lower here, according to the Pernambuco sugar industry 
spokesman Renato Cunha. Yet Brazil's regulations give the less 
developed Northeast preferential treatment in exporting ethanol. 
As the U.S. looks for alternatives to oil, Brazil, the leading 
producer of ethanol, would be the obvious place to go. Cunha 
predicts a better future for Pernambuco's sugar producers and 
more investment in irrigated lands. End Summary 
 
¶2. With Brazil facing a shortage of ethanol to fuel its 
"flex"cars and cut oil consumption, the traditional 
sugar-producing Northeastern states might be expected to be 
happily distilling away.  But the chairman of the Sugar and 
Alcohol Industry Association in Pernambuco (SINDACUCAR), Renato 
Cunha shakes his head. The harvest season just ended, cane 
production was less than expected due to late rains, and 
distilleries will remain idle until the next crop which could 
begin in August. With 20 sugar refineries in his organization, 
Cunha knows the sugar-to-ethanol business. He told the Consul 
March 7 that the Northeast has the potential to export much more 
ethanol in the future, even though the South of Brazil is by far 
the largest producer. 
 
¶3. The harvest season in Sao Paulo and the South is April to 
November, when 85 percent of the ethanol is produced; the 
Northeastern states supply only 15 percent, most from the states 
of Pernambuco and Alagoas, in the period from August to 
February. "But the law allows the Northeast a preference for 
exports of ethanol in order to compensate for social 
conditions," Cunha said, pulling out his copy of the law 
regulating the internal market of ethanol (Law 9,362 December 
13, 1996).  Article 7 states that "sugar-derived products 
destined for preferred markets will be given to the 
North/Northeast region, taking into consideration its 
socio-economic stage." According to Cunha, export markets are 
"preferred" since they offer higher prices, and the Northeast 
producers could take advantage of lower labor costs and 
proximity to sea ports to price their ethanol at competitive 
rates. The tax on ethanol in Pernambuco is 12 percent versus 25 
percent in Sao Paulo, according to SINDACUCAR. 
 
¶4. In 2005, Brazil exported 261 million liters of ethanol to the 
American market, despite the import duties of US$0.54/per 
gallon. The potential is certainly bigger, as Brazil is the 
world's largest ethanol producer. According to data reported in 
the Brazilian press, the average price per liter in southern 
Brazil (using the January rate of exchange) is 25 cents (about 
one dollar per gallon), while U.S. corn-based ethanol costs 33 
cents per liter (about $1.32 a gallon.) 
 
¶5. The issue for the Northeastern producers is how to increase 
their output efficiently, which means increased sugar cane 
acreage. In Cunha's vision, one backed by local politicians 
including President Lula's Minister of National Integration Ciro 
Gomes, the answer is irrigation of the "sertao" dry lands with 
San Francisco River water. (The fruit and wine center around 
Petrolina is already a showcase of desert transformation, 
attracting foreign investment.) This major water project, known 
as the "Transposition," would carry water by canals as far as 
Ceara and Rio Grande do Norte, but Cunha explained how 
Pernambuco would get its own "sugar canal" to irrigate rich soil 
in the western region of Pernambuco. (Comment: This is not 
likely to happen any time soon since the grand water project is 
tied up in court, being fought by the states upstream.) But if 
the weather cooperates this year, it will still be at least six 
months before Pernambuco's distilleries fire up with their 
bagasse (cane hulls or waste products that produce thermal 
energy) to produce more ethanol. 
 
PAGE