05QUITO1403
ANTI-BOLIVARIAN COMMENTS LEAD TO GOE DAMAGE CONTROL
Wed Jun 15 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Quito
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 001403 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL EC
SUBJECT: ANTI-BOLIVARIAN COMMENTS LEAD TO GOE DAMAGE CONTROL 
 
 
¶1.  (U) Summary:  Public Administration Secretary Luis 
Herreria made televised remarks on June 10 criticizing 
Venezuela's Bolivarian movement and blaming it for causing 
instability in the region.  The GOV protested orally and 
asked for a diplomatic response from the GOE.  In an attempt 
to mend relations, Ecuador's Foreign Minister called his 
Venezuelan counterpart to clarify that any comments made were 
personal views and do not represent the GOE's position. 
Several groups are calling for Herreria's dismissal. 
Ironically, press reports claim that Herreria had 
participated in Bolivarian events as recently as November 
last year.  End Summary. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
"Horrible and Diabolical", Says Herreria 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) Luis Herreria, presidential Public Administration 
Secretary, declared on television on June 10 that Chavez' 
 
SIPDIS 
politics were "horrible and diabolical" and threatened to 
destabilize the region.  He also accused Chavez and his 
Bolivarians of having ties to the FARC.  Media have suggested 
that perhaps Herreria was trying to stifle criticism that the 
current administration sympathized with Venezuela, rumors 
fueled by Patricio Acosta, a known Bolivarian supporter, 
being seen frequently around the presidential palace. 
 
------------------------------ 
GOV Not Happy, GOE Reaches Out 
------------------------------ 
 
¶3.  (U) The statement was met with some measured protest from 
the GOV.  On June 13, the Venezuelan Ambassador to Ecuador, 
Oscar Navas, said publicly that these comments did not need 
to harm bilateral relations, but that the GOV would want an 
official diplomatic response from the GOE, distancing itself 
from the comments.  Press reported that GOE Foreign Minister 
Antonio Parra reached out to his counterpart on June 14 with 
a telephone call in order to reduce tension created by 
Herreria's statement.  Parra explained that Herreria's 
declarations did not represent the GOE's views, and were 
strictly Herreria's personal opinions. 
 
---------------------------- 
A Former Bolivarian Himself? 
---------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (U) El Comercio newspaper reported that Herreria had some 
Bolivarian ties himself.  A June 14 article quotes General 
Rene Vargas, head of Ecuador's Pro Bolivarian Republic 
movement, as saying that Herreria participated in a November 
2004 Bolivarian meeting and signed a document agreeing to 
work toward forming a "Great Latin-American Nation" inspired 
by Bolivarian thought.  Press also reported Herreria's office 
recently contacted Vargas; it is rumored that Vargas was 
offered the Minister of Energy position.  It is not clear if 
there is a connection between this contact and Herreria's 
statements. 
 
------------------- 
Latest Developments 
------------------- 
 
¶5.  (U) Since this administration's beginning, Herreria was 
considered one of the people closest to Palacio; however, he 
has been maintaining a low profile since making his 
statements.  He did not attend a June 14 Cabinet session, and 
was noticeably absent at the possession ceremony of new 
Presidential Secretary Max Donoso.  Donoso criticized 
Herreria's comments soon after assuming his post, calling 
them "unfortunate" and said that relations with Venezuela 
were normalizing.  Herreria also received criticism for 
failing to deliver a report on debtors due to the President 
this week. 
 
------------------------- 
Dismissal May Be Imminent 
------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Several social groups, including human rights 
organizations, have called for Herreria's dismissal.  Embassy 
contact Patricio Contreras of the AFL-CIO Solidarity Center 
told PolOff on June 14 that Herreria's dismissal was highly 
probable.  One of the candidates the President was 
considering replacing him with is current Minister of Labor 
Galo Chiriboga.  Gilberto Talahua, a leader of the indigenous 
Pachakutik party, has said that Herreria should apologize 
publicly.  Pachakutik has looked positively at Chavez' 
Bolivarian project as an alternative for regional development. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) The GOE's reaction to Herreria's statements is more 
proof that the government goes out of its way not to offend 
its neighbors, Colombia excluded.  Having miscalculated 
public and GOE reaction to his comments, Herreria will likely 
be replaced in the coming days, the third Palacio Cabinet 
casualty in ten days. 
Kenney