05QUITO536
AMBASSADOR PROTESTS ATTACKS ON CIVIL SOCIETY
Tue Mar 08 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Quito
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 000536 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM KDEM EC
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR PROTESTS ATTACKS ON CIVIL SOCIETY 
 
REF: A. QUITO 468 
 
     ¶B. QUITO 424 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  The Ambassador on March 7 expressed concern to 
President Lucio Gutierrez about the latest in a series of 
attacks on civil society groups, involving the Ecuadorian NGO 
"Citizen Participation" (PC), an AID democracy program 
grantee.  Gutierrez claimed not to be aware of the incident, 
a hostile march and break-in to PC's offices, which occurred 
earlier in the day, but promised to investigate it fully. 
The Ambassador sent Embassy security personnel to the scene 
during the incident and later personally called PC director 
Cesar Montufar to express Embassy concern and solidarity. 
The Embassy spokesman publicly condemned any acts of violence 
or threat against civil society and encouraged more civil 
political discourse.  We will monitor GoE efforts to 
investigate this and other recent cases.  End Summary. 
 
Facts of the Case 
----------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) Around 0900 local time on March 7 approximately 
50-100 persons arrived at PC offices in Quito, chanting 
slogans and carrying placards identifying them as members of 
"Zero Corruption."  This group was formed by the Ecuadorian 
Roldosista Party (PRE) of fugitive ex-president Abdala 
Bucaram in December 2004 to support the government and the 
newly-packed courts.  Protesters shouted threats against PC 
director Cesar Montufar, forced entry onto the grounds and 
sprayed the premises with anti-PC and anti-US graffiti.  Upon 
hearing of the incident, the Embassy sent police security 
patrols to the scene.  The protesters remained outside PC 
offices for an hour before dispersing when police and media 
arrived.  PC staff remained sequestered inside their offices 
during the incident but were unhurt.  The Ambassador later 
called Montufar, who said he and his staff were shaken but 
undeterred, and expressed appreciation for Embassy efforts on 
PC's behalf. 
 
¶3.  (U) Montufar had become a controversial public figure 
since helping organize and participating in the February 16 
anti-government protest march in Quito.  He subsequently made 
public USG and European financial support to PC for its 
electoral monitoring and pro-democracy activities.  The 
action against PC came after a series of incidents 
threatening the security of various government opponents, 
including a March 5 shooting attack on a socialist 
congressman, Enrique Ayala Mora.  In response to growing 
security concerns, on February 25 the IACHR had requested GoE 
protective measures for ten opposition figures, including 
Montufar.  Amnesty International and Transparency 
International had recently called publicly for the government 
to thoroughly investigate recent incidents of intimidation 
and violence against the opposition. 
 
Ambassador Weighs in with President 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The Ambassador expressed concern to President 
Gutierrez about the implications of this incident at a 
previously-scheduled lunch (SepTel) on March 7.  The 
Ambassador noted growing concern about what some perceive to 
be a pattern of violence and intimidation of government 
critics.  She defended the role of civil society groups such 
as PC, which seek to defend democracy, occasionally by 
protesting government actions.  USG support for such 
pro-democracy groups is non-partisan and would continue. 
Later the same day, in response to press inquiries, the 
Embassy spokesman was quoted condemning "any act of violence 
or intimidation against members of civil society" and 
emphasized the need for dialogue and civilized, non-violent 
political discourse. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Gutierrez, who had recently returned to the capital 
from a trip to the Galapagos and Guayaquil, claimed that he 
had not heard of the incident.  He thanked the Ambassador for 
bringing it to his attention, and promised to investigate. 
Unfortunate recent incidents of violence and intimidation 
were not in the government's political interest, and must be 
stopped.  Gutierrez said he had called Ayala in the hospital 
to express his support. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Gutierrez' professed unawareness of the action to 
pressure PC is certainly possible but suspect.  The "Zero 
Corruption" group is a creation of the PRE, a government ally 
and defender of the packed courts.  A presidential advisor 
had earlier conveyed to us Gutierrez' personal pique at PC 
leader Montufar for his activism directed against him, 
personally, and the current Supreme Court (Ref A), and the 
MFA summoned the AID director to inquire about PC's US 
financing (Ref B).  Nevertheless, Gutierrez' acknowledgment 
that such actions hurt, not help, the government, seemed 
sincere.  We will continue to press for a full investigation 
of this and other incidents to prevent further abuses. 
KENNEY