06PORTOFSPAIN137
T&T PM MANNING SUPPORTIVE OF HAITI IN CARICOM;
Fri Jan 27 00:00:00 +0100 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Port Of Spain
VZCZCXYZ0031
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHSP #0137/01 0271553
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 271553Z JAN 06
FM AMEMBASSY PORT OF SPAIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6340
INFO RUCNCOM/EC CARICOM COLLECTIVE PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L PORT OF SPAIN 000137 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/27/2016 
TAGS: PREL KDEM HA TD
SUBJECT: T&T PM MANNING SUPPORTIVE OF HAITI IN CARICOM; 
HAITIAN PM PRESSING FOR JEAN-JUSTE RESOLUTION 
 
REF: PORT AU PRINCE 00185 
 
Classified By: DCM, Eugene P. Sweeney for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY:  Ambassador Austin met Interim Haitian Prime 
Minister Latortue and informed him of the desirability of 
immediately releasing Father Jean-Juste from prison. 
Ambassador also asked about the outcome of Latortue's meeting 
with Prime Minister Manning.  Latortue stated that he would 
call Port au Prince immediately upon arrival in Miami to seek 
immediate resolution of the Jean-Juste case.  Latortue also 
reported that Manning was supportive of Haiti and wants to 
help, but Manning's hands are tied by CARICOM recalcitrance. 
Latortue floated the idea of stationing a U.S. naval vessel 
near Haiti in the run up to the election to provide a 
psychological counterweight to the drug and arms runners who 
are likely to intimidate the population away from the ballot 
box on February 7.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Ambassador Austin met with Interim Haitian Prime 
Minister Gerard Latortue (with Poloff as note taker) on 
January 26 and urged him to seek immediate release of Father 
Jean-Juste's release in light of his rapidly deteriorating 
medical condition.  Ambassador also sought to determine the 
outcome of Latortue's meeting with Trinidad's Prime Minister 
Manning.  Latortue responded that he would call Port au 
Prince immediately upon arrival in Miami (his next 
destination) to urge Jean-Juste's immediate release, but 
noted that the case was now in the Judiciary, where he had no 
control over it.  Latortue also reported that his meeting 
with PM Manning was productive, with Manning expressing 
support to bring Haiti back into the CARICOM fold.  Latortue 
made no mention of CARICOM election observers, but did report 
that CARICOM Foreign Ministers might make a trip to Haiti on 
February 1, after their January 30-31 meeting in Jamaica. 
 
¶3.  (C) On the Jean-Juste case, Latortue reiterated the 
information contained reftel, that the Judiciary was ready to 
bring Jean-Juste to trial and to conclude the trial within a 
day.  If found guilty and sentenced to the minimum six 
months, Jean-Juste has already served the time.  If sentenced 
to longer, the government has amnesty papers ready to ensure 
that Jean-Juste receives medical treatment immediately in the 
United States.  Latortue expressed his frustration with 
Jean-Juste and his lawyers, calling them political activists 
who are doing all within their power to embarrass the interim 
government.  He claims that they are dealing in bad faith, 
and that Jean-Juste would prefer to die in prison rather than 
give the government the chance to do the right thing.  "We 
fight to do the right thing," said Latortue, "but we're made 
to look like the devil." 
 
¶4.  (C) Latortue stated that his meeting with PM Manning was 
a success, with Manning expressing strong support to bring 
Haiti back into the CARICOM fold.  Latortue also stated that 
he will invite a CARICOM delegation to visit Haiti in the 
near future to set the stage for Haiti to rejoin CARICOM as 
early as July.  He mentioned the upcoming CARICOM Foreign 
Ministers' meeting in Jamaica, and said that there is a 
possibility for the ministers to travel immediately from 
Kingston to Port au Prince to see for themselves Haiti's 
progress.  Manning himself is committed to helping Haiti, but 
has difficulty mobilizing CARICOM due to the opposition of 
St. Lucia and St. Vincent. 
 
¶5.  (C) Manning and Latortue also discussed the possibility 
of bringing T&T private investment to Haiti.  Specifically, 
they discussed involvement in the cement sector.  T&T has 
already expressed interest in this sector, but lost a bid 
previously because their company would not pay bribes. 
Latortue reaffirmed that the only way to improve the quality 
of life in Haiti was through private sector involvement; an 
area that he intends to remain active in after the permanent, 
elected government is sworn in. 
 
¶6.  (C) Turning to what the U.S. could do to help, Latortue 
reiterated his idea for "psychological support" in the form 
of a naval vessel to be stationed near Haiti in the days 
before the election, with helicopters flying overhead to 
emphasize U.S. support (reftel).  Latortue believes this is 
necessary because the drug and weapons runners have the 
population running scared; a U.S. presence would serve to 
reassure the population and encourage them to vote on 
February 7.  Ambassador likened Latortue's recommendation to 
the British colonial strategy of having naval vessels cruise 
within sight of citizens of countries that may have been 
contemplating insurrection.  He advised that while the 
strategy may be effective, it may also backfire because some 
observers may interpret it as U.S. interference intended to 
influence the outcome of the election. 
 
 
AUSTIN