06ABIDJAN532
COTE D'IVOIRE: STATUS OF PILOT ID PROGRAM
Tue May 23 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Abidjan
VZCZCXRO4041
RR RUEHMA RUEHPA
DE RUEHAB #0532/01 1431049
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 231049Z MAY 06
FM AMEMBASSY ABIDJAN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1337
INFO RUEHZK/ECOWAS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ABIDJAN 000532 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL ASEC KPKO IV
SUBJECT: COTE D'IVOIRE: STATUS OF PILOT ID PROGRAM 
 
REF: A) ABIDJAN 523 B) ABIDJAN 515 C) ABIDJAN 500 D) 
 
     ABIDJAN 495 
 
¶1.  Summary: The second and third day of the pilot 
identification program ran smoothly in all seven sites both 
north and south.  After the first day, pro-Gbagbo militias 
ceased their disruptive activities against the program in the 
south and the population appears to be gaining confidence in 
the procedure.  However, the pace of the process remains 
painfully slow (averaging about 45 minutes to an hour per 
applicant).  According to a United Nations report, on May 18, 
out of a total of 319 applicants, 190 received birth 
certificates, and 130 qualified for certificates of 
nationality.  All certificates will be issued after a 48-hour 
waiting period.  On that first day, there were only nine 
applicants in the government-controlled south.  At all sites, 
many applicants were turned away because they had been born 
in a different city.  In addition, many indviduals visited 
the sites just to learn more about the process.  The pilot 
program is still scheduled to end on May 25.  End summary. 
 
New Forces Territory: 
 
¶2.  On the first day, a total of 160 interviews were 
conducted and 30 individuals, all of whom were over the age 
of 18, were granted birth certificates and certificates of 
nationality.  Interviews lasted an average of 40 minutes per 
person.  New Forces (NF) leader Guillaume Soro and spokesman 
Sidiki Konate, who observed the interviews at Botro, welcomed 
the start of the identification process in rebel territories. 
 Konate was quoted by the UN news agency, IRIN, as saying 
that "It is an immense joy for everyone...It is a strong sign 
that from now on, the serious business begins."  IRIN also 
cited concerns by NF leaders in the rebel capital of Bouake 
over militia protests against the pilot program in Port Bouet 
in Abidjan (ref A). 
 
Break-down by city on May 18 
 
City / # of Apps. / Birth Certs. / Nat. Certs. 
 
Botro   100             4            4 
 
Bouna    60            35            35 
 
 
Government Controlled South: 
 
 
¶3.  In the government-controlled south, a total of nine 
people were interviewed on the first day, four of whom were 
granted certificates of nationality.  After the militia 
protests in Port Bouet on May 18, the process has proceeded 
without incident at all three sites.  The Defense Attache who 
was on the scene in Port Bouet, reported all was calm and the 
total number of people waiting to be interviewed exceeded the 
number of people that could be processed in one day. 
Interviews in Port Bouet also took 45-minutes to one-hour. 
The increase in numbers on May 19 apparently reflects a 
growing confidence among the population in the south.  Prime 
Minister Banny reported to the International Working Group on 
May 19, that he had attended the opening of the registration 
process in Meagui, a city located 350 km west of Abidjan near 
Soubre, on May 18.  This opening ceremony was witnessed by 
several hundred people including Justice Minister Mamadou 
Kone.  The Young Patriots also attended Banny's ceremony as 
non-violent "observers." 
 
Break-down by city on May 18 
 
City       / # of Apps. / Birth Certs. / Nat. Certs. 
 
Port Bouet    01              01             01 
 
Meagui        02              02              0 
 
Tiapoum       06              04             03 
 
 
Zone of Confidence: 
 
¶4.  In the Zone of Confidence, a total of 150 people were 
interviewed, 87 of whom were granted certificates of 
nationality.  According to the United Nations Office for the 
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), reports from 
Bangolo indicate that the registration process has continued 
without any disruption or interference.  However, according 
to the United Nations, in Bangolo, 60 applicants were 
interviewed, 57 of whom were issued birth certificates, but 
apparently the teams did not issue any decisions on 
nationality certificates.  Thus far we have received no 
explanation for this discrepancy.  In Sandegue, 90 people 
were interviewed and 87 birth certificates were issued.  All 
 
ABIDJAN 00000532  002 OF 002 
 
 
87 people were found to be Ivoirian and issued certificates 
of nationality. 
 
Break-down by city 
 
City     / # of Apps. / Birth Certs. / Nat. Certs. 
 
 
Bangolo     60           57               0 
 
Sandegue    90           87              87 
 
 
¶5. Comment:  The biggest problem with the pilot procedure is 
the painfully slow rate at which it is carried out.  In 
addition, the ruling FPI party continues to float accusations 
of fraud, and there still seems to be much confusion on the 
part of the population over the need to report to cities of 
birth to be eligible.  The pilot phase is still scheduled to 
end on May 25. 
Hooks