06AITTAIPEI1636
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Fri May 12 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0025
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1636/01 1320844
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 120844Z MAY 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0149
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5204
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 6406UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001636 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - ERIC BARBORIAK 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
 
¶1. Summary: Taiwan dailies focused their coverage May 12 on U.S. 
Deputy Secretary of State Robert Zoellick's remarks at a 
congressional hearing Wednesday, President Chen Shui-bian's return 
trip, AIT Taipei Director Stephen Young's speech at an American 
Chamber of Commerce luncheon Thursday, and the interrogation of the 
Financial Supervisory Commission chairman by the Investigation 
Bureau.  The pro-status quo "China Times" ran a front-page banner 
headline that read "U.S. Deputy Secretary of State Harshly 
Criticizes Bian," and the pro-unification "United Daily News" 
front-paged "U.S. Deputy Secretary of State: Challenging One China, 
Taiwan Running into a Wall."  The newspaper also ran a banner 
headline on page two that said "Stephen Young:  Constitutional 
Amendments Must Not Touch on Taiwan Independence."  The 
pro-independence "Liberty Times," Taiwan's biggest daily, also ran a 
banner headline on page three that read "U.S. Deputy Secretary of 
State: Supports Taiwan But Does Not Encourage Taiwan Independence." 
The pro-independence "Taiwan Daily" front-paged "United States 
Understands that President [Chen's] Decision Not to Transit Is Aimed 
at Foreign Relations." 
 
¶2. Most Taiwan papers editorialized on Zoellick's remarks and 
Taipei-Washington relations.  A "Liberty Time" editorial criticized 
the pan-Blue camp's logic that opposes Chen and Taiwan-centered 
values.  A "Taiwan Daily" editorial cited Zoellick's remarks and 
said it showed Washington's determination to defend Taiwan.  An 
opinion piece in the pro-independence, English-language "Taipei 
Time" urged both Taiwan and Washington to focus on the long-term 
game, and an editorial in the pro-independence, English-language 
"Taiwan News" said Chen's Libya transit deserves support.  A "China 
Times" editorial asked if the U.S.-Taiwan relations really remain 
intact, and a "United Daily News" editorial said Chen is walking a 
dangerous road to self-marginalization.  End summary. 
 
A) "Taiwan People Cannot Accept Defeatist Thinking" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 600,000] 
editorialized (5/12): 
 
"... Emotional confrontations have occurred between Taiwan and the 
United States lately.  A high-ranking Taiwan diplomatic official 
said in public that '[Taiwan] does not want to be a lackey of the 
United States,' so it is not surprising that [Deputy Secretary of 
State Robert] Zoellick made some harsh remarks [against Taiwan]. 
But Zoellick also highly praised Taiwan's democracy during the 
congressional hearing and asked why China cannot achieve it while 
Taiwan can. ...  In short, given the pan-Blue camp's long-standing 
thinking that opposes Bian and Taiwan-centered values, the negative 
effect of [Chen's] transit of Libya or Zoellick's remarks have been 
deliberately amplified, while they hardly pay attention to the 
aspects that are favorable for Taiwan.  If Taiwan is to act 
according to the pan-Blue camp's logic, it would be like imposing 
restrictions on itself, and all it can do is to wait for China to 
annex the island.  Are the Taiwan people willing to accept such 
defeatist thinking?" 
 
B) "Taiwan-U.S. Relations Remain Intact in Wake of 'Trip of Peace 
and Prosperity; President Chen Has Striven for Foreign Relations and 
Wins National Dignity! - Looking at Development of Bilateral Ties 
from U.S. Deputy Secretary of State Zoellick's and AIT Taipei 
Director Stephen Young's Remarks" 
 
The pro-independence "Taiwan Daily" [circulation: 100,000] 
editorialized (5/12): 
 
"... U.S. Deputy Secretary of State Robert Zoellick and AIT Taipei 
Director Stephen Young both talked about the triangular relationship 
between Taipei, Washington and Beijing yesterday, and their remarks 
may serve as a footnote for A-bian's trip to strive for [Taiwan's] 
foreign relations. ...  It is noteworthy that Zoellick was 
addressing U.S. Representatives, the international community, and 
more importantly, China.  It was thus necessary [for him] to 
reiterate [Washington's] positions.  What's special was that one can 
sense the United States' emotions when he mentioned that '[Taiwan] 
independence means war. ...'  Hs next sentence:  'And that means 
American soldiers will sacrifice their lives ...' however, 
indicated U.S. determination to defend Taiwan and a warning to China 
that it must not act rashly. ..." 
 
C) "US, Taiwan Must Focus on the Long-term Game" 
 
Paul Lin, a political commentator based in New York, opined in the 
pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] (5/12): 
 
"The troubles surrounding President Chen Shui-bian's visit to Latin 
America have highlighted Taiwan's difficult diplomatic situation. 
One could say that this is the most tragically heroic overseas visit 
by a government official since the Democratic Progressive Party 
(DPP) came to power in 2000.  The tragedy this time lies mainly in 
the US' restrictions, since Chinese pressure and blue camp 
obstruction is part of the daily routine.  It is indeed a tragedy 
for Taiwan that the US, an ideological ally, would strike out at it. 
 In this situation, it was heroic not to give and shrink away from 
offending one's ally in order to maintain national dignity. 
 
"Chen is the popularly elected president of Taiwan, and the US 
government is constantly urging China to engage with Taiwan's 
democratically elected government, something China is unwilling to 
do.  When the US government treats Taiwan's president with less than 
the full respect he deserves, isn't this tantamount to playing into 
the hands of China? ..." 
 
D) "President Chen's Libya Initiative Deserves Support" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" [circulation: 
20,000] editorialized (5/12): 
 
"The successful visit made by President Chen Shui-bian Wednesday to 
Libya is worthy of approval by Taiwan's people as a rare major 
diplomatic breakthrough for our external relations in an era of 
incessant oppression by the hostile People's Republic of China. ... 
President Chen's 'Libya' initiative is fully in keeping with the 
approach adopted by the United States and the United Nations and can 
hardly be accurately described as 'tantamount to breaking up with 
the U.S.' or as giving assistance to a 'terrorist' nation. ..." 
 
E) "What Gain from This 'Surprise Trip'?" 
 
The pro-status quo "China Times" [circulation: 400,000] 
editorialized (5/12): 
 
"... Having experienced the impact created by [Chen's] trip, the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs started to chant from time to time that 
Taiwan-U.S. relations have remained intact.  We of course hope so, 
too.  But anyone can sense something wrong after having learned 
about Deputy Secretary of State Robert Zoellick's testimony at the 
U.S. Congress Wednesday.  Zoellick hardly polished his criticism 
against Taiwan this time.  He directly refuted Chen's remarks that 
there is a precondition for his 'Five Nos' pledge; he believes that 
'China hasn't used force to attack Taiwan' and that since Chen has 
made his pledge, he has to stick to it.  But what was going on, 
Zoellick said, 'is an effort to kind of erode, and knock sort of at 
the edge and sand it off," so the United States has to 'hold people 
to their terms and words.'  Zoellick also said 'Taiwan keeps running 
into a wall!'  Zoellick's ranking is high enough, right?  Didn't 
these sentences clearly explain why President Bush not allow Chen to 
'transit New York?'  Does the 'cessation of the National Unification 
Council' really have nothing to do with his transits?  Do 
U.S.-Taiwan relations remain intact?  Read Zoellick's remarks more 
carefully! ..." 
 
F) "The More Mistakes One Makes, the Braver One Becomes: Chen 
Shui-bian Walks Dangerous Road of Self-Marginalization" 
 
The pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 400,000] 
commented in an editorial (5/12): 
 
"... Judging from the entire diplomatic strategic layout, Chen 
managed to maintain his face at the expense of breaking with 
Taiwan's most important ally, the United States, and he even made 
friends with the notorious Qadhafi.  Whether this move is a gain or 
loss for Taiwan is without question.  As a matter of fact, this 
diplomatic fireworks show put on by the President to break his low 
approval rating perhaps will not only bring long-term, stable 
interests for Taiwan but will also result in a period of freezing in 
Taipei-Washington relations.  This will be something else that Chen 
will be held responsible for in the wake of the 'cessation of the 
National Unification Council.'   Chen's paranoid behavior during his 
trip can be generally classified into three deviations: First, he 
deviated from Taiwan's interests and the diplomatic mainstream, 
whose axis is the United States.  Second, he deviated from the 
universal values of democracy.  Third, he deviated from the 
expectations of mainstream public opinion.  The three deviations 
show that Chen is walking a dangerous road of self-marginalization. 
..." 
 
YOUNG