09EFTOASMARA373
ERITREA SEEKS "CONTINUOUS ENGAGEMENT" WITH U.S.
Tue Oct 27 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Asmara
INFO  LOG-00   AID-00   AMAD-00  CIAE-00  INL-00   DODE-00  ANHR-00  
      PERC-00  DS-00    FBIE-00  VCI-00   H-00     TEDE-00  INR-00   
      L-00     MOFM-00  MOF-00   VCIE-00  NSAE-00  OIG-00   GIWI-00  
      FMPC-00  SP-00    SSO-00   SS-00    SCRS-00  DSCC-00  PRM-00   
      SAS-00   FA-00    SWCI-00  PESU-00    /000W
  
P 270908Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY ASMARA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0563
INFO DARFUR COLLECTIVEUNCLAS E F T O ASMARA 000373 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL ER SU
SUBJECT: ERITREA SEEKS "CONTINUOUS ENGAGEMENT" WITH U.S. 
 
¶1. (SBU) AMBASSADOR CALLED IN 
------------------------------ 
 
Foreign Minister Osman Saleh convoked the ambassador October 
26 and spoke at length about Eritrea's (professed) view of 
the need for the United States and Eritrea to improve 
relations for each country's mutual benefit.  He 
characterized the September discussions with Ambassador Rice 
and Assistant Secretary Carson in New York as "welcomed and 
constructive."  The foreign minister said he appreciated the 
Secretary's September 26 invitation to the meeting on food 
security, but regretted he had been unable to speak with her 
on the margins of that event. 
 
¶2. (SBU) SIDEBARS AT ABUJA MEETING ON DARFUR? 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
The foreign minister, who was about to depart for the AU's 
Abuja conference on Darfur, asked if the embassy could pass 
the word that he and Yemane Ghebreab would welcome the chance 
to discuss Darfur and other Sudan issues with "Johnnie 
Carson, General Gration, or any other U.S. official" 
available in Abuja.  Acknowledging Eritrea's role in helping 
broker the 2006 Eastern Sudan Peace Agreement, the ambassador 
noted that both the United States and Eritrea had an interest 
in its successful implementation but cautioned that efforts 
by outsiders to manipulate events in Sudan would only 
complicate Sudan's already difficult road ahead. 
 
¶3. (SBU) FM REQUESTS MEETING WITH THE SECRETARY 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
Post understands that the Government of Eritrea has sent a 
letter to the Secretary via private channels requesting a 
meeting for the foreign minister and Yemane Ghebreab.  On 
October 26 the foreign minister handed the ambassador a 
diplomatic note (text below) containing a similar request. 
The ambassador committed only to forwarding the request, 
suggesting that concrete actions, such as those discussed 
with A/S Carson and Ambassador Rice in New York, would 
demonstrate that Eritrea's stated willingness to improve 
relations was genuine. 
 
BEGIN SUBSTANTIVE TEXT: 
 
It is to be recalled that H.E. Osman Saleh Minister of 
Foreign Affairs of the State of Eritrea, met and held 
constructive dialogue with Ambassador Susan Rice, Permanent 
Representative of the United States of America to the UN, on 
the sidelines of the 64th session of the UN General Assembly 
in New York. 
 
The Eritrean government realizes the importance of continuous 
engagement with the United States government.  In this vein, 
a delegation led by H.E. Mr. Osman Saleh is planning to visit 
the United States to hold meetings with Ms. Hillary Clinton, 
Secretary of State and other U.S. Government officials.  The 
Ministry requests the cooperation of the Embassy in arranging 
the meeting during mid of November 2009. 
 
END TEXT. 
 
 
 
McMULLEN