05CAIRO5744
SHARM TERRORISM CONDEMNED: EGYPTIAN MEDIA THEMES,
Tue Jul 26 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS CAIRO 005744 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NEA/PD FOR FRANK FINVER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PGOV KPAO KMDR OPRC IS EG
SUBJECT:  SHARM TERRORISM CONDEMNED: EGYPTIAN MEDIA THEMES, 
JULY 25 
 
REF:  CAIRO 5652 
 
¶1.  Summary:  The Sharm El Sheikh terrorist attacks on July 
23 dominated Egyptian media coverage the following two days 
(reftel).  All commentators condemned the attacks.  On July 
25, some TV and print press commentators began to question 
why the attacks occurred and who was behind them; then 
engaged in a blame game tagging the Egyptian government, 
security forces, the lack of reform, and U.S. policies in 
the region.  Several PA contacts suggested that Israel 
might have been behind the attacks.  Most commentators 
offered solutions to stop terrorism  e.g., increasing 
reform and opening a "national dialogue" to stop terrorism. 
Before the attacks, Egyptian media coverage was largely 
concerned with the Israeli-Palestinian issue, with 
commentators urging Palestinians to support Abu Mazen and 
demanding that Israel complete its withdrawal from Gaza. 
End summary. 
 
¶2.  The terrorist bombing attacks in Sharm El Sheikh 
dominated Egyptian news coverage July 23 to 25. The 
government-controlled media covered the July 24 anti- 
terrorism demonstrations in Sharm El Sheikh, with large 
front-page photos of the demonstrators appearing in both of 
the leading pro-government dailies, Al-Ahram (circulation: 
750,000) and Al-Akhbar (circulation: 800,000). 
Condemnation of the attacks continued on TV and in the 
print press.  On July 25, some commentators began to assign 
blame  to the Government of Egypt, security forces, Al- 
Qaeda, or the U.S. Government; some commentators advocated 
"fighting back"; and a good number asked such questions as 
who benefited from the attacks?  Why now?  What was the 
cause behind the attacks?  (Comment:  A surprising number 
of PA contacts asserted that many Egyptian reporters 
believe that Israel may have been behind the Sharm attacks, 
pointing to rumors that vehicles with temporary license 
plates from Taba  a town near the Israeli-Egyptian border 
 had transported the explosives used in Sharm.  "How else 
could all of that explosive material be brought into Egypt, 
except from the Israeli side of the border?" claimed one 
contact.  End comment.) 
 
¶3.  Many current affairs commentators suggested ways to 
prevent further attacks.  "National dialogue is the best 
way to overcome terrorism," asserted the Chairman of Al- 
Azhar's Committee for Religious Dialogue on Channel 2's 
popular program Al-Bayt Baytak ("Make Yourself at Home") on 
July 25.  "Handling these attacks aggressively will lead to 
the emergence of a new generation of terrorists," warned a 
well-known Islamic scholar on Dream TV's "Ten P.M." program 
on July 25, adding "The solution required is more 
e 
democracy, more freedom, more justice."  A columnist 
writing in independent daily Al-Masry Al-Youm (circulation: 
20,000) on July 25 claimed, "We should fight domestic 
terrorism by implementing reform immediately."  The same 
day, an Al-Ahram commentator called for the government to 
deal with extremist groups through dialogue, "not just 
through security measures."  Another commentator in Al- 
Akhbar on July 25 advocated rebuilding destroyed property 
in Sharm "as soon as possible to send the message that life 
will win." 
 
¶4.  Israeli-Palestinian issue:  Before the attacks in 
Sharm, the media was concerned largely with the Israeli- 
Palestinian issue.  Secretary Rice's talks with both sides 
received lead coverage in Al-Ahram on July 23.  The Mufti 
of Egypt was interviewed the same day in Al-Ahram.  In 
reply to a question about the Israeli-Palestinian struggle, 
he stated, "Resisting occupation in all its forms  but not 
killing innocent civilians  is a legitimate form of 
f 
jihad."  Nearly all commentators appearing on TV called on 
Palestinians to support Abu Mazen, and on Israel to re- 
deploy its army from Gaza.  A commentator in Al-Akhbar on 
July 23 warned that Israel "is hoping for a Palestinian 
civil conflict to limit its Gaza withdrawal and reject the 
Roadmap." 
 
JONES