05CAIRO2416
EGYPT PUBLIC DIPLOMACY RESULTS AND ACTIVITIES
Mon Mar 28 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CAIRO 002416 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NEA/PPD; ALSO FOR NEA/ELA, IIP/SC AND ECA/P 
 
E.O. 12958: NA 
TAGS: SCUL OEXC KPAO EG
SUBJECT: EGYPT PUBLIC DIPLOMACY RESULTS AND ACTIVITIES 
(03/09/05 - 03/24/05) 
 
REF: CAIRO 2097 
 
Public Diplomacy programming in Egypt for this 
reporting period continued to address the full range of 
Post's MPP themes.  This programming included an 
exchange alumni gathering, a book fair, and a Women's 
History Month program.  Post also recorded positive 
results from an exchange program participant who 
reconnected with an Embassy-sponsored American theater 
director, from a children's literature speaker who 
influenced local publishers to work more with the 
Embassy, and from increased cooperation with the 
Egyptian Council of Universities.  Summary reports 
follow. Reftel is post's most recent prior submission 
for NEA/PPD reporting and IIP's PD results database. 
 
------- 
RESULTS 
------- 
 
(03/21/05) MISSION SUPPORTED DIRECTOR TO HEAD THEATER 
PRODUCTION IN CHICAGO 
 
During her participation in the International Visitor 
Leadership Program, a top Egyptian theater director, 
Efat Yehia, reconnected with an American director 
brought to Egypt in 2004 by the Embassy to direct a 
Mission-sponsored, Arabic language production of 
Thorton Wilder's "Our Town."  During their reunion, 
the two planned for further Egypt-American theater 
exchanges, and Yehia was asked to direct an American 
play in Chicago. 
 
MPP GOAL: MUTUAL UNDERSTANDING 
 
 
(03/22/05) EGYPTIAN COUNCIL OF UNIVERSITIES AGREES TO 
PROMOTE USG "PLUS" SCHOLARSHIPS 
 
As a result of a meeting with Embassy's educational 
advising contractors, the new Secretary General of the 
Supreme Council of Universities promised to play an 
active role in promoting two-year "PLUS" scholarships 
to an American university, and he said that he would 
personally contact the deans of the relevant faculties 
at all Egyptian public universities to ask them to 
nominate candidates.  He agreed to begin informing 
students about the "PLUS" program during this academic 
year, so that they can prepare well in advance of the 
October application deadline. 
 
MPP GOAL: MUTUAL UNDERSTANDING 
 
 
(03/18/05  03/26/05)  EMBASSY-SPONSORED SPEAKER 
ENLIVENS ARABIC BOOK PUBLISHING CONTACTS BY 
HIGHLIGHTING IMPORTANCE OF CHILDREN'S LITERATURE 
 
During a week-long Embassy-sponsored speaking tour, 
The New York Times' Children's Book Editor, Eden Ross 
Lipson, addressed Egypt's most important children's 
book publishers, writers, illustrators, critics, 
reviewers, and librarians at several events in both 
Cairo and Alexandria.  Lipson spoke about the history 
of children's literature in the United States and 
about modern trends in children's book publishing. 
Her appearance in a thirty-minute primetime live 
broadcast on Egypt's national Channel 2 reached an 
estimated 2 million viewers.  Other media coverage 
included additional TV, radio and print.  Stirred by 
Lipson's enthusiasm and the lively discussions at 
these events, several local publishers have re-engaged 
with the Embassy's Regional Arabic Book Office (RBO) 
and proposed to collaborate on the publication of 
Arabic-translations of American youth literature. 
 
MPP GOAL: MUTUAL UNDERSTANDING 
 
 
---------- 
ACTIVITIES 
---------- 
 
(03/09/05) EMBASSY REKINDLES CONTACT WITH EXCHANGE 
ALUMNI 
 
In the first of what will be a series of salon-like 
gatherings, the Embassy hosted a small-group gathering 
of exchange alumni and Mission personnel for a 
discussion on U.S. economic policy and the economic 
situation in Egypt.  Exchange alumni in the field of 
economics and finance were invited to meet and interact 
with officers and locally employed staff involved in 
economic work.  A lively discussion and new contacts 
resulted.  Future gatherings will focus on a variety of 
topics, but will continue to emphasize bringing 
exchange alumni back in touch with Embassy personnel 
and activities. 
 
MPP GOAL: ECONOMIC PROSPERITY 
 
 
(03/22/05-03/23/05)  AMERICAN CENTER ALEXANDRIA'S 
LOCAL BOOK FAIR RECORDS YEAR'S HIGHEST BOOK SALES 
 
The American Center in Alexandria (ACA) hosted a two- 
day in-house book fair featuring products from the 
Regional English Language program and the Regional 
Arabic Book Translation Program.  The event, formally 
opened by the Governor of Alexandria, along with the 
Alexandria PAO and the Cairo-based Regional English 
Language Officer, not only showcased USG publications 
and teaching materials, but also hosted a viewing of 
the PBS series "Do You Speak American?" and it 
distributed numerous complimentary copies of "Hi" 
magazine and other IIP publications.  Total sales 
topped the Embassy's earlier sales this year at both 
the Cairo and Alexandria Book Fairs.  Attendees, who 
included academics and students from high schools and 
universities, encouraged the ACA to host other such 
book fairs.  AMIDEAST also participated, staffing an 
exhibit table with information about study in the U.S. 
 
MPP GOAL: MUTUAL UNDERSTANDING 
 
 
(03/16/05) AMERICAN CENTER IN ALEXANDRIA CELEBRATES 
EGYPTIAN-AMERICAN CULTURAL CONNECTIONS WITH CONCERT OF 
WORKS BY EGYPTIAN COMPOSER 
 
In celebration of Egyptian-American cooperation and 
appreciation of the arts, the American Center in 
Alexandria hosted a by-invitation concert of the music 
of Egyptian composer Sayed Darwish.  In introducing 
the event, the Alexandria PAO praised the richness of 
Egyptian musical culture and drew parallels between 
the life of Sayed Darwish and that of American 
composer George Gershwin, both of whom were concerned 
with developing a national vocabulary in song and 
dance.  The program was prominently featured on local 
television news programs and broadcast in its entirety 
on Alexandria's Channel 5-TV. 
 
MPP GOAL:  MUTUAL UNDERSTANDING 
 
 
(03/17/05) COLLOQUIUM ON "VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN" AT 
THE AMERICAN CENTER IN ALEXANDRIA 
 
In celebration of women's history month, the American 
Center in Alexandria (ACA), in cooperation with a 
local NGO, hosted a program on "Violence Against Women 
in Egypt: Causes and Remedies."  Panelists included 
government officials, activists, judiciary officials 
and legislators.  After the discussion, participants 
began to draft a proposal for a new law on violence 
against women for submission to the Egyptian 
government, and they announced the establishment of 
the "Al Nadim Center for Victims of Violence" in 
Alexandria.  Participants received a portfolio of ACA- 
prepared documents that included information from the 
IIP website "Combating Violence Against Women."  The 
event was featured on local television news. 
 
MPP GOAL:  MUTUAL UNDERSTANDING 
 
GRAY