06CAIRO1653
EGYPTIAN MEDIA THEMES, MARCH 6-12, 2006:
Thu Mar 16 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CAIRO 001653 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NEA/PPD, RRU-NEA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
TAGS: PGOV KPAO KMDR OPRC EG DA XZ IS XF IZ
SUBJECT:  EGYPTIAN MEDIA THEMES, MARCH 6-12, 2006: 
MUBARAK'S REGIONAL TOUR, REFORM AND DEMOCRACY, PRESS 
FREEDOM, IRAN NUKES. 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Throughout the week, all papers highlighted President Mu 
and European trip, and commentators analyzed his role and message to 
importance as a counter-balance to the U.S.  While simultaneously arg 
Egypt as a regional power-broker, columnists turned inward to demand 
momentum on domestic reform and democracy.  The issues of press freed 
nuclear program continued to dominate news and commentary, and the an 
Rights Report received considerable coverage.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  Mubarak's tour.  All papers headlined with Mubarak's tour of Euro 
states last week.  Editors-in-chief, as well as columnists seized the 
Mubarak's role as the "right leader" to "explain the real situation i 
the West (unsigned editorial, leading pro-government daily, Al-Ahram, 
350,000, March 11).  Others used the tour as an occasion to call on A 
"solve Arab issues rather than complain about American and Western pl 
(editorial, independent daily, Nahdet Misr, circulation 8-15,000, Mar 
March 9 editorial contrasted the "wisdom" of Mubarak as a "regional l 
"irrational acts" of the U.S. "as a world leader" and called the timi 
given the "U.S.'s threats to punish Egypt."  Many rallied around Muba 
leadership and raised expectations of his abilities.  On March 11, th 
pro-government weekly, Al-Akhbar Al-Yom (circulation 340-400,000) arg 
Egypt's fate to be the wise voice on Arab issues" and the editor-in-c 
government daily, Al-Gomhouriyya (circulation 70,000) praised Mubarak 
a repeat of the Iraqi scenario in Iran would have more serious conseq 
that "Europe listens to the wise voice of Mubarak."  At least one col 
of Mubarak's "efforts to tour Arab countries in defense of Iraq", loo 
whether he would succeed in leading the region given that "the weakne 
opposition parties is hindering Egypt's national role" (pro-governmen 
circulation unconfirmed, March 11). 
 
¶3.  Reform and Democracy.  While the press was praising Mubarak for h 
Europe and the region, many commentators were pressing for more refor 
democracy in Egypt on many fronts.  Speculation that the emergency la 
extended again in the Parliament spurred defensive statements from in 
Nahdet Misr, who challenged Speaker of the Parliament, Fathy Sorour, 
misconstrue the people's call for a change in the constitution as a c 
of legitimacy and stability" (March 8).  Al-Ahram's unsigned editoria 
March 11 argued on behalf of continuing reform and democracy movement 
the notion that "reform should slow down because people are pre-occup 
economic situation" was "shortsighted and nave."  According to the p 
for political reform has become a public demand" and "freedom for civ 
interest of the regime."  A column in Al-Ahram on the same day argued 
countries, "The most effective weapon to fight foreign intervention i 
freedom and democracy."  Al-Masry Al-Yom's senior columnist quoted a 
Brotherhood official, who called on the public "not to depend solely 
make changes, but also on the media, free thinkers and writers and th 
themselves." 
 
¶4.  Press freedom. The issue of press freedom continued to appear pro 
opinion pages.  Early in the week, columnists were reacting to the an 
columnists in independent dailies, Al-Masry Al-Yom and Nahdet Misr, a 
the cessation of the case was positive, "this does not ensure" the is 
law, and that "someone has an interest in preventing its passage." On 
government daily, Rose-Al-Youssef printed a full interview with Speak 
Parliament, Fathy Sorour, on the draft press law, in which he assured 
would "also apply to opinion leaders" and that "the People's Assembly 
as soon as it is received."  He also explained that the bill must "en 
freedom of opinion and citizens' rights, and must ensure that penalti 
to violations."  On the same day, regional newspaper, Al-Sharq Al-Aws 
Masry Al-Yom printed articles on the sentencing of a female journalis 
for defaming a judge in Alexandria in an article that appeared in ind 
Fagr, in 2005.  With the news of the sentence, Sorour's words did not 
columnists, as critical opinions continued through to the end of the 
government weekly magazine, Al-Akhbar Al-Yom's March 11 edition featu 
contribution by the president of the press syndicate who accused the 
"corruptly blocking" the new law. On March 12, opposition daily, Al-W 
an announcement by Minister Mufeed Shehab that the government is "alm 
drafting the law" next to his "refusal to comment" on the ruling agai 
journalist.  Some voices used the opportunity to criticize "lack of e 
Al-Gomhouriyya printed a contributing article from a professor who en 
law to "prompt a discussion with journalists" about mis-reporting and 
columnist in Al-Ahram on March 6 defended journalists' frequent use o 
attack as a response to "lack of true information that can be printed 
 
¶5. Iranian Nukes.  This week's papers continued to focus on the Irani 
the increasing pressure by the U.S. and the IAEA on Iran.  While most 
the U.S. for its tough stance, many also focused on the potential for 
asked Iran "whether the merits of its nuclear program will outweigh t 
against it" (Rose-Al-Youssef daily's editor-in-chief, March 10). The 
exemplified through Al-Ahram's March 12 senior columnist, Salama Ahme 
argued that "the U.S. is repeating the Iraq and Libya scenarios." Thi 
by Al-Akhbar's Mohamed Abdel Moneim Mourad who asked readers "not to 
American nuclear hype" and to prevent the U.S. from "making the same 
Iraq."  Salama castigated "Arab countries for giving in to the U.S. t 
lacking any strategic visions."  The news of the U.S. agreement with 
maelstrom of critical opinion, most similar to the separate March 12 
Al-Ahram, which asserted that Bush's agreement with India "again esta 
principal of double standards." 
 
¶6.  Human Rights Report.  The human rights report received considerab 
open-minded and defensive.  On March 10, pro-government, independent 
dailies published articles of the report, with independent daily, Al- 
providing lengthy excerpts and opposition daily, Al-Wafd, provided a 
section on Egypt.  Al-Masry Al-Yom continued coverage on March 11, gi 
prominence to the report, and quoting a number of politicians and law 
report on Egypt very harsh, although it includes true and objective c 
in Nahdet Misr on March 12, endorsed China's declaration that the rep 
hypocritical, and urged the GOE to say as such and "to listen to its 
wait for an American evaluation." 
 
Ricciardone