07CAIRO2697
COOPERATION MINISTER ABUL NAGA ON FY 09 ESF;
Mon Sep 03 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Cairo
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHEG #2697 2461513
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 031513Z SEP 07
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6752
INFO RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS CAIRO 002697 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID PREL PGOV KIRF EG
SUBJECT: COOPERATION MINISTER ABUL NAGA ON FY 09 ESF; 
ALLEGES RELIGIOUS DISCRIMINATION 
 
Sensitive but unclassified.  Please protect accordingly. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) On September 2, Ambassador met with Minister for 
International Cooperation Fayza Abul Naga , accompanied by 
Acting USAID Mission Director John Groarke and Econcouns 
(notetaker).  The meeting was at Abul Naga's request, and 
focused on the recent notification by the USG to the GOE of 
the Administration's FY 09 ESF request and alleged USAID 
directed funding of Coptic organizations in Egypt. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Minister Abul Naga opened by reviewing GOE concerns 
about the ESF program, both in terms of "form and substance" 
of the notification of proposed levels for FY 09 and after. 
She repeated her comments to the Ambassador of last week, 
that the GOE had received no response to its proposal for the 
establishment of an endowment, presented in Washington by 
Ambassador Fahmy in June.  She said that she understands that 
Ambassador Fahmy will call on A/S Welch in Washington on 
September 4, and said that he would make a proposal for an 
"endowment" that would set up a mechanism for "$200-250 
million" in ESF to cover repayment of non-PL 480 debt.  Abul 
Naga said that debt service on this debt is about $150 
million per year, and it should be completely paid off by 
¶2021.  (The GOE has evidently agreed to leave the PL 480 debt 
out of the discussion, in part because their understanding 
that payments go back into a fund for additional PL 480 
programming, and also because proposed ESF levels will not 
cover the $280m in annual PL 480 debt service.) 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Abul Naga again noted that the GOE would welcome a 
delegation to Egypt to discuss the economic assistance 
program, and would also be able to send a delegation to 
Washington.  She urged the USG to consider this because there 
are currently some "very important programs" now being 
implemented in Egypt including support for the administration 
of justice, training for judges and democracy, as well as 
health, education, and economic reforms.  These, she 
observed, could not all continue under the reduced funding 
levels, and the two governments should "agree jointly on what 
should be done." 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Abul Naga, citing an August 14 Inter Press Service 
story, accused the USG, through USAID, of providing directed 
funding to Coptic NGOs without notifying the GOE.  She 
pointed in particular to a statement in the IPS report that a 
Congressional report accompanying the House Foreign 
Operations bill for 2008 "explicitly called for funding 
politically active Christian NGOs."   This, she said was 
"extremely, extremely" sensitive, and was an "absolute red 
line."  She noted that under the jointly agreed-upon economic 
assistance program, the GOE had never consented to USAID 
funding of Coptic NGOs and that the USG had not informed the 
GOE that such funding was being provided.  According to Abul 
Naga, "credible" reports of USG funding had come to the GOE 
not just from the press but from governors, and civil society 
groups in the governorates.  She cited one specific example 
of an alleged $4 million grant to a Coptic organization to 
carry out media monitoring.  The minister insisted that these 
grants were taking place outside of the established "direct 
grants" program under USAID's Democracy and Governance 
funding, and that the GOE had not been notified of these 
alleged grants. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The Ambassador and USAID Acting Director responded 
that USAID does not direct funding to organizations based on 
their religious affiliation, and that the USG has no policy 
of directing funding to Coptic NGOs.  USAID's policy is to 
fund groups whose proposals merit it irregardless of their 
religious affiliations.  Direct funding to NGOs, the USAID 
Acting Director reminded the minister, took place only under 
USAID's Democracy and Governance program.  The GOE, he said, 
is notified of all the grants made under this program.  He 
agreed that some Coptic-run NGOs were included in this 
program, and noted that USAID also has important health, 
education and other programs in areas where there are large 
Coptic populations.  In response, Abul Naga asked that USAID 
confirm that facts about the alleged $4m media grant, and 
reiterated that this is a "national security" issue for 
Egypt.  She noted that over the summer, she had received 
formal questions from the Parliament's National Security 
Committee on the subject, and predicted that discussion of 
the issue would continue once Parliament returned to session 
this fall. 
RICCIARDONE