07CAIRO3219
EYGPT'S ECONOMIC REFORMS DISCUSSED WITH THE AMBASSADOR
Wed Nov 07 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Cairo
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHEG #3219/01 3111211
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 071211Z NOV 07
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7400
INFO RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC 0353UNCLAS CAIRO 003219 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR NEA/ELA, NEA/RA 
USAID FOR ANE/MEA MCCLOUD AND RILEY 
TREASURY FOR MATHIASON AND HIRSON 
COMMERCE FOR 4520/ITA/ANESA/OBERG 
 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV ECON EG
SUBJECT:  EYGPT'S ECONOMIC REFORMS DISCUSSED WITH THE AMBASSADOR 
 
REF: CAIRO 2826 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED.  PLEASE PROTECT ACCORDINGLY. 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (U) The Ambassador hosted an economic roundtable on October 30 
which included the IMF and World Bank representatives, as well as 
banking and private sector leaders.  While noting the generally 
positive economic reforms to date, the group focused on many of 
Egypt's development challenges, including: lack of investment in 
human capital and physical infrastructure, subsidy reform, and the 
need to reform pension, insurance and the fixed-income market as a 
means to increase the country's credit efficiency. 
 
IMF AND WORLD BANK GENERALLY UPBEAT, BUT CONCERNS NOTED 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) The IMF Resident Representative summarized the recent 
Article IV mission (Reftel).  The IMF remains upbeat on the Egyptian 
economy and believes that growth is becoming more broad based.  He 
noted that the Article IV report should go to the IMF Board soon and 
could be discussed before the end of November (note: it was not 
listed on the most recently circulated Board calendar).  The IMF 
expects growth of about 7.5% in 2007, just slightly above 2006's 
results.  While the IMF noted the growth is increasingly broad 
based, the impact on most Egyptians has been limited. 
 
¶3. (SBU) The IMF rep noted that there will continue to be pressure 
on inflation, but that generally the monetary and fiscal policies 
have been sound, thus containing the inflationary pressure.  He 
noted that imports are booming as a result of the country's 
increased wealth, thus much more inflation is being imported than 
had previously been experienced.  The IMF continues to view the 
large deficit, and the quality of spending as one of the most 
important issues that the government needs to tackle. 
 
¶4. (SBU) The World Bank Resident Representative noted that the 
reforms enacted to date had been successful, but that the next 
generation of reforms would be harder.  Among the next generation of 
reforms he included: pension, civil service, and improving the 
targeting of subsidies.  While he was generally on the financial 
sector reforms to date, he noted that banking supervision continues 
to need improvement and that insurance reform needs acceleration. 
 
PRIVATE SECTOR VIEWS 
-------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) Yasser El-Mallawany, CEO of EFG-Hermes, noted that much of 
Egypt's growth to date has been based largely on improved 
perceptions of Egypt which, in turn, has led to greater increased 
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI).  While the increased FDI is clearly 
good for Egypt, he noted that it is neither sustainable nor a good 
strategy upon which to base long-term growth prospects for all 
Egyptians.  He noted that Egypt needs to use its current "window of 
opportunity" to take the next leap to become integrated into the 
global economy.  He noted that infrastructure (particularly energy) 
and human resources were two areas where the Egyptian government is 
not dedicating adequate vision or leadership. 
 
¶6. (U) Subsidies were discussed at length.  While all agreed that 
the current subsidies are inefficient, there was agreement on how 
quickly the Government would or could take further action.  The IMF 
rep noted that subsidies constitute more of the government budget 
than either wages or investment.  (Note: combined, subsidies, wages 
and debt service make up about three quarters of the Egyptian 
budget, leaving very little for productive discretionary 
investments).  The IMF rep noted that the fuel subsidy is far and 
away the most regressive subsidy so it should be fixed the most 
urgently (note: for example, a World Bank study notes that the 
richest quintile of the population receives 93% of the benefits of 
the gasoline subsidy).  Other participants, however, noted that the 
political sensitivity of the subsidies will make it very difficult 
for the government to address soon.  The World Bank noted that it is 
helping the government replace the food ration cards with direct 
cash transfers and better targeting methods. Once this more 
efficient system is functioning, it could be used as a mechanism to 
increase welfare payments to the poor which will offset the impact 
of subsidy cuts. 
 
¶7. (U) The group discussed the best role for government in improving 
the country's physical infrastructure.  The government is pushing a 
public private partnership (PPP) initiative, which is initially 
focusing on schools and hospitals.  Mallawany argued that the 
Government needs to shift the PPP into those infrastructure projects 
which will more immediately have commercial return (roads, ports, 
airports), rather than to schools and hospitals which will always 
have a large subsidy component.  The IMF rep noted that the 
experience globally with PPPs has been mixed and noted that there 
will still be government liabilities even once the PPPs are 
underway. What is most important, the IMF rep argued, is to improve 
the quality of service. 
 
¶8. (SBU) There was some discussion of the lack of investment in 
productive enterprises in Egypt.  The well-known phenomenon of a 
small number of corporate clients chasing all the bank credit 
continues.  Banks continue to make money without extending much 
credit, so there is little incentive for them to extend risky loans 
to unknown clients.  The same is true in mortgages, where very 
little lending is taking place.  Gamal Moharam, CEO of Piraeus Bank, 
noted that there is very little long-term money available to banks 
in Egypt, so banks cannot affordably extend long-term loans.  This 
led many in the group to note the inefficiencies and underdeveloped 
status of the traditional sources of long-term money in Egypt, 
particularly pension and insurance (two areas the U.S. is trying to 
assist, either via the cash transfer program or traditional 
technical assistance).  Mallawany was very critical of the lack of a 
fixed-income market in Egypt and the dearth of tradable securities. 
 
 
¶9. (SBU) The group also discussed the government's inability to 
effectively convey its vision or reform agenda to the Egyptian 
population.  The World Bank noted that without a good outreach 
effort, the reforms were at risk, given that the public is not 
inclined to trust the government.  Abdel Latif, Chairman of Bank of 
Alexandria noted that the government is trying hard to improve its 
communication with people but blamed inaccurate and irresponsible 
reporting by the media for the public misunderstanding.  The 
Ambassador and Econoffs encouraged the group to push the government 
to do a better job of publicizing the program and its goals. 
 
RICCIARDONE