04TAIPEI3517
MEDIA REACTION: NEW BUSH ADMINISTRATION; IRAQ
Mon Nov 08 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TAIPEI 003517 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/RSP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - 
ROBERT PALLADINO 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: NEW BUSH ADMINISTRATION; IRAQ 
 
A) "To Face the Growing Conservative Atmosphere in the 
U.S. Political Arena" 
 
The pro-status quo "China Times" said in an editorial 
(11/6): 
 
". The U.S. media have pointed out that the key issue 
to the latest elections is neither the war in Iraq nor 
economic issues but `ethical values.' 
 
". Such Conservative thinking will certainly be 
reflected in U.S. foreign and defense policies in the 
next four years. 
 
"After the election results were clear, President Bush 
is both domestically and internationally expected to be 
able to commit himself to `correcting the wrong' of the 
past, as he does not have any re-election pressure 
anymore.  [People] hope that he can be a truly tolerant 
leader, who will listen to those who did not vote for 
him in the United States and respect different views of 
foreign countries about U.S. policies.  Thus, the world 
can enjoy post-Cold War peace and stability under U.S. 
leadership.  However, the executive, legislative, and 
judicial branches will all be under Republican control, 
and Bush has won so much popular support, which gives 
him a strong mandate.  As a result, in the next four 
years the whole world may have to give up unrealistic 
expectations and pragmatically face a world depicted 
under the dominance of U.S. Conservatism. 
 
B) "Heavy Attack to Seek an End and Let U.S. Troops Go 
Home for Christmas?" 
 
Kung Yan, an associate professor in Taipei, wrote in 
the conservative, pro-unification "United Daily News" 
(11/8): 
 
"Bush sent 20,000 troops to Fallujah just after he was 
re-elected.  This was also the largest-scaled action in 
Iraq since April 2003.  The world became nervous again. 
 
"Why is Bush doing this?  We need to notice two 
reasons.  First, the anti-terror war needs an ending 
after it was started.  Second, the fighting in Iraqi 
fields must be completed as soon as possible.  The best 
is to settle it before Christmas. 
 
". Without trying to feel and understand in depth about 
the belief and lifestyle of the Islamic world, this war 
is determined to cause high casualties.  One only wants 
to ask, when he was making policy decisions, why Bush 
did not think of using religious communications and 
dialogue to resolve disputes and seek peace?" 
 
KEEGAN