04TAIPEI3449
MEDIA REACTION: SECRETARY POWELL'S BEIJING
Tue Nov 02 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TAIPEI 003449 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/RSP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - 
ROBERT PALLADINO 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: SECRETARY POWELL'S BEIJING 
TRIP AND U.S. POLICY 
 
 
A) "Have [Our] Rulers Really Tried Every Means to Stop 
War?" 
 
The centrist, pro-status quo "China Times" 
editorialized (11/2): 
 
". U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell's recent 
remarks have triggered a storm [in Taiwan], but they 
have also fully proven that `arms sales alone are not 
adequate to protect peace in Taiwan.'  The focus of 
Powell's remarks was the denial of Taiwan's independent 
sovereignty and an emphasis on a `peaceful resolution' 
[to cross-Strait disputes].  He even misspoke or hinted 
about the `peaceful unification' of both sides of the 
Taiwan Strait.  Powell's talks . mainly stick to the 
principle of maintaining peace across the Taiwan 
Strait, and he warned the Taiwan authorities not to 
transgress the boundaries.  For now, what can be 
certain is that no matter how Washington-Beijing-Taipei 
ties will develop in the future, the United States will 
not go to war with China for the Taiwan issue, and 
Taiwan (no matter whether it buys those weapons [from 
the United States] or not) cannot afford to resolve the 
cross-Strait disputes by means of war.  China's missile 
threat [against the island] is a fact, but [Taiwan's] 
push for and provocative movements towards Taiwan 
independence is also a reality.  The United States, 
however, is strongly opposed to any `unilateral attempt 
to change the status quo in the Taiwan Strait.'  Under 
such a situation, the only factor that Taiwan can 
control is not to purposely cross the `red line.'  The 
[Taiwan] government, however, is trying to solicit 
political support by occasionally `sneaking in' some 
movement to push for Taiwan independence but at the 
same time trying to engage in an arms race [with 
Beijing] by spending a huge amount of money buying 
weapons.  Can such an attitude of making combat 
readiness, engaging in an arms race and even [taking] 
provocative movements help in the pursuit of peace for 
Taiwan? ." 
 
B) "A Self-ruled Chinese Non-state" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language 
"China Post" said in an editorial (11/2): 
 
". Taipei's reckless push for independence, defying 
repeated U.S. cautions and ignoring the basic rules of 
courtesy, prompted Powell's tough talk.  Some critics 
have openly scolded Taipei for `biting the hand that 
feeds it.' 
 
"The U.S. has come to the realization that separatism, 
if unchecked, is bound to spark a cross-strait war, 
disrupting regional peace and stability and dragging 
the reluctant U.S. into it. 
 
"Washington also aims to influence Taiwan's December 
legislative election, reminding voters of the risk of 
supporting pro-independence candidates.  When Powell 
stated that Taiwan was not a sovereign state, he was 
describing a historic fact.  As a piece of Chinese 
territory, it was never a state. . 
 
"The Powell episode suggests Taiwan's course for the 
future is limited. 
 
"Like it or not, the U.S. message is loud and clear: 
`Taiwan can continue its self-rule as long as Beijing 
is not disturbed.'" 
 
PAAL