05TAIPEI479
SUMMARY OF PREMIER FRANK HSIEH'S OP-ED IN
Thu Feb 03 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TAIPEI 000479 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EAP/RSP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - ROBERT 
PALLADINO 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPAO TW
SUBJECT: SUMMARY OF PREMIER FRANK HSIEH'S OP-ED IN 
"TAIWAN DAILY" CONCERNING HIS POLITICAL THINKING 
 
 
Summary: The pro-independence "Taiwan Daily" ran an 
almost one-page op-ed by Taiwan Premier Frank Hsieh 
entitled "From 'Co-existence and Cooperation' to 
'Taiwan Consciousness': My Political Thinking" that 
said (2/2): 
 
CO-EXISTENCE AND COOPERATION; THE PEOPLE'S VOICE 
 
The ideals of "co-existence and cooperation" are to be 
implemented as the new administration takes office. 
"The new cabinet will be a `stability cabinet' that 
responds to people's expectations.  `A stable political 
situation' is our priority goal.  `Dialogue and 
negotiation' is our method for reaching that goal.  And 
`co-existence and cooperation' is our central 
thinking." 
 
Cooperation between political parties and co-existence 
between different ethnic groups is vital to stability. 
I have mentioned in several interviews and in an 
article published a few days ago the new thinking of a 
"non-zero-sum" game, which aims at resolving many 
problems that could not be solved by the "zero-sum" 
struggles of the past. 
 
I believe that the evolution of civilization is a 
process of moving from "zero-sum" systems toward "non- 
zero-sum" systems.  "Taiwan's experiences over the past 
four years have proved that the 'zero-sum' system 
cannot resolve Taiwan's political problems.  Continuous 
internal struggle and confrontation only make Taiwan's 
civilized development go backwards.  Everyone in Taiwan 
will be a loser.  In order to deal with the internal 
and external challenges Taiwan is now facing, we must 
create a more refined and delicate `non-zero-sum' 
political system." 
 
"This system will provide for negotiation and dialogue 
mechanisms at different levels.  All political parties 
can maintain their basic propositions while seeking 
open agreements in areas that they can cooperate on 
with each other.  Based on getting a consensus for 
policy priorities, a 'stability alliance' can be 
established in the Legislative Yuan and act as a stable 
majority.  Furthermore, the sharing of administrative 
powers will also be an expected result." 
 
ADMINISTRATIVE IDEALS; DIALOGUE WITH SOCIETY 
 
Everybody has noticed that mainstream public opinion in 
Taiwan reacted positively to the proposal of a cross- 
party dialogue.  This indicates that the majority of 
the public is tired of confrontations under "zero-sum" 
politics.  Based on their collective wisdom, the people 
of Taiwan are calling for a new political system.  My 
article and interviews have received many responses 
from academic circles, business circles, and the 
general public.  This shows that my proposal of "co- 
existence and cooperation" is what the people want now. 
 
"Of course, there will be criticism and doubt.  Some 
are concerned whether entering a dialogue means one has 
to give up one's positions.  Others worry that co- 
existence will result in losing one's self.  Still 
others question whether the suggestion of instituting 
cross-party cooperation is anything more than lip 
service." 
 
These reactions are all expected.  I mentioned in my 
article that it would be hard to promote co-existence 
and cooperation in Taiwan society, which is in need of 
"trust."  All the criticism and doubt are but signs 
indicating the lack of "trust." 
 
What is the meaning of my political thinking?   What 
impact will it bring about?  These questions can be 
examined in the future with regard to what I will have 
done.  But as I believe it is important for political 
figures to communicate with society, I would like to 
share some of my basic ideas, including what I am doing 
right now, for further discussions. 
 
REBUILD TRUST AND START FROM ONESELF 
 
The basis for "coexistence and cooperation" is trust in 
society.  In the "prisoner's dilemma," two prisoners 
will benefit from each other if there is trust between 
them.  Without trust, there can be neither a "non zero- 
sum" outcome nor "co-existence." 
 
Trust is the most important asset of a society.  It is 
the foundation for the development of the economy and 
culture.  According to neo-institutionalism in 
economics, trust is an important mechanism for reducing 
transaction costs and stabilizes the environment for 
investment.  In other words, ample trust is 
advantageous for the development of an economy. 
Leaders form the ruling party and the opposition 
parties are, thus, responsible for creating trust in 
society. 
 
"Our society lacks trust, and the government, political 
parties, media and other departments are all 
responsible for that."  The fact that no one is 
building trust in society means that any trust that 
exists is constantly eroded away. 
 
Everyone should cherish the existing trust in society 
and restrain statements or behaviors that may destroy 
that trust. 
 
"I would like to call upon the people to rebuild trust 
in society.  I want to tell everybody that we are still 
willing to choose to believe in humanity as well as 
other people although betrayals take place in the 
world." 
 
"Trust needs to be accumulated incrementally and it 
takes time to examine whether a political assertion or 
a political figure is trustworthy.  Even though some 
people may choose a negative or a suspicious attitude, 
there should be a beginning to establish trust." 
 
FORMED DYNAMICALLY - TAIWAN'S CONSCIOUSNESS OF ITSELF 
AS AN ENTITY 
 
"Since 1987, I have been proposing the theory of 
`Taiwan's Community Fate.  The theory is supported by 
`four priorities,' such as Taiwan first, the 
disadvantaged first, culture first, and environment 
first." These four are the priorities that should be 
considered when the government sets policies. 
 
". There is not a clear, fixed, and static boundary for 
`Taiwan's Community Fate,' but the identity for members 
of the `Taiwan's Community Fate' is formed dynamically. 
It is a process, not a result. The formation of 
`Taiwan's Community Fate' cannot rely solely on a 
theory because there are always rival points of views, 
and there are always exceptions.  The `Taiwan's 
Community Fate' is dynamically formed by practice, 
public events, and collective memories.  The 
identification of `Taiwan's Community Fate' will be 
strengthened, not weakened, continuously through the 
future efforts of the Cabinet. `Negotiation and 
dialogue' and `co-existence and cooperation' are the 
most powerful mechanisms for consolidating `Taiwan's 
Community Fate.'  Hence, any chance that Taiwan's 
consciousness of itself as an entity will disappear is 
not going to happen." 
 
"The purpose to stress Taiwan's consciousness of itself 
as an entity is not to annihilate those who do not 
agree.  Within a community of shared fate, there are a 
consciousness of an entity and tolerance.  Since there 
is tolerance, then there is the so-called `Taiwan 
first' mentality.  ... `Co-existence' means that other 
things may exist at the same time due to tolerance. 
 
PRAGMATIC NEGOTIATION DOES NOT MEAN TO GIVE UP [ONE'S] 
IDEALS 
 
Before I assumed the premiership, I published two 
articles to elaborate on my personal philosophy of life 
and my political ideas.  Since I entered politics, I 
have always told myself to practice what I preach and 
act consistently, hoping that I could thus win the 
trust of other camps that have different political 
views from mine.  "Cooperation between different 
political parties is a brand-new thing in Taiwan, so 
many people are worried.  In a previous article that I 
wrote, I called upon all political leaders in both the 
ruling and opposition parties to bring their political 
imagination and moral courage into full play in order 
to make the first critical move [i.e. cooperation] for 
Taiwan's future in the long run.  The `zero-sum' 
confrontations between political parties in Taiwan must 
be resolved first before a new `non zero-sum,' `co- 
existence' situation could be created across the Taiwan 
Strait. 
 
On the other hand, I want to tell our people that since 
the DPP government has failed to win a majority of the 
seats in the Legislative Yuan, it will be very 
difficult to get our bills or budgets passed.  In order 
to promote our policies, cooperation among the 
political parties is a must, and as a result, pragmatic 
concessions become inevitable.  "But I will not view 
pragmatism as an goal; it is just a way of doing 
things.  As for concessions, it just means that [we 
need to] slow down or to detour [on our way to] 
realizing our goals; it is not to give up our goals." 
 
BALANCED DEVELOPMENT; FROM SELF EXISTENCE TO CO- 
EXISTENCE 
 
"To truly incorporate the concept of `co-existence' 
into the government's administration, I emphasize a 
balanced development of economic growth, social 
justice, and environmental humanism, and I want to 
start by improving Taiwan's public security." 
 
Why do I want to put the improvement of Taiwan's social 
order as a top priority for the administration of my 
"stability cabinet?"  It is still based on my "co- 
existence" theory.  The promotion of cooperation among 
different parties and various ethnic groups are kinds 
of "co-existence" for groups, but without each 
individual's "self-existence," there is no "co- 
existence" of groups.  Thus, before implementing the 
"co-existence" for various groups, we must first 
properly handle the problems concerning the "self- 
existence" of each individual.  That is why public 
security, which involves the citizens' rights to be 
free of fear and to enjoy security regarding their 
lives and property, should be addressed first. 
 
"To put it in a simple way, economic growth, social 
justice and environmental humanism should form a right 
triangle as their importance weighs equally with regard 
to the government's administrative performance." 
Inside this triangle, economic development is the first 
issue that should be dealt with because without 
economic growth, social justice and environmental 
humanism can hardly be maintained. 
 
"Taiwan has a sound economic foundation, and the 
financial and economic policies of former Premier Yu 
Shyi-kun's cabinet have also been moving in the right 
direction, as evidenced by the recovery of Taiwan's 
economic growth rate and the reduced unemployment rate 
this year.  With regard to our economic policy, what I 
want to do is to continually ease our policies and 
restore [economic] vitality, so that many economic 
activities that were restricted by the obsolete laws or 
regulations of the past can be conducted naturally. ." 
 
PAAL