05TAIPEI3611
MEDIA REACTION: U.S. ARMS SALES TO TAIWAN
Wed Aug 31 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

310058Z Aug 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TAIPEI 003611 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/RSP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - 
ROBERT PALLADINO 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S. ARMS SALES TO TAIWAN 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Major Chinese-language Taipei dailies 
focused their coverage August 30 on local politics and 
the surge in crude oil futures.  Nonetheless, the pro- 
independence "Liberty Times," Taiwan biggest daily, 
spent half of its page five reporting on Taiwan's arms 
procurements.  The newspaper ran a news story that was 
topped with the headline: "[Defense Minister] Lee Jye 
promotes U.S. arms deal strenuously; `United States 
sends cable to push me,' [Lee said.]"  The newspaper 
also reported that Taiwan Air Force plans to purchase 
another 100 U.S. F-16 fighter jets to replace the F-5 
fighter planes as Taiwan's Mirage 2000s will be stored 
to reduce maintenance costs in 2010.  The centrist 
"China Times," on the other hand, carried a news 
analysis by Washington correspondent Norman Fu 
commenting on AIT's future operations.  The article 
said that former AIT Director Raymond Burghart will 
soon be appointed as the new AIT Chairman and that 
Burghardt will continue to reside in Hawaii while 
incumbent [acting] AIT Managing Director Barbara 
Schrage will be the key person to manage all the 
regular work at AIT Washington headquarters.  As a 
result, Fu said, AIT will be run as "a two-horse-drawn 
wagon from now on, unlike its past single-command 
operational style." 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, an 
editorial in the limited-circulation, conservative, pro- 
unification, English-language "China Post" proposed 
that the U.S. arms procurements be put on hold for the 
time being because selling arms to Taiwan, which is 
governed now by a pro-independence government, is 
counterproductive to maintaining the status quo in the 
Taiwan Strait.  The limited-circulation, pro- 
independence, English-language "Taiwan News," on the 
other hand, carried an exclusive interview with 
Taiwan's Vice Minister of National Defense Michael Tsai 
in which Tsai said he is willing to make more 
concessions, if necessary, to ensure the passage of the 
U.S. arms procurement bill.  End summary. 
 
A) "U.S. Should Hold Arms Deal" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language 
"China Post" [circulation: 30,000] editorialized 
(8/30): 
 
"Washington appears desperate.  It no longer hides its 
impatience with Taiwan over the failure to conclude the 
deal of a robust package of advanced weapons that 
President Bush offered to sell in 2001. 
 
"Obviously, there is a campaign to press Taiwan, 
especially the opposition in the Legislative Yuan, to 
approve funding of the purchase as soon as possible. . 
 
"For more than a year, the opposition Kuomintang (KMT) 
and its allies have used their slim legislative 
majority to block the special NT$480 billion (US$16 
billion) bill.  Included in the arms package are eight 
diesel-powered submarines, 12 anti-submarine aircraft 
and six Patriot missile batteries. 
 
"To Taiwan's people, the basic questions are: how many 
Patriot interceptors are needed to offset the threat of 
Beijing's 700 missiles, grown by at least 50 a year; 
and how soon and how many submarines and anti-submarine 
aircraft Taiwan can buy to match those already deployed 
by Beijing, not to mention the enemy's size, strategic 
resources and nuclear weapons. 
 
"Selling arms to Taiwan now is counterproductive to 
maintaining the status quo.  When in the hands of a pro- 
independence government, the weapons encourage 
independence sentiments, raising tensions with Beijing. 
But when they are in the hands of an anti-independence 
government, they serve the purpose of deterring a 
forced reunification under Beijing's terms.  Beijing 
has no timetable for unification but also no tolerance 
for secession. 
 
"The Taiwan status quo, cherished by all except the 
independence activists, can be assured by neutralizing 
the separatist movement, not by selling more arms to 
anti-China administration.  The arms deal should at 
least be put on hold." 
 
B) "Tsai Ready to Deal to Win Approval of Arms Package" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" 
[circulation: 20,000] carried an exclusive interview 
with Vice Minister of National Defense Michael Tsai 
(8/30): 
 
"Having foundered in the Legislature for a year, the 
multibillion U.S. dollar arms package appears set to 
move forward ... . Tsai provided more details about the 
shifting attitudes toward the arms package and the 
reversal on how it should be funded during a recent 
interview ... 
 
"Taiwan News: Has the U.S. raised any complaints about 
the arms purchase delay? 
 
"Tsai: Let me be frank with you.  The U.S. side is 
quite disappointed.  They don't understand why Taiwan 
has yet to approve the purchase after seeking to obtain 
the package for a long time.  The inaction has prompted 
the U.S. to doubt our resolution and seriousness to 
defend the country.  Some even wonder if Taiwan is 
seeking to shift the burden of preserving cross-strait 
peace to the U.S.  That is not true, of course. 
Defense Minister Lee Jye has reiterated that Taiwan's 
armed forces will not hesitate to fight People's 
Liberation Army, if necessary. 
 
"Taiwan News: Will U.S.-Taiwan ties suffer if the 
opposition-controlled Legislature refuses to approve 
the arms package after all? 
 
"Tsai: The arms package will not influence U.S.-Taiwan 
ties, but I believe they will grow stronger if we buy 
the weapons.  The U.S. will have to help train 
Taiwanese military officers on how to operate the 
weapons after we purchase them. 
 
"Under the Taiwan Relations Act, the U.S. is obligated 
to help Taiwan defend itself.  But we must not take 
their help for granted and do nothing ourselves. 
 
"Fortunately, polls show 65 percent of the people share 
the need to maintain peace in the Taiwan Strait and 50 
percent support reasonable arms purchases to achieve 
that end.  Although some 30 percent voice objection to 
the arms procurement.  I believe it's politically 
motivated.  With a majority of the public on our side, 
I'm optimistic the arms purchase will not be held up in 
the Legislature forever. ..." 
 
PAAL