05TAIPEI4368
MEDIA REACTION: CROSS-STRAIT RELATIONS
Thu Oct 27 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

270814Z Oct 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TAIPEI 004368 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - ERIC 
BARBORIAK 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: CROSS-STRAIT RELATIONS 
 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY:  Taiwan dailies October 27 focused on 
legislative amendments regarding pensions for Taiwan farmers 
that will be passed in the Legislative Yuan before the year- 
end elections (December 3), and Taiwan's reaction to 
Senegal's resumption of diplomatic ties with China. 
Taiwan's Foreign Minister Mark Chen said Wednesday in the 
Legislative Yuan that he felt "cheated" by Senegal, because 
Senegal had promised that China's economic activity in the 
country would not influence its diplomatic relations with 
Taiwan.  Taiwan's National Security Bureau Director-General 
Hsueh Shih-ming said Wednesday in the Legislative Yuan that 
Taiwan is at risk of losing every country that has 
diplomatic ties with Taiwan. 
 
¶2. Editorials and Commentaries: pro-independence "Liberty 
Times" editorialized that it is a farce for China to 
celebrate the "Taiwan Retrocession Day" and to take away 
Senegal from Taiwan on the same day.  The centrist, pro 
status-quo "China Times" used the `domino theory' to 
forecast problems facing Taiwan regarding diplomatic ties. 
The pro-independence "Taiwan Daily" said the case of Senegal 
may not be exceptional, and urged government agencies to 
prevent similar cases from happening.  END SUMMARY 
 
¶1. "`Celebrating the Retrocession of Taiwan?' This is a 
Farce" 
 
¶1. The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 
600,000] editorialized (10/27): 
 
". China, on one hand, echoed with the pan-Blue alliance [in 
Taiwan] to celebrate the so-called `Taiwan Retrocession 
Day.' On the other hand, it paid a high price to buy off 
Senegal in an attempt to undermine the foundation of 
Taiwan's diplomacy and to constrain Taiwan's space in the 
international community. . 
 
". The People's Republic of China, established by the 
Chinese Communist Party in 1949, and Taiwan constitute two 
parallel lines that have no intersections in terms of 
history.  It is therefore a farce [for China] to celebrate 
the 60th anniversary of the retrocession of Taiwan. . What 
makes it seem more ridiculous is that China announced the 
resumption of diplomatic ties with Senegal on the so-called 
`Taiwan Retrocession Day.' ." 
 
¶2. "Warnings of the `Domino Theory' [for Taiwan] Forecasted 
by Senegal's Turning to China" 
 
The centrist, pro-status quo "China Times" [circulation: 
400,000] editorialized (10/27): 
 
". [I]n terms of regional politics, Senegal is a not bad 
country in Africa, and it could have a diplomatic `domino 
effect' toward the neighboring countries, Gambia and Burkina 
Faso, that have diplomatic ties with Taiwan.  Moreover, 
China will strengthen its movements to lure countries that 
have diplomatic ties with Taiwan to turn to China. . Taiwan 
should therefore consolidate the diplomatic front not only 
in Africa, but also in Latin America, South America, and the 
Oceania in order to prevent the next domino from falling. 
 
". Taiwan is facing an even harsher situation in its 
relation with foreign countries.  The reason is not because 
China may become rich, but that China may emerge as a real 
world power politically and economically.  Every country 
therefore wants to get connected with China.  Hence, 
problems facing Taiwan do not lie not developing more ties 
with other countries, but whether or not Taiwan can find a 
space for its survival in the new international situation. 
." 
 
¶3. "Senegal's Resumption of Relations with China Shows that 
China is Trying to Block By All Means Taiwan`s Space in the 
International Community.  The Ruling Authorities Should 
Consider How to Solve this Problem." 
 
The pro-independence "Taiwan Daily" [circulation: 150,000] 
said in its editorial (10/27): 
 
". We consider that the case of Senegal cannot be viewed as 
a single case; it should, however, be viewed as a warning 
for the performance of Taiwan's overall diplomatic work. . 
 
". In the face of China's comprehensive `warfare' against 
Taiwan and Taiwan's diplomatic fiasco, the [Taiwan] 
government should carry out a thorough review of Taiwan's 
foreign affairs policies.  Agencies of foreign affairs and 
national security should work hand in hand to imagine all 
the possibilities, and prevent these possibilities from 
happening. ." 
 
KEEGAN