05TAIPEI4929
MEDIA REACTION: WTO
Tue Dec 20 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TAIPEI 004929 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - ERIC 
BARBORIAK 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: WTO 
 
¶1. Summary: Major Chinese-language Taiwan dailies focused 
their coverage December 20 on local political issues such as 
possible candidates for the DPP chairmanship; the suspension 
of Taitung County magistrate-elect for his alleged 
involvement in a corruption scandal; and KMT Chairman Ma 
Ying-jeou's meeting with Legislative Yuan (LY) President 
Wang Jin-pyng Monday to clear up confusion about whether 
Wang would be selected to head the cabinet.  Coverage also 
focused on U.S. arms procurement and the treatment Taiwan 
protesters received outside the WTO ministerial meetings in 
Hong Kong. 
 
With regard to U.S. arms procurement, the pro-independence 
"Liberty Times," Taiwan's biggest daily, ran a banner 
headline on its page six that quoted LY President Wang Jin- 
pyng as saying: "Ma Refuses to Talk with Bian [Chen Shui- 
bian]; Chances Remain Slim for [U.S.] Arms Procurement Bill 
to Pass."  The centrist "China Times," however, said on its 
page four that "Under U.S. Pressure, the KMT Is Considering 
Passing [the Budget for] P-3C Anti-Submarine Aircraft."  The 
pro-unification "United Daily News" ran an interview of a 
senior U.S. official page 13 with the headline "How Taiwan 
Should Allocate Its Arms Procurement Budget?  U.S. Says: Not 
Appropriate to Interfere," and the sub-headline added: 
"Reports Saying that the United States Will No Longer 
Support [Taiwan's] Special [Arms Procurement] Budget Are 
`Incorrect;' [U.S. Official] `Compliments' Bian's Remarks 
about Increasing [Taiwan's] Defense Budget to 3% of GDP." 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials, a "China Times" editorial 
discussed a WTO interim deal reached Sunday in Hong Kong to 
end farm export subsidies by 2013 and future prospects for 
Taiwan's agriculture.  The article challenged the Taiwan 
government to say "No" to the United States with regard to 
the WTO decisions on agriculture and urged Taiwan's private 
sector to stand up and ally with other Asian nations to 
fight against the WTO decisions.  End summary. 
 
"Will 2013 be the Sunset Year for Taiwan's Agriculture?" 
 
The centrist, pro-status quo "China Times" [circulation: 
400,000] commented in an editorial (12/20): 
 
"The sixth WTO ministerial meeting reached a compromised 
agreement recently to end all farm export subsidies by 2013. 
Participants of the meeting also decided to work out a 
negotiation framework by April 30 2006 to set the tone for 
the `Doha round' plan to reduce tariff barriers and 
subsidies concerning agricultural and industrial products. 
 
"Taiwan's Council of Agriculture, after learning about the 
news, said the decision would not have any impact on 
Taiwan's agriculture as Taiwan does not provide farm export 
subsidies.  The social activists in Taiwan, however, have a 
pessimistic view in general about the future of Taiwan's 
agriculture.  The question is: is there no good prospect for 
Taiwan's agriculture?  Not necessarily so.  But the key [to 
this issue] lies in whether our government is bold enough to 
say `No' to the United States.  If yes, there are still many 
`strategic cards' that the government could use.  In a 
nutshell, ending all farm export subsidies is just one of 
the `cards;' the real key lies in whether our government has 
a long-term and comprehensive plan for Taiwan's agricultural 
policy as a whole. . 
 
"When it comes to the future of Taiwan's rural community, 
[it is evident that] the survival of the island's 
agricultural industry hinges on whether our government dares 
to follow the examples of the United States and Europe to 
implement other forms of subsidies other than farm export 
subsidies.  Another [feasible] way is to use [people's] 
health and safety as reasons, like mainland China did, to 
stop bulk imports of U.S. agricultural products into Taiwan. 
But does the Taiwan government have the guts to do so? 
Without doubt, it has no guts. 
 
"Thus, what Taiwan needs most is not the government's 
courage and wisdom, but the power of the private sector. 
Only when the private sector has enough power and its voice 
is loud enough to fight against the WTO [decisions] will our 
government stop to listen to it just for the sake of getting 
their votes. Then the government will have the guts to say 
`No' to the United States.  The private sector needs to 
realize that such a goal must not be altered by a change in 
Taiwan's ruling parties - a natural outcome especially when 
Taiwan relies heavily on the United States for its military 
security.  As a result, the private sector must make its 
power lasting and its voice loud enough; or even, it could 
ally with other Asian nations to form a core of resistance 
in Asia to change the current trends. ." 
 
PAAL