05TAIPEI2990
MEDIA REACTION: FORMER DEPUTY ASSISTANT
Tue Jul 12 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TAIPEI 002990 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/RSP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - 
ROBERT PALLADINO 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: FORMER DEPUTY ASSISTANT 
SECRETARY OF STATE RANDY SCHRIVER'S TAIWAN TRIP, NORTH 
 
SIPDIS 
KOREA 
 
¶1. Summary: Almost all the major Chinese-language 
Taipei dailies reported in their inside pages July 12 
on the visit by former Deputy Assistant Secretary of 
State Randy Schriver to Taipei.  The pro-independence 
"Liberty Times," Taiwan's biggest daily, carried a news 
story on page four with the headline: "Randy Schriver: 
One China is just part of the elements of the United 
States' Taiwan Policy."  The centrist "China Times" ran 
a story on its cross-Strait news page with the 
headline: "Randy Schriver visits [Taiwan] and starts 
arguments over the [U.S.] arms deal."  The pro- 
independence "Taiwan Daily" also topped a story with 
the headline: "[KMT Chairman] Lien Chan meets with 
Randy Schriver [and said]: It is the Bian 
administration that has blocked the arms procurement 
bill."  The pro-unification "United Daily News" carried 
a news story that was topped with: "Randy Schriver: It 
is very dangerous to include national defense budget 
into a referendum." 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials, an editorial in the "Taiwan 
Daily" strongly criticized KMT Chairman Lien Chan's 
remarks Monday that put the blame for the stalled U.S. 
arms procurement bill on the DPP government.  The 
editorial said the U.S. government and American 
friends, including Schriver, should not be hoodwinked 
by Lien.  An editorial in the limited-circulation, pro- 
independence, English-language "Taiwan News" commented 
on the crisis concerning North Korea, noting that 
Taiwan should closely track economic developments on 
the Korean peninsula and actively participate in 
developments.  End summary. 
 
¶1. Former Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Randy 
Schriver's Taiwan Trip 
 
"[KMT Chairman] Lien Chan's Move to Put the Blame for 
the Stalled Arms Deal on the Government Is a Failed 
Attempt to Cover up His Pro-China, No-Taiwan, and Anti- 
U.S. Route" 
 
The pro-independence "Taiwan Daily" [circulation: 
150,000] noted in an editorial (7/12): 
 
"Former U.S. Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Randy 
Schriver called on KMT Chairman Lien Chan Monday 
morning to express Washington's concern over the arms 
deals and the possibility of holding a meeting between 
[President] Chen Shui-bian and [Chinese President] Hu 
Jintao.  According to the account relayed by KMT 
Spokesperson Cheng Li-wen afterwards, Lien said he had 
no idea how the DPP government would promote the `Bian- 
Hu meeting' since Chen totally denies the 1992 
Consensus and [official] interaction across the Taiwan 
Strait is extremely difficult.  With regard to the arms 
procurement bill, Lien said the obstruction [of the 
bill's passage] `actually comes from within the DPP 
government.'  Lien's statement is both very daring and 
shameful because he not only treats the U.S. government 
and Schriver as idiots but also sees the Taiwan people, 
who know perfectly why the arms procurement bill has 
failed to pass, as nothing. 
 
"In Taiwan, everybody knows that the DPP is proactively 
promoting the passage of the arms procurement bill, and 
everybody knows that [Taiwan] Defense Minister Lee Jye 
has repeated several times that he would step down if 
the arms procurement bill fails to pass.  Instead, it 
is the opposition Pan-Blue Camp and their caucuses in 
the Legislative Yuan that have tried all they can to 
block and thwart the passage of the arms procurement 
bill.  Such a fact is well and widely known by Taiwan 
society, and nobody would think that it is the ruling 
party that wants to block the bill or is itself an 
obstruction to the bill's passage.  The U.S. government 
surely knows [this fact] very clearly, or Schriver 
would not have to come to Taiwan to lobby Lien. . 
 
"As a matter of fact, Lien was just attempting to cover 
up [his intent].  The KMT, under Lien's leadership, is 
opposed to the passage of the arms procurement bill and 
has deliberately hindered it.  Its move is in essence a 
reflection Lien's pro-China and anti-U.S. position. . 
 
"In a nutshell, the U.S. arms procurement bill is 
against China's interests and will generate obstacles 
to China's attempt to use force to annex Taiwan.  China 
is opposed to the U.S. arms deals, so Lien must do what 
China expects him to do and what fits China's 
interests, namely, to oppose the arms deals that would 
help to safeguard Taiwan against China's threats.  [It 
is as] simple as that.  We believe that American 
friends and the U.S. government, including Schriver, 
can definitely understand such logic and will not be 
hoodwinked by Lien. ." 
 
¶2. North Korea 
 
"Taiwan Should Prepare for Future Role in Region" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" 
[circulation: 20,000] editorialized (7/12): 
 
". Therefore, maintaining the status quo on the Korean 
Peninsula will continue to be the first priority for 
Washington.  Although North Korea's nuclear threat to 
the U.S. position in Northeast Asia and to Japan and 
South Korea is far from resolved, Washington is being 
pulled and pushed into having to consider the strategic 
option of a policy of comprehensive engagement toward 
North Korea. 
 
"Under this option, Washington will adopt direct or 
indirect measures to encourage North Korea to improve 
her weak economy and thereby try to foster peaceful 
evolution instead of launching costly effort at 
military regime change. . 
 
"The adoption of an engagement policy by the U.S. could 
offer important benefits for North Korea and for the 
region generally.  With the adoption of engagement 
policies toward Pyongyang as well as toward Beijing, 
Northeastern Asia can hopefully look forward to a more 
relaxed environment that will be more conducive to 
economic development. . 
 
"Taiwan's government and private sector should closely 
track developments in the Korean peninsula and 
Northeast Asian region in general, especially since the 
continuing tide of globalization will necessarily 
intensify the importance of the regional economies in 
Northeast Asia and Southeast Asia. . 
 
"As the Asia-Pacific region is undergoing a further 
stage of deepening economic cooperation, war will not 
fit our regional priorities.  Values of peace, 
stability and prosperity should be emphasized, and we 
hope sincerely that the hawkish neoconservative camp in 
Washington can learn enough from the disaster in Iraq 
to give peace a chance on the Korean peninsula." 
 
KEEGAN