06AITTAIPEI2448
MEDIA REACTION:  KMT CHAIRMAN MA'S JAPAN TRIP, MIDDLE EAST
Thu Jul 20 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #2448/01 2010750
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 200750Z JUL 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1176
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5436
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 6641UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 002448 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - ERIC BARBORIAK 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION:  KMT CHAIRMAN MA'S JAPAN TRIP, MIDDLE EAST 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused their 
coverage July 20 on Vice Minister of Interior Yen Wan-chin, who with 
five other officials was taken into custody Wednesday on suspicion 
that of taking kickbacks in a cable car construction project; First 
Lady Wu Shu-chen's alleged involvement in the Presidential Office's 
allowance for state affairs; a Taipei-bound China Airlines flight 
from Ho Chi Minh City which was forced to land in Kaohsiung Thursday 
after an Vietnamese-American passenger allegedly broke a window and 
attacked flight attendants; and the results of this year's 
island-wide university entrance exams.  All three English-language 
papers front-paged the launch of direct cargo charter flights from 
Taiwan to China Thursday, while the Chinese-language papers gave 
very limited coverage to the news. 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, KMT Spokeswoman Cheng 
Li-wen opined in the mass-circulation "Apple Daily" how the KMT 
exchanged views with high-ranking Japanese officials during KMT 
Chairman Ma Ying-jeou's recent trip to Japan.  Cheng said the 
Japanese officials showed support and respect for the KMT's 
pragmatic attitude toward cross-Strait relations and its East Asian 
security policy.  An editorial in the limited-circulation, 
pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times," however, said Ma 
had an embarrassing experience when meeting with Japanese Diet 
members, as they are concerned about the KMT's cross-Strait policy. 
With regard to the Middle East, an editorial in the 
limited-circulation, conservative, pro-unification, English-language 
"China Post" urged the U.S. to play a more active role in making 
Israel and Lebanon restrain themselves.  An editorial in the 
limited-circulation, pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan 
News," however, said it disagreed with the U.S. view that Israel 
should be given some time to pound Hezbollah targets and that 
Hezbollah should be "rubbed out."   End summary. 
 
¶3. KMT Chairman Ma Ying-jeou's Trip to Japan 
 
A) "Sharing Ma Ying-jeou's Experience Gained from His Japan Tour" 
 
KMT Spokeswoman Cheng Li-wen opined in the mass-circulation "Apple 
Daily" [circulation: 500,000] (7/20): 
 
"... Judged from our meetings with Japanese political leaders, it 
seemed very clear that the Japanese government's position is quite 
different from what the DPP perceives.  First, the DPP leadership 
has emphasized the importance of Taiwan's participation in the 
U.S.-Japan military alliance.  But the DPP's real purpose is to use 
such a move to continue playing the 'Taiwan independence card,' 
which does not tally with the strategic goal of the U.S.-Japan 
alliance at all.  The DPP and the pro-independence activists have 
been unwilling to face an important international political fact - 
that is, given the strong demand by all parties involved for the 
maintenance of the status quo and stability across the Taiwan 
Strait, it is unlikely that they will support or cover up for Taiwan 
independence.  In fact, the Japanese authorities very clearly 
expressed their doubts about Taiwan independence, because it totally 
violates Japan's wish for cross-Strait peace. 
 
"Second, the DPP authorities' wishful thinking is that Japan does 
not hope to see Taiwan develop a sound relationship with mainland 
China because it will threaten Japan's interests.  But both Japan 
and the United States have directly expressed that they are happy to 
see both sides of the Taiwan Strait improve relations under the 
premise that the cross-Strait status quo is maintained. 
 
"Third, the DPP has deliberately tried to create the impression that 
the Japanese government and the KMT lack mutual trust; it has even 
repeatedly claimed that the KMT is 'anti-Japan' and a 'Japan-hater.' 
 In order to seek Japan's support for Taiwan independence, the DPP 
even tried its best to flatter the Japanese right wing. ...  But 
such an attitude of deliberate flattery actually stunned the 
Japanese authorities.  In comparison, Japanese officials expressed a 
certain degree of support and respect for the KMT's pragmatic 
attitude towards cross-Strait relations and its East Asian security 
policy. ..." 
 
B) "Japan, Ma Ying-jeou and Reality" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] editorialized (7/20): 
 
"... This negative view among Japanese lawmakers was palpable during 
last week's trip by KMT Chairman Ma Ying-jeou to Japan, especially 
during an uncomfortable forum last week in which members of the Diet 
grilled Ma about his party's policies.  ...  All of Ma's fevered 
dissembling could do nothing to change the realities of regional 
politics when he was in Tokyo last week, and a few carefully tweaked 
e-mails sent to members of the Japanese Diet will do nothing to 
change those realities this week.  Japan should be concerned about 
the KMT's intentions.  Tokyo has every right to be concerned about 
how closely into Beijing's orbit Ma will bring Taiwan if he is 
elected president.  So, for that matter, do the people of Taiwan. 
...  Ma will need to do more to reassure the Japanese - and all 
Taiwanese who cherish their liberty - that this country's future is 
not tied to the whims of the autocrats in Beijing. ..." 
 
¶4. Middle East 
 
A) "Brokering a Lasting Peace in Lebanon" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (7/20): 
 
"... The differences between the two warring countries should be 
worked out as soon as possible to halt the killing and suffering the 
war is causing.  Parties such as the United States, France and the 
United Nations should work promptly together to broker a cease-fire. 
 Israeli Foreign Minister Tzipi Livni said a cease-fire is 
impossible unless the soldiers captured by Hezbollah are released. 
Washington has also urged that the Israeli soldiers held hostage be 
released.  The U.S.'s call is valid and deserves to be supported. 
However, many lives and stability in the region depend on the 
restoration of peace.  The U.S. should play a more active role in 
making the warring parties restrain themselves." 
 
B) "Peace Is First Priority in Lebanon" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" [circulation: 
20,000] editorialized (7/20): 
 
"... The first priority must, however, be the restoration of peace. 
We therefore add our voice in opposition to the notion, backed by 
the United States administration of President George W. Bush, that 
the IDF [i.e. Israeli Defense Forces] should be 'given some time,' 
perhaps weeks, to pound 'Hezbollah targets' and other residential 
areas and road and ports throughout Lebanon before allowing the 
United Nations or other combination of international forces to set 
up a buffer zone.  This position does not imply any endorsement of 
the rocket attacks by the Hezbollah military wing, but it is clear 
that the Israeli government has launched an offensive on the entire 
economy and social structure of Lebanon in over reaction to the 
attack by one political and military group, whoever influential. 
 
"We also do not agree with the expressed intention by some U.S. 
officials that Hezbollah, whose political wing is a legal political 
party in Lebanon, should be 'rubbed out.'  What is legitimate is 
that armed factions in Lebanon should in principle disarm in order 
to protect the peace and security of citizens in Lebanon as well as 
Israel, but such disarmament should be negotiated and not promoted 
by an offensive against the entire country of Lebanon, a method 
which will only exacerbate tensions instead of improving security 
and at the cost of even more Lebanese and Israeli lives. ..." 
 
YOUNG