06AITTAIPEI2224
MEDIA REACTION: RECALL OF PRESIDENT CHEN SHUI-BIAN
Wed Jun 28 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0017
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #2224/01 1790840
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 280840Z JUN 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0911
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5359
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 6567UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 002224 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - ERIC BARBORIAK 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: RECALL OF PRESIDENT CHEN SHUI-BIAN 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  President Chen Shui-bian's survived the recall motion 
in the Legislative Yuan Tuesday and stayed in the Taiwan media 
spotlight June 28.  Almost all papers front-paged the failure of the 
recall motion and Chen's apology to the public.  The 
pro-independence "Liberty Times," Taiwan's biggest daily, ran a 
banner headline on page two that read "Four-Point Statement:  Bian 
Urges Ruling, Opposition Parties to Return to Rational Middle Path." 
 The pro-unification "United Daily News," however, ran a banner 
headline on page three that said "Ma:  Disgrace for Democracy, 
History Will Remember This Day."  The same newspaper front-paged the 
results of its latest survey, which showed that the disapproval 
rating for the DPP rose to a new high of 68 percent, and the number 
of those who are displeased with President Chen's performance rose 
to 66 percent.  The pro-status quo "China Times" also front-paged 
the results of its own poll:  42 percent of those polled said they 
are disappointed with the outcome of Tuesday's recall vote, and 56 
percent said they believe it is no longer appropriate for Chen to 
remain in his position.  The same poll also found that KMT Chairman 
Ma Ying-jeou's overall approval rating had dropped to a new low of 
49 percent, while 34 percent of respondents are displeased with his 
recent performance. 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, the "Liberty Times" 
"Free Talk" column urged President Chen and the DPP to seriously 
face the fact that their clean image has been damaged.  Editorials 
in the limited-circulation, pro-independence, English-language 
"Taipei Times" and "Taiwan News" both said that since Chen has paid 
a heavy price, the opposition parties should show restraint and 
discipline as they have made their point.  A column in the 
mass-circulation "Apple Daily" said with a leader who has lost his 
prestige and a ruling party in which all its heroes strive for 
supremacy, Chen and the DPP are just about to face their challenges. 
 A "China Times" editorial said even though the recall motion has 
failed, the public have already made their judgment - namely, over 
50 percent of the people hope Chen would step down on his own 
accord.  A "United Daily News" editorial said the Legislative Yuan's 
vote on the recall motion is not a political verdict for Chen, as 
the public and the judiciary will continue to uncover the truth 
behind the many scandals.  An editorial in the limited-circulation, 
conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" echoed 
that even though Chen has survived the recall, he still faces a lot 
of problems.   End summary. 
 
A) "After the Show Is Over!" 
 
The "Free Talk" column in the pro-independence "Liberty Times" 
[circulation: 600,000] noted (6/28): 
 
"... In the wake of the failure to pass the recall motion, both 
President Chen and the DPP must solemnly and seriously face the fact 
that their clean image has been smashed.  They need to take action 
to prove their incorruptibility and competence.  There will be no 
more opportunities for them.  Both Ma Ying-jeou and the KMT must 
also reflect upon themselves and the legitimacy of their claim to 
pursue cleanliness and justice on the one hand, and sheltering 
corruption by selling ill-gotten party assets on the other. ..." 
 
 
B) "Toppling the Cabinet Is Not an Option" 
 
The pro-independence "Taipei Times" [circulation: 30,000] 
editorialized (6/28): 
 
"Taiwan's unprecedented presidential recall vote yesterday failed to 
achieve the majority required to pass.  Although the motion came to 
naught, it should serve as a lesson and reminder for President Chen 
Shui-bian of the need to improve his administration in the last two 
years of his presidency. ...  The recall bid has highlighted that 
Chen's performance has not been up to par.  He has paid a heavy 
price, and the opposition should now show restraint and discipline 
as it has made its point.  It is time to call for an end to 
hostilities if Taiwan is to escape from this political quagmire. 
Ma's decision not to entertain further discussions on toppling the 
Cabinet is a step in the right direction.  It is more important, 
however, that he holds true to his promises rather than dancing to 
the tune of the hawkish faction within his party or the waning 
PFP." 
 
C) "Taiwanese People Should Come First" 
 
The pro-independence English-language "Taiwan News" [circulation: 
20,000] noted in an editorial (6/28): 
 
"... We sincerely hope that the pan-KMT camp and its leaders will 
cease this futile and undemocratic campaign, accept the result of 
the March 2004 presidential election and adopt a proactive attitude 
to allow the passage of major bills, construction, and economic 
budgets of benefit to all Taiwanese people, regardless of political 
affiliation. ...  While attempting to kick-start discussions with 
opposition leaders is important, the highest priority for Chen and 
other DPP leaders now is to initiate a frank and thorough dialogue 
with Taiwan's 23 million people.  Then confidence and trust can be 
rebuilt through action as well as words." 
 
D) "A Big Fish That Has Been Washed to the Beach" 
 
Columnist Antonio Chiang noted in his column in the mass-circulation 
"Apple Daily" [circulation: 500,000] (6/28): 
 
"...  The DPP passed a critical test this time with A-bian on its 
back, and as a result, the supervisor-subordinate relationship 
between A-bian and the DPP has changed from its essence.  With a 
leader who has lost his prestige and a ruling party in which all the 
heroes are striving for supremacy, these people are just about to 
face their challenges.  A-bian used to swim leisurely in the big sea 
of Taiwan's mainstream public opinion.  But now he is like a big 
fish washed by giant waves to the beach, taking his last gasp. 
There is no way he can return to the ocean again." 
 
E) "Even Though Recall Motion Fails to Pass, Public Opinion Has Made 
Its Judgment" 
 
The pro-status quo "China Times" [circulation: 400,000] 
editorialized (6/28): 
 
"...  That's right, President Chen has again resolved another crisis 
in his term of office, but he has paid a high price for his bitter 
victory!  Chen passed this critical test not because the reasons for 
his recall have disappeared, but because the threshold stipulated by 
the Constitution to recall the president is really too high, plus 
the fact that the DPP has done the best it can to support him.  But 
the undeniable fact is that Chen is, after all, the first president 
in ROC constitutional history against whom a recall motion was 
launched, and this recall motion gained majority support from the 
legislators.  No single pan-Blue legislator voted against the 
motion; seven independent legislators voted for the motion; and the 
Taiwan Solidarity Union legislators, who also belong to the 
pan-Green camp, did not vote against the motion.  The symbolic 
significance of such an outcome is self-evident.  Even though Chen 
has dodged a popular vote, there is no way he can dodge the message 
clearly sent to him via all the opinion polls:  Over 50 percent of 
the public hope Chen would step down on his own accord; over 50 
percent of the people did not accept the contents of his 'report to 
the people;' and over 50 percent of the public chose to trust 
[tycoon fugitive] Chen Yu-hao, rather than him. ...  Just look at 
these figures.  In fact, it is no longer important whether there 
will be a popular vote or not.  The public have made their judgment, 
haven't they? ..." 
 
F) "Legislative Yuan Casts Zero Ballot Against Recall Motion; 
Society Will Continue to Uncover Truth" 
 
The pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 400,000] wrote 
in an editorial (6/28): 
 
"... The recall motion has come to an end in the Legislative Yuan, 
but the public opinion in Taiwan's society which believes that Chen 
is no longer qualified to be a state leader is mounting ever more. 
The result of 'zero vote against the recall motion,' an outcome of 
the DPP's tactical manipulation, even fully demonstrated that the 
Legislative Yuan's recall motion is by no means a political verdict 
for Chen.  Now the scandals are still escalating, and the truth 
remains to be uncovered.  After having got rid of the political 
noises created by the recall motion, the judiciary's and social 
public's probe into the scandals will surely return to the center of 
the stage. ...  " 
 
G) "Chen Survives Recall, Still Face Problems" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] noted in an editorial (6/28): 
 
"... The DPP, which holds 87 seats, boycotted the vote by not 
attending the legislative session and refusing to cast ballots. 
This strategy effectively obstructed the recall motion from being 
approved.  But the DPP will pay a political price.  It will be 
remembered by the voters for choosing to sacrifice moral principles 
when it came to the need for defending the presidency and guarding 
its ruling power. ..." 
 
KEEGAN