06AITTAIPEI3098
MEDIA REACTION: TAIWAN'S POLITICAL SITUATION, CROSS-STRAIT
Thu Sep 07 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0005
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #3098 2500734
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 070734Z SEP 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2010
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5628
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 6839UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 003098 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - DAVID FIRESTEIN 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: TAIWAN'S POLITICAL SITUATION, CROSS-STRAIT 
RELATIONS 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused their 
coverage September 7 on President Chen Shui-bian's transit of Guam 
and return to Taiwan Wednesday; former DPP Chairman Shih Ming-teh's 
campaign to unseat President Chen; the KMT's plan to push 
legislation of anti-graft laws; a local mail bomb case; and the 
birth of Japan's new prince.  The pro-unification "United Daily 
News" ran a front-page banner headline that read "Bian Was Secretly 
Questioned in State Affairs Fund Case."  With regard to U.S. arms 
procurements, the pro-status quo "China Times" ran an exclusive 
story on page six with the headline "United States Has for First 
Time Given Green Light to Selling Taiwan JDAM Precision-guided 
Munitions."  The pro-independence "Liberty Times,' Taiwan's biggest 
daily, also ran a banner headline on page four that said "66 F-16s 
Will All Be Assembled in Taiwan." 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, a "Liberty Times" 
editorial urged the Legislative Yuan to quickly pass or revise 
relevant sunshine laws in order to eradicate and punish corruption. 
An editorial in the limited-circulation, pro-independence, 
English-language "Taipei Times" discussed the possible visit to 
Taiwan by China's Taiwan Affairs Office Director Chen Yunlin.  The 
article said "no one should harbor any illusions over the grave 
potential for sabotage that underlies the liberalization of 
cross-strait ties."  End summary. 
 
¶3. Taiwan's Political Situation 
 
"Pass Sunshine Laws as Early as Possible to Remove Gray Areas in 
Laws" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 600,000] 
editorialized (9/7): 
 
"... Perhaps President Chen's clarification of and counterattacks at 
some of the accusations against him would not be able to win 
recognition of those who criticized him.  They nonetheless highlight 
the fact that Taiwan society is full of double standards, and that 
people tend to judge things from their own political stances, 
ideologies, and ethnic consciousness.  There seems to be a need for 
an objective system or laws that can serve as norms which are 
applicable everywhere. ... 
 
"The origin of these contentions lies in the fact that during the 
process when Taiwan was transformed from an authoritarian system to 
democracy, it failed to establish a sound legal system, such as 
legislation of sunshine laws, to serve as a corresponding measure 
for democracy.  [Such a deficiency] has thus created some historical 
problems, like the KMT's ill-gotten party assets, and some new 
controversies, like the state affairs funds, the allowances for 
government agency heads, and the assets reports for public 
functionary.  The loopholes in the regulations have, in particular, 
resulted in serious confrontations in Taiwan's current political 
situation.  Thus, the best way to remove the ultimate cause of 
trouble is to legislate or revise relevant sunshine laws, make them 
more comprehensive and avoid any gray or ambiguous areas in the 
laws, so that they can thoroughly eradicate and punish graft and 
create a clean political culture and climate. ..." 
 
¶4. Cross-Strait Relations 
 
"Chen Yunlin, a Trojan Envoy" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] editorialized (9/7): 
 
"The Chinese Nationalist Party (KMT) has applied for permission for 
China's Taiwan Affairs Office Director Chen Yunlin to attend its 
'cross-strait agricultural cooperation' forum next month in Taipei. 
The KMT has accused the Mainland Affairs Council of obstructing 
Chen's visit, while council officials say the government has been 
dealing with the issue according to the law, and that it has not 
attempted to block Chen from visiting. ... 
 
"If China is so eager to 'normalize, regularize and stabilize 
cross-strait economic relations,' as Chen himself was quoted as 
saying during the KMT-CCP forum, then why does Beijing not 
immediately engage in dialogue with Taipei?  Few oppose cross-strait 
economic exchanges and trade in principle.  But no one should harbor 
any illusions over the grave potential for sabotage that underlines 
the liberalization of cross-strait ties. ...  If Chen's visit is 
going to be just another cog in the Chinese machinery of 
manipulation and veiled threats, then he is not welcome.  If his 
appearance at the KMT's forum next month is going to be just another 
transparent attack on the national interest under the ruse of 
'benefiting Taiwan's farmers,' then he should forget about ever 
coming here - so long as this nation harbors any self-respect." 
 
YOUNG