06AITTAIPEI997
MEDIA REACTION: KMT CHAIRMAN MA YING-JEOU'S U.S. TRIP
Fri Mar 24 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0021
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0997/01 0830913
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 240913Z MAR 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9315
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 4959
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 6155UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000997 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - ERIC BARBORIAK 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: KMT CHAIRMAN MA YING-JEOU'S U.S. TRIP 
 
 
¶1. Summary: As Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies gave 
extensive coverage March 23 to the suicide of a suspect allegedly 
involved in a recent train derailment; the freeway electronic toll 
collection system scandal; and other local issues.  KMT Chairman Ma 
Ying-jeou's U.S. trip also received a great deal of coverage, with 
several papers devoting their second pages to reports on Ma's 
meetings with high-ranking American officials in Washington and his 
remarks at U.S. think tanks.  The pro-status quo "China Times" ran a 
banner headline on its page two that said: "The United States Uses 
Super-High-Profile [Treatment] to Receive Ma Ying-jeou with 
Courtesy.  [Ma] Meets with 'Three Big Heads' Within Two Short Days 
[of Being] in Washington."  The pro-independence "Liberty Times," 
Taiwan's biggest daily, however, ran a banner headline on its page 
two that read: "Ma Urges China to Differentiate Between the Republic 
of Taiwan and the Republic of China, [i.e.] Its Primary and 
Secondary Enemy."  The front-page news story of the pro-independence 
"Taiwan Daily," in the meantime, quoted President Chen Shui-bian's 
electronic newsletter with the headline that "Eighty Percent of the 
Taiwan People Hope to Join the United Nations." 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, a "Liberty Times" news 
analysis pointed out that Ma has gotten carried away by the 
high-profile treatment he is receiving from the United States, and 
as a result, his remarks about primary and secondary enemies reveals 
again his pro-China stance.  A "China Times" news analysis, however, 
said Washington's courteous treatment toward the KMT chairman is a 
vote of confidence in him.  Professor Chen I-hsin of Tamkang 
University's Graduate Institute of American Studies opined in the 
"China Times" that Ma's call for maintaining the status quo meets 
the expectations and interests of Washington, Beijing and Taipei.  A 
news analysis in the pro-unification "United Daily News" said Deputy 
Secretary of State Robert Zoellick's meeting with Ma will help 
 
SIPDIS 
Washington estimate the possible direction of cross-Strait 
developments.  End summary. 
 
A) "Being Carried away by His Successful [U.S. Visit], Ma Reveals 
His Unification [Intent]" 
 
Journalist Wang Yu-chong said in a news analysis in the 
pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 600,000] (3/24): 
 
"... According to Ma's remarks [in Washington], China's primary 
enemy is the Republic of Taiwan while its secondary enemy is the 
Republic of China (ROC).  Ma's comment clearly indicates that China 
can join hands with the KMT that defends the ROC in order to strike 
a blow against its secondary enemy - the Taiwan independence 
activists who promote the Republic of Taiwan. ... 
 
"Ma's U.S. visit has not concluded yet, but while his clarification 
of his pro-China and anti-U.S. stance is stilling ringing in the 
air, the KMT is ready to visit China again to hold an economic forum 
with the Chinese Communist Party.  The KMT's move, which is clearly 
an effort to extend and deepen the pro-China route adopted following 
[former KMT Chairman] Lien Chan's meeting with [Chinese President] 
Hu Jintao last year, will perhaps arouse more doubts.  Ma received 
high-profile treatment during his visit in the United States, and he 
has obviously gotten carried away by his success.  His remarks about 
the primary and secondary enemies has again revealed his pro-China 
stance and lets people see more clearly his ultimate goal." 
 
B) "[Washington] Casts a Vote of Confidence [in Ma]; the United 
States' Release of Its Messages Is of Great Significance" 
 
Journalist Hsiao Tsu-tseng said in a news analysis in the pro-status 
quo "China Times" [circulation: 400,000] (3/24): 
 
"... [U.S. Deputy Secretary of State Robert] Zoellick's nearly 
public meeting with the chairman of the KMT was the most courteous 
reception ever accorded to a Taiwan opposition party.  In addition 
to doing honor to both the KMT and Ma, the United States also meant 
to [use this courtesy to] send direct messages [to Taiwan], and this 
move carries 'dual significance' for Taiwan's two major political 
parties - the KMT and the DPP. 
 
"The [U.S.] message to the KMT was that the United States recognizes 
the KMT's elaboration of its position - that is, the KMT pledges 
that it will play the role of a stabilizing force inside Taiwan and 
that it will play the role of an alleviator of cross-Strait 
tensions.  More importantly, the KMT will assist the United States 
in stabilizing the East Asian region.  Evidently, Washington was 
very pleased with the KMT's pledges and was willing to cast a vote 
of confidence in Ma during its formal 'first contact' with him. 
 
"When it comes to the [U.S.] message to the DPP, one must not 
overlook the fact that this was [Washington's] final, clear, and 
most heavy-handed response to President Chen Shui-bian in the wake 
of his decision to 'cease the functions of the National Unification 
Council (NUC) and the National Unification Guidelines (NUG).'  The 
United States has no intention to make the DPP feel that it is 
'befriending Ma in order to restrain Chen.'  But when the 'cessation 
of the NUC and NUG' has endangered the cross-Strait situation and 
jeopardized U.S. interests, Washington, even though (to quote 
[former AIT Chairperson] Therese Shaheen) once considered Chen's 
'guardian angel,' has to clearly indicate its position, even when it 
is 'so clear' that it hurts Bian's eyes. 
 
"For China or its neighboring East Asian countries like Japan, the 
United States is also using the high-profile treatment granted to Ma 
to signal its highest strategic principle: that is, [Washington 
pursues] regional stability and [strives to] reduce trouble. 
Judging from this perspective, it is clear that Washington cares 
more about Beijing than about Taiwan's pan-Blue or pan-Green camps; 
Washington wants Beijing to know clearly that the 'cessation of the 
NUC and NUG' was definitely not a two-man show put on by the U.S. 
and Taiwan governments. ..." 
 
C) "Has Ma Ying-jeou Passed His Interview?" 
 
Professor Chen I-hsin of Tamkang University's Graduate Institute of 
American Studies opined in the pro-status quo "China Times" 
[circulation: 400,000] (3/24): 
 
"... In fact, Ma did not address his policy plans to the United 
States only; his audience also included the Chinese leaders and 
people on both sides of the Taiwan Strait.  Since the call to 
maintain the status quo is in line with Washington's and Beijing's 
expectations and Taiwan's mainstream public opinion, it can be 
easily accepted by the United States, China, Taiwan and the 
international community.  The pan-Green camp of course cannot 
possibly accept Ma's ideas, but as long as Washington and Beijing as 
well as a majority of people in Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen and Matzu 
accept it, and both sides of the Taiwan Strait can resume dialogue, 
it will naturally meet the expectations and interests of the United 
States, China and Taiwan. ..." 
 
D) "The United States Has Its Plans [Behind] Its High-Profile 
Treatment Given to Ma" 
 
Journalists Sun Yang-ming and Fan Ling-chia said in the 
pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 400,000] (3/24): 
 
"... There are possibly two reasons behind the United States' final 
decision to greatly upgrade its treatment to Ma Ying-jeou and 
exclude TECRO Chief David Lee from joining Ma's meeting [with 
high-ranking U.S. officials]:  First, the impact of [President 
Chen's decision] to 'cease the functions of the NUC and NUG' 
remained valid.  Washington, as a result, intended to let Chen know 
its displeasure toward his remarks made since the New Year's Day by 
lifting up Ma's prestige.  Second, given the fact that U.S. 
President George W. Bush will meet with Chinese President Hu Jintao 
soon, it will help the United States to estimate the possible 
direction of the development of cross-Strait relations before 2008 
if Robert Zoellick, who is in charge of Chinese affairs in the State 
Department, could obtain a face-to-face understanding of Ma's views 
toward cross-Strait relations. ..." 
 
YOUNG