06AITTAIPEI2278
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-JAPAN ALLIANCE, U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS,
Tue Jul 04 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #2278/01 1852151
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 042151Z JUL 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0976
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5368
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 6576UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 002278 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - ERIC BARBORIAK 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-JAPAN ALLIANCE, U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS, 
DPRK NUCLEAR PROGRAM 
 
 
¶1. Summary: Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused their 
coverage July 1 -3 on the investigation into the alleged role of the 
First Family's personal physician in First Lady Wu Shu-chen's 
involvement in the Sogo Department Store gift certificates scandal; 
the rumored discord between President Chen and former President Lee 
Teng-hui; the Legislative Yuan's decision to slash pensions for 
former presidents and vice-presidents; and the abduction of two 
Taiwan Coast Guard officers by Chinese fishermen on Saturday.  The 
pro-status quo "China Times" front-paged July 1 the results of a 
joint poll conducted by the newspaper and CTI-TV, which showed that 
56 percent of those polled said when they think of the Democratic 
Progressive Party, they think of corruption.  The poll also found 
that respondents said they believe that the DPP is more susceptible 
to corruption than the KMT. 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, a "China Times" opinion 
piece discussed the U.S.-Japan alliance, saying that Japan is sure 
to play a bigger and undeniable role with regard to the cross-Strait 
issue.  An editorial in the limited-circulation, pro-independence, 
English-language "Taipei Times" protested the Bush Administration's 
opposition to a House of Representatives measure which would lift 
restrictions limiting contacts between American and Taiwan 
government officials.  An editorial in the limited-circulation, 
conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" urged 
the U.S., Japan, and South Korea to keep up pressure on Pyongyang 
with regard to the nuclear crisis on the Korean Peninsula.  End 
summary. 
 
¶3. U.S.-Japan Alliance 
 
"U.S., Japan [Maintain] Strategic Clarity, But Ma Remains 
Ambiguous?" 
 
Lai I-chung, director of the DPP's Chinese Affairs Department, 
opined in the pro-status quo "China Times" [circulation: 400,000] 
(7/3): 
 
"... As a result, when Taiwan ponders the cross-Strait issue, it 
must understand that the traditional 'U.S.-China-Taiwan triangular 
structure' can no longer reflect the current strategic status quo in 
the Taiwan Strait.  Given its own diplomatic efforts and the 
'U.S.-Japan alliance,' Japan is sure to play a bigger and undeniable 
role with regard to the cross-Strait issue.  Also, Japan's strategic 
view and its expectations toward Taiwan and China will become one of 
the keys that shape the cross-Strait strategic status quo. 
 
"In addition, we need to understand that with the globalization of 
the 'U.S.-Japan alliance' and the request that the cross-Strait 
issue remain peaceful, the 'double ambiguity' - namely, the 
'strategic ambiguity' regarding whether the United States will get 
involved in a cross-Strait [conflict], and the 'support ambiguity' 
of whether Japan will support the U.S. military - has been replaced 
by 'double clarity' - namely, the 'strategic clarity' that the U.S. 
may likely get involved and the 'support clarity' that Japan will 
surely come to the U.S.'s aid.  But for Taiwan, the appearance of 
security protection may indicate 'preventive diplomacy,' meaning 
that the outside world will intervene more strongly in Taiwan's 
internal affairs.  ..." 
 
¶4. U.S.-Taiwan Relations 
 
"Please, Mr. Bush, Let Taiwan Speak" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] editorialized (7/1): 
 
"Good news indeed that the US House of Representatives has adopted a 
measure as part of a funding bill that would prevent the Bush 
administration from spending money on enforcing restrictions against 
visits by Taiwanese officials.  But the bill must be passed by the 
Senate and signed by President George W. Bush to take effect, and 
the chances of the measure relating to Taiwan surviving seem small, 
given the indecent haste with which the famously pro-China US State 
Department expressed its disapproval of developments.  But the 
overwhelming support in the House for the bill is a genuine cause 
for celebration.  The symbolism affirms the efforts of all those who 
are striving to turn Taiwan into a credible diplomatic partner for a 
country that is key to its future. ... 
 
"It is high time that pro-China forces in Washington were reminded 
in practical terms that Taiwan is not Cuba - and that the 
fundamental freedoms of Taiwanese should be reflected in the ability 
of their unofficial representatives in the US to speak to who they 
want, when they want.  The ability of Washington to conduct its 
foreign affairs cannot be injured by the simple act of enhancing 
communication between friends and allies.  If anything, it is the 
opposite: shackling Taiwanese envoys and their US counterparts is 
antagonistic toward everything good that the US stands for, and 
 
corrodes the American goal of seeding democracy around the world. 
... 
 
"The thought of Washington gagging its own public servants and 
diplomats to avoid offending an autocratic government is surprising 
enough; even more surprising - indeed, unnerving - is the apparent 
belief in the US State Department that this policy has no malign 
effect on Taiwan's ability to defend itself.  Muting the voices of 
the imperiled and cultivating an atmosphere of misunderstanding and 
aloofness is in the interests of no responsible party.  With the 
Senate vote and Bush's response to follow, Taiwan will soon be 
reminded of who in the US takes it security more seriously." 
 
¶5. DPRK Nuclear Program 
 
"U.S., Japan, South Korea Should Keep up Pressure on Pyongyang" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] said in an editorial (7/2): 
 
"After the invasion and occupation of Iraq on the pretext of 
destroying weapons of mass destruction, many critics have accused 
U.S. President George W. Bush of employing a double standard when it 
comes to North Korea.  While there are indeed some comparisons to be 
made between the two regimes, we believe that the United States is 
following a wise policy by forming a united front with Japan and 
other allies while remaining open to talks with Pyongyang.  Even 
though there are many elements in common between the former Iraqi 
regime and North Korea, we believe that as long as the U.S. and 
Japan remain committed to their stance, patient negotiations will 
eventually produce results. ... 
 
"As long as the U.S., Japan and South Korea are willing to give 
North Korea a reasonable deal in exchange for a more amicable 
relationship, we are confident that Pyongyang will cave in, in order 
to survive.  ...  Besides standing tough against Pyongyang and 
demanding it abandon weapons of mass destruction, the United States, 
Japan and South Korea need to continue prodding North Korea into 
reforming its economy. ..." 
 
YOUNG