06BEIJING24344
MFA BRIEFING ON EAST ASIA SUMMIT, CHINA-ASEAN
Wed Dec 06 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO7499
RR RUEHCHI RUEHCN RUEHDT RUEHGH RUEHHM RUEHNH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #4344/01 3400912
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 060912Z DEC 06
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2789
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 024344 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL ETRD CH RP JA KS KN
SUBJECT: MFA BRIEFING ON EAST ASIA SUMMIT, CHINA-ASEAN 
MEETINGS AND PREMIER WEN?S STATE VISIT TO THE 
PHILIPPINES 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  On December 6, Assistant Foreign Minister Cui 
Tiankai held a special press briefing outlining 
Premier Wen Jiabao?s upcoming planned state visit to 
the Philippines and Chinese participation in ASEAN- 
related events in Cebu from December 11-15.  Wen will 
attend the East Asia Summit, China-ASEAN meeting, 
ASEAN-plus-Three meeting and will chair the Northeast 
Asian Leaders Trilateral Meeting before finishing the 
trip with a State Visit.  The DPRK nuclear issue, 
energy security and trade will be among the key issues 
discussed, he said.  Answering reporter?s questions, 
Cui said China remains willing to be in touch with the 
United States about the EAS even though the United 
States is excluded from the Summit.  End Summary. 
 
East Asia Summit 
---------------- 
 
¶2. PM Wen will head a PRC delegation that includes 
Foreign Minister Li Zhaoxing, Commerce Minister Bo 
Xilai and others for the second East Asia Summit (EAS) 
and other upcoming ASEAN-related meetings in Cebu, 
Philippines, AFM Cui said.  China views the December 
13 EAS as an open and inclusive platform for East 
Asian communication and cooperation, not in 
competition with ASEAN.  Energy security will be high 
on the agenda and China believes there is room for 
cooperation in this field among the 16 participating 
countries.  China will also discuss the orientation of 
future summits and make proposals in priority areas 
including avian flu, trade, finance, disaster relief 
and education, Cui said. 
 
Northeast Asian Trilateral Leaders Meeting 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶3. PM Wen will chair the seventh China-Japan-ROK 
Leaders Meeting, during which he will meet with 
Japanese PM Abe, Cui said.  Resumption of these 
trilateral meetings promotes peaceful development and 
security in the region, Cui said.  The meeting will 
promote trilateral cooperation and China will make 
proposals for specific cooperative projects in 
political, economic, trade and cultural fields. 
Responding to a reporter's question, Cui said the 
meeting would also discuss the DPRK nuclear issue. 
China-Japan bilateral issues will not be a central 
element of the meeting, but the interaction between 
Chinese and Japanese leaders since the agreement in 
October to overcome political obstacles (e.g. Yasukuni 
issue) indicates that relations continue to develop in 
a positive direction, Cui said. 
 
ASEAN-Plus-Three Summit 
------------------------ 
 
¶4.  The tenth ASEAN-Plus-Three Summit on December 11 
will review past cooperation while planning to 
strengthen and deepen future cooperation between ASEAN 
and its northeast Asian partners.  China will make 
proposals on disaster relief, women's issues, finance 
and poverty relief.  China hopes to take advantage of 
next year's Tenth Anniversary of the ASEAN-Plus-Three 
Summit to create strategic plans and to solidify 
ASEAN-Plus-Three as a main channel of East Asian 
regional cooperation. 
 
10th ASEAN-China Summit 
----------------------- 
 
¶5. Wen's participation in the tenth ASEAN-China Summit 
December 11 will build on consensus reached between 
Wen and ASEAN leaders in the November China-ASEAN 15th 
Anniversary meeting hosted by China in Nanning.  The 
meeting will discuss material assistance by China to 
ASEAN, review recent progress and develop concrete 
plans for next year.  Three documents will be signed, 
although Cui did not disclose their content or 
subject-matter. 
 
State Visit to the Philippines 
------------------------------ 
 
¶6.  At the invitation of President Arroyo, PM Wen will 
pay a state visit to the Philippines following the 
ASEAN meetings.  PM Wen will work to deepen Beijing's 
strategic cooperative relationship with Manila and 
 
BEIJING 00024344  002 OF 002 
 
 
will meet President Arroyo, Vice President de Castro, 
Senate President Villar and Speaker of the House de 
Venecia.  Agreements concerning economic cooperation, 
trade, infrastructure and cultural protection will be 
signed.  AFM Cui expressed China?s concern about the 
welfare of the Philippine people in the aftermath of 
Typhoon Durian and noted that China has made a USD 
250,000 donation to relief efforts. 
 
U.S. An Important Part of Asian Affairs But Not In EAS 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶7.  A reporter asked AFM Cui if there would be 
representatives from the United States attending the 
meetings in Cebu in light of what the reporter 
described as the unease caused last year when the 
United States was not invited.  Cui said he has often 
discussed East Asian cooperation with his United 
States counterparts and China recognizes that the 
United States is an important cooperative partner with 
close ties to the region.  The regional cooperation 
symbolized by the EAS is open, gradual and mutually 
beneficial, he said.  It is complementary, not 
exclusive.  The United States has interests in the 
region and China welcomes such non-regional countries 
to enhance their cooperation with East Asian 
cooperative mechanisms, Cui said.