07BEIJING1064
FEBRUARY 14 TAO PRESS BRIEFING: DE- SINIFICATION,
Wed Feb 14 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO7467
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1064/01 0451208
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 141208Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4778
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 001064 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL ETRD ECON CH TW
SUBJECT: FEBRUARY 14 TAO PRESS BRIEFING: DE- SINIFICATION, 
MA YING-JEOU RESIGNATION, TEXTBOOKS, DPP VISITS 
 
 Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. Key points at the February 14 Taiwan Affairs Office 
(TAO) press briefing were: 
 
-- A firm condemnation of Chen Shui-bian's "de- 
Sinification" and "de jure independence" tactics at 
the opening of the press briefing. 
 
-- TAO is paying attention to events surrounding Ma 
Ying-jeou's resignation from the KMT and welcomes 
development of relations with DPP figures if they 
accept the "One China" principle and the "1992 
Consensus." 
 
-- A claim by a Tsinghua University scholar that China 
would achieve reunification by 2020 reflects his 
individual opinion. 
 
-- No information was given regarding the possible 
visit to Taiwan of the TAO Economic Director, but Li 
said TAO personnel often visit Taiwan for exchanges. 
 
Taiwan Textbooks, Museum Promote "Independence" 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶2. Taiwan Affairs Office (TAO) spokesman Li Weiyi 
opened the February 14 press conference with a stern 
denunciation of Chen Shui-bian's disregard for the 
economy and people of Taiwan in vigorously promoting 
secessionist activities of "de-Sinification" and 
scheming for "de jure Taiwan independence."  Other 
political parties and the people of Taiwan, in 
addition to the international community, have strongly 
condemned this selfish provocation of tension in 
cross-Strait relations, Li said, adding that 
compatriots on both sides of the Strait oppose "Taiwan 
Independence" for which there is no road forward. 
Reporters asked questions regarding specific name 
changes, such as those of "China Post," "China 
Airlines," and "China Steel," to which Li responded 
that those most harmed by the "name changing" behavior 
were the Taiwan people and Taiwan enterprises. 
 
¶3. When asked by a Singaporean reporter for a specific 
definition of "de jure Taiwan independence" and 
whether enterprise name-changing and textbook 
revisions were considered to constitute "de jure 
Taiwan independence," Li said this is the atmosphere 
in society Chen Shui-bian is striving to create for 
"de jure independence." 
 
KMT Leadership Change, Warming Toward DPP 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. The TAO is paying attention to the events 
surrounding Ma Ying-jeou's resignation of the KMT 
chairmanship and the potential impact on cross-Strait 
relations, said Li.  Asked if President Hu would send 
congratulations to the new KMT chairman as he 
reportedly did when Ma assumed the position, the 
spokesman denied that such a gesture ever took place. 
Li declined to comment on the possibility of Lien 
Chan's taking over as acting KMT chairman. 
 
¶5. The DPP itself is closing the door on developing 
relations with the Mainland through its party platform 
of "Taiwan independence," Li said when asked if the 
Mainland would change its strategy toward Taiwan in 
light of Ma's resignation and choose to develop 
relations with the DPP.  The spokesman did, however, 
acknowledge the difference between the vast majority 
of DPP members and a handful of "Taiwan independence" 
separatists, welcoming DPP members to visit China and 
increase understanding under the "appropriate name." 
Additionally, Li reiterated the Mainland's willingness 
to discuss the development of cross-Strait relations 
and promote peaceful reunification with any person or 
party from Taiwan, no matter what they have said or 
done, as long as they accept the "One China" principle 
and the "1992 Consensus." 
 
Textbooks Should Objectively Present Heinous Massacre 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶6. Prompted by Mainland media for a response to the 
"watering down" of the Nanjing Massacre in high school 
textbooks in Taiwan, Li said heinous crimes committed 
by Japanese militarists should not be forgotten and 
should be represented objectively in history 
textbooks.  China is resolutely opposed to any 
 
BEIJING 00001064  002 OF 002 
 
 
"distortion or obliteration." 
 
2020 Reunification Timetable: Scholar's Opinion 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶7. In light of a research report by Tsinghua 
Univerity scholar Hu Angang stating that China's 2020 
national security objective includes reunification, a 
Taiwan reporter asked if the Mainland has set a 
definite timetable.  Li said the report was the 
personal opinion of a scholar and reiterated China's 
commitment to the One-China Principle, realization of 
complete reunification, safeguarding national 
sovereignty, and opposing "Taiwan independence." 
 
Economic Director of TAO Might Visit Taiwan 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶8. Li said he had no definite information relating to 
recent reports that the Economic Director of the 
Taiwan Affairs Office would visit Taiwan, but noted 
that cross-Strait exchanges are frequent. 
 
Pilot Cooperation Measures in Fujian 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶9. When queried as to whether new pilot measures in 
Fujian Province to promote cross-Strait exchanges are 
masking preparations for future military action, Li 
replied that Fujian has "unique advantages' including 
culture, familial ties and economic relations in 
developing cross-Strait trade, personnel exchanges and 
policy which will be come deeper and more extensive. 
 
No News on Progress in Tourism Consultations 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶10. When asked to comment on reports that progress on 
Mainland tourists traveling to Taiwan is expected 
after Spring Festival, Li would only restate cross- 
Strait trade organizations have conducted technical 
consultations and reached consensus in many areas. 
Everyone hopes for a final consensus as soon as 
possible. 
 
¶11. Li said cross-Strait airlines and related 
organizations have safely and thoughtfully implemented 
this Spring Festival's charter flights, but he would 
provide no additional information on regularization of 
charter flights when asked by reporters. 
 
 
SEDNEY