09AITTAIPEI1529
MEDIA REACTION: U.S. BEEF IMPORTS
Tue Dec 29 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1529/01 3630938
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 290938Z DEC 09
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3015
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 9586
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0973UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001529 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/P, EAP/PD - THOMAS HAMM 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S. BEEF IMPORTS 
 
Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused December 
29 news coverage on Taiwan's economy, which showed signs of 
sustained recovery for the first time in 25 months; on the aftermath 
of the fourth round of cross-Strait negotiations; and on the 
discussion in the Legislative Yuan regarding possible legislation 
restricting U.S. beef imports.  In terms of editorials and 
commentaries, an op-ed in the pro-independence "Liberty Times" 
provided several principles for the Taiwan government and public to 
"fight against" the U.S.-Taiwan beef deal.  An op-ed in the 
pro-unification "United Daily News," however, urged the legislators 
from both the ruling and opposition parties not to oppose the deal 
just for the sake of opposition.  End summary. 
 
A) "The Key to Fight against the [U.S.-Taiwan] Beef [Deal] Lies in 
the Last Paragraph of the Protocol" 
 
Former Environmental Protection Administration Minister Winston Dang 
opined in the pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 
680,000] (12/29): 
 
"When the time has come for the final stage of law amendments 
concerning U.S. beef [imports], the Ma administration still hopes to 
use [the phrase] offshore [beef] 'inspection' to replace that of 
'blocking [U.S. beef] outside the border.'  The Ma administration 
has also continued to call on the public in a threatening tone....to 
jointly assume the burden of the consequences of offending the 
United States.  The following principles are provided for the 
[public's] reference to teach them how to fight against the 'beef' 
[deal]: 
 
"First, fighting a decisive battle outside the border:  As for 
national security, the best policy for [maintaining] food safety is 
to fight a decisive battle outside the border.  U.S. beef has been 
regarded as a food product harmful to people's health, so it leaves 
[us] no other options but to amend the laws to block it outside the 
border and to start renegotiating [a new deal].  Second, do not make 
[the wording] vague:  When it comes to 'inspection,' it is unlikely 
that the U.S. government will allow 'any foreigner or foreign 
officials' to exercise such authority that is exclusive to U.S. 
officials. ...  Third, do not fear [U.S.] retaliation:  The Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs said the United States will likely adopt 
'economic retaliation' [against Taiwan], such as refusing to resume 
talks under the Taiwan-U.S. Trade and Investment Framework Agreement 
(TIFA).  But according to former [Taiwan] officials stationed in the 
United States, Taipei and Washington have had digital video 
conferences on TIFA since 2007; what the two sides lacked was just 
sitting down and talking face-to-face with each other. 
 
"Fourth, do not be worried about the U.S. attitude:  The U.S. side 
is clearly aware that blocking [U.S. beef] outside the border will 
only cause them to lose....approximately US$2 million.  By imposing 
'economic retaliation' or by 'not supporting Taiwan's participation 
in international organizations' for such a small amount of money, it 
will trigger a backlash from the Taiwan public and push them to 
refuse to eat U.S. beef all the more (which will end up being a 
[much larger] loss, including both boneless and bone-in beef).  What 
is worse is that it will likely spark anti-U.S. sentiment, which is 
rare among the Taiwan people.  Fifth, it is all about Ma again: 
U.S. beef is a simple food safety issue.  Yet it is the ignorance 
and arrogance of [Taiwan's] National Security Council (NSC) 
officials in charge of the [U.S.-Taiwan beef] deal; their disregard 
for the importance of communication and transparency concerning the 
risks of food safety policies; and their black-box operations, which 
have set off the anti-U.S. beef sentiment in society.  Washington 
should be clearly aware that it is all about 'Ma,' not the 'beef.' 
 
"Sixth, do not let others look down on us:  The series of 
administrative measures adopted by the Department of Health are 
merely moves centering on technically interfering [with the U.S. 
beef imports] -- an attempt to make up for the mistakes the NSC has 
made.  Such childish, petty tricks or playing with words will not 
only waste the taxpayers' money but also violate the Taiwan-U.S. 
[beef] protocol, the commitments made under the World Trade 
Organization, and the foundation of mutual trust built upon the 
international practices.  Such moves by the Ma administration, which 
is feeling good about itself, will only make foreigners look down on 
us. 
 
"Seventh, [now] is a good opportunity for renegotiating [with the 
United States]:  In fact, according to the last paragraph of the 
[U.S.-Taiwan beef] protocol -- 'shall hold consultations within 180 
days of the effective date of the protocol to review its 
implementation,' both sides can take this opportunity to review [the 
deal] in an effort to prevent any controversy caused by the failure 
to communicate [thoroughly] over the possible risks. ..." 
 
B) "No U.S. Beef, and No ECFA; What Does Taiwan Want?" 
 
Professor Edward Chen from Tamkang University's Graduate Institute 
of American Studies opined in the mass-circulation "United Daily 
News" [circulation: 400,000] (12/29): 
 
"... With regard to the U.S. beef issue, it is true that the 
[Taiwan] government had a lapse in communicating sufficiently within 
the government itself and with the Legislative Yuan.  When it comes 
to the matter of [signing] the Economic Cooperation Framework 
Agreement (ECFA) [with China], the [Taiwan] government also fell 
short in communicating with the ruling and opposition parties and 
making publicity that hit the mark.  Nonetheless, both the ruling 
and opposition legislators must not oppose [the U.S.-Taiwan beef 
deal and ECFA] just for the sake of opposition, because Taiwan 
cannot afford to have neither the U.S. beef deal nor ECFA -- that 
would mean opposing both the United States and China.  For the 
ruling party legislators in particular, they must never abandon 
their party line, because if our country is beaten, all our people 
will suffer." 
 
MADISON