09AITTAIPEI1503
MEDIA REACTION: CROSS-STRAIT RELATIONS, U.S. BEEF IMPORTS
Thu Dec 17 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1503/01 3511000
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 171000Z DEC 09
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2972
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 9578
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0965UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001503 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/P, EAP/PD - THOMAS HAMM 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: CROSS-STRAIT RELATIONS, U.S. BEEF IMPORTS 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused news 
coverage December 17 on the fourth round of cross-Strait 
negotiations, which is scheduled to be held in Taichung from 
December 22 to December 24; on cross-Strait relations; and on the 
new Secretary-General of the KMT and DPP, respectively.  In terms of 
editorials and commentaries, an editorial in the pro-independence 
"Liberty Times" discussed two opinion surveys conducted recently on 
cross-Strait relations.  The article said the surveys showed that it 
is the will of the Taiwan people to move from the current status of 
maintaining the status quo to independence, which is opposite to 
Ma's goal of ultimate unification with China.  An editorial in the 
pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" also said Ma does 
not have the authority to determine Taiwan's future.  With regard to 
U.S. beef imports, an editorial in the conservative, 
pro-unification, English-language "China Post" said now that the DPP 
has won the December 5 local elections, all the controversy caused 
by the Taiwan government's decision to open its market to U.S. beef 
and beef products should come to an end.  End summary. 
 
¶2. Cross-Strait Relations 
 
A) "Poll Survey Figures Talk -- Opposition to China's Annexation" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 680,000] 
editorialized (12/17): 
 
"... Judging from the [recent] poll surveys done by 'CommonWealth' 
magazine and National Taiwan University, one can easily tell that it 
is indeed the will of the Taiwan people to maintain the status quo 
[for the time being] and then move toward independence.  To sum up, 
it is the choice made by the majority of the Taiwan people to move 
from the current status of maintaining [Taiwan's] independent 
sovereignty to [becoming] a completely normalized country.  In other 
words, moving from the current [status] of de facto independence to 
de jure independence is the only road that the leader of Taiwan, a 
democratic country that puts the democratic rights in the hands of 
its people, must do in order to carry out the will of his people. 
... 
 
"... If 'no unification' and 'no independence' weigh equally in Ma's 
heart, shouldn't he respect the will of the Taiwan people and 
thereby create a climate favorable for carrying out the will of his 
people?  The fact that Ma constantly bears ultimate unification in 
mind and is thinking of the one-China common market all the time is 
sufficient to prove that he stands on the opposite side of the 
[Taiwan] people's will; Ma's will is to unify [with China]. ..." 
 
B) "Ma Remains Oblivious to the Public" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] editorialized (12/17): 
 
"Rushing to respond to President Ma Ying-jeou's recent interview 
with the Wall Street Journal in which he was quoted as supporting a 
timetable of 10 years for Taiwan and China to consider unification, 
the Presidential Office on Tuesday said that the president had been 
misquoted. ...  The crux of the controversy is: What gives Ma the 
authority to set a timetable of any duration for Taiwanese to 
consider unification with China?  The decision on Taiwan's future -- 
be it independence, unification or the 'status quo' -- lies in the 
hands of Taiwanese. It is not a subject that the Taiwanese people 
have authorized the president to decide unilaterally, nor a subject 
that should be influenced by what people on the other side of the 
Strait believe.  During campaigning and when delivering major 
speeches, Ma often states that 'Taiwan's future should be decided by 
its 23 million people.'  This wording sounds democratic and shows 
respect for the idea that Taiwanese should determine the country's 
fate.  Ma's remarks in the Wall Street Journal interview, however, 
confirm that he wants eventual unification with China. ..." 
 
¶3. U.S. Beef Imports 
 
"Is the Beef War Finally Coming to an End?" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (12/17): 
 
"Now that the opposition Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) has won 
the important local elections, the beef war, triggered by the 
conclusion of a protocol signed on Oct. 22 for importation of bovine 
products that may cause spongiform encephalopathy or mad cow 
disease, seems to be coming to an end. ...  The opposition party 
gathered 129,065 signatures to have its referendum proposal 
endorsed.  But it's going to be very difficult to collect more than 
seven times as many for the second round -- at the request of the 
commission -- to have the referendum adopted.  By far the great 
majority of people on Taiwan are non-beef eaters. They have no fear 
of infection because they don't eat beef and will stay away from the 
polls.  None of the six referendums called in 2004 and last year 
were validated because less than half of the eligible voters took 
part due to lack of interest. ... 
 
"All this means the amendments will be deliberated on and a 
compromise may be adopted before the Legislative Yuan adjourns for 
the winter in February next year.  The opposition would be happy to 
negotiate a compromise with the ruling party, its legislative caucus 
whip said.  The amendments would ban risky imports, but do not 
entail renegotiation of the protocol, which KMT lawmaker Hwang 
Yih-jiau, who proposed one amendment, said can be overridden by 
legislation.  It's time to end the totally unnecessary war so that 
both the KMT and the opposition party may get on with their 
respective campaign for the mayoral elections in five special 
municipalities, three of them newly created. ..." 
 
STANTON