09CHENGDU315
TIBET PARTY LINE PITFALL: "TIBET HAS BEEN PART OF CHINA
Fri Dec 18 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Chengdu
VZCZCXRO0041
PP RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHCN #0315/01 3520939
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 180939Z DEC 09
FM AMCONSUL CHENGDU
TO RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC PRIORITY 0043
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 4368UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 CHENGDU 000315 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS IBB/VOA/CHINESE SERVICE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM KPAS VOA CH
SUBJECT: TIBET PARTY LINE PITFALL: "TIBET HAS BEEN PART OF CHINA 
SINCE ANCIENT TIMES" 
 
REF: A) CHENGDU 251;   B) CHENGDU 248 
 
CHENGDU 00000315  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶1.  (U)  This message contains sensitive but unclassified 
information.  Not for Internet distribution. 
 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) Summary: The politically charged historical statement 
"Tibet has been part of China since ancient times" has been 
widely used in the PRC media and officials since 2008 and became 
an additional condition that the "Dalai Clique" must accept. 
Tibetan Autonomous Region (TAR) government websites and media 
even put this new Tibet policy formulation into the mouth of the 
U.S. Consul General, visiting from Chengdu last October, via a 
fabricated quote.  While foreigners generally leave ancient 
history to the historians, this is an intensely political issue 
for which the Chinese Communist Party (CPC) and its propaganda 
apparatus are ready to use bold-faced lies to promote. 
 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) The statement "Tibet has been part of China since 
ancient times" itself became part of the party line only in 
2008, inspired by a 2007 book.  This Tibet rhetoric has echoes: 
the theme "has been a part of China since ancient times" is now 
showing up in unofficial PRC articles and blog postings about 
Xinjiang, Taiwan and Mongolia.  Foreign visitors and scholars 
are sometimes victims of misrepresentation in the PRC press on 
sensitive issues, including then-senator Hillary Clinton (on 
references to Tiananmen) in her memoirs.  End Summary. 
 
 
 
After Refusing to Correct Record in "Free TAR Media", 
 
TAR Official Invites U.S. to Issue its Own Correction 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
 
 
¶4. (SBU)  TAR government websites and media maliciously "quoted" 
Chengdu CG's October 20 in a meeting with TAR Vice Governor Wu, 
quoting him as saying "Tibet has been part of China since 
ancient times." (Chinese of misquote is tinyurl.com/yj2tx3e; see 
also ref A.)  When CG protested to the TAR Foreign Affairs 
Office (FAO), an official replied that since the TAR has a "free 
press," and cannot be given orders-- two cynical falsehoods, of 
course, as the PRC's press -- particularly press organs attached 
to the government -- are tightly controlled.  If the USG 
disagrees with the report, the FAO official said, then it should 
put out its own statement. 
 
 
 
Saying Tibet Part of China, "Since Ancient Times" is New Twist 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------------- 
 
 
 
¶5.  (U)   There are at least three ways, and one new fourth way, 
to say that Tibet is part of China: 
 
 
 
-- Tibet is part of China. 
 
-- Tibet is part of the People's Republic of China 
 
-- Tibet is historically part of China 
 
-- Tibet has been part of China since ancient times.  (Xizang 
zigu yilai shi zhongguode yibufen) 
 
 
 
¶6.  (SBU)   Discussion of the Tibet-China question founders in 
the complexity of the questions what is Tibet and what is China: 
 
 
 
-- "What is Tibet?" in both English and Chinese statements refer 
to Tibet as the Tibetan Autonomous Region where about half 
(three million) of China's ethnic Tibetans live.  By contrast, 
the Dalai Lama and most ethnic Tibetans consider Tibet to be not 
just the TAR, but also adjacent Tibetan areas of China including 
parts of Qinghai, Gansu, Sichuan and Yunnan: altogether a 
quarter of the territory of the PRC. 
 
 
CHENGDU 00000315  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
 
 
-- "What is China" the current territory of the PRC was home to 
a succession of dynasties, some led by foreign invaders, some 
led by Chinese with constantly shifting borders as imperial 
power waxed and waned.  Chinese nationalists often consider the 
conquest of a territory or tribute relations with a previous 
dynasty as strengthening the claim for the PRC to that 
territory, and that the Republic of China, and later the PRC, 
have a natural claim to the former territory of the Qing Empire. 
 
 
 
 
Historical Background: 
 
Three Generations of PRC Leaders on Tibet and China 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Mao Zedong, Deng Xiaping and Jiang Zemin on Tibet: 
 
 
 
-- Mao Zedong: according to the current story in China's 
official media, Mao wanted the Dalai Lama to recognize Tibet as 
part of China, and allow democratic and socialist reforms in 
Tibet (URL at tinyurl.com/ylsfdxm). 
 
 
 
-- Deng Xiaoping:  according to official media, in 1979 Deng 
said Tibet is part of China, and made that the main question in 
China's discussions with representatives of the Dalai Lama, 
placing less emphasis on subsidiary questions (URL at 
tinyurl.com/yfxsd83). 
 
 
 
-- Jiang Zemin: according to official media, Jiang Zemin said in 
1998 that the Dalai Lama should recognize not only that Tibet is 
part of China, but also that Taiwan is part of China, and that 
the PRC is the only legitimate government of China (URL at 
tinyurl.com/yjh547f). [Comment: The PRC has been adding ever 
more conditions that the Dalai Lama must meet. For more on the 
PRC and the Dalai Lama, see ref B on CG's meeting with the 
United Front Department.] 
 
 
 
In 2007, "Tibet has been Part of China Since Ancient Times" 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
 
 
¶8.  (U) The formulation "Tibet has been part of China since 
ancient times" seems to have arisen in 2007; Chinese language 
Google searches turn up nothing earlier.  The formulation seems 
to have arisen from the 2007 book "The Local History of Tibet" 
[Xizang Difang Tongshi Shu described at URL tinyurl.com/yfr24ro] 
by two Chinese/ethnic Han scholars at the TAR Academy of Social 
Sciences, Luo Guangwu and He Zongying. 
 
 
 
¶9.  (U) After March 2008, an increasing number of articles using 
the formulation "Tibet has been part of China since ancient 
times" have appeared in the PRC media.  Sun Yong (ethnic Han), 
Deputy Director of the TAR Academy of Social Sciences says that 
Tibet is part of China's history, or China's frontier history 
from its very beginnings and does not just date from the Yuan 
Dynasty one thousand years ago.  Sun claims that Tibetans like 
the Han and other PRC nationalities are all descended from 
Beijing Man found by archaeologists at Zhoukoudian near Beijing 
during the 1930s (URL at tinyurl.com/auuks6). 
 
 
 
¶10.  (U) The CPC's United Front Department, which has 
responsibility for work on nationalities issues and is the 
contact point for talks with the Dalai Lama's representatives, 
added "from ancient times" to the list of points that the Dalai 
Lama must accept.  In June 2009, Zhu Weiqun, the lead PRC 
counterpart for the Dalai Lama's representatives and Executive 
Deputy Director of the United Front Department, said that the 
point at issue with the Dalai Clique is that they completely 
 
CHENGDU 00000315  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
deny Tibet has been part of China since ancient times.  "We on 
the other hand insist that Tibet has been part of China 
throughout its history" (URL at tinyurl.com/yj6ha3c). 
 
 
 
On an Ancient Rhetorical Roll: Tibet, Xinjiang and Mongolia Too 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------------ 
 
 
 
¶11. (U) The Tibet rhetoric has echoes: the theme "has been a 
part of China since ancient times" is now showing up in 
unofficial PRC articles and blog postings about Xinjiang, Taiwan 
and Mongolia: 
 
 
 
-- "Xinjiang has been part of China since ancient times" an 
August 2009 Guangming Ribao [a CPC paper aimed at intellectuals] 
article in Guangming Ribao by Li Ren of the China Border Region 
History and Geography Institute of the Chinese Academy of Social 
Sciences. 
 
 
 
-- The formula "Taiwan has been part of China since ancient 
times" has been taken up by many unofficial articles and blogs. 
A Google.cn search comes up with over 300,000 hits on this 
phrase from articles and blogs online mostly over the past 
several years [URL tinyurl.com/taiwan-at]. 
 
 
 
-- and even a rhetorical spillover into Mongolia with 10,000 
hits on the phrase "Mongolia has been part of China since 
ancient times [URL tinyurl.com/mongolia-at]. 
 
 
 
 
 
Comment: SecState Clinton Also Victim of Chinese Censorship 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
 
 
¶12.  (SBU) Foreign visitors and scholars are sometimes victims 
of misrepresentation of their statements in the PRC press on 
sensitive issues.  For example, translations of foreign books, 
including books by prominent Americans including the memoir of 
as then-senator Clinton (on references to Tiananmen) are 
sometimes censored.  Each time, the offended foreigner, if they 
dare to try to set the record straight, has not been able to 
reach the Chinese audience with a reply.  The problem of "Tibet 
has been part of China since ancient times" is not a historical 
one.  The problem is politicizing historical questions. 
BROWN