09CHENGDU198
GETTING TRADE FLOWING:  A PHASED APPROACH TO BEEF
Mon Sep 21 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Chengdu
VZCZCXRO0176
RR RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHCN #0198/01 2640728
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 210728Z SEP 09
FM AMCONSUL CHENGDU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3408
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHRC/DEPT OF AGRICULTURE WASHINGTON DC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 4099UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 CHENGDU 000198 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/CM 
COMMERCE FOR USTR CHINA DESK, WINELANDT, O'CONNORL 
USDA FOR FAS/OSTA/ANIMAL DIVISION, BERMAND, BEANC 
USDA FOR FAS/OCRA/CHINA DESK, SHEPPARDW, RADLERC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD EAGR EINV ECON PREL CH
SUBJECT: GETTING TRADE FLOWING:  A PHASED APPROACH TO BEEF 
 
CHENGDU 00000198  001.2 OF 004 
 
 
¶1. (U) Sensitive But Unclassified.  Not for Internet 
Distribution. 
 
What's at "Steak": A Billion Dollars in U.S. Exports in Short 
Order 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
-------- 
 
¶2. (U) At a recent meeting with Ambassador in Chengdu, AmCit 
Steven Allemang pleaded for USDA to issue export certificates so 
that he could comply with Chinese import requirements for his 
U.S. beef.  The expert certificate is "all that is stopping me 
from leading a USD one billion U.S. export bonanza." 
 
"Where's the Beef?" - Recommend Legal Imports Now, Greater 
Market Access Later 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
------------------- 
 
¶3. (U) Allemang proposed a phased approach for gaining Chinese 
compliance with international import standards for beef.  Small 
and medium sized business could comply with current Chinese 
import requirements for U.S. beef, and the U.S. government could 
continue to negotiate for market access for a broader category 
of products, he said. 
 
Ambassador Roundtable, JCCT: Ban on U.S. Beef Exports to China 
Needs Review 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
---------------- 
 
¶4. (U) At an August 28, 2009 round table discussion with 
Ambassador Huntsman in Chengdu, U.S. businessman Steven Allemang 
of SMA Holdings highlighted the billion dollar business impact 
on U.S. beef exports as a result of the current U.S.-China 
stalemate in beef market access negotiations.  As follow-up, and 
in light of the upcoming, October 27-29, 2009 meeting of the 
Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade (JCCT) in Hangzhou, 
Consul General, Foreign Agricultural Service (FAS) 
representative, and Econoff met with Allemang September 9 to 
review the issue in detail. 
 
I Can Export: Give Me a USDA Export Certificate 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶5. (U) Allemang explained that, but for the U.S. government's 
rejection of China's July 31, 2006 veterinary requirements, the 
United States would have over a billion dollar in beef exports 
to China.   Further, the U.S. rejection of China's veterinary 
requirements, and unwillingness to issue USDA export 
certificates consistent with these requirements, threatens 
long-term U.S. trade interests by allowing an on-going degrading 
of U.S. beef's reputation in the China market. Allemang 
estimates U.S. exports would be over $200 million the first year 
USDA provides these certificates. 
 
SMEs: Let Me Sell My Beef NOW 
----------------------------- 
 
¶6. (U) The current U.S. all-or-nothing negotiating position is 
bad for business, Allemang contended.  This position responds to 
large industry producers in the United States, and assumes that 
China will eventually capitulate.  "In the meantime, businessmen 
like myself are losing market opportunities," he said. 
 
¶7. (U) Allemang acknowledged that China's position on U.S. beef 
imports is inconsistent with international standards and not 
compliant with rules of the World Organization for Animal Health 
(aka International Office of Epizootics (OIE) ).  However, he 
argued that our priority should be to "start the flow" of U.S. 
beef into the China market and then work on expanding market 
access.  He proposed that the U.S. begin by "accepting the rules 
as written" to allow U.S. producers willing and able to meet 
China's current import requirements to begin exporting. 
 
BSE Found: China Bans U.S. Beef 
------------------------------- 
 
¶8. (U) Background: In December 2003, a cow infected with bovine 
spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) was identified in the state of 
Washington.  Shortly thereafter, China and most U.S. trade 
partners, banned imports of live cattle and bovine products from 
the United States.  The ban extended even to low-risk products, 
including cosmetics and other products that used non-protein 
beef tallow, plus bovine semen and embryos.  The U.S. industry 
 
CHENGDU 00000198  002.2 OF 004 
 
 
and U.S. negotiators looked for a short-lived ban.  USDA 
negotiations led to the resumption of trade in cosmetics, bovine 
semen and other low-risk materials in 2004. 
 
China Issues Veterinary Requirements: U.S. Says "No Deal" 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
¶9. (U) After protracted negotiations with the United States, on 
July 31, 2006, China agreed to resume imports.  The import 
requirements were outlined in an announcement of the "Inspection 
and Quarantine Requirements on the Conditional Resumption of 
U.S. Boneless Beef Imports," known in the industry as China's 
Veterinary Requirements.  The Veterinary Requirements permitted 
the import of boneless beef from the U.S. as long as it met 22 
import requirements and came with an USDA export certificate. 
 
¶10. (U) USG concerns about the onerous import certification 
requirements included that only muscle meat was permitted entry, 
animals had to be under 30-months of age, U.S. beef imports into 
China had to be "fully traceable," and beef that was not 
compliant with the Veterinary Requirements could not be 
comingled with beef exported to China.  As a result, the U.S. 
rejected the Chinese Veterinary Requirements as not being based 
on science, as required under China's World Trade Organization 
accession agreement, and also impossible for U.S. industry to 
meet. 
 
The U.S. Position: All or Nothing: China Says No 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶11. (U) The U.S. did not accept the 2006 terms.  To date, legal 
beef trade has still not resumed, and the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture (USDA) still will not provide an export certificate 
for U.S. beef products for China.  The U.S. position remains 
that China's Veterinary Requirements are inconsistent with the 
OIE guidelines under which the U.S. has been eligible to export 
all beef and beef products from cattle of any age since May 
2007, when the OIE issued its BSE "controlled risk" country 
status for the United States. 
 
¶12. (U) High level talks continued between the U.S. and China 
after the July 2006 Veterinary Requirements were issued.  These 
discussions, including those following the December 2007 JCCT, 
failed to make any progress.  Some further information sharing 
took place at the September 2008 JCCT, and again during working 
level meetings held in November 2008, but there has been no 
significant engagement on this issue in the interim.  The GOC 
claimed that it was being held to a higher standard than other 
markets, such as Japan and Korea, where, prior to its May 2007 
OIE eligibility certification, the U.S. had previously agreed to 
less than complete market openings. 
 
Phased Approach: A Good Negotiating Position 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶13. (U) If the market is opened under the current Chinese rules, 
Allemang asserted, Chinese industry interest in expanding access 
to high-quality U.S. beef would gradually influence the Chinese 
government to grant more complete market access.  Additionally, 
he contends, a flexible U.S. stance would help create an overall 
more cooperative negotiation environment.  Allowing U.S. beef 
exports to resume under current rules, he said, need not 
preclude continued, hard bargaining toward the ultimate goal of 
an OIE-compliant beef regime. 
 
U.S. Beef Industry Organizations Urge United States to Negotiate 
Phased-in Market Access for Beef 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶14. (U) In a April 15, 2009 letter to Agriculture Secretary 
Vilsack and U.S. Trade Representative Kirk, U.S. beef industry 
representatives acknowledged China and several other trading 
partners are "not in a position politically" to restore full 
access immediately.  The groups propose negotiating market 
opening agreements in stages that eventually lead to full OIE 
compliance.   The letter was co-signed by the following 
organizations representing U.S. beef producers:  American Meat 
Institute, National Cattlemen's Beef Organization, National Meat 
Association, and the U.S. Meat Export Federation. 
 
Elimination of DeLauro Amendment Necessary to Resume Beef 
Negotiations 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
----------- 
 
CHENGDU 00000198  003.2 OF 004 
 
 
 
¶15. (SBU) U.S. efforts to reopen the Chinese beef market have 
been hampered by legislation prohibiting USDA from rulemaking to 
allow imports of cooked chicken from China (aka the DeLauro 
Amendment).  Beef negotiations were suspended in November 2007, 
when the amendment was first signed into law.  China continues 
to emphasize unofficially it cannot proceed on key U.S. 
agriculture market access concerns, including beef, as long as 
the DeLauro amendment remains in place.  The amendment was 
extended through September 2009.  Legislation to eliminate 
DeLauro under the fiscal year 2010 Agriculture Appropriations 
Bill is currently being debated.   Elimination of DeLauro would 
allow beef negotiations to resume. 
 
No Formal Market Access But Illegal Imports Are Booming 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
¶16. (SBU) Post understands that current estimates are the market 
for U.S. beef in China is approximately $200 million.  China 
imports U.S. beef through gray market channels brought in 
through Hong Kong and Vietnam.  In the restaurants and hotels of 
the "first tier" cities of Beijing, Guangzhou and Shanghai, U.S. 
beef is not on the menu, even if it is on the plate.  In "second 
tier" cities, like Chengdu, U.S. beef is not only on the plate 
but on the menu in most top-end restaurants and five-star 
hotels. In addition, because of the high demand of specialty 
means, including stomach, intestines, throat and tongue, these 
products from the U.S. are also available.  FAS Chengdu market 
surveys confirmed the availability of U.S. beef at wholesale 
markets and in hotels and restaurants. At $200 million, China 
would be the fifth largest export market for U.S. beef. 
 
Contraband is Not Good for Quality or Reputation 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶17. (U) While lamenting that he cannot legally bring in 
America's best, Allemang railed against the argument that 
illegal access is better than no access.  Traditionally, the 
reputation in China of U.S. beef is that it is second to none - 
the highest quality available on the world market.  Now, low 
quality U.S. beef or mislabeled domestic or third-country beef 
is compromising the U.S. reputation for quality among millions 
of emerging, middle-income consumers. 
 
¶18. (U) Allemang explained that in the absence of legal imports, 
low quality U.S. beef is entering the China market.  Instead of 
USDA Premium or Choice as would normally be imported for top-end 
food service facilities, U.S. beef smugglers typically bring in 
commercial USDA Select beef, an inferior product that 
compromises future premium marketing efforts.  In addition, 
domestic or third-country (especially Australian) beef is 
sometimes labeled as "U.S. beef" to deceive the consumer and 
thus obtain larger profit margins. The result is to provide 
smugglers and unscrupulous handlers of a price-premium for a 
less-than-premium product; the result is a long-term hit to U.S. 
beef's high-quality reputation and market prospects. 
 
Small Producers and Processors Ready to Meet the Market Meat 
Demand 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
-------- 
 
¶19. (U) Allemang asserted that for small and medium-sized 
producers and processors (SME) like himself, only the lack of 
USDA export certificate bars U.S. beef export viability to 
China.  His company alone, he said, would be able to import a 
container a week almost immediately.  The total market for U.S. 
beef could easily reach USD one billion within a short period, 
and would only grow from there, he emphasized. 
 
¶20. (U) Allemang explained that his company has business 
relationships with producers and processors in Florida, Texas 
and New Mexico that are already compliant with the current 
Chinese veterinary requirements, including the requirements for 
"full traceability," and that he is ready to market premium beef 
to the Chinese food service industry.  Once this obstruction is 
removed, he said, he would be able to have his product in China 
within 2-3 months. 
 
¶21. (U) Allemang notes that many SME involved in beef 
production, which comprise about 20 percent of U.S. beef 
production capacity, are also either ready to export under 
current Chinese requirements or could adjust to meet them within 
12 to 18 months.  In the short- to medium-term, the greater 
problem would be for the large producers. 
 
CHENGDU 00000198  004.2 OF 004 
 
 
 
Traceability: What it is and What it Means 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶22. (U) The second issue that has been problematic for the large 
U.S. beef industry players, says Allemang, is the full 
traceability requirement.  Traceability requires that each cut 
of beef be traced back to an individual animal throughout the 
food distribution chain, from birth to slaughter to 
in-store/restaurant sales.  Further, there can be no comingling. 
 
 
¶23. (U) In response to the identification of a dairy cow with 
BSE in Washington, USDA implemented in 2004 the National Animal 
Identification System (NAIS).  NAIS is a voluntary 
identification system.  According to Allemang, only an estimated 
30 percent of ranchers have adopted NAIS as a result of a 
reluctance to share such information among industry players, 
including ranchers, feedlots, processers, and government 
agencies, and over concern for the costs involved.  As a result 
of this low adoption rate, most large-volume slaughtering plants 
cannot procure an adequate supply of traceable beef without 
running into comingling problems. 
 
¶24. (U) In fact, while large players would face a longer 
adjustment period to meet China's veterinary requirements, 
Allemang believes they would quickly begin to adjust once the 
flow of legal, high-quality U.S. beef resumed.  In the meantime, 
he emphasized the benefit of giving U.S. SMEs the opportunity to 
establish a competitive presence in the Chinese beef market. 
 
Comment and Recommendation:  Phased Approach is the Right 
Approach 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
------- 
 
¶25. (SBU) The absence of legal imports of high-quality U.S. beef 
from the Chinese market, now in its sixth year, is resulting in 
the erosion of U.S. beef's reputation and long-term 
competitiveness, as black/grey market or counterfeit products 
current being sold under the "U.S. Beef" label are causing 
Chinese consumers to increasingly associate the U.S. beef label 
with a low quality product.  Our current policy of blocking all 
beef exports to China pending China's full compliance with OIE 
guidelines has proven ineffective and deserves reconsideration. 
 
¶26. (SBU) The U.S. should adopt a more incremental approach.  A 
negotiating posture that allows U.S. beef exporters able to meet 
current Chinese Veterinary Requirements to immediately begin 
selling into the Chinese market would make it possible to start 
reestablishing a market presence for high quality U.S. beef, 
while continuing to pursue long-term, full market access 
objectives. 
 
¶27. (U) This cable was coordinated with Embassy Beijing. 
BROWN