09HONGKONG1074
EXTRANCHECK: POST SHIPMENT VERIFICATION:
Fri Jun 12 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Hong Kong
VZCZCXYZ0018
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHHK #1074/01 1630801
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 120801Z JUN 09
FM AMCONSUL HONG KONG
TO RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
INFO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7830
RHMFIUU/HQ BICE WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS HONG KONG 001074 
 
USDOC FOR 532/OEA/MCANNER/MHAMES 
USDOC FOR 3132 FOR FCS/OIO REGIONAL DIRECTOR PATRICK SANTILLO 
BICE FOR OFFICE OF STRATEGIC INVESTIGATIONS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BMGT BEXP HK ETRD ETTC
SUBJECT: EXTRANCHECK: POST SHIPMENT VERIFICATION: 
ADDCOM SOLUTIONS LIMITED 
 
REF: A) BIS EUC request e-mail dated May 15, 2009; B) HK 01982 
(2007) Concord Carnival/Addcom; C) HK 00966 Free Components(2008) 
D)HK 02289 (2007) Hope Sea 
 
¶1. Unauthorized disclosure of the information provided below is 
prohibited by Section 12C of the Export Administration Act. 
 
¶2. As per reftel A request and at the direction of the Office of 
Enforcement Analysis (OEA) of the USDOC Bureau of Industry and 
Security (BIS), Export Control Officer Philip Ankel (ECO) conducted 
a post shipment-verification (PSV) Addcom Solution Ltd., Unit B7, 
7/F, Shatin Industrial Building, 22-28 Wo Shui Street, Fo Tan, Hong 
Kong (Addcom).  The PSV concerned twelve exports to Addcom from U.S. 
exporter Austin Semiconductor of Austin, Texas as well as two 
proposed exports that are the subject of pending BIS license 
applications.  The items in question include multiple shipments of 
integrated microcircuits and other electronic components.  On the 
applicable order documentation, most of the items are classified 
under export control classification number (ECCN) 3A001 and, if 
properly classified, would be controlled for national security (NS) 
reasons.  Based on documentation provided by the exporters, in some 
instances, it appears that the applicable items are of the class 
that may be exported license free to Hong Kong, but would require a 
license for export or reexport to mainland China because of their 
ability to function at extreme temperatures (ECCN 3A001a2c). Since 
all of the items in the various shipments were resold to different 
buyers, those buyers (and related consignees) are described below. 
 
¶3.  Addcom was the proposed intermediate consignee in a previous 
unfavorable pre license check (PLC) of Hong Kong buyer Concord 
Carnival.  That PLC is described in reftel B. 
 
¶4.  BACKGROUND OF ADDCOM:  Addcom is a Singapore based electronics 
distributor with offices in Singapore, Hong Kong, Shenzhen, 
Malaysia, Thailand, and the Philippines.  The company does not 
appear to have a web site.  According to the Hong Kong Companies 
Registry, Addcom was registered in Hong Kong in 2004.  It has the 
Hong Kong equivalent of USD 6500 in share capital.  Its directors 
are Singapore nationals Tan, Lee Kim Alison (S6811627I) and Tan, Yew 
Mui Calvin (S1619129I).  The company's facility in Hong Kong is 
comprised of a one room office located in a converted warehouse 
building.  ECO met with Addcom representatives Ailey So, and Anthony 
Chan, Account Manager, on two occasions (May 29, 2009 and June 8, 
2009). Ms. So provided documentation about the particular orders 
while Mr. Chan provided greater background detail on the buyers and 
his interaction with them.  It is worth noting that for all 
transactions involving items subject to Hong Kong strategic 
commodities licensing requirements, Ms. So obtained and provided to 
ECO Hong Kong licenses for the import into Hong Kong of those items. 
 In addition, Ms. So provided declarations from the Hong Kong buyers 
in which they state that they will not reexport the items from Hong 
Kong.  Mr. Chan is the account manager for all of the transactions 
described below. 
 
¶5.  FREE COMPONENTS:  Some of the shipments in question were 
destined for Free Components in Hong Kong.  Free Components and a 
series of related companies including Xing Hang Yuan, Surlink, CTC 
International, Hongtu Hangyuan and others are of particular 
diversion concern as more fully detailed in reftel C. 
 
¶6.  FREE COMPONENTS TRANSACTIONS:  Three transactions are at issue 
here and are grouped under Addcom purchase order numbers: 
ADS312131, ADS316690, and ADS317158.  According to documentation 
made available to ECO by Addcom, ADS316690 was delivered to Free 
Components at its 1702 Grand City Plaza address.  The order 
documentation lists Hazel Liu as the contact person at contact 
numbers 86 755 882 65085 and 8675588265080 and email address 
hazel@xhy-ic.com (www.xhy-ic.com is the web domain of Xing Hang 
Yuan, a company of diversion concern referenced above).  Order 
ADS317158 was likewise delivered to the Grand City Plaza address but 
contact numbers are now listed as 852 3426 2188 and 852 3426 4778. 
According to the Free Components purchase order for this 
transaction, the confirmation fax number is listed as mainland 
number 86 755 882 65080.  Order ADS 312131 lists a ship-to address 
as the Grand City Plaza address noted above.  The contact person is 
listed as Hazel and the e-mail address for Hazel is listed as 
Hazel@xhy-ic.com. 
 
¶7.  FREE COMPONENTS CONCLUSIONS:  Despite repeated attempts, 
Commercial Assistant Carrie Chan was unable to arrange a meeting 
with Free Components. When asked, Addcom's Anthony Chan stated that 
he was aware that Xing Hang Yuan (XHY) is related to Free Components 
(as indicated by Hazel's e-mail address).  Chan also stressed that 
his orders from Free Components were always received from the Hong 
Kong company although he conceded that he had never visited the Hong 
Kong address.  Ms. So stated that at the time of an order, if the 
purchaser states that the item is for Hong Kong use, then she is 
 
prepared to accept that assertion.  If the buyer (subsequently) 
intends to reexport the items, Ms. So asserted that she informs 
those buyers that they must obtain a Hong Kong export license.  It 
is clear to ECO that Addcom is aware that its customers are not 
using products they purchase from Addcom in Hong Kong.  However, 
Addcom is prepared to fulfill orders on the buyer's mere assertion 
that they are for use in Hong Kong.  Mr. Chan stated that he does 
not inform the exporter (Austin Semiconductor) that the items will 
almost certainly be reexported to mainland China.  One of these 
shipments destined for Free Components appears to include items that 
may be shipped BIS license free to Hong Kong but would, in almost 
all circumstances, require a license for export/reexport to mainland 
China. 
 
¶8.  PROGRESS STEP INTERNATIONAL:  As detailed below, Progress Step 
appears to be the latest iteration of the Xing Hang Yuan and Free 
Components group of companies in Hong Kong.  According to the Hong 
Kong Companies Registry, Progress Step International was registered 
in November 2006 and has the Hong Kong equivalent of USD 1300 in 
paid up share capital.  Its sole director (appointed in September 
2008) is mainland Chinese national Zhang Haiyun (with mainland ID 
number 412823196208057270 suggesting a birth date of August 5, 
1962).  The company is located at the offices of SBC International, 
a company secretarial service that has been used by a range of 
companies that have been the subject of unfavorable end use checks. 
The SBC address in this case is 21/F, New World Tower 1, 18 Queens 
Road Central, Hong Kong. 
 
¶9.  PROGRESS STEP TRANSACTIONS:  Three shipments to Addcom were 
destined for Progress Step International (Addcom purchase orders 
ADS318582, ADS319195 and ADS321379).  At least two of these 
shipments appear to include items that may be shipped BIS license 
free to Hong Kong but would, in almost all circumstances, require a 
license for export/reexport to mainland China.  As to ADS319195 and 
ADS318582, order documentation shows Hazel Liu as a contact person 
(vice Hazel Lau on the end user statement provided to Austin).  In 
these cases, Hazel's e-mail address is listed as Buyer1@ctc-ic.com 
(www.ctc-ic.com is the web domain of mainland company of diversion 
concern CTC International which is referenced above).  As to order 
ADS321379, Hazel is again listed as the contact person.  According 
to Addcom's Anthony Chan and Austin Semiconductor, this order is now 
the subject of an Austin export license pending before BIS. 
 
¶10.  PROGRESS STEP CONCLUSIONS:  Repeated attempts to set up an 
appointment with Progress Step in Hong Kong were unsuccessful.  It 
is apparent that Progress Step is simply another iteration of Free 
Components.  ECO surmised that Hazel Liu (apparently her real name) 
signed Progress Step end user statements as Hazel Lau to give the 
appearance (to Austin Semiconductor) that Free Components and 
Progress Step are distinct.  Mr. Chan stated that he simply knows 
this individual as Hazel and he did not focus on the signatures on 
the forms.  When asked by ECO whether he had visited Progress Step, 
 
Mr. Chan replied that he had visited Progress Step's offices in 
Shenzhen (but not Hong Kong).  He stated that those offices were 
quite large.  When asked whether payment for these orders was made 
from mainland China, Mr. Chan insisted that payment had been made 
from Hong Kong, consistent with the fact that this was a Hong Kong 
sale.  ECO did not find Mr. Chan and Ms. So's answers to questions 
regarding these transactions to be credible, in particular, 
statements about whether they were aware that the items were 
destined for mainland China.  It is clear to ECO that the 
transactions described in this cable are structured in attempt to 
allow Addcom to plausibly assert that it is only selling to Hong 
Kong customers. 
 
¶11.  BRILLIANCE TECHNOLOGY LIMITED:  According to the Hong Kong 
Companies Registry, Brilliance was registered in 2006 and has the 
Hong Kong equivalent of USD 12 in share capital.  Its sole director 
is Chinese mainland national Wang, Xuanhui (with mainland ID number 
513031197502236072 suggesting a birth date of February 23, 1975). 
Two addresses are available for this company, namely Rm 110A, 6/F, 
Grosvenor Mansion, 110 Austin Rd, Hong Kong (the registered address) 
and Flat A, 8/F, Adolfo Mansion, 114-116 Austin Road, Hong Kong (the 
address listed on the applicable end user statements provided by 
Addcom). 
 
¶12.  BRILLIANCE TRANSACTIONS:  Five Addcom orders involved 
Brilliance, namely ADS318360, ADS321559, ADS320784, ADS320108 and 
ADS318856.  In all cases, Brilliance contact persons were listed as 
Derek Chiu and Mr. Wang (with various phone and fax contact numbers 
such as 852 6876 5919, 852 3020 6598, 852 9012 4193 and 852 2155 
0335).  Mr. Wang's contact e-mail is listed as 
jasonw@brilliance.net.cn.  In each case, Addcom's Ailey So provided 
Brilliance declarations that it would not reexport the items from 
Hong Kong.  Except for ADS318360/ADS318856 (which are mirror 
transactions involving a returned shipment to the U.S., and 
ADS321559 (which is the subject of a pending license applications) 
 
all of the items were shipped to Brilliance in Hong Kong.  Items 
actually shipped to Brilliance are of the category of items that may 
be shipped BIS license free to Hong Kong but would, in virtually all 
circumstances, require a BIS license for shipment to mainland China. 
 According to Ms. So, Brilliance is not related to Free 
Components/Progress Step. 
 
¶13.  BRILLIANCE CONCLUSIONS:  When Commercial Assistant Carrie Chan 
attempted to call Brilliance to set up a meeting, the phone number 
(6876 5919) appeared to roll to a mainland phone.  The person who 
answered the phone stated that the phone number was the Brilliance 
phone number (although he would not identify himself as a Brilliance 
representative).  This individual stated that all relevant 
information is located in Hong Kong and asked Ms. Chan to call Derek 
Chiu (9012 4193) in Hong Kong (referenced above).  Mr. Chiu stated 
that Brilliance does not have an office in Hong Kong but only a 
warehouse.  He further stated that the items had been reexported to 
mainland China.  When Ms. Chan asked for a meeting, Mr. Chiu stated 
that the documents were not available for review in Hong Kong and 
that he would check with the Brilliance office in China.  When 
subsequently asked again for a meeting, Mr. Chiu requested 
additional time.  ECO does not expect that Mr. Chiu will be 
available to meet in the foreseeable future.  ECO surmises that the 
items shipped to Brilliance in Hong Kong have been reexported to 
mainland China. 
 
¶14.  MAXDRAGON (HONG KONG) LIMITED:  According to the Hong Kong 
Companies Registry, Maxdragon was registered in 2006.  Hong Kong 
Resident Hong, Nga Song (HKID H449217(1)) is listed as director. 
The company's registered (and operating) address is Flat A, 13/F, 
Excellente Commercial Building, 456-458 Jaffe Road, Hong Kong.  As 
noted below, an additional company associated with this order, 
namely Citic Technology Company, is located at Rm D, 3/F, Thomson 
Commercial Building, 8 Thomson Road, Hong Kong.  Ms. Hong, Nga Song 
also owns this company (a sole proprietorship). 
 
¶15.  MAXDRAGON TRANSACTION:  Addcom order ADS318712 was destined for 
Maxdragon.  The items in question may be shipped BIS license free to 
Hong Kong but would, in virtually all circumstances, require a 
license to mainland China.  Maxdragon representative Candy Hong 
signed a declaration (provided to ECO by Addcom) stating that 
Maxdragon would not reexport the items. 
 
¶16.  MAXDRAGON CONCLUSIONS:  ECO was eventually able to meet Ms. 
Candy Hong of Maxdragon at the company's Excellente Commercial 
Building address on June 2, 2009.  The offices are no more than 300 
square feet in size and are located in a small older office 
building.  Ms. Hong stated that she had acquired the items and then 
had reexported them to mainland China using another company she 
owns, namely Citic Technology (referenced above). When asked whether 
she had applied for a Hong Kong export license, Ms. Hong stated that 
she could not recall (ECO expects that she did not).  Ms. Hong 
stated that she had shipped the items to her affiliate in Guangzhou, 
namely Maxdragon (S.Z.) Biochem Ltd., Rm. 30513 Guangxinguan Bldg, 
number 18, 20th st. South Siyou, Yozxiuzongz, Guangzhou (telephone 
number 20-87383772).  Ms. Hong stated that the items would be used 
as part of a new venture to manufacture cameras for cars.  When 
asked why such a project would require high temperature range 
electronic components, Ms. Hong stated that it is quite cold in the 
north of China in the winter so high temperature range products are 
required.  Web research reveals that the purported partner for 
Maxdragon is Lantuo Electronics Co, Ltd. which bills itself on its 
web site as a distributor of electronic components (more information 
at www.szlantuo.com). 
 
¶17.  CHITRON ELECTRONICS COMPANY LIMITED:  According to the Hong 
Kong Companies Registry, Chitron was registered in 2005 and has the 
Hong Kong equivalent of USD 6.5 million in share capital.  Directors 
include mainland Chinese nationals, Ni, Hai Nan (passport number 
610125680301121), Wu, Zhen Zhou (ID 110104196403173111 with 
corresponding birth date of March 17, 1964), Zha, Jun (ID 
352102197803240019 with corresponding birth date of March 24, 2978) 
and Hong Kong resident Zhang, Zing (wit HKID R249769).  Wu, Zhen 
Zhou was arrested in te United States in December 2008 for export 
contrl violations related to the activities of a Chitro affiliate 
(Chitron-U.S.). 
 
¶18.  CHITRON TRANSCTION:  Addcom order ADS318213 was destined for 
Chitron and subsequently for Hengsai Electronics Ltd. in Hefei city, 
Anhui Province.  These items appear to be classified as EAR99, 
meaning that they may be shipped to virtually all destinations, end 
users/uses worldwide.  The Chitron purchase order lists the bill to 
address as Room 06, 26/F, Modern Warehouse, No 6 Shing Yip Street 
and the contact person as Ms. Linda Liu (86 755 82116111 and 86 755 
8211 6462) with e-mail address linda@chitron.com.  The shipping 
address is the same but the contact person is listed as Roc Jiang 
(852 31060791 and 852 31060792) with e-mail address 
 
 
jiangpeng@chitron.com.  The purchase order header address is listed 
as 2127 Sungang East Road, Suite 1916, Shenzhen 518001 (86 755 8211 
6111 and 86 755 8211 5452). 
 
¶19.  CHITRON CONCLUSIONS:  As these items are EAR99, no apparent 
export control violation has occurred in respect of this shipment. 
 
¶20.  XIAN RIRONIC/HOPE SEA IMPORT AND EXPORT:  Xian Rironic is a 
mainland company that was the intermediate consignee listed in BIS 
export license D408497.  Delivery in this transaction was made to 
Hope Sea Import and Export in Hong Kong.  Hope Sea was the subject 
of an unfavorable end use check detailed in reftel D. 
 
¶21.  XIAN RIRONIC/HOPE SEA IMPORT AND EXPORT TRANSACTIONS:  Addcom 
order ADS 319752 was destined for Xian Rironic.  ECO reviewed the 
underlying Xian Rironic purchase order for this transaction.  It is 
not on letterhead and includes only the name "Ferry" as the contact 
person.  Separate documentation provided by Addcom shows that Xian 
Rironic certified that it would not reexport the items from Hong 
Kong.  Addcom obtained a Hong Kong export license listing as end 
user, China Petroleum Logging Company Ltd.  Delivery was made to 
Hope Sea Import & Export, Unit 12-16, 20F, No 1 Hung To Rd (attn. 
Ms. Yeung). 
 
¶22.  XIAN RIRONIC/HOPE SEA IMPORT AND EXPORT CONCLUSIONS:  As noted 
earlier, Hope Sea was the subject of a prior unfavorable PSV in 
¶2007.  ECO assumes that all of this information as available to BIS 
licensing officers as well as additional information Addcom's 
Anthony Chan claimed to have presented to Austin Semiconductor 
during the BIS licensing process.  Nonetheless, the Purchase Order's 
style and the involvement of Hope Sea is of concern to ECO. 
 
¶23.  A range of consignees listed herein (including Addcom, 
Maxdragon, Progress Step, Brilliance, Chitron and Hopesea) are 
unsuitable recipients of U.S. origin controlled technology.  ECO 
recommends that BIS conduct a thorough review of all shipments 
listing any of these consignees. ECO also recommends that BIS have 
further discussions with the exporter, Austin Semiconductor, to 
better understand whether it knew about the true final destination 
of these shipments.