09HONGKONG1031
HONG KONG FUNDING PROPOSAL FOR TAFT FUND FOR
Mon Jun 08 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Hong Kong
VZCZCXYZ0003
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHHK #1031 1590630
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 080630Z JUN 09
FM AMCONSUL HONG KONG
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 7778UNCLAS HONG KONG 001031 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR PRM/ANE - KINSEY, CURTIS; ALSO FOR EAP/CM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREF PHUM HK
SUBJECT: HONG KONG FUNDING PROPOSAL FOR TAFT FUND FOR 
 
REFUGEES 
 
REF: (A) STATE 14280 (B) WEBER-KINSEY/CURTIS E-MAILS 
 
¶1. Summary: At PRM/ANE request, Post has coordinated with 
Hong Kong's Christian Action NGO on their proposal for a 
project to increase the capacity of their Chungking Mansions 
Service Center to address the needs of vulnerable women and 
children among Hong Kong's refugee and asylum-seeker 
population.  The grant would focus on protecting and 
supporting women and children who may be in flight from 
domestic violence, and in preventing exploitation of 
otherwise vulnerable women by the sex trade.  Besides helping 
this vulnerable population, this grant would be a visible 
sign of our commitment to help Hong Kong improve its handling 
of refugees and asylum seekers, concerns about which we have 
expressed in our Human Rights Report.  End summary. 
 
¶2. Recipient:  Christian Action is a registered non-profit, 
non-government organization in Hong Kong.  Founded by the 
Rev. Karl Stumpf in the 1950s, the organization has 
previously worked to support Vietnamese "boat people" in Hong 
Kong in the 1980s.  The group's "aim is to promote the 
welfare of the poor and disadvantaged with particular 
emphasis on displaced persons, irrespective of race, gender, 
religion or nationality."  Current activities include: Direct 
advice and advocacy; emergency support for families and 
singles of both genders; education for children; after-school 
support and social integration programs; recreational 
activities; assistance for unaccompanied minor-age refugees; 
therapeutic support; food program; and a limited counseling 
support program. 
 
¶3. Proposal:  Christian Action's complete proposal was 
submitted electronically to PRM/ANE.  Its general goals 
include public advocacy for refugees and asylum seekers in 
Hong Kong, providing protection for women and children 
fleeing domestic or other violence or exploitation, and 
offering financial, emotional, physical and spiritual support 
to refugees and asylum seekers.  In addition, the group hopes 
its support for women will help protect them from falling 
into exploitation in the sex trade because of economic 
hardship. 
 
¶4. Justification:  Hong Kong is not a signatory to the 1951 
Refugee Convention, and claims for refuge are processed by 
the UNHCR representative in Hong Kong.  Hong Kong's process 
for dealing with asylum seekers has been found by the UN and 
Hong Kong's courts to be inadequate, and an extensive policy 
review is underway.  Pending resolution of these issues, 
refugees and asylum seekers are left in a legal limbo, with 
limited support provided by the Hong Kong government through 
its welfare system.  While the courts have ruled refugees and 
asylum seekers cannot be forbidden to work pending resolution 
of their cases, there is not a substantial legal or 
regulatory framework in place yet to normalize this status. 
Since these concerns have and continue to be expressed by the 
USG in our human rights reporting process, support for NGOs 
providing service to this population serves to highlight that 
we are doing more than merely leveling criticism. 
 
¶5.  Grant Authority:  Post's Public Affairs Office has the 
authority and the capacity to award a grant to the proposed 
recipient. 
DONOVAN