08BEIJING4555
DECEMBER 16 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: SIX-PARTY TALKS, DETENTION
Tue Dec 16 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO7952
OO RUEHAG RUEHCN RUEHDF RUEHGH RUEHIK RUEHLZ RUEHROV RUEHSR RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #4555/01 3512316
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 162316Z DEC 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1417
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 1862
RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 004555 
 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PARM PHUM ECON EFIN EAIR CH FR PL JA KS
 
SUBJECT: DECEMBER 16 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: SIX-PARTY TALKS, DETENTION 
OF ACTIVISTS, PRESS FREEDOM, SINO-FRENCH RELATIONS, SOMALI PIRACY 
 
¶1. Key points at the December 16 MFA press briefing: 
 
-- China believes the Six-Party Talks is a "process," with the major 
task being implementing the second phase of denuclearization of the 
Korean Peninsula in a "comprehensive manner."  All six parties 
"agreed verification was necessary," but the approaches to 
verification were "very different." 
 
-- Asked about the detention of human rights activist Liu Xiaobo, 
the MFA spokesman said he was "not aware of the specifics of the 
case" but that the PRC "opposes any country interfering in China's 
internal affairs." 
 
--China "supported international cooperation" to "crack down on 
piracy," but the spokesman did not have any "specific information" 
on concrete measures China might take. 
 
--China maintains its "solemn position" regarding foreign leaders 
meeting with the Dalai Lama.  "Interference in other countries' 
affairs" is not a European value, and China "cannot accept" using 
values as an "excuse" for "undermining" China's interests. 
 
-- The latest regulations on foreign journalists will be "accurately 
translated into reality," and foreign journalists should contact MFA 
if they encounter any problems.  But foreign journalists should do 
their work "according to Chinese law." 
 
-- Responding to a question about discrepancies between the actual 
content of the regular MFA press briefing and the official 
transcript released afterward, the spokesman said the MFA does not 
include items that are "are not within its capabilities" so as to 
prevent "misunderstanding" among readers. 
 
Six-Party Talks 
--------------- 
 
¶2. MFA Spokesman Liu Jianchao said at the December 16 regular press 
briefing that each side issued "their own opinions and positions" 
after the December 2008 Six-Party Talks Heads of Delegation meeting. 
 China believes the Six-Party Talks is a "process," and that the 
major task is to implement the second phase of denuclearization of 
the Korean Peninsula in a "comprehensive manner."  Liu said all 
sides had agreed to provide North Korea with aid equivalent to one 
million tons of heavy fuel oil, corresponding to North Korea's 
disablement of the Yongbyon nuclear facility.  Liu said "all sides 
agreed verification was necessary," but that the approaches to 
verification were "very different."  China wants the talks to be 
"sincere, honest and beneficial," and as host of the talks, China is 
ready to "strengthen communication and cooperation" in the hope of 
"improving state-to-state relations" and "advancing a peace 
mechanism" in Northeast Asia. 
 
Detention of Human Rights Activists 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶3. A journalist asked whether China would release recently detained 
human rights activist Liu Xiaobo and other activists during its 
celebration of the 30th anniversary of opening and reform, to which 
Liu Jianchao responded he was not aware of the specifics of the 
human rights cases but that China had made "great success" in 
achieving a "legal structure" and "handles issues according to the 
law."  Later, when asked for comments on the U.S. State Department's 
December 11 statement on China's detention of Liu Xiaobo, Liu 
replied that China "opposes any country interfering in China's 
internal affairs," even though he was "not aware of the specifics of 
the case." 
 
Blocked Internet Sites 
---------------------- 
 
¶4. During a series of questions about blocked internet sites and 
press freedom, Liu said he was not aware of the "specific 
conditions" regarding which internet sites are blocked.  China is 
"following the policy of openness and reform" and manages internet 
sites "according to the law."  Like other countries, there are some 
internet sites that are "against Chinese law," such as those that 
treat Taiwan as a separate country, which violate "China's 
anti-secession law." 
 
Detention of Journalists in Shanxi Province 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. Liu answered a question about whether the Central Government 
would ensure press freedom for foreign journalists visiting Shanxi 
province following the disappearance and detention of Chinese 
journalists there by saying that provincial authorities would 
"welcome" foreign journalists and "facilitate" their work.  Liu 
continued that the "latest regulations" on foreign journalists will 
be "accurately translated into reality" and foreign journalists 
 
BEIJING 00004555  002 OF 003 
 
 
should contact MFA if they find any problems.  Liu said his 
colleagues would "do their best to help" journalists, but foreign 
journalists should do their work "according to Chinese law."  Liu 
denied any specific knowledge of the Chinese journalists reportedly 
detained in Shanxi province, saying that these cases will be 
"handled within the legal framework." 
 
Integrity of MFA Press Briefing Transcripts 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. A reporter commented on discrepancies between the actual content 
of the regular MFA press briefing and MFA's official transcript 
released afterward.  The journalist asked for Liu's comment and his 
assurances that the "sensitive questions" asked during the December 
16 briefing would appear in the official transcript.  Liu said no 
"sensitive issues" had been discussed.  Although the MFA "does its 
best to speak on behalf of the Chinese Government" occasionally some 
issues come up that "are not within [MFA's] capabilities" and 
therefore are "not necessary" to release via the website.  This is 
done to prevent "misunderstanding among readers." 
 
Sino-French Relations 
--------------------- 
 
¶7. A journalist cited French President Nicolas Sarkozy's comments 
that many European leaders had met with the Dalai Lama, the recent 
problems in Sino-French relations are not Sarkozy's fault and that 
France will not abandon its values in its relations with China.  Liu 
reiterated China's "solemn position" in this regard, saying that 
"interference in other countries affairs" is not a European value. 
China "cannot accept" using "values" as an excuse for activities 
that "undermine" China's interests, Liu said. 
 
¶8. When asked later about the 45th anniversary of Sino-French 
relations, Liu said China "would not forget" the 45th anniversary" 
and that China "cherished" its "friendship and achievements" with 
France.  For this reason, China hopes the two countries will 
celebrate the anniversary in a "happy and harmonious atmosphere." 
Liu said he believed France did not want the current situation to 
continue and hopes that France "will do something to solve the 
problem" so the two countries can come together to celebrate the 
anniversary. 
 
Somali Piracy 
------------- 
 
¶9. Replying to a question on Somalia's request for China to send 
vessels to Somali waters to deal with pirates, Liu said Chinese Vice 
Foreign Minister He Yafei was scheduled to attend a UN meeting on 
December 16 to discuss the issue.  Liu said China "supports 
international cooperation" to "crack down on piracy" but did not 
have any "specific information" on what concrete measures China 
might take. 
 
Chinese Import Fees on Foreign Auto Parts 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶10. Asked about U.S. Trade Representative Ambassador Susan Schwab's 
December 15 comments urging China to stop imposing extra fees on 
imported auto parts after it lost an appeal at the World Trade 
Organization, Liu replied that the Ministry of Commerce is 
"preparing to issue information on that issue shortly" and that 
journalists should wait for that information. 
 
Iraq Press Conference Incident 
------------------------------ 
 
¶11. Asked for comment on the journalist who threw his shoes at 
President Bush during a December 14 press conference in Iraq, Liu 
said that although people understood issues in different ways, it 
was important to have "basic respect" for the leaders of another 
country.  Liu joked that he should be careful to watch not only the 
journalists' hands during the press conference but also their 
shoes. 
 
Thai Political Situation 
------------------------ 
 
¶12. Liu responded to a question about the Thai political situation 
by saying China "congratulates" Abhisit Vejjajiva on his election as 
prime minister and hopes China's "friendly neighbor" will "maintain 
social harmony and economic development." 
 
Vice Premier Li Keqiang Overseas Travel 
--------------------------------------- 
¶13. Liu announced that Chinese Vice Premier Li Keqiang plans to 
travel overseas from December 20-30 to visit Indonesia at the 
invitation of Indonesian Vice President Yusuf Kalla; Egypt at the 
invitation of Prime Minister Ahmed Mohammed Nazif; and Kuwait at the 
 
BEIJING 00004555  003 OF 003 
 
 
invitation of Prime Minister and Defense Minister Nasir Muhammad 
al-Ahmad al-Sabah.  During his visit to Indonesia, Li Keqiang plans 
to meet with Indonesian President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono and Vice 
President Kalla, and attend the third China-Indonesia Energy Forum. 
Liu said Li plans to further develop friendly relations and build on 
the "good momentum" the two nations enjoyed in bilateral relations. 
 
PICCUTA