08PARISFR2227
UNESCO DIRECTOR GENERAL CAMPAIGN:  JORDANIAN AND INDIAN
Tue Dec 09 00:00:00 +0100 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Mission UNESCO
C O N F I D E N T I A L   UNESCOPARI   12092227 
VZCZCXRO2050
PP RUEHFL RUEHKN RUEHMJ RUEHMR RUEHPA RUEHPB RUEHQU RUEHRN
DE RUEHFR #2227/01 3441639
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 091639Z DEC 08
FM UNESCO PARIS FR
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY
INFO RUCNSCO/UNESCO COLLECTIVEC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS FR 002227 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/09/2018 
TAGS: PREL UNESCO JO FR EG IN CU VE BR RS AR
SUBJECT:  UNESCO DIRECTOR GENERAL CAMPAIGN:  JORDANIAN AND INDIAN 
VIEWS 
 
REF:  (A) PARIS FR 2202 
(B) PARIS FR 2209 
(C) PARIS FR 2220 
 
CLASSIFIED BY AMBASSADOR LOUISE V. OLIVER FOR REASON 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY:  During a meeting with Ambassador Oliver, the 
Jordanian Ambassador to UNESCO said that Egypt will move ahead with 
its candidate for the next Director General (DG) of UNESCO unless it 
decides that its candidate, Minister of Culture Farouk Hosni, would 
have serious difficulty getting elected.  At a lunch organized by the 
French Ambassador to UNESCO, concerns about Mr. Hosni were expressed 
by Brazil, India, and Greece, while China and France repeated the 
fact that their countries have not yet given formal support to Mr. 
Hosni, as was stated in an interview given by Mr. Hosni published in 
the Egyptian weekly, Al-Ahram.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (C) Ambassador Oliver met with Jordan's Ambassador to UNESCO and 
France, Dina Kawar, on December 5 to discuss the race for UNESCO's 
next DG.  Ambassador Oliver told Ambassador Kawar that although the 
U.S. could not support Mr. Hosni, it had no problem with an Arab 
candidate.  In response to a question from Ambassador Kawar as to the 
reasons for the U.S. concerns with Mr. Hosni, Ambassador Oliver 
stressed that the U.S. was very uncomfortable with some of Mr. 
Hosni's public statements and the fact that he seemed to be 
controversial and provocative.  Ambassador Oliver added that some of 
the comments in the introduction to an interview given by Mr. Hosni 
to the Al-Ahram magazine were of concern as well. 
 
¶3.  (C) Ambassador Kawar said that it was very important that the 
U.S. confirm the truth of its concerns, as opposed to being 
influenced by rumors and gossip.  She added that if the concerns of 
the U.S. were valid and serious, a discreet conversation with the 
representative of the Arab League in Paris, Dr. Nassif Hitti, might 
be a good idea since the head of the Arab League is Egyptian. 
Ambassador Kawar also confirmed that Prince Hassan Bin Talal is not a 
candidate for the DG position, as had been rumored.  (Comment: 
Mission strongly supports the suggestion that verifiable information 
relating to U.S. concerns about Mr. Hosni be provided to the Mission. 
 After that has been done, if appropriate, Ambassador Oliver will 
meet with Dr. Hitti with whom she has a friendly relationship. End 
Comment.) The Jordanian Ambassador gave no indication as to whether 
she was aware of the U.S. demarche that had been delivered in Amman 
relating to U.S. opposition to Mr. Hosni's candidacy. 
 
¶4.  (C) Many comments concerning the DG race were made at a a lunch 
hosted on December 5 by the French Ambassador to UNESCO, Catherine 
Colonna, for the UNESCO Ambassadors of Brazil, China, Greece, 
Morocco, India, and the U.S.  When asked whether the candidacy of 
Senator Chrisovam Buarque was a serious possibility, the Brazilian 
Ambassador Joao Carlos de Souza-Gomes, replied that it was because 
President Lula da Silva's party was a minority in the Senate, and the 
Brazilian President needed to work with the Senate.  However, 
Ambassador Souza-Gomes added that it all depended on whether Mr. 
Buarque could transform the support of a few Senators into a 
broad-based majority. 
 
¶5.  (C) The UNESCO Ambassador from India, Ms. Bhaswati Mukherjee, 
said that relations between India and Egypt were at a thirty year 
low, and that India would look very favorably on a Brazilian 
candidacy, as it thought that Mr. Hosni was very provocative.  The 
Indian Ambassador also said that it was of great concern that Jews 
were specifically targeted for the first time in the recent terrorist 
attacks in Mumbai.  Ambassador Mukherjee added that she understood 
that the Russian Ambassador Vladimir Kalamanov, also had a very 
negative opinion of Mr. Hosni.  (Comment:  Since there will be a new 
Russian Ambassador to UNESCO in January, it is hard to know whether 
the Russian position will stay the same.  End Comment)  When the 
Ambassadors of China and France were asked whether their countries 
had given support to Mr. Hosni's candidacy as has been claimed, both 
of them said that the reports were misleading and that their 
countries did not yet have official positions on the DG race.  The 
Ambassador of Greece, George Anastassopoulos, told Ambassador Oliver 
that as President of the General Conference, he could not make public 
statements on the DG race, but that privately he had grave concerns 
about Mr. Hosni. 
 
¶6.  (C) COMMENT:  It is obvious that as of now, Mr. Hosni does not 
have much support from some of the most powerful countries at UNESCO, 
something the Egyptians must be aware of.  If the Egyptians decide to 
press on with their candidacy, it is likely that Mr. Hosni will begin 
to spend more time at UNESCO.  A Latin American country like Brazil 
may be a good alternative, though it would probably mean adding 
biofuels to UNESCO's work.  In addition, because of geographical 
rotation, Argentina's Minister of Education Mr. Daniel Filmus is 
supposed to be the next President of the General Conference, despite 
the fact that he speaks no English and almost no French.  Moreover, 
he is not very effective as the current Chairman of the Executive 
Board's PX Commission, and has little interest in anything except 
debt relief.  That would mean that Latin America would have both the 
DG slot and the President of the General Conference, UNESCO's two 
most important positions. 
 
UNESCOPARI 12092227  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
¶7.  (C) COMMENT continued:  In addition, Cuba will probably continue 
as the Chairman of the NAM at UNESCO, and Venezuela will be the next 
Chairman of the G77 plus China.  When Ambassador Oliver asked how 
Venezuela was chosen for the G77, the response was that the 
Venezuelans had insisted on it, and that nobody felt comfortable 
challenging them.  The Brazilian Ambassador, who served in Venezuela 
for four years and worked closely with the American Ambassador during 
that period, shrugged his shoulders and looked at Ambassador Oliver 
with an embarrassed smile.  The same thing happened several years ago 
when Cuba insisted on representing GRULAC on the Bureau of the 
International Program for the Advancement of Communication, UNESCO's 
program that promotes freedom of expression.  Even though the GRULAC 
was embarrassed by this, the Latin American countries said that due 
to "bilateral reasons", they had no choice.  If the U.S. promotes a 
Latin American candidate, it must be an individual who can stand up 
to regional pressure.  Moreover, since it seems that the possible 
price for a Latin American DG might be increased influence by 
Venezuela and Cuba, the U.S. would have to insist on a very 
high-level position at UNESCO. 
 
OLIVER