08SAOPAULO691
ANNUAL OVERSEAS SECURITY ADVISORY COUNCIL (OSAC)
Tue Dec 30 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Sao Paulo
R 301300Z DEC 08
FM AMCONSUL SAO PAULO
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 8819
INFO AMEMBASSY BRASILIA 
AMCONSUL RECIFE 
AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIROUNCLAS SAO PAULO 000691 
 
 
DS/DSS/OSAC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC
SUBJECT: ANNUAL OVERSEAS SECURITY ADVISORY COUNCIL (OSAC) 
CRIME AND SAFETY REPORT - SAO PAULO 
 
REF: 08 STATE 132056 
 
(U)  Annual OSAC Crime and Safety Report -- the following 
responses are keyed to Reftel. 
 
 ----------- 
 Sao Paulo 
 ----------- 
 
¶1.     CRIME AND SAFETY SITUATION: 
 
¶A.  Crime Threats: The criminal threat for Sao Paulo is rated 
critical by the Department of State.  Despite reported 
decreases in crime levels in the State of Sao Paulo, crime is 
still oppressive and widespread.  Much of Sao Paulo,s crimes 
and violence can be attributed to mobile street gangs and 
organized crime groups.  Sao Paulo continues to be notorious 
for the brazenness of certain high profile crimes and violent 
crimes such as murder, rape, and kidnappings.  Armed assaults 
and burglaries continue to be a part of normal everyday life. 
 Every Sao Paulo neighborhood is susceptible to high crime 
rates.  Reports of armed robberies continue to occur 
regularly in the generally affluent residential sections of 
Jardins Morumbi and Santo Amaro, where a number of government 
and business leaders and a majority of the US Consulate 
employees reside. 
 
The major crimes that tend to dominate the environment in Sao 
Paulo and are still a serious concern to Consulate employees 
and Americans in Brazil are express or lightning kidnapping, 
carjacking, virtual kidnapping and home/complex invasion. 
Express kidnappings occur when criminals force their victims 
to extract their daily cash limit from an ATM machine, 
virtual kidnappings are a telephone scam designed to get 
potential victims to pay a ransom even though no one close to 
them has been kidnapped and home invasions involve large 
groups of heavily armed criminals who take over either houses 
or apartment complexes and rob the owners or all the 
occupants.  Home/complex invasions usually are well planned 
and involve the use of a person on the inside or a scam (such 
as impersonating police, mail carriers, or potential 
homeowners) to gain easy access.  Levels of gratuitous 
violence are on the increase and the majority of criminals 
use lethal weapons in the course of carrying out their 
activities. 
 
¶B. Safety:  Street crime remains a problem for visitors and 
local residents alike, especially in the evenings, late at 
night travel or during traffic jams.  It is advised to use 
caution with regards to evening travel due to reported 
incidents of roadside robberies that randomly target passing 
vehicles.  Everyone is regularly cautioned about incidents of 
robbery and "quicknappings" outside of banks and ATM 
machines.  The wealthy or those with perceived financial 
affluence continue to be the most attractive targets for 
professional criminals.  Road conditions within Sao Paulo are 
subject to extreme flooding due to poor drainage during 
rainstorms. 
 
¶2.      POLITICAL VIOLENCE AND CIVIL UNREST 
 
¶A.  Historical Perspective: 
 
The threat of political violence is one that continuesto be 
an ever-present possibility.  There have ben protests in the 
past, some with significant nmbers depending on the issue. 
While the majorityof these protests are peaceful, violence 
can occsionally flare-up resulting in some rioting, 
signficant property damage and increased police activiy. 
All visitors should exercise caution when appoaching crowds 
and should refrain from going outwhen there are ongoing 
protests. 
 
B & D OrganiZed Crime & Civil Unrest: 
 
In 2006 Sao Paulo experenced some of the worst violence the 
city and stte had ever seen, as violent prison gangs 
revolted against State security forces and the conflict 
spilled out into the streets.  The violence was mainly the 
work of one organization known as the First Capitol Command 
(PCC), a violent prison gang which reputedly controls the 
majority of illegal contraband and drugs coming in an out of 
the prisons in Sao Paulo.  The civil unrest resulted in the 
deaths of over forty police officers and hundreds of 
criminals, although civilians were not specifically targeted. 
 Police stations and municipal buildings were attacked and 
public buses, gas stations, and 
ATM machines were randomly burned throughout the state and 
city, creating hysteria and paranoia among the local populace. 
 
 
¶C.  International Terrorism:  The tri-border area, comprised 
of Brazil, Argentina and Paraguay, is home to a large Arab 
community.  As of this date, no incidents directed against 
official or non-official Americans have occurred in this 
area, some anti-American sentiment has been expressed in the 
region.  It is recommended that American visitors to the 
area, to include Foz de Iguazu, remain especially vigilant 
and maintain a low profile. There are, at this time, no known 
indigenous terrorist groups, other than the organized crime 
elements listed above, operating in Brazil.  Brazil is a 
non-aligned country with no significant enemies and is not 
targeted by any known radical groups.  Certain border areas, 
including those in the tri-border region, are considered 
porous. 
 
¶3.     POST SPECIFIC CONCERNS 
 
¶A.  Earthquakes and Floods:  Natural disasters such as 
earthquakes are not a major problem in Brazil. 
 
In November 2008 flooding in the southern state of Santa 
Catarina left nearly 100,000 homeless and claimed over 100 
lives.  The disaster is one of the worst in the country,s 
history. 
 
Severe rainstorms in 2006, 2007 and 2008 saw some of the 
worst flooding in years for Sao Paulo, with bridges and 
highways closed due to flooding and major roads and highways 
submerged underwater.  The most recent rainstorm in December 
2008 left 20,000 residents without water, motorists stranded, 
and 70 canceled flights at Congonhas International Airport. 
 
In many cases weather conditions such as rains can cause 
severe gridlock within the city, sometimes turning a 40 
minute ride from the center of the city to the International 
airport into a three hour marathon.  Congonhas International 
Airport is susceptible to heavy rainstorms and air traffic 
comes to a halt during inclement weather. 
 
¶B.  Industrial and Transportation Accidents: Sao Paulo being 
the economic and commercial center of the country, as well as 
the most populated, sees its share of these types of 
incidents.  Some vehicle accidents carrying hazardous 
chemicals have occurred within the last year causing roadways 
to be closed down for significant periods of time until the 
area could be cleared and sanitized.  In January 2007, a 
major construction site near a Subway station in Sao Paulo 
suffered a sink-hole collapse killing five and destroying 
many construction vehicles.  In July 2007, a TAM passenger 
flight from Porto Alegre to Sao Paulo, skidded off the runway 
and crashed at Sao Paulo's Congonhas airport killing 149 
passengers.  The accident drew attention Brazils increasing 
problems with aviation safety.  In addition, Sao Paulo 
reportedly has over 400 helicopters in circulation, as most 
CEO's of major corporations and the wealthy chose to avoid 
the vehicle congestion and gridlock in this manner. 
 
¶C.  Kidnappings:  The majority of kidnappings in Sao Paulo 
continue to be of the "lightning or quicknapping." variety. 
The criminals will abduct someone for a short time, usually a 
Brazilian citizen, in order to receive a quick payoff from 
the family, business, or the victim's ATM card.  In some 
cases they will even take the victims shopping if their ATM 
cash limit has already been met.  However, all foreigner's, 
including Americans, are vulnerable to this crime as well. 
Virtual kidnappings continue to be prevalent and remain one 
of the most popular common scams perpetrated by criminals in 
Sao Paulo.  In these cases, a random telephone call is 
generated to an unsuspecting family and a ruse is conducted 
claiming that a member of the family has been abducted and a 
ransom is demanded.  In reality no family member has been 
taken but the criminals are able to elicit important 
information from the distraught family members and take 
advantage of their emotional state to generate a ransom 
payment.  In some cases the criminals have evolved this 
concept to include recordings in the background of children 
or others crying for help.  Consulate personnel have been 
subject to these crimes in the past but none of them 
successful from a criminal standpoint. 
 
¶D. Drugs and Narcoterrorism:  Sao Paulo, like many cities 
throughout the world, experiences the effects of persons 
addicted to illicit drugs.  This includes criminal activity, 
such as street assaults and robberies, which are used in 
support of their addictions.  Several Brazilian cities 
continue to be viewed as likely transshipment points for 
illicit drugs.  Large numbers of impoverished people are 
scattered throughout the city of Sao Paulo.  Public officials 
have expressed frustration with the difficulty in addressing 
these social problems, including the challenges faced by 
local law enforcement when directly dealing with these issues. 
 
Reports of cargo theft, from both overland shipments and from 
storage facilities, occur frequently, and are rising in other 
cities within Sao Paulo state such as Campinas, Porto Alegre 
and Santos.  Airports countrywide, as well as private 
companies have become actively engaged in instituting 
supplemental security measures and countermeasures to combat 
these crimes. 
 
¶4.     POLICE RESPONSE 
 
The Police support, both from the Military and Civil Police, 
for the Consulate in the past year has been excellent, 
especially in view of rising criminal incidents around the 
Consulate area.  Police authorities still cite a lack of 
resources, under-staffing and payroll issues among the key 
reasons why response times are delayed and a significant 
amount of crimes are not solved.  Military police units will 
not even respond to the scene of a vehicle accident unless 
there are injuries, all parties involved must go to the local 
Civil Police precinct if they wish to btain a police report 
for insurance purposes.  Sifling and oppressive traffic 
conditions continu to be an important factor with regards to 
crimeprevention, as Brazilian law enforcement entities 
continue to look for creative means of policing toovercome 
these obstacles, e.g. community policin base stations in 
Favela's ("Slums"), motorcycle, helicopters and even cavalry 
units for major eents. 
 
Visitors are asked to inform the Consulatein the event they 
encounter any problems while taveling in Brazil. 
 
Sao Paulo Emergency Phone Numbers: 
 
Police - 190 
Fire Department - 190 
Ambulance - Dial 190 
 
¶5.     MEDICAL EMERGENCIES 
 
The following local hospital has been identified by Post as 
suitable for use by visitors to Sao Paulo: 
Albert Einstein Hospital 
Avenida Albert Einstein, #627 
Sao Paulo - SP 
Telephone: (55) (11) 3747-1233 
 
For Air Medical Evacuation Services -- Post recommends 
visitors consider purchasing private air medical evacuation 
insurance, before traveling to Brazil, which will provide 
medical information and insurance for overseas travelers. 
Post can assist visitors with further information about 
obtaining these services. 
 
Vaccinations and Immunizations -- Travelers should consult 
with their own medical provider prior to traveling to Brazil, 
regarding immunization and vaccination requirements. 
Travelers should have a documented yellow fever card, 
especially after recent reports of cases of yellow fever in 
Brasilia. 
 
¶6.     CRIME AVOIDANCE, SAFETY AND PREVENTION 
 
Crime continues to be the principal and real threat to 
visitors to Sao Paulo.  The crime threat in Sao Paulo is 
critical.  Armed street robberies are common in Sao Paulo. 
Consulate employees and visitors have been robbed at gunpoint 
while walking on the street.  Taxi's and private vehicles 
should be used when moving about.  Even while driving 
motorists are targeted by armed bandits patrolling the 
streets on motorcycles who prey on potential victims waiting 
at traffic lights or stuck in heavy traffic.  Utilizing 
tinted windows and keeping valuables out of sight are viewed 
as the best defenses against this type of random criminal 
activity. 
 
Sao Paulo's International Airport continues to be an area of 
concern from a security perspective.  Reports of crimes 
against travelers along the road to the airport frequently 
occur as criminals look to identify potential targets of 
wealth and affluence as they arrive and depart.  Laptop 
computers are still the number one choice of thieves and 
criminals in Sao Paulo and travelers should seek to use 
alternative and more concealable means of transporting 
information, such as "thumb drives" or CD/DVD ROMs.  If 
laptops are brought in to Sao Paulo they should be stored 
discretely in luggage and/or placed in the trunk of a vehicle. 
 
Visitors should practice good common sense preventative 
security techniques, just as they would in any large 
metropolitan city in the world where crime is prevalent. 
Below are some of the more important tips visitors should 
follow to avoid becoming a potential crime victim: 
 
Do not carry or wear valuable items that will attract the 
attention of thieves.  If you need to wear expensive jewelry 
or carry a camera, conceal it until you arrive at your 
destination.  Do not physically resist any robbery attempt. 
While this is a personal decision, statistics show that 
resistance can lead to severe consequences such as injury or 
potentially something more fatal. 
 
Avoid city buses and other public transportation.  Many pass 
through high crime areas and are susceptible to robberies. 
Brazilian law enforcement and security authorities have 
expressed private concern that the next wave of violent 
interaction with the PCC could take place in the 
transportation system.  In 2006 one public bus was 
highjacked, near the Consulate, and all the occupants on 
board were robbed with the incident ending in a shoot-out 
with police.  Only use legitimate taxis at taxi stands or 
have your hotel call one for you directly. 
 
Be aware of the street environment and avoid contact with 
those who may be looking for potential crime targets.  Seek a 
safer location.  Go into a store, bank or simply cross the 
street and alter your route.  Use well traveled, 
well-illuminated streets and always plan your routes before 
you leave for your final destination. 
 
¶7.     FOR FURTHER INFORMATION 
 
U.S. companies are encouraged to contact the RSO in Sao Paulo 
for specific inquiries concerning the local security 
situation.  Information is also available from the active 
OSAC Country Council operating in Sao Paulo. 
 
American Consulate General Sao Paulo - is located at Rua 
Thomas Deloney, 381 Chacara Santo Antonio, Sao Paulo-SP, 
04710-110.  The telephone switchboard number is (011-55) (11) 
5186-7000.  The RSO POC may be reached at (011-55) (11) 
5186-7260.  The Consulates fax number is (011-55) (11) 
5186-7099. 
 
Emergencies calls after normal hours may be directed to 
Post One at (011-55) (11) 5186-7373. 
 
¶8.     OSAC COUNTRY COUNCIL: 
 
Post has an extremely vibrant and proactive OSAC Council with 
over 100 members, to include major U.S. Companies such as 
Motorola, General Electric, 3M, McDonalds and Citibank.  The 
council meets monthly, usually at the American Chamber of 
Commerce in Sao Paulo, however additional venues for meetings 
and related functions are selected on a regular basis.  RSO 
attends all Council meetings to engage in roundtable 
discussions with members.  The Council takes an active role 
on all issues of crime and security in Sao Paulo and 
surrounding areas to include outreach to public officials for 
speaking engagements, training seminars as well as an 
extensive e-mail network to promote ideas and facilitate the 
exchange of information and contacts.  Country council 
information can be located, via password, at the OSAC website 
at the following address, www.osac.gov/countrycouncils. 
 
 
WHITE