08USUNNEWYORK1209
COPY OF LETTER SENT TO AMBASSADOR KHALILZAD FROM
Wed Dec 31 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
USUN New York
VZCZCXYZ0002
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUCNDT #1209 3662115
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 312115Z DEC 08
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5607
INFO RUEHBUL/AMEMBASSY KABUL IMMEDIATE 0252UNCLAS USUN NEW YORK 001209 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR S, D, P, AND SCA 
EMBASSY KABUL FOR AMBASSADOR WOOD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL AF
SUBJECT: COPY OF LETTER SENT TO AMBASSADOR KHALILZAD FROM 
GRAND CONFERENCE OF THE AFGHANS ORGANIZING COMMITTEE 
 
REF: A. CHRISTENSEN EMAIL 10/14/08 TO D P AND SCA 
        ASSISTANTS (ZK DISCUSSION WITH AFGHAN 
        FIRST VICE PRESIDENT - 
     ¶B. INFORMATION ABOUT BONN II-LIKE MEETING) 
 
¶1. (SBU) Ambassador Khalilzad received the following letter 
from the Grand Conference of the Afghans Organizing 
Committee, forwarded to him by Hekmatyar's son-in-law, Mr. 
Jarir.  The text of the correspondence is included below. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Begin text: 
 
Dear Excellency, 
 
Some time ago Mr. Jarir, a member of the Organizing Committee 
to convene a Grand Conference of the Afghans, has provided 
you with a concept paper. In the meantime we discussed this 
concept will all the concerned parties. The response was very 
positive. The two opposition groups, Taliban and Hikmatyar, 
appointed their representatives and agreed to send them to 
such a meeting if and when it is convened outside Afghanistan 
and to discuss along the principles contained in the concept 
paper. Other Groups also appointed their representatives and 
wanted to have some preparatory meetings in Kabul to discuss 
the concept and the Agenda of the Conference. The President 
had been informed in the early stages about the conference 
and was given a copy of the concept paper when it was 
available. H. E.'s response was to some extent neutral, being 
not against it but also having doubts about its results. 
 
Considering these positions the Organizing Committee convened 
two sessions of a working group comprising of the 
representatives of the relevant groups, some people close to 
Taliban and Hikmatyar (in order to have a reflex ion  of the 
mentality of these groups) and the members of the Organizing 
Committee. During these meetings the Dari language of the 
concept paper has been modified in order to accommodate the 
various tastes of the participants. The only modification of 
substance is concerning the point dealing with the present 
Constitution. The beginning of point 2 is now as follows: 
 
"Support for the prevailing Constitution of the Country and 
trying to win the agreement of the important political groups 
to support The Constitution and to secure its implementation 
knowing that this constitution has been adopted in a special 
time under certain circumstances and as it is clear from its 
content, it can be modified in accordance with changes in the 
circumstances through a mechanism which is identified in it. 
This includes... " 
 
While all the participants are enthusiastic about convening 
the actual Conference the position of The President is now 
basically changed. H. E. condemns the meeting as being a 
conspiracy of Iran and ISI against the legitimacy of the 
Government (which is completely baseless ) and believes that 
the USA will also be against it. Thus H. E. forbids the 
convention of the Conference to the extent that no government 
official is allowed to take part in it and other participants 
will also be interrogated as conspirators. 
 
Under the circumstances we wanted to update Your Excellency 
and ask for support. If Your Excellency and the USA find the 
idea worth supporting, so we expect two things: 
 
--Through proper channels to let the Government of 
Afghanistan know that the USA favors the convention of the 
Conference. 
 
--As it is now impossible to get the financial support of the 
Afghan Merchants who had promised to do so, and in order to 
annihilate any doubt in regard of the financial resources of 
the Conference, we would like to ask the USA to provide 
financial and logistic support for the working group meetings 
as well as the convention of the Conference. For the 
preliminary steps so far we spent US$ 5.000,00 from our own 
resources, but we cannot afford the expenses of the next 
steps. 
 
Looking forward to have your positive response very soon, we 
remain, 
 
Yours truly, 
 
 
 
The Organising Committee 
 
End text. 
Khalilzad