08USOSCE310
FSC AUTUMN 2008 END-OF-ROUND: GEORGIA-RUSSIA WAR
Wed Dec 17 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Mission USOSCE
VZCZCXRO8464
PP RUEHAST RUEHFL RUEHLA RUEHMRE RUEHPOD RUEHROV RUEHSK RUEHSR
DE RUEHVEN #0310/01 3521230
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 171230Z DEC 08
FM USMISSION USOSCE
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6114
INFO RUCNOSC/ORG FOR SECURITY CO OP IN EUR COLLECTIVE
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 0653
RUEHUNV/USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA 1208
RHMFISS/CDR USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE
RHMFISS/CDRUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHDLCNE/CINCUSNAVEUR LONDON UK
RUEKJCS/DIA WASHDC
RUEASWA/DTRA ALEX WASHINGTON DC
RUESDT/DTRA-OSES DARMSTADT GE
RHMFIUU/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL
RUEKJCS/JCS WASHDC
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 1148UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 USOSCE 000310 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR VCI/CCA, VCI/NRRC, EUR/RPM, EUR/PRA, EUR/CARC, 
SCA/CEN, SCA/RA, PM/WRA, ISN/CPI 
JCS FOR J-5 
OSD FOR ISA (PERENYI) 
NSC FOR HAYES 
USUN FOR LEGAL, POL 
EUCOM FOR J-5 
CENTCOM FOR J-5 
UNVIE FOR AC 
GENEVA FOR CD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PARM PREL KCFE OSCE RS GG XG
SUBJECT: FSC AUTUMN 2008 END-OF-ROUND: GEORGIA-RUSSIA WAR 
REVERBERATES AS U.S. OBJECTIVES MET 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  Recriminations from the August 
Georgia-Russia war echoed through the autumn session in the 
Forum for Security Cooperation (FSC), coloring Security 
Dialogue presentations and even reactions to an otherwise 
mundane decision describing the work of the Forum.  Russia 
introduced a draft decision for an embargo of arms to Georgia 
but failed to gain support.  Russia has warned it will return 
in 2009 to all the CSBM proposals it has made over the last 
two years, including those on naval forces, rapid reaction 
forces, and improved implementation of the Vienna Document. 
 
¶2. (SBU) France will follow Finland into the FSC chair in 
January but has not made known in detail its priorities for 
the winter 2009 round.  France is known to support further 
work to strengthen the existing OSCE political-military 
acquis, although it has also been supportive of greater 
engagement with Russia over the Medvedev proposals for a new 
European security architecture.  Besides the cyber security 
workshop on March 17-18, a meeting to review the OSCE 
Document on SALW and supplementary decisions will also be 
held in 2009. 
 
¶3. (SBU) U.S. goals for the autumn FSC session were met. 
Inter alia, this included maintaining Allied unity in 
refusing Russian entreaties to reopen OSCE documents or 
create new CSBMs and advancing implementation of UNSCR 1540, 
although progress on the 1540 Best Practice Guide is slower 
than anticipated.  Allied unity was also conspicuous in the 
response to Russia's invasion of Georgia, with almost all pS 
supporting Georgia's sovereignty and territorial integrity. 
The U.S. often finds itself reacting to initiatives of others 
rather than leading.  At an appropriate point, the U.S. may 
want to become more proactive in the FSC.  Washington, see 
para 29.  End summary. 
 
Georgia-Russia War 
------------------ 
 
¶4. (SBU) Russia made good on its threat at the first meeting 
of the autumn round to focus on the August Georgia-Russia 
war, returning to it several times in the Security Dialogue 
and under General Statements in the FSC plenary.  Russia 
charged Georgia with starting the war by an unprovoked 
invasion of South Ossetia and the indiscriminate bombardment 
of civilian targets in the region.  Russia also alleged 
violations of the Code of Conduct for armed forces by Georgia 
and of OSCE documents on arms transfers by those states 
supplying Georgia. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Georgia countered that Russian provocations over the 
years preceding had increased tensions in the region. The 
Georgian attack on South Ossetia was actually in response to 
the threatened or actual movement of Russian forces into the 
area. 
 
¶6. (SBU) The U.S. and others called for both sides to observe 
the six-point cease-fire agreement and cooperate with the 
OSCE in restoring peace and stability to the region.  The 
U.S., EU, and other pS reminded Russia of Georgia's right as 
a sovereign state to determine its defense requirements.  The 
U.S. challenged Russia to explain how heavy weapons got into 
the hands of separatists in South Ossetia and Abkhazia and 
why this did not violate OSCE principles, including the OSCE 
 
USOSCE 00000310  002 OF 006 
 
 
Document on SALW and the OSCE Principles Governing 
Conventional Arms Transfers. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Russia also sponsored a guest speaker in the 
Security Dialogue, Petr Litavrin, a deputy director from the 
Russian MFA security affairs and disarmament department, who 
warned that pS should not export arms to countries where they 
might be used for international aggression or domestic 
repression.  Litavrin called for review of OSCE documents on 
SALW and arms transfers to enhance transparency and 
accountability in arms transfers. 
 
¶8. (SBU) A Ministerial decision drafted by the FSC on the 
2009 work plan (MC.DEC/13/08) was held up in the working 
group for several weeks because Russia and Georgia could not 
agree how to describe the ongoing FSC discussion over the 
August conflict.  Georgia wanted a reference to a 
"Georgia-Russia" conflict, while Russia insisted this was 
insufficient as Georgia had started the war by attacking 
South Ossetia, which Russia then rescued. 
 
¶9. (SBU) As part of its verbal skirmishing with Georgia, 
Russia also introduced a draft decision calling for an 
embargo of arms and military assistance to Georgia 
(FSC.DEL/155/08/Rev.1).  Only Belarus supported the proposal, 
while it was successfully opposed by the U.S. and the EU. 
 
CSBMs 
----- 
 
¶10. (SBU) Russia attacked the U.S. for insisting that no 
substantive work on CSBMs in the FSC could occur while Russia 
had suspended implementation of the CFE treaty.  Russia 
accused the U.S. of linking Russian initiatives in the FSC to 
"unrelated and secondary issues" like Georgia and the CFE. 
Russian proposals for naval CSBMs, rapid reaction forces 
information exchange, and notification of transits and 
deployments of brigades or larger have not appeared on the 
FSC agenda for several months, but Russia told the incoming 
FSC chair, France, that it intends to renew discussion of 
them in 2009.  Russia has alluded to the Medvedev proposals 
for a new "European security architecture" in the FSC but has 
yet to elaborate. 
 
Cyber Security 
-------------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) Estonia sponsored the decision to hold a March 
17-18, 2009 workshop on cyber security (FSC.DEC/10/08).  The 
approved agenda and modalities (FSC.DEC/17/08) include 
discussion of state and terrorist cyber attacks and cyber 
crime.  Russia, Germany, and the U.S. announced their 
intention to provide keynote speakers.  Goals of the workshop 
include exchange of information on national priorities and 
showcasing potential defensive measures, lessons learned, and 
relevant best practices. 
 
Vienna Document 
--------------- 
 
¶12. (SBU) Russia revived its 2007 proposal for a single 
deadline of September 20 to submit defense planning 
information under the Vienna Document.  The U.S. opposes the 
 
USOSCE 00000310  003 OF 006 
 
 
suggestion as impracticable and unnecessary given the 
differences among pS legislative calendars and procedures. 
Russia did not request further discussion of its Vienna 
Document-related proposals for specifying the area of 
inspection at 25,000 square kilometers (FSC.DEL/493/07/Rev.2) 
and requiring annual notification of at least one major 
military activity below the threshold for mandatory 
notification (FSC.DEL/495/07/Rev.3), although it recently 
told France, the incoming FSC chair, that it will push for 
their adoption in 2009. 
 
Code of Conduct 
--------------- 
 
¶13. (SBU) Work continued on an update of the Code of Conduct 
questionnaire.  Despite numerous informal meetings and 
extensive discussion in the working group, consensus has not 
been reached, almost a year after work began after adoption 
of a decision to promote awareness and support outreach of 
the Code (FSC.DEC/1/08).  Delegations remain deadlocked over 
draft questions on, inter alia, arms control and CSBMs, the 
role of gender in security affairs, and taking account of 
other states' security interests in defense planning. 
 
¶14. (SBU) Proposals on "supplementary measures" to enhance 
implementation of the Code will be taken up in the winter 
2009 session.  Germany reportedly will offer a 
Food-for-Thought calling for annual review of Code 
implementation. 
 
SALW/SCA 
-------- 
 
¶15. (SBU) A Ministerial decision (MC.DEC/11/08), drafted by 
the FSC, enjoins further work on SALW/SCA, specifically: 
review of the OSCE Document on SALW with a view to further 
action; implementation of a legal framework for brokering 
activities; conformance of national legal and administrative 
norms with the International tracing Instrument; 
implementation of the UN Program of Action to eliminate 
illicit trade of SALW. The decision also requires a progress 
report to the 2009 Ministerial on the implementation of the 
OSCE Documents on SALW and SCA. 
 
¶16. (SBU) Landmines and ERW:  Germany offered a 
Food-for-Thought paper on landmines and explosive remnants of 
war that did not receive much comment.  Germany is expected 
to introduce a draft decision based on the paper.  The U.S. 
opposed any reference in the paper to the Ottawa Convention 
as a norm. 
 
¶17. (SBU) UNPOA:  Finland, as CiO and FSC chair, publicized 
the UN Program of Action (UNPOA) on small arms and light 
weapons (SALW) and encouraged delegations to help further its 
implementation. Finland also urged the FSC undertake the 
assessment of all normative issues connected with SALW and 
stockpiles of conventional ammunition (SCA).  Finland invited 
several NGOs to address the Security Dialogue on the UNPOA. 
Small Arms Survey, Saferworld, and GRIP called for more 
implementation of existing instruments, including the UNPOA, 
and more action on transparency in information exchanges, 
brokering, stockpile management, and marking and tracing. 
 
 
USOSCE 00000310  004 OF 006 
 
 
¶18. (SBU) Illicit air trafficking:  The Forum adopted the 
Wassenaar Arrangement Best Practices "to prevent 
destabilizing transfers of SALW through air transport" and 
will hold an information exchange by June 30, 2009 on 
national practices in preventing the illicit transfer of SALW 
by air (FSC.DEC/11/08).  The decision follows on the special 
FSC meeting workshop on the same subject held in 2007.  the 
decision reflects a compromise among the drafters, including 
the U.S., who wanted a normative document but also wanted to 
import without alteration the Wassenaar Best Practices. 
 
¶19. (SBU) End-use certificates:  The Forum decided to task pS 
to exchange with other pS and the Conflict Prevention Center 
exemplars of their end-use certificates for transfer of SALW 
and other information on relevant verification procedures by 
March 27, 2009.  U.S. goals were partly met as the decision 
solicits additional information, apart from the EUC itself, 
relevant to verification and the requirement for a CPC 
"analysis" was dropped. 
 
¶20. (SBU) OSCE project work:  Tenders have been invited on 
the OSCE melange project in Ukraine.  The project would be 
the largest yet attempted by the OSCE, involving 16,000 tons 
of melange.  The first phase of the projects envisions the 
elimination of 3,000 tons of melange at a budget of 3.1 
million euros. 
 
Best Practice Guides 
-------------------- 
 
¶21. (SBU) The OSCE published the "Handbook of Best Practices 
on Conventional Ammunition" in its six official languages. 
 
¶22. (SBU) The Finnish-drafted "overview of disposal aspects 
for melange," earlier circulated as "Best Practice Guide" 
(BPG) was endorsed for publication. 
 
¶23. (SBU) The U.S.-drafted UNSCR 1540 BPG chapter on export 
controls and transshipment is under revision in response to 
edits from Russia.  A Canadian chapter on 1540-related 
physical security is also under revision.  No other chapters 
are currently in preparation. 
 
UNSCR 1540 
---------- 
 
¶24. (SBU) While work on the UNSCR 1540 Best Practice Guide 
continued, informal consultations with other delegations and 
the Secretariat indicate continued support for further work 
in implementation of the resolution.  Possible follow-on 
could include a one-off information exchange on the state of 
national implementation efforts including national action 
plans. 
 
¶25. (SBU) The U.S. 1540 coordinator led discussions with 
representatives of the OSCE Secretary General, the Border 
Management and Actions against Terrorism Units, and several 
national delegations on broadening the scope of 1540 work in 
Vienna to include the Permanent Council's Security Committee 
and other international organizations such as the IAEA and 
the UN Office on Drugs and Crime.  Russia announced that it 
prefers to keep 1540 work in the FSC and avoid the problem of 
"too many cooks." 
 
USOSCE 00000310  005 OF 006 
 
 
 
¶26. (SBU) Ambassador Jorge Urbina, the chair of the 1540 
Committee, addressed the Security Dialogue of the role of the 
OSCE in furthering implementation of the resolution, 
including technical assistance and the development of 
sensitive goods export controls.  Urbina, echoing the U.S. 
1540 coordinator, supported broadening the scope of 1540 work 
within the OSCE and urged greater cooperation with other 
international organizations in Vienna. 
 
Security Dialogue 
----------------- 
 
¶27. (SBU) Beside the ongoing discussion of the Georgia-Russia 
war and others topics discussed elsewhere in this report, the 
Security Dialogue included a wide range of subjects including 
presentations of the OSCE's first-dimension normative and 
project work on Bosnia-Herzegovina, the Geneva Declaration on 
Armed Violence and Development, the Arms Trade Treaty, the 
OSCE melange project in Ukraine, the Montreux Declaration on 
Private Military and Security Companies, the ODIHR "Handbook 
on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms of Armed Forces 
Personnel," and a proposed OSCE project for removing 
explosive remnants of war from the Crimea. 
 
¶28. (SBU) U.S. presentations in the Security Dialogue 
included Coast Guard Commandant Admiral Thad Allen on 
maritime security capacity and international outreach 
programs, including anti-piracy measures, environmental 
protection, and maritime border management.  Also, Major 
General Paul Schafer, USAF, director of strategy at U.S. 
European Command, explained the "strategy for active 
security," designed to defend the U.S. while creating an 
environment that supports the strategic interests of the U.S. 
and its allies and partners in Europe--including Russia. 
 
RFG 
--- 
 
¶29. (SBU) The French program for the 2009 winter round is 
largely unknown, although programming on UNSCR 1540 and air 
trafficking of SALW is expected.  The OSCE cyber security 
workshop is to be held March 17-18 and the Forum has been 
directed by Ministerial decision (11/08) to hold a meeting to 
review the OSCE Document on SALW.  Specific guidance will be 
required for both these meetings.  Further guidance on next 
steps on UNSCR 1540, particularly if the focus of activity is 
to shift away from the FSC, is also needed.  Updated guidance 
may be needed on Russian CSBM and Vienna Document-related 
proposals if Russia raises them again in the working groups. 
 
The U.S. and Leadership of the FSC 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶30. (SBU) COMMENT:  With the important exception of Georgia, 
the U.S. remained per instructions largely in a defensive 
position in the FSC this session.  Particularly regarding 
setting norms through draft decisions, such as on SALW and 
related issues, the U.S. exercised influence mostly through 
criticism and revision of others' initiatives, and by 
exhortations to allies and partners to resist Russia's call 
to reopen existing documents or create "new" CSBMs.  The only 
U.S.-initiated activity remains the effort to further 
 
USOSCE 00000310  006 OF 006 
 
 
implementation of UNSCR 1540 among pS.  While U.S. support is 
always welcome, delegations increasingly turn to others, 
notably Germany and to a lesser degree France and the 
Nordics, for leadership and new ideas. 
 
¶31. (SBU) (COMMENT contd) An assumption often stated by 
Russia and shared by many pS is that there should be more to 
the FSC than merely monitoring implementation and dialogue. 
At an appropriate point, the U.S. may want to proffer what 
that "more" could be and/or be more proactive in contributing 
constructive ideas to improve initiatives by other states. 
Besides 1540, possible initiatives include outreach on 
MANPADS along the lines of the recent U.S. seminar in Vienna 
for Mediterranean Partners, enhancing export controls norms 
and enforcement for dual-use goods, and discussion of 
security and stabilization operations by multinational 
coalitions, including recent EU efforts.  END COMMENT. 
 
Next Meeting 
------------ 
 
¶32. (SBU) The first meeting of the 2009 winter session will 
be on January 21 with France in the chair. 
FINLEY