05SANAA3003
FEMALE LOCAL COUNCIL QUOTA EXPECTED TO BE
Mon Oct 17 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Sanaa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SANAA 003003 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/ARP, NEA/PD, NEA/RA, DS/OP/NEA, S/CT 
CENTCOM FOR POLAD 
NEA/PPD FOR AFERNANDEZ 
WHITE HOUSE PASS TO NSC 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM KMPI PGOV PHUM PREL YM DEMOCRATIC REFORM
SUBJECT:  FEMALE LOCAL COUNCIL QUOTA EXPECTED TO BE 
ANNOUNCED AT DECEMBER CONFERENCE 
 
¶1.  (U) SUMMARY: At a signing ceremony on October 9 for a 
USAID grant for women's rights projects, Minister of Human 
Rights Amat al-Alim Soswa conveyed invitations for several 
high-ranking current and former USG officials to a December 
conference in Sanaa on women's issues in the Arab world. 
She said that at the conference, President Saleh is expected 
to announce a quota of 20 percent female representation in 
upcoming local council (LC) elections.  In view of the home- 
grown nature of the conference and of Soswa's efforts, with 
considerable USG support, to increase the enfranchisement 
and political participation of women, Post encourages the 
attendance of a suitable USG representative at this 
conference.  End Summary 
 
¶2.  (U) On October 9, Ambassador Krajeski and MHR Soswa, 
together with Flavia Pansieri, Resident Representative of 
the United Nations Development Program (UNDP), signed a 
USAID grant for $463,300 to support women's rights programs 
under Ministry of Human Rights auspices. 
 
¶3. (U) Following the ceremony, Soswa conveyed to the 
Ambassador formal invitations for Secretary Rice, former 
Secretary Albright, and Senator Clinton to a conference 
 
SIPDIS 
entitled "Women's Rights in the Arab World:  From Words to 
Deeds."  The conference, to be held in Sanaa on December 3- 
5, is being organized in collaboration with the UNDP.  Soswa 
urged high-level USG representation at the conference. 
 
¶4.  (U) Excerpted text of the invitation reads:  "The 
proposed conference will provide a platform for the exchange 
of experiences and discussions on issues related to the 
empowerment of women in the Arab world and their 
participation in public life [and] will cover three main 
themes:  women and political participation, women as clients 
of justice, and women as providers of justice.  Therefore, 
it is with great pleasure that I would like to invite you to 
attend and participate as a keynote speaker in this 
important regional conference.  As the undersecretary [sic] 
of state and one of the most prominent female international 
figures, your participation in this conference whose main 
themes are women and political participation and women and 
justice, is most fitting." 
 
¶5.  (U) Soswa also said that at the conference Saleh intends 
to announce a 20 percent female representation quota for the 
2006 LC elections.  She noted that this announcement 
requires no changes to the law and that the two primary 
opposition parties, Islah and the Yemen Socialist Party, 
have already agreed in principle to the quota.  Soswa 
acknowledged that the outcome likely would be less than 20 
percent in many regions, notwithstanding an announced quota, 
as there are few women prepared to run for office in some 
tribal areas. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) COMMENT:  Post recommends that a suitable USG 
representative attend this conference.  The conference is a 
home-grown initiative and merits USG support particularly in 
light of the prospective increase in local female political 
participation if President Saleh's announcement transpires 
as anticipated by Soswa.  In view of Soswa's past efforts on 
behalf of the USG and the cause of human right, as well as 
her efforts to increase the enfranchisement and political 
participation of women, this conference merits high-level 
representation to increase her credibility and to 
demonstrate the USG commitment to human rights in the 
region.  End comment. 
 
KRAJESKI