06SANAA348
MEDIA REACTION - CARICATURES OF
Mon Feb 13 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Sanaa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANAA 000348 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA, NEA/ARP, NEA/PD, NEA/RA, 
DS/OP/NEA, S/CT, RRU/NEA 
CENTCOM FOR POLAD 
NEA/PPD FOR AFERNANDEZ 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM KMPI PGOV PHUM PREL YM
SUBJECT:  MEDIA REACTION - CARICATURES OF 
MOHAMMED. 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY.  Recent caricatures of the Prophet 
Mohammed, which appeared in European newspapers, 
have angered Yemenis, who have responded with 
protests, boycotts, and calls for diplomatic 
measures.  Yemeni protests, however, have been 
peaceful.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  EDITORIAL COMMENTARY: 
 
¶A. On January 28, 26 September (Armed Forces- 
funded, Defense Ministry daily with circulation of 
40,000) reported that a source at the Foreign 
Ministry denounced the caricatures in the Danish 
newspaper as "insulting to the Prophet Mohamed." 
The source added that Yemen called on the 
international community to condemn the publication 
and take tough measures to prevent similar 
episodes.  Also on January 28, Al-Shura (Islamist 
weekly affiliated with opposition Popular Forces 
Union party with circulation of 6,000) reported 
the Yemeni Parliament "condemned" the drawings and 
called on the Arab League to demand an apology 
from the Danish government. 
 
¶B.  The same day, condemnation of the drawings 
followed from the Yemeni Writers and Authors 
Association, according to reports in Al-Wahdawi 
(Nasserite Party weekly with circulation 12,000), 
and from imams across the country, who, during 
Friday prayers, demanded expulsion of the Danish 
Ambassador according to reports in Al-Ayyam 
(independent Aden-based daily with circulation of 
40,000).  [Note: Denmark has no Ambassador in 
Yemen as relations are handled from Saudi Arabia. 
End note.] 
 
¶C.  On January 30, Al-Shura further reported a 
statement issued by the Yemeni Journalists 
Syndicate condemning the caricatures.  On the same 
day, Al-Sahwa (Islah Party weekly with circulation 
of 25,000) reported the Consumer Protection 
Association demanded a boycott of Danish and 
Norwegian goods and published a list of such goods 
sold in Yemen.  An Al-Thawra (official government 
daily with circulation 40,000) unsigned editorial 
strongly condemned the caricatures. 
¶D.  Outrage over the caricatures continued on 
January 31 and the Yemen News Agency reported on a 
statement of condemnation by the Yemen Scholars 
Association.  Also that day, 26 September reported 
a gathering of Arab ministers in Jordan had 
demanded the Danish government punish the 
newspaper, which had first published the 
caricatures.  By January 31, SMS messages, 
advising of upcoming protests and including lists 
of products to avoid (in some cases mistakenly 
sweeping in non-Danish and non-Norwegian companies 
such as Nestle), gained wide circulation across 
the Yemen mobile network. 
¶E.  On February 1, the official Saba News Agency 
reported the Islah Party had called for a boycott 
of Danish and Norwegian products and Al-Shura 
reported the advisory Shura Council had requested 
that the ROYG sever relations with Denmark.  On 
the same day, Al-Sahwa reported that Denmark's 
honorary consul in Yemen, Ahmad Hayel Saeed, had 
resigned in protest. 
¶F.  Media outlets devoted extensive coverage 
during the weekend (2/2-3) to a demonstration of 
protest by Yemeni women in Sana'a.  Al-Sahwa (2/4) 
reported protestors marched to the European 
Commission and UN headquarters demanding an 
apology and burned the Danish flag and added that 
similar protests took place in Aden and Dhamar. 
Al-Sahwa also reported that, following 
republication of certain of the caricatures in a 
Jordanian newspaper, the Islah Party issued a 
statement calling for a boycott of Jordanian 
products and for a mass recall of Arab ambassadors 
to Jordan.  Al-Shura (2/4) reported that the Al- 
Shura.net (2/4) reported the opposition coalition 
Joint Meeting Party (JMP) released a communiqu 
calling upon Arab and Islamic countries to adopt a 
unified stance against "a growing crusade against 
Islam."  Also on February 4, NewsYemen.net (well- 
regarded, independent news website) reported that 
Sheikh Abdul Majeed Al-Zindani, head of the Islah 
Shura Council and Rector of Al-Iman University, 
called for more demonstrations during Friday 
prayers. 
¶G.  The USG to date has stayed above the fray in 
the Yemeni media.  On February 4, Al-Ayyam gave 
positive coverage to a State Department statement 
that the caricatures were "offensive and morally 
repugnant."  Al-Ayyam also noted a statement by 
British Foreign Minister Jack Straw describing the 
editorial decision as disrespectful to Muslims. 
 
KRAJESKI