08SANAA265
YEMEN'S 2008 SUBMISSION FOR 2008 EISA
Wed Feb 13 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Sanaa
VZCZCXYZ0017
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHYN #0265/01 0441150
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 131150Z FEB 08
FM AMEMBASSY SANAA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8976UNCLAS SANAA 000265 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
EEB/ESC/IEC FOR B. GLENN GRIFFIN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ABUD APER ENRG SENV YM
SUBJECT: YEMEN'S 2008 SUBMISSION FOR 2008 EISA 
 
REF: STATE 10743 
 
¶1.  In response to reftel, Post provides the following 
information. 
 
¶2.  The Political and Economic Section at post handles energy 
matters.  A total of four employees handle energy-related 
issues:  one entry-level Economic Foreign Service Officer, 
one entry-level Commercial Foreign Service Officer (DOS, not 
DOC), one Economic Assistant Foreign Service National and one 
Commercial Assistant Foreign Service National. The Economic 
Officer and Economic Assistant spend 20 percent of their time 
on energy-related issues and the Commercial Officer and 
Commercial Assistant spend 10 percent of theirs.  The four 
employees are supervised by the Political and Economic 
Section Chief, who spends 5 percent of his time on 
energy-related issues. 
 
¶3.  The Economic Foreign Service Officer reports on 
developments in the oil and gas sector.  Past reporting has 
included updates on the oil and gas sector, a resource 
nationalism cable, a cable on the Extractive Industries 
Transparency Initiative (EITI), and developments affecting 
security of American oil companies.  The Economic Officer is 
in frequent contact with both oil companies and the ROYG 
Ministry of Oil and Mineral Resources.  The Economic Officer 
also monitors the USD 500,000 U.S. Trade and Development 
Agency (USTDA)-funded National Rural Electrification Project, 
which aims to establish a National Rural Electric Agency in 
Yemen, along with a pilot electricity cooperative in Ibb. 
The project is implemented by the National Rural Electric 
Cooperative Association (NRECA).  The Economic Officer serves 
as liaison between the USTDA and NRECA and the ROYG Ministry 
of Electricity and Energy.  The Economic Officer serves as 
the control officer for USTDA and NRECA representatives 
during their trips to Yemen.  The Economic Officer devotes 
approximately 20 percent of his time to energy-related 
issues.  The current Economic Officer, who departs post this 
fall (2008), has a Master of Arts Degree in Arab Studies in 
Georgetown University with a concentration in Economics and 
Development.  He also received Political and Economic 
Tradecraft training at the U.S. State Department's Foreign 
Service Institute in Arlington, VA. 
 
¶4.  The Economic Foreign Service Officer is assisted by an 
Economic Assistant Foreign Service National (FSN-08).  The 
Economic Assistant Foreign Service National assists the 
Economic Foreign Service Officer in setting up meetings with 
CEOs in oil companies and with the Ministry of Oil and 
Mineral Resources.  The Economic Assistant collects 
information on developments in the oil and natural gas 
sectors.  The Economic Assistant also sets up meetings for 
the USTDA and NRECA with ROYG officials, especially at the 
Ministry of Electricity and Energy.  He devotes 20 percent of 
his time to energy-related issues.  The current Economic 
Assistant holds a Bachelor's Degree in Accounting from Ibb 
University in Yemen, and has worked as an Executive Officer 
at the International Department of Saba Islamic Bank in 
Sana'a, Yemen. 
 
¶5.  The Commercial Foreign Service Officer follows and 
reports on developments in the electricity and energy sector. 
 The Commercial Officer also meets with U.S. companies who 
would like to do business in Yemen.  Recently, the Commercial 
Officer met with the U.S. Powered-Corps Corporation, who was 
considering undertaking a nuclear power project in Yemen. 
The Commercial Officer spends about 10 percent of his time on 
energy issues.  The current Commercial Officer holds a 
graduate degree from the School of Oriental and African 
Studies in London.  He also received Political and Economic 
Tradecraft training at the U.S. State Department's Foreign 
Service Institute in Arlington, VA. 
 
¶6.  The Commercial Foreign Service Officer is assisted by a 
Commercial Assistant Foreign Service National (FSN-08), who 
covers developments in the electricity and energy sector. 
The Commercial Assistant also sets up meetings with relevant 
Ministry of Electricity and Energy officials and with CEOs of 
energy companies.  He devotes about 10 percent of his time to 
energy issues.  The current Commercial Assistant holds a 
Bachelor's Degree in English from Sana'a University in Yemen, 
and has prior work experience as Information Assistant at the 
Public Affairs Office at the U.S. Embassy in Sana'a, 
Information Officer at the Indian Embassy (where he dealt 
with a number of commercial issues), and in administration at 
the Yemen Commercial Bank. 
 
¶7.  The Political and Economic Section Chief supervises all 
four aforementioned employees.  He reviews cables and reports 
submitted by them on energy-related issues.  He spends 5 
percent of his time on energy-related issues. 
¶8.  Post spent the following amounts of State Department 
funds in FY 2007 on energy-related activities: 
 
a-  Personnel:  USD 36,670 (Note:  Amount includes base 
salaries, premiums, post differential, danger pay and a post 
allowance.  End note). 
 
b-  Programs:  USD 0 
 
SECHE