05JERUSALEM3580
WB/G SITREP: AUGUST 9, 2005 (1800 HOURS LOCAL) --
Tue Aug 09 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Jerusalem
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 JERUSALEM 003580 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FO; NEA/SA/EX FOR AUSTIN-FERGUSON; DEPT FOR 
DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN/MUSTAFA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PBTS PHUM KWBG KPAL IS ASEC
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: AUGUST 9, 2005 (1800 HOURS LOCAL) -- 
ICRC SUSPENDS GAZA OPERATIONS AFTER VIOLENCE; PALESTINIAN 
TEEN SHOT/KILLED IN CLASHES WITH IDF 
 
 
This is a joint ConGen Jerusalem/Embassy Tel Aviv cable. 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  The International Committee of the Red 
Cross (ICRC) has suspended its activity in Gaza after 
militants fired at their offices in Khan Yunis August 8 and 
in the aftermath of recent kidnappings of foreign aid 
workers.   The IDF shot and killed a Palestinian in Nur Shams 
Refugee Camp, near Tulkarm, August 8 and injured five others 
after stones and a firebomb were thrown at IDF jeeps 
executing a raid there.  PA President Abbas delivered a 
speech to the PLC August 9 in which he called for calm during 
Israel,s pullout from Gaza and pushed for creation of an 
office of vice-president.  He also set a January date for PLC 
elections (Septel).  End Summary. 
 
 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) ATTACKS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Death: The IDF shot and killed an 18-year-old Palestinian, 
Tamer Zandaq, during stone-throwing clashes in Nur Shams 
refugee camp near Tulkarm August 8, according to Palestinian 
media reports.  Israeli media coverage quoted IDF sources 
saying that Zandaq was part of a group that had thrown a 
firebomb at an IDF jeep. 
 
-- Injuries: The IDF shot and injured five other Palestinians 
in the above incident, according to Palestinian media 
reports. 
 
-- Arrests: The PA on August 8 arrested three Palestinians 
suspected of carrying out a shooting attack on an Israeli 
settler,s car near Qalqiliya August 7, in which a 
10-year-old Israeli boy was seriously wounded.  PA security 
sources said that the weapon likely used was seized and that 
the three were transferred to Jericho prison for 
interrogation. 
 
-- Arrests: The IDF arrested two Palestinians in Nablus and 
three in Attil village near Tulkarm on August 8, according to 
Palestinian newspapers. 
 
-- Arrest: According to Israeli radio, Israeli police 
arrested an Israeli settler for allegedly shouting anti-Arab 
slogans near the Justice Ministry in East Jerusalem on August 
¶8. 
 
-- Curfew/Closure: Azun village, near Qalqiliya, remains 
under total closure and curfew imposed by the IDF on August 9. 
 
-- Riots/Lawlessness: Fighting including gunfire broke out at 
Bir Zayt University in Ramallah August 9 when Hamas tried to 
stop Fatah students from holding a ceremony on-campus. 
Tensions have been high since Fatah narrowly won student 
council elections.  University administrators temporarily 
closed the school until disputes between the factions can be 
resolved. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- PA President Abbas delivered a speech to the PLC August 9 
calling for calm during Israel,s pullout from Gaza and 
saying that a peaceful pullout and takeover of Gaza would 
demonstrate that the PA can maintain security and govern 
effectively.  He also met with Fatah members of the PLC to 
push for creation of an office of vice-president.  He also 
set a January date for PLC elections (Septel). 
 
-- PA Prime Minister Quraya, visited Jenin August 8, calling 
for the Gaza pullout to be the beginning of additional 
Israeli pullouts from the West Bank.  He condemned continuing 
settlement activity in the West Bank. 
 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) ATTACKS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Shootings: The IDF reported 11 shootings in Gaza August 8: 
two shootings near the Netzarim settlement that targeted IDF 
patrols, one shooting targeting IDF soldiers at the Mor 
Bridge, a shooting near the Morag settlement, three shootings 
at IDF soldiers near Khan Yunis, and four shootings, one 
targeting Israeli civilians and three targeting IDF soldiers, 
near Rafah.  No injuries resulted. 
 
-- Shooting:  Israeli radio reported at 14:17 hrs that 
Palestinians fired on IDF troops in southern Gaza.  No 
casualties were reported. 
 
-- Shooting: UNRWA reported that on August 9 at approximately 
1325 hrs IDF soldiers in an outpost on Karni road fired 
machine guns for five minutes at the Palestinian area of 
Karni road.  UNRWA reported that it believes the shooting was 
to cover an Israeli convoy traveling on the road.  No 
injuries were reported. 
 
-- Shooting: According to UNRWA, on August 8 at approximately 
2310 hrs IDF soldiers in an outpost located near the Rafah 
Terminal fired machine guns for ten minutes at the 
Palestinian Al Shouka area.  A 24-year-old man received 
shrapnel wounds in his leg. 
 
-- Mortars: The IDF reported one mortar shell fired into 
Israel August 8 at 1230. The shell targeted Israeli civilians 
north of Sderot.  No injuries were reported. 
 
-- Explosions: UNRWA reported that on August 9 at 1415 hrs a 
home-made bomb went off while it was being handled in Tel 
Es-Sultan, critically injuring a 23-year-old man. 
 
-- Incursion: UNRWA reported that on August 8 at 2300 hrs IDF 
troops guarding the border fence of Bureij camp lit the area 
with flares and conducted a search operation with sporadic 
shooting.  UNRWA believes that the IDF suspected that 
Palestinians were trying to enter Israel. 
 
-- Arrests: UNRWA reported that on August 8 at 0430 hrs the 
IDF arrested Muhammed al-Majjar in his house west of Khan 
Yunis.  According to Israeli media reports, he was suspected 
of terrorist activity. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS/INTERNAL CHECKPOINTS: 
 
-- Erez crossing was open for Palestinians.  On August 9, 306 
Palestinian laborers and 136 Palestinian merchants used the 
crossing. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone was open August 9, with 434 
Palestinian laborers admitted. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open in both directions, but closed to 
Palestinian males between the ages of 16 and 35 on August 9. 
UNRWA reported that the IDF allowed Palestinian males in this 
age group to cross provided they had coordinated their travel 
with Israeli authorities through PA officials. 
 
-- The Karni terminal was partially open August 9. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers but open 
for construction materials August 9. 
 
-- Netzarim Junction at Salahadeen Road was closed August 9. 
 
-- The Netzarim Coastal Road was open August 9. 
 
-- The Abu Houli internal crossing was open August 9. 
 
-- Salahadeen Road was open at Sufa/Morag August 9. 
 
-- The Abu Al-Ajeen bypass road was closed August 9. 
 
--- The Toufah checkpoint was closed August 6 and had not 
been reopened through August 9. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Political Developments: 
 
-- The International Red Cross (ICRC) suspended its activity 
in Gaza after militants fired at its offices in Khan Yunis 
August 8 and in the aftermath of recent kidnappings of 
foreign aid workers.  On August 8, three UNRWA workers in 
Khan Yunis were kidnapped by militants and later released. 
Israel media reported that the ICRC closed its offices in 
Khan Yunis indefinitely.  ICRC also cited an overall 
deteriorating security situation in Gaza for its closure. 
 
-- The PA Foreign Ministry called on the international 
community to continue to recognize the Gaza Strip as occupied 
territory after Israel evacuates Gaza. 
WALLES