05TELAVIV5186
DISENGAGEMENT SITUATION REPORT, AUGUST 22, 2005
Mon Aug 22 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 TEL AVIV 005186 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG KPAL PREL ECON EAID PINS IS GAZA DISENGAGEMENT
SUBJECT: DISENGAGEMENT SITUATION REPORT, AUGUST 22, 2005 
 
REF: TEL AVIV 5157 
 
This is a joint message from Embassy Tel Aviv and Consulate 
General Jerusalem. 
 
This message is sensitive but unclassified.  Please protect 
accordingly. 
 
This message conveys information as of 1700 hours local time. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: On the eighth day of disengagement, the 
evacuation of the Gaza Strip settlers concluded without 
incident.  The evacuation proceeded smoothly with little of 
the protest that marked the evacuations of Kfar Darom or 
Atzmona.  Removal and relocation of agricultural equipment 
from Gush Katif settlements began today, and demolition of 
houses is well underway.  The GOI's objective is to complete 
evacuations this week.  Israeli security forces are focusing 
on the upcoming evacuations of the northern West Bank 
settlements of Homesh and Sa Nur, which are scheduled to 
begin on Tuesday, August 23.  Some 100 infiltrators were 
arrested on the morning of August 22 after trying to reach Sa 
Nur and Homesh settlements in the northern West Bank.  End 
Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) SETTLER EVACUATION STATUS 
 
-- Fast-Paced Evacuation:  Gabi Golan in the PM's office told 
Economic Counselor that disengagement operations had gone 
well, tracking with the GOI's most optimistic scenarios.  He 
suggested that the disengagement would be completed by the 
end of September.  Demolition of houses is well underway, 
with 100 houses demolished out of 2,000 houses and structures 
in the Gaza Strip.  (Note:  Press reports indicated that the 
demolition of houses continued today in Dugit, Peat Sadeh, 
Ganei Tal, Shalev, Rafah Yam, and Morag.  End note.) 
Greenhouses that have not been sold are being dismantled. 
Golan said the Palestinians had been cooperative given the 
number of people outdoors exposed to attacks during the 
disengagement. 
 
-- Housing: According to Golan, of the 1,500 families 
evacuated, 800 are in hotels, 400 are in temporary houses, 
and 200-300 are in yeshiva dormitories, available until the 
schools open to students in October.  Netzarim settler 
families plan to move to Ariel College in the West Bank.  The 
GOI is renting 900 houses and building 150 temporary houses 
which the settlers have an option to rent or buy.  In the 
next few weeks, 650 more temporary housing units will be 
available, and by the end of September, all evacuees should 
be out of hotels and into permanent housing.  Golan added 
that the GOI is having difficulty meeting settlers' demands 
that members of communities all be housed together.  About 
500 families will arrange for housing without GOI assistance. 
 According to press, 300 people evacuees from Ele Sinai set 
up an encampment at Yad Mordechai outside of the Gaza Strip, 
and said they would stay there until the GOI can move them 
together to a new community.  The Director General of the 
Ministry of Construction and Housing has asked them to speak 
to him to find a solution to their housing situation. 
 
-- Compensation: Only 150 settlers have received GOI 
compensation, according to Golan.  He estimated that the 
average compensation award for each family would be around 
USD 400,000-500,000.  Most settlers have yet to submit 
claims, preferring to wait and see how those who have already 
filed claims fare.  Each family received USD 1,000 against 
compensation for immediate expenses. 
 
Gaza Strip: 
 
Netzarim: The residents of Netzarim were finishing their 
prayers and leaving the synagogue at approximately 1600 hours 
local time.  According to press, the settlement's rabbi had 
asked the police on Sunday night to remove the infiltrators 
who were planning to obstruct the evacuation today.  This is 
the last settlement in the Gaza Strip to be evacuated, as the 
IDF completed the evacuations of Atzmona, Dugit, Ele Sinai, 
Nissanit, Qatif, and Shalev last night. 
 
Neve Dekalim: Fifteen teenage boys infiltrated the settlement 
this afternoon and threatened to set themselves on fire to 
protest disengagement. 
 
West Bank: 
 
Two IDF divisions and four police divisions moved from the 
Gaza Strip to the northern West Bank today to prepare for the 
evacuations that are expected to begin tomorrow in Sa Nur and 
Homesh.  The Palestinian Authority deployed 2,100 police to 
Janin, Nablus, and Salfit ahead of the evacuations.  The IDF 
announced that several roads in the northern West Bank would 
be closed to prevent the entrance of more infiltrators in the 
two settlements, but press reports indicate that the YESHA 
Council is planning a march from Kedumim to Sa Nur and Homesh 
around 1700 hours today. 
¶3. (SBU) DEMOLITION UPDATE 
 
-- GOI Ministry of Environment contacts told ESTH Officer Aug 
22 that the MOE has a high degree of confidence that 
asbestos, cooking gas, swimming pool chemicals, pesticides 
and other hazardous materials are being removed from the 
evacuated areas.  International chief Ori Livne noted that 
approximately 80 percent of houses have tile roofs that do 
not/not contain asbestos (e.g., homes with shingles, 
including those with red roofs, do not/not have asbestos. 
Other homes are being examined and dealt with accordingly). 
The separation of hazardous materials is being done by MOD 
contractors.  Though MOE does not have its own people on the 
scene, it has reviewed procedures and has a high degree of 
confidence in the contractors, who are licensed in asbestos 
removal and participated in the destruction of the former IDF 
base at the Kirya, which involved significant complex removal 
of hazardous wastes.  There are also audit mechanisms in 
place.  The contractors have been applying to MOE for permits 
to remove asbestos from affected dwellings; later they will 
have to present deposit receipts to show that they took the 
asbestos to licensed sites in Israel.  Though there could 
certainly be errors in execution, MOE has confidence that all 
of the asbestos roofs will be identified and dealt with 
appropriately.  There are additional specific efforts to 
identify and remove cooking gas and chemicals for swimming 
pools, and farmers have agreed to remove pesticides. 
Although MOE personnel are not on the scene, they have given 
professional guidance to the contractors through MOD on all 
aspects of hazardous waste removal. 
 
¶4. (SBU) SECURITY SITUATION 
 
Northern West Bank: 
 
On August 22, Gabi Golan in the PM's office advised 
EconCounselor that about 700 young activists from other West 
Bank settlements had gathered at Sa Nur to block the 
scheduled August 23 evacuation there.   (Note: Shin Bet chief 
Yuval Diskin provided similar estimates for infiltrators, 
noting that only two resident families remain in Sa Nur and 
20 families in Homesh, according to press reports.  End 
Note.)  Golan asserted that sufficiently large numbers of 
Israeli police and IDF troops would be involved to handle any 
resistance.  He added that MK Arieh Eldad, a retired general 
(Medical Corps), was at Sa Nur trying to convince the 
activists to leave peacefully.  The IDF announced late on 
August 21 that the IDF has put in place a number of changes 
to prevent the entrance of civilians who have not been 
granted permission into the areas due to be evacuated in the 
northern West Bank, and to prevent the disruption of the 
activities of the security forces in the area. 
 
-- Joint IDF/PA Security coordination rooms remain 
operational in Jenin and Ramallah, according to the UN. 
Coordinator of Government Activities in the Territories 
(COGAT) Mishlev told General Ward August 22 that cooperation 
with the PA was going very well.  He emphasized authorities 
will continue to control movement and regulate construction 
in Area C of the northern West Bank following disengagement 
from four settlements.  The GOI will continue to prevent 
well-digging that could impact the aquifer that is a major 
source of water for Israel.  (Note: There is a mechanism 
through the bilateral Joint Water Committee to request a 
permit to construct a new well though permits are seldom 
granted.  End note.) 
 
-- Right-wing settler youth attacked and destroyed an Israeli 
bulldozer near Kedumim junction at 1900 on August 21, setting 
it ablaze.  The Israeli driver narrowly escaped injury. 
 
-- Arrests:  Some 100 infiltrators were arrested on the 
morning of August 22 after trying to reach Sa Nur and Homesh 
settlements in the northern West Bank.  The IDF arrested 87 
Israelis attempting to enter Homesh settlement where 
infiltrators had already burned down an IDF communications 
post and punctured tires of an IDF vehicle trying to reach 
the area, according to Israeli media reports. 
 
Gaza Strip: 
 
A senior IDF commander told U.S. personnel that coordination 
with PA security forces is proceeding very well at all 
levels.  COGAT authorities conveyed a similar assessment to 
General Ward. 
 
-- Rocket/Mortar Attacks:  IDF reported two mortar attacks 
overnight:  one near Kissufim Crossing and the other near 
Netzarim.  There were no injuries.  The UN reported that one 
mortar was fired at an IDF operations post in Rafah.  The IDF 
returned fire but no injuries were reported. 
-- Attack foiled in Gaza:  The PA succeeded in foiling an 
attack originating in Khan Yunis at Israeli targets, 
according to press reports. 
 
-- Tunnel Collapse:  IDF reported that at 2210 hours August 
21 a tunnel being dug in the vicinity of Tel Qatifah 
collapsed, killing one Palestinian and injuring another. 
 
-- Shootings:  At 1950 hours, August 21, Palestinian 
militants fired on an IDF outpost near Khan Yunis, lightly 
injuring one IDF soldier, according to the IDF.  IDF reported 
another shooting overnight near an IDF outpost in Tel 
Qatifah.  No injuries were reported. 
 
-- Kidnapping: French Channel 3 journalist Mohammad Luoati, 
seized by gunmen on August 15, was released on August 22. 
 
¶5. (SBU) PALESTINIAN REACTIONS 
 
A lively debate in Palestinian society continues over what 
names to give the cities and towns that will be built on the 
ruins of the settlements.  Gaza residents are considering 
naming the village to be built in Netzarim after Sheikh Ahmed 
Yassin.  Yasir Arafat is another whose name is in the mix. 
The mayor of Rafah made a more practical suggestion that the 
new places be named after those donors who invest their money 
to build them. 
 
-- Fatah organized a festival at Sheikh Zayed City in Gaza to 
celebrate disengagement. 
 
-- Sa'eb Erakat said the Palestinian leadership views with 
extreme serious the process of transferring settlers from 
Gaza to the West Bank settlements, according to the Voice of 
Palestine radio.  He reportedly said this required 
intervention by the Quartet to abort such plans. 
 
¶6. (SBU) GOI POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS 
 
-- The Foreign Affairs and Defense Committee met on August 
¶22.  PM Sharon appeared before the Committee for the first 
time since the beginning of disengagement, and briefed the 
committee on the IDF operation to evacuate Gush Katif. 
Vehement disengagement foe MK Effi Eitan said that revenge 
against Sharon would be political revenge, and that Sharon 
would be sent back to his farm where could stroke sheep. Vice 
Premier Peres came to Sharon's defense, criticizing 
right-wing MKs for their verbal assault on the Prime Minister. 
 
-- The Israeli ministerial committee on disengagement will 
meet on the afternoon of August 22, and PM Sharon will 
reportedly seek to obtain updates on housing solutions, 
school registration, and employment options for evacuees. 
 
-- Justice Minister Livni issued a warning that anyone who 
tries to disrupt the evacuation of Sa Nur and Homesh will be 
prosecuted to the full extent of the law, according to radio 
reports. 
 
-- The Cabinet communique of August 21 included PM Sharon's 
response to Minister Livnat's query regarding the Secretary's 
remarks regarding post-disengagement moves.  In brief, PM 
Sharon said that "in the Disengagement Plan there is only one 
stage of disengagement.  There is no stage after this one. 
The next stage in the diplomatic negotiations regards the 
roadmap, but in order to enter the roadmap, the things I have 
already stated must take place -- the cessation of terrorism, 
violence and incitement; dismantling of the terrorist 
organizations and impounding their weapons; and the carrying 
out of reforms in the terrorist organizations...  There is no 
second stage in the Disengagement Plan." 
 
¶7.  (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS/HUMANITARIAN ACCESS 
 
-- West Bank: The IDF has issued an order stopping all 
Palestinian workers from entering West Bank settlements until 
further notice, according to UN sources.  The order is 
expected to be reviewed after Sa Nur and Homesh are 
evacuated. 
 
-- Gaza Coastal Road: The IDF closed the coastal road at 0530 
hours August 22 in preparation for the evacuation of Netzarim 
settlement, according to Palestinian sources.  Nevertheless, 
movement between north and southern Gaza resumed at 0800 
hours with the IDF allowing 20 vehicles at a time to move 
alternately in each directions.  PA National Security Forces 
were responsible for managing the convoys. 
 
-- Erez Crossing and Industrial Zone: According to Gaza 
private sector contacts, Erez remains officially closed to 
Palestinians, but the IDF continues to allow a small number 
of people to pass based on humanitarian/medical grounds with 
prior coordination. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal: According to UNRWA, Rafah crossing remains 
open in both directions. 
-- Abu Kholi junction: Re-opened at 2245 hours August 21 and 
closed at 0500 hours August 22 as scheduled. 
 
-- Karni Terminal: Karni remains open on August 22. 
 
-- Kissufim, the main crossing used to enter Gush Katif and 
Kfar Darom settlements, remains open only to traffic/persons 
leaving Gaza.  The IDF announced that all media personnel 
must leave Gaza by 2200 hours, August 22 through Kissufim. 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
KURTZER