09DUBLIN47
ADVANCING IRELAND'S LEADERSHIP ON GUANTANAMO
Fri Jan 30 00:00:00 +0100 2009
SECRET
Embassy Dublin
VZCZCXYZ0001
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDL #0047 0301945
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
P 301945Z JAN 09
FM AMEMBASSY DUBLIN
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9741S E C R E T DUBLIN 000047 
 
INFO EU MEMBER STATES PRIORITY 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/30/2019 
TAGS: PREL PTER EUN EI
SUBJECT: ADVANCING IRELAND'S LEADERSHIP ON GUANTANAMO 
 
REF: DUBLIN 038 
 
Classified By: CDA ROBERT J FAUCHER.  REASONS 1.4 (b/d) 
 
¶1. (S) Conor Lenihan, Irish Minister of State at the 
Department of Justice, Equality and Law Reform, with special 
responsibility for Integration Policy and Resettlement, 
called on the Charge January 29 to discuss a decision paper 
he was putting together for the Prime Minister and Cabinet 
that would recommend Ireland's accepting up to ten detainees 
from Guantanamo.  He hoped the paper would go forward in the 
first week of February for a decision and announcement by 
February 21.  Lenihan acknowledged that divisions remain in 
the Irish cabinet, with Irish Foreign Minister Martin 
pressing the argument in favor of accepting the detainees and 
announcing it early and Justice Minister Ahern leading the 
faction that prefers to wait for a common EU position for 
Ireland to act.  Lenihan aligned himself with Martin and 
declared deep frustration at the lack of EU action on 
Guantanamo at the January 26 EU Foreign Ministers' Council 
meeting in Brussels.  He felt it imperative that Ireland lead 
on this issue and in any case not wait to announce its 
intentions until the expected traditional U.S.-Ireland 
bilateral meeting at the White House on St. Patrick's Day 
(March 17). 
 
¶2.  (C)  Irish Foreign Affairs Department Political Director 
Rory Montgomery told the Charge January 30 that Foreign 
Minister Martin also was dissatisfied with the results of the 
luncheon discussion at the January 26 Council meeting. 
Nevertheless, Martin left the meeting with the general sense 
that Ireland's EU partners agreed that the EU should find 
ways to respond positively to the President's recent 
Guantanamo closure announcement.  Martin told his EU 
counterparts that Ireland is willing to accept detainees, 
which he stressed flowed logically from their calls for 
Guantanamo's closure.  Montgomery stated that, with the shift 
in the Irish Justice Department's position toward accepting 
detainees, no one in the Irish Cabinet was arguing against 
it.  Justice Minister Ahern, however, wants to act only upon 
an EU common position, which "won't come any sooner than the 
end of the Czech EU presidency in June," according to 
Montgomery, "and this was not acceptable."  An Irish 
announcement would likely come between now and St. Patrick's 
Day, he declared. 
 
¶3.  (S) Lenihan and Montgomery separately told the Charge 
that presentation of the issue by the President and the 
Secretary of State in the weeks ahead would greatly impact 
the abilities of Ireland and the EU to move forward on the 
detainee issue.  They stressed the need for clarity about 
whether the U.S. itself would resettle any detainees.  A 
strong, direct request to Ireland would generate a strong, 
direct response, they both predicted. 
 
¶4.  (S) Comment.  Ireland is poised to move ahead of its EU 
partners and announce its intention to resettle detainees 
from Guantanamo.  The Embassy will continue to work this 
issue but a call from the Secretary would likely generate a 
positive response.  Irish leaders clearly hope to maximize 
the political capital Ireland would earn from such a move and 
believe that an announcement prior to St. Patrick's Day would 
be preferred over making it a deliverable for any White House 
meeting. 
FAUCHER