09EFTOASMARA34
LETTER TO PRESIDENT OBAMA FROM HASSAN DAHIR AWEYS
Wed Jan 28 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Asmara
R 281504Z JAN 09
FM AMEMBASSY ASMARA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 0123
INFO SOMALIA COLLECTIVEUNCLAS E F T O ASMARA 000034 
 
 
FOR AF/E 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL PTER SO ER
SUBJECT:  LETTER TO PRESIDENT OBAMA FROM HASSAN DAHIR AWEYS 
 
The following is an informal translation of the letter to 
President Obama from Sheikh Aweys, head of the hardline 
faction of the ARS resident in Asmara.  A copy of the Arabic 
text was sent to the desk on January 26. The original has 
been pouched to the desk, registration number 4666720  Post 
appreciates the assistance of Embassy Sanaa in providing the 
translation. 
 
Begin text: 
In the Name of Allah Most Gracious, Most Merciful 
Praise be to Allah 
And Peace and Blessing be upon the Prophet, and his Companions 
 
Third letter:  Letter of advice to Barack Obama on the day of 
his inauguration as President of the United States of America. 
 
When I heard and followed your speech during your 
inauguration, I found that your speech carried new visions 
toward Muslims which encouraged me to offer you this advice. 
 
What is terrorism?  What are the reasons for it?  How to deal 
with it?  And, who are the terrorists targeted today? 
 
Terrorism:  Two types:  Defamed and desired: 
 
Defamed terrorism is the killing of a human being, fighting 
him with no right, taking his money, or intimidating him 
unjustly and out of aggression.  Muslims call this type of 
terrorism Muharabah (fighting), and those commiting it are 
called Muhariboon (fighters), or bandits.  The Islamic 
judgment against them is known. 
 
Or fighting to evade paying rightful dues, or for the purpose 
of coercing others to give up what is in their hands. 
 
Desired terrorism is fighting for a lawful right such as 
fighting for a cause of Allah, self defense, or against 
perversive aggressors on earth.  This type of terrorism is 
desired and loved by all nations across history. 
 
Causes and types of condemned terrorism: 
 
Arrogance, jealousy, desire, and doubt. 
 
Arrogance is what caused the Fascists and Nazis to fight all 
nations, take over their lands and wealth, and for that 
reason, the Second World War commenced when man felt he had 
enough weapons and financial strength. 
 
Jealousy is what caused the Serbs to kill Muslims 
(Bosnia-Herzegovina). 
 
Desire is what caused those colonial countries in past 
centuries to occupy people, and impose their authority on the 
whole world. 
 
Doubt is when one thinks that he is fighting for a rightful 
purpose when he is not, as the fighting of a group of the 
Prophet's (Peace Be Upon Him) companions in Damascus (Syria) 
against a similar group in Kufa (Iraq).  Muslims call these 
fighters aggressors, and fighting them is also known. 
 
Or, fighting for power, and Muslims call this a sedition 
fight. 
 
Or, fighting to take money, kill people unjustly, or 
intimidate them.  In Islam, this is called Al-Hirabah, 
(fighting belligerents). 
 
Fighting to force the payment of rightful fees as alms 
(charity) in Islam. 
 
How to deal with all of these: 
 
After proving evidence against them, repel and fight them, or 
repel any other possible method.  This is agreed upon. 
 
And who are the terrorists of today:  I don't doubt, and 
don't think any reasonable people doubt, that what is meant 
by the term "terrorism" and "terrorist" is Islam and Muslims 
of today as they fight, despite their weakness, war of the 
weak. 
 
The strong usually accuse the weak fighters with distasteful 
names so as to alienate, find a reason to fight them, and 
solicit as much assistance from others as possible against 
them. 
 
But what is the reason for that war: 
 
No doubt, Muslims see themselves maltreated by the West, 
deprived of their rights, stripped of their land, oppressed 
politically, socially, economically, militarily, morally, 
historically and scientifically. They were even deprived of 
the industrial boom that included the whole world, and it 
became a red line they cannot get close to.  They either give 
in to the painful reality that only adds to their 
humiliation, or move.  And, if they want to move, how? 
 
Either with advice and preaching!  Only a few are affected by 
this method.  Books and articles in newspapers and magazines, 
plays, stories and others?  Not too many are affected. 
 
Politics and political parties?  This is relatively stronger 
(more effective) than the previous, and achieved some kind of 
change, but the West stood in the way, and fighting became a 
necessity for them as they found no other effective or 
permissible method.  The fight is unmatched (unequal), 
unorganized, and unauthorized for them, and they are 
terrorists any way. 
 
Fighting for Muslims 
 
Fighting for Muslims is a type of worship as they have a 
promise from Allah (God) for one of two good outcomes (of 
life):  either victory or martyrdom for the path (cause) of 
Allah.  Therefore, it is extremely difficult for them to 
surrender and raise the white flags as the Germans and 
Japanese did.  If a group is martyred, others carry the flag 
and so on.  If they all are killed, they receive their full 
rewards from Allah.  Also, they look at this life as nothing, 
even if their homes were destroyed and wealth taken, as their 
real homes are in the hereafter.  They also believe that 
fighting is an obligation upon each individual when the enemy 
is on their land. That is why they fight as individuals and 
groups, young and old, women and children.  However, they 
adopt extremely good war principles including peace with the 
peace giver, war with the warrior, honoring promises 
(commitments), good treatment, fairness, and kindness.  They 
are well known with these characteristics in history. 
 
There is another reason that made them hate the West, 
especially Americans, and that is their creation of the 
Jewish State in the middle (east?) oppressively, offensively, 
and displacing and killing of Palestinians for these people. 
 
My advice to you toward them is the following: 
 
¶1. Withdrawal of all foreign forces from their lands (from 
Iraq, Afghanistan, Somalia, and others). 
 
¶2. Offering a new reconciliation with them. 
 
¶3. Allowing serious political change from the corrupt 
governments in their countries. 
 
¶4. Opening scientific processes in commercial, politcal 
economic, military, and social fields, 
 
¶5. Place responsibilities upon them, and not consider them 
unfit. 
 
¶6. Give them the rights you would like to have without 
preferring over them with dicussion on the potential improper 
(unclear). 
 
¶7. Fair resolution of the axial issue, which is the 
Palestinian issue. 
 
¶8. Abandon your persistence not to resort to Islam for 
settling issues as it is an obligation upon them. 
 
As far as Somalia is concerned: 
 
We complain of Americans on the following issues: 
 
Extending to Ethiopians finance, military, media and 
political support against us. 
 
Fighting and killing of the Somali people from land, sea and 
air. 
 
Supporting warlords against nations, especially Muslims. 
Supporting corrupt governments of that nation. 
Failing those selected by the nation, who are expected to 
repair what has been damaged by people. 
Lack of respect for the choice of our people, especially if 
the choice is Islam. 
 
We want you to respect our choice as you would like to be 
respected, and assist us towards charity, God-fearingness, 
justice and kindness, and not towards sin and aggression, and 
not assist our enemy against us. 
 
Peace. 
 
Hasan Taher Awes 
Chairman 
Alliance for Reliberation of Somalia 
Asmara, Eritrea 
22/1/2009 
26/1/1430 (Hegira) 
 
 
MCMULLEN