09PARISFR48
SEOUL MEETINGS ON THER RETURN OF CULTURAL PROPERTY TO ITS
Wed Jan 14 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Mission UNESCO
UNCLAS        PARIS FR 00048
cxparis:
    ACTION: UNESCO
    INFO:   POL ECON DCM SCI DAO AMBU AMB AMBO

DISSEMINATION: UNESCOX
CHARGE: PROG

APPROVED: AMB:LOLIVER
DRAFTED: DCM:SCENGELKEN
CLEARED: LA:TMPEAY

VZCZCFRI759
RR RUEHC RUCNSCO
DE RUEHFR #0048/01 0141737
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 141737Z JAN 09
FM UNESCO PARIS FR
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC
INFO RUCNSCO/UNESCO COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 PARIS FR 000048 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PASS TO ECA/P/C - MKOUROUPAS 
SEOUL PASS TO BMCFEETERS 
BEIJING PASS TO BZIGLI 
TOKYO PASS TO WMMESERVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SCUL UNESCO KPAO KS FR JA
SUBJECT:  SEOUL MEETINGS ON THER RETURN OF CULTURAL PROPERTY TO ITS 
COUNTRY OF ORIGIN (NOVEMBRE 26-28, 2008) 
 
REF:  07 Paris 002594 
 
¶1. Begin Summary.   From November 26-28, two international meetings 
were held in Seoul, South Korea to address the issue of the return 
of cultural property to its country of origin.  On November 26, 
independent Experts met under the auspices of the Korean Government 
to review selected case studies of cultural property returns that 
have occurred in recent years.  The Experts also exchanged 
observations on lessons learned from those returns and exchanged 
ideas about further steps that can be taken to facilitate more such 
returns.   From November 27-28, UNESCO's Intergovernmental Committee 
on the Return/Restitution of Cultural Property to its Country of 
Origin (the "Committee") held its first Extraordinary Session and 
its only meeting outside of UNESCO headquarters in Paris.  Though 
separate, both sets of meetings were held under the banner of, and 
in tandem with, the celebration in 2008 of the 30th anniversary of 
the Committee's existence.  The U.S., as a Committee member, was 
substantially successful in preventing the deliberations of the 
Experts' meeting from dominating the Committee's agenda of work and 
its deliberations.  Also, importantly, at the closing session the 
United States (with help from one or two other Committee members) 
persuaded the Committee to only "take note of" and not to formally 
"endorse" several proposed initiatives that had emerged from the 
Experts' meeting.    Korean governmental authorities, aided by 
Korean experts present, exploited their status as host government to 
repeatedly criticize France and Japan for having failed to return a 
number of important Korean cultural heritage properties closely 
linked to Korean national identity.   The Committee's next ordinary 
session is scheduled to take place in Paris in between 11-13 May, 
¶2009.  The Committee in principle agreed to consider at its next 
meeting a U.S.-proposal to have the Committee begin holding ordinary 
meetings annually rather than bi-annually, as is now the practice. 
End Summary. 
 
¶2. The United States, joined by other Committee members and also by 
government representatives of UNESCO Member States not on the 
Committee (such as Canada, France, Germany and the UK), participated 
in the Experts' meeting in Observer status.   (Mission Legal 
Adviser, T. Michael Peay, represented the U.S.).  At the opening 
session of that meeting, the Assistant Director-General for Culture, 
Francoise Riviere said that the Committee was meeting for the first 
time in its 30-year history in extraordinary session.   She 
clarified for the record that the Experts' meeting was being held 
"under the authority of the Government of Korea", not UNESCO, and 
that the Committee's extraordinary meeting was being held under the 
joint authority of UNESCO and the Government of Korea (GoK).   She 
clarified further that the conclusions of the Experts' meeting would 
have no binding effect upon either UNESCO or its Member States.  She 
added that it had been decided in consultation with Korean 
authorities (after much discussion) to call the Experts' meeting's 
final outcome document "Conclusions" rather than a "Declaration." 
This was done to avoid any suggestion that the Experts' document 
would have normative connotations, she said.  Finally, Riviere 
applauded the holding of Experts meetings such as this and the one 
held in Athens in March 2008 as forums that offer opportunities for 
museums, art dealers, academies, and other private expert 
institutions to discuss and find realistic solutions to requests for 
the return of cultural property to its country of origin. 
 
¶3. Salient Points from the Experts Meeting: Session One.  Generally 
speaking, the line-up of experts assembled (many of whom were 
academics) was fairly impressive and their individual presentations 
were similarly pithy, thoughtful and well-organized, even if at 
times a bit too far-reaching.  Nearly all presentations were done in 
power-point format, had been pre-printed and were readily available 
in loose-leaf binders distributed to all participants.  Korean 
Professor LEE, Keun-Gwan opened by referring to an International 
Plea issued by former-UNESCO Director-General (D-G) M'Bow  in 1978 
("the 1978 Plea") which called for the return of cultural properties 
to their countries of origin.  Lee alluded to the Italian 
Government's return of a fragment of the Parthenon marbles and also 
to Italy's return of a Venus statue to Libya and to the importance 
of the 2008 Treaty of Amity, Partnership and Cooperation between 
those two countries, in this regard.   Lee cited as another 
favorable precedent the return of a cultural object from Japan to 
South Korea, and then its ultimate rendition by South Korea to North 
Korea as the country of origin.  Professor Lee observed that, during 
the course of its thirty-year existence, only a very small number of 
cases of return had been resolved as a result of actions taken by 
the Committee.  However, he noted that the Committee had nonetheless 
played a supportive role by giving heightened visibility to the 
overall issue of return. 
 
¶4. Reading from remarks prepared by former D-G M'Bow who could not 
attend the meeting for health reasons, A/DG Riviere underlined 
M'Bow's point that the reason he launched the 1978 Plea was not/not 
"to empty the museums of Europe and America, but rather to allow 
certain items to be returned that have special cultural 
significance" to the requesting country concerned.   Australian 
Professor Patrick O'Keefe (a widely revered eminence grise with over 
40 years experience in this field) enumerated a list of 10 specific 
initiatives that he says the Committee should consider taking to 
enhance the return of such cultural objects.   Many of his 
suggestions were seen as practical in nature, pertinent, and 
possibly feasible. 
 
¶5. Specifically, Professor O'Keefe suggested that the Committee: 
(i) monitor more closely and try to reinvigorate the 1999 Code of 
Ethics for Dealers to ensure that it is being used by dealers; (ii) 
renew its past discussions and consideration of possibly drafting a 
Code of Ethics for Collectors based on the principles of the 1995 
UNIDROIT Convention on Stolen or Illegally Exported Cultural 
Objects; (iii) renew its commitment to undertake "studies" done by 
experts "to clarify issues on cultural objects that are disputed and 
unclear" (noting that to date only one such study has been done); 
(iv) while working with the World Heritage Committee and others, 
endeavor to distill a set of general principles which could guide 
interpretation of the various international instruments regarding 
the treatment of cultural heritage; (v)  prepare educational 
materials for local people aimed at heightening their awareness of 
the  value of antiquities and monuments as part of their history, 
including preparing a study of cases where such initiatives have 
been successfully done; (vi) conduct a study on what legal 
requirements judicial courts in art market States are  demanding 
before they will declare a claimant State to be the owner of an 
antiquity; (vii) try to develop a methodology to quantify annually 
in monetary terms reliable statistical information that can measure 
the extent of illicit trade in cultural heritage; (viii) conduct a 
study on the pro's and the con's of disposing of museum duplicates 
(as a means to reduce illicit traffic), with the objective of 
establishing an authoritative statement on the issue of duplicates; 
(ix) illustrate best practices in establishing inventories of 
cultural heritage collections, on the theory that good inventories 
enable collections to be properly managed, are an essential tool in 
proving the provenance of an object, and assist in the fight against 
illicit traffic; and finally (x) conduct a study of how tax 
deduction regimes are applied vis-`-vis cultural properties, 
including whether it must be shown as a precondition for such 
deductions that the object has not been illicitly exported since 
¶1970. 
 
¶6. One Korean expert, Professor Kim Chang-gyoo noted that the role 
of mediation under the Committee's auspices is still not 
well-formulated and needs more detailed guidelines.   A Mexican 
expert, Professor Jorge Sanchez-Cordero, vehemently argued the need 
for the international community to draft a "model law" on State 
ownership that could then be used as a common template by States so 
that their laws in this regard become more harmonious.  This would 
facilitate the judicial and other resolution of disputes relating to 
cultural heritage objects the ownership of which is claimed by a 
sovereign State.  Sanchez-Cordero stressed that the model law 
approach had been successfully used in the United States with the 
Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) to facilitate the resolution of 
commercial disputes.  (Prof. O'Keefe and others found this idea 
attractive). 
 
¶7.  Salient Points from the Experts' Meeting: Session Two. UK 
Barrister Mr. Norman Palmer (who served as session moderator) asked 
panelists to bear in mind three questions that could help illuminate 
and broaden understanding of returns of cultural properties to their 
countries of origin.  Those questions were: (a) What were the "right 
conditions" that made restitution possible in a given instance, and 
can those conditions be replicated elsewhere?; (b) What was the 
process used: diplomatic, unilateral, inter-State; inter-museum?; 
and (c) What was the document or instrument used to effectuate the 
return: a gift, a loan, the unconditional ceding of title, an 
arrangement involving an exchange/swap?   Korean Expert Professor 
Boa Rhee offered a detailed and succinct history of Japanese pillage 
of Korean cultural heritage dating back to the Japanese invasion of 
Korea in 1592, then again during the Russo-Japanese War (1904-5), 
followed by Japan's annexation of Korea (1910) and most recently 
during the Korean War (1950-53).  She noted the repatriation of the 
Korean Bukgwan Victory Monument as an exceptional but rare example 
of Japanese repatriation to South Korea of one of its cultural 
heritage properties.  South Korea in turn repatriated that Monument 
to North Korea. 
 
¶8.  Italian Professor Tullio Scovazzi offered two recent examples 
involving returns of cultural objects by Italy to Libya (a Venus of 
Cyrene statue) and to Ethiopia (the Axum Obelisk).  He asserted that 
these cases have helped to promote three emerging principles of 
international law relevant to the return of cultural objects: (i) 
the principle of the non-impoverishment of the cultural heritage of 
States of origin; (ii) the principle of non-exploitation of the 
weakness of other countries to achieve a cultural gain; and (iii) 
the principle of the preservation of the integrity of cultural, 
including World Heritage, sites.    Scovazzi then offered the 
provocative idea that the international regime of transnational 
movements of cultural properties could be better controlled by 
borrowing certain restrictions and principles found in the Basel 
Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous 
Wastes and Their Disposal.   For instance, the Basel Convention 
prohibits "covert movements" of wastes and "movements without the 
previous explicit consent of the potentially affected State."  It 
contains other similar constraints and obligations for States 
parties.  GoK Expert, LEE Nan-young, contrasted the United States' 
return of a precious Korean flag (taken in 1871 before U.S.-Korean 
diplomatic relations were established) following a negotiation that 
lasted only one year with Korea's protracted and still unsuccessful 
attempts to retrieve from France large volumes of imperial archival 
materials (taken during a French 1866 invasion).  Swiss Expert, 
Prof. Marc-Andre Renold, said that UNESCO has a duty to keep track 
of all outstanding disputes involving demands for returns of 
cultural property.  Renold endorsed Prof. O'Keefe's list of 
suggestions and the "model law" idea suggested by Prof. 
Sanchez-Cordero. 
 
¶9. Salient Points from Experts' Meeting: Session Three.  France came 
in for yet another round of withering criticism for having removed 
from Korea the imperial archives of the Emperor Joseon Era.   A 
UNESCO Expert, Etienne Clement, described the loss of Cambodian 
Khmer statues and other cultural items in connection with the 
conflict there during the 1970's.  Many of those items were later 
found in U.S. museums and galleries.  Major U.S. museums, the U. S. 
Government (the State Department in particular), and also France, 
Thailand, and the Netherlands were complimented for playing a 
constructive role in facilitating or effectuating the return of many 
of those objects.  It was noted that the substantive provisions of 
the 1970 Convention served as the legal framework for the return of 
those Cambodian properties.  Chinese Government Expert, Zhang 
Jianxin, set forth in specific detail the Chinese Government's 
position on issues relating to the return of cultural property to 
its country of origin.  Zhang, referring to "significant cultural 
objects displaced in history," specifically appealed to "relevant 
countries, institutions and individuals . . . to return those 
cultural objects illegally displaced to their countries of origin." 
He added that museums should "realize they should no longer purchase 
and collect cultural objects with unknown provenance."  During the 
brief time for questions and answers, a local French diplomat took 
the floor and launched a spirited defense of France's position on 
the return of Korean objects.  He refuted many of the allegations 
made, but readily volunteered that because those Korean imperial 
archives are now part of France's heritage, it will be "impossible 
under French law to transfer them back to Korea or to send them 
elsewhere."  (Comment: Many delegates later whispered that they 
found this a shocking admission). 
 
¶10. Discussion re "Experts' Conclusions".  At the end of the day, 
the Experts group began reviewing a draft set of "Conclusions."  The 
U.S. and other government Observer Delegations were permitted to 
comment on the draft text, but only after it had been largely agreed 
to by the Experts.   The U.S. asked to delete the reference to 
"discussions taking place on the return of cultural property 
displaced during World War II", explaining that those discussions 
were very delicate, that they were taking place under UNESCO 
auspices and pursuant to other instruments such as the Washington 
Principles and Vilnius Declaration.  (Comment:  Our request was 
intended to emphasize the need to ensure that both expert and 
Committee meetings do not blur the line between the Committee's 
mandate regarding the return of cultural property to its country of 
origin and the on-going discussions taking place regarding cultural 
property displaced during World War II).   Moreover, as currently 
worded, the Experts Conclusions would leave the erroneous impression 
that this issue had been discussed at their forum.   The Experts 
evinced a strong reluctance, however, to alter the text of the 
Conclusions.   The U.S. suggestion was not accepted.  U.S. concerns, 
however, were to some degree assuaged in a companion note addressed 
to the UNESCO Director-General that was signed by the Expert who 
oversaw the drafting of the Conclusions (Professor Lyndel Prott). 
That note, published as an integral part of the Conclusions, says 
"The reference to 'current discussions on the return of cultural 
property displaced in connection with the Second World War' was 
intended to include national efforts on spoliation issues as well as 
international initiatives such as the Washington Principles, Vilnius 
Declaration and discussions within UNESCO and the Council of 
Europe." 
 
¶11. Extraordinary Session of the Committee.   By acclamation, it was 
agreed that Korean Professor Lee Keun-Gwan would chair the 
Committee, and he performed this task very ably throughout.   A 
number of new ideas or noteworthy observations emerged during the 
Committee's deliberations during the two following days.   Japanese 
expert Professor Toshiyuki Kono discouraged the Committee from 
becoming more active in dispute mediation/conciliation, pointing out 
the drawbacks encountered by WIPO in its mediation process (e.g., 
high cost and non-disclosure of case results).   The U.S. agreed 
that the Committee should be very circumspect about moving the 
Committee in the direction of greater involvement in 
conciliation/mediation; any such move in that direction would 
require very careful consideration.  Canada (sitting as an Observer 
State, represented by the immediately preceding Chairperson of the 
Committee, Catherine Zedde), however, took a more open view towards 
conciliation/mediation, though acknowledged that this should not be 
the Committee's primary focus right now.  Egypt complained about the 
excessively short time delay (3-4 days) between public notices of 
auctions and the eventual sales and said that the International Code 
for Dealers should be amended to make the pre-sale interval longer. 
The UNESCO Legal Advisor, upon request, opined that the UNESCO 
General Conference would have the sole authority to amend that Code, 
as it was the entity that authorized the Code.    There were a 
number of interventions from Committee members (Italy, for one) 
calling for the draft rules on conciliation/mediation to be 
finalized and adopted by the Committee. 
 
¶12. Expert, Professor Lyndel Prott noted that most art dealers are 
either reluctant to use the International Code for Art Dealers or 
worse they are outright hostile to it.  Assistant Director-General, 
Francoise Riviere said that the Model Export Certificate in use 
needed to be updated to address illicit sales and exports taking 
place in today's modern context, including sales consummated on the 
Internet.   Riviere also suggested that the Committee begin 
directing more of its attention away from the inter-governmental 
arena and more towards museums and other private actors.   (Comment: 
 This suggestion by a senior UNESCO official underscores the need 
for  Mission and USG vigilance to try to ensure that UNESCO as an 
international institution does not assume a "big-brother", traffic 
cop role vis-`-vis the activities of museums and other private 
actors.)  Egypt proposed that greater attention needs to be given to 
inventorying cultural items that are in storage.   Greece gave a 
summary of the March 2008 Athens Conference on the return of 
cultural property to its country of origin and stressed two major 
themes that emerged from that conference: (i) a growing sense of 
"ethical norms" that transcend legal technicalities and (ii) the 
importance of ascertaining whether a cultural object whose return is 
requested is considered as a "sine qua non" of the requesting 
country's cultural heritage.   The U.S.  (along with France and 
Germany sitting as Observer States) opposed Italy's suggestion that 
the Committee "endorse" the Conclusions adopted at both the Athens 
Conference and at the Seoul Experts' meeting.  Saudi Arabia 
suggested that the Committee should adopt some of the Seoul Experts' 
conclusions in one of its Recommendations.  After debate, however, 
it was ultimately agreed to only "take note" of both sets of 
conclusions (with Japan shown as formally opposing). 
 
¶13. Professor Lyndel Prott presented in power-point format an 
excellent "Compendium on Historical, Philosophical, and Legal 
Approaches to Issues of Return and Restitution.   One of the more 
provocative and iconoclastic presenters among the group was Prof. 
Ana Vrdoljak (U. of West Australia) who discussed "The history and 
evolution of International Cultural Heritage Law" as it relates to 
removals and returns of cultural objects.  Among some of her 
recommendations was that the Committee attempt to "codify" 
international law in this field of activity and that contributions 
to the Fund of the Intergovernmental Committee be made compulsory. 
A Kenyan Government expert, Mr. Kiprop Lagat, stated that the Kenyan 
and other African Governments do not accept as an excuse for 
non-return that sub-Saharan African museums and local governments 
cannot properly protect the cultural items that would be returned. 
He said that Kenya has not yet made any formal demands to the 
British Museum for return of items, but his use of the term "yet" 
seemed to imply that this could be envisaged.  He noted that some 
duplicates have been given to Kenya by the UK and he alluded to a 
2004 Kenya-UK Memorandum of Agreement to cooperate on loans of 
cultural property.  During a question and answer interval, a 
heretofore silent representative of the Iran Cultural Heritage, 
Handicrafts and Tourism Organization piped up to accuse the United 
States Government of politicizing and holding "hostage to political 
interests" certain rare Iranian/Persian tablets (a reference to the 
pending Jenny Rubin civil lawsuit over Persian tablets on loan to 
the University of Chicago).   The U.S. took the floor to correct the 
erroneous suggestion that the U.S. Government had politicized the 
claim to those tablets.  The U.S. representative pointed out that 
the Government of Iran itself had apparently sought to politicize 
that litigation by refusing to respect the U.S.  court system and 
duly making an appearance before court as expected to assert that 
the tablets were immune from seizure.  We noted that after much 
delay, Iran did properly assert immunity and the matter remains sub 
judice. 
 
¶14.  Committee's Closing Session.   Before the Committee turned its 
discussion to the specific Recommendations proposed for adoption at 
this session, there was a final round of shadow-boxing between the 
Koreans, on one side, and the French and Japanese, on the other, 
concerning certain unreturned items of Korean cultural heritage 
(discussed above).   Korea said it rejected France's invocation of 
French domestic law as a basis for refusing to return the archival 
documents in question, asserting that this violated a basic 
principle of customary international law.  Japan justified its 
stance by saying that a 1965 Japan-Korean Agreement represented a 
final and complete resolution of these issues. 
 
¶15. By pre-arrangement with the Chairman, just before closure of the 
discussion and debate phase of the meeting, the U.S. representative 
intervened to propose that the Committee consider holding its 
meetings more regularly, i.e., once a year rather than once every 
two years, as currently done.   (This proposal had been pre-cleared 
with both the Department and Ambassador Oliver).  Many new and 
important developments are occurring in the field of cultural 
property returns, we explained, and at its present pace the 
Committee will always be lagging behind.   There was wide support in 
the room for this idea, including from A/DG Riviere who said the 
timing of this proposal was good, as her Sector is currently 
drafting a proposed budget for the next biennium.  However, Japan 
vociferously objected, urging that we keep to the status quo pace of 
meetings.  (The Japanese had previously informed us privately of 
their fear that more meetings will simply give the Koreans more 
opportunities to browbeat them in public over non-return issues. 
However, the Japanese have failed to sufficiently appreciate that 
their concerns can be better managed within a framework of more 
frequently-scheduled "regular" meetings of the Committee held at 
UNESCO headquarters in Paris, which should limit the holding of 
"extraordinary" meetings like the one in Seoul where host countries 
can orchestrate their narrow political agendas under the guise of a 
Committee meeting).  The U.S. put forward in writing its draft 
recommendation asking that this suggestion be placed on the agenda 
at the Committee's next regular session for discussion.  Japan 
reiterated its strong opposition to more frequent regular meetings, 
but its line of reasoning became increasingly incoherent, and Japan 
soon found itself completely isolated.  The Chairman reminded Japan 
of the United States' point that this extraordinary Committee 
session was not being asked to make a final decision on whether to 
approve the U.S. suggestion, only that the Committee give this idea 
consideration at its next meeting.  The Chairman noted there was 
strong support in the room for the U.S. idea.  A/DG Riviere then 
intervened to say that, taking into account the Chairman's favorable 
observations regarding this proposal, rather than taking additional 
time at that late hour to debate the final wording on the U.S. 
Recommendation, she would give her personal assurance that the U.S. 
proposal will be included within the agenda for discussion at the 
next Committee meeting in May 2009.  As the time had come to close 
the meeting, Japan relented. 
 
¶16. Beyond the issue of frequency of Committee meetings, the U.S. 
also achieved success in persuading the Committee to delete or 
modify three other problematic operative paragraphs.  We eliminated 
one paragraph in which the Committee would have affirmed that it 
"Supports drafting of a model law for the protection of cultural 
property, to be proposed to States for their consideration, taking 
into account their specific legislations."  We were able to change 
another to say "Invites States to consider becoming parties to . . . 
international instruments" rather than "become parties."   And, we 
were able to remove a third paragraph (proposed by Italy) that would 
have said "Invites the Director-General to prepare a draft document 
outlining the principles of international law and the procedures to 
be followed for return of cultural property."   The final set of 
Recommendations, as adopted by the Committee, is available at 
UNESCO's website. 
 
¶17.  Comment.   This extraordinary session of the Committee was 
clearly worth the effort, in terms of its overall substantive value 
and timeliness.   For the United States, the meeting produced a good 
outcome that had been fortified in advance by two discussions that 
Ambassador Oliver had had with the Korean Ambassador to UNESCO in 
which she candidly expressed the substantive and procedural U.S. 
concerns regarding certain aspects and possible ramifications of the 
Experts' Meeting.   This was a session at which the U.S. needed to 
have boots on the ground in order to prevent a number of 
objectionable and potentially dangerous elements from slipping into 
the Committee's Recommendations and future working methods.  U.S. 
presence also was influential in preventing the Experts' Conclusions 
from becoming too intrusive vis-`-vis the Committee's deliberations. 
  The Japanese and French Governments, by contrast, must be far less 
comfortable with the outcome of this meeting.  As UNESCO committees 
go, the focus and professionalism of this Committee and its 
participants are comparatively high and thus give it the potential 
to make constructive contributions in the field of return of 
cultural property to its country of origin.  Though there may be 
further resistance, there is a good chance the Committee will agree 
to adopt the U.S. proposal to begin meeting annually.   It is highly 
likely that, as part of the Committee's consideration of "a strategy 
for [its] future work", it will gradually begin studying and then 
implementing some of the innovative ideas that emerged from the 
Experts' meeting.   It is clear that, as a result of what the United 
States is doing at the federal level (specifically, the State 
Department and Homeland Security), the U.S. is currently seen in a 
favorable light both within the Committee and by other stakeholders 
in this field.  Indicative of this was the strong support that Peru 
openly provided in support of nearly each U.S. intervention. 
 
¶18. Comment cont'd.  As the issue of cultural property returns 
continues to gain greater visibility and the number of requests for 
returns continues to grow, the Committee will likely be asked to 
play an increasingly prominent role, including in the areas of 
mediation/conciliation and standard setting.   Moreover, it has 
become unmistakably clear that the issue of the return of cultural 
property to its country of origin is braced to become more political 
and more contentious in the period ahead.   Accordingly, continued 
U.S. leadership on this issue at UNESCO and U.S. monitoring of the 
Committee's activities will be key to managing that process. 
End Comment. 
 
Oliver