09RABAT42
MOROCCO: WOMEN'S ELECTORAL SUPPORT PROJECT
Thu Jan 15 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Rabat
VZCZCXYZ0003
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHRB #0042/01 0152003
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 152003Z JAN 09
FM AMEMBASSY RABAT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9543
INFO RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 4951
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 9764
RUEHCL/AMCONSUL CASABLANCA PRIORITY 4457UNCLAS RABAT 000042 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/PI (KIRBY), DRL/NESCA, AND NEA/MAG 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV PREL KMPI KWMN MO
SUBJECT: MOROCCO: WOMEN'S ELECTORAL SUPPORT PROJECT 
 
REF: A. 08 RABAT 1194 
     ¶B. 08 RABAT 1196 
     ¶C. 08 RABAT 1150 
     ¶D. EMBASSY-MEPI EMAILS 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary and Action Request:  Mission Morocco 
proposes that the USG (MEPI) urgently provide between USD 
500,000 to USD 1 Million to implement a major quick action 
effort to support a major expansion of women's political 
participation and enhance democracy.  Morocco has recently 
allocated twelve percent of seats in local councils to women, 
up from under one percent, at present.  Victors would also be 
eligible for higher office.  We understand the U.S. major 
party institutes, already active on the ground in Morocco, 
are submitting proposals for this.  With the elections slated 
for June, and nominations due in May, there is very little 
time to act.  Due to their existing projects and connections, 
NDI and IRI may be the only providers who can make this 
happen in time. This is a coordinated mission message.  End 
Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) Embassy has reported the recent decision of the 
Government of Morocco (GOM) to revise its electoral law to, 
in effect, allocate some 12 percent of municipal/local 
council seats in the June 2009 elections for women.  This 
would result in approximately 2,800 new women elected 
officials, with thousands more politically involved as 
candidates (ref A).  Currently, less than one percent of 
local council seats are held by women (125 nationwide). 
USAID,s local government project helped prepare the landmark 
legislation.  Of the victors, some likely would be elected by 
their peers in July to fill regional and provincial councils 
and some of the one-third of the rotating seats in the 
Chamber of Councilors, the upper house of parliament. 
National-level women politicians have told us this is an 
excellent opportunity to expand both women,s role in the 
political process and reform in general (ref B).  While the 
mechanisms to accomplish this significant expansion of 
women's participation remains informal, complex, and somewhat 
vague, the end result could help build the now wanting level 
of political interest and participation. 
 
¶3.  (U) Action Request:  Embassy proposes a significant 
short-term assistance program to generate women candidates 
across the party spectrum and among independents and train 
them to run and win, including in the follow-on elections. 
Initially, the effort would be based a good deal on civil 
society organizations, which would beat the grassroots for 
candidates, help them find parties, and prepare them to run, 
thus also reducing the likelihood of cronyism.  In a second 
phase, political parties would be assisted to train their own 
candidates, who also would get general assistance.  This 
would not be a pilot project, but at least an effort to 
achieve comprehensive, country-wide reach. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The U.S. major political party institutes, NDI and 
IRI, both have existing projects with women's political 
associations (the former funded by USAID and the latter, we 
understand, by NED).  To their credit, the institutes have 
stepped forward and proposed to fill this urgent need, which 
they appear uniquely in a position to accomplish.  Both have 
indicated they were submitting proposals to MEPI.  IRI was 
already working to strengthen the nascent Association of 
Women Local Councilors.  NDI has a project with the Women's 
Action Union (UAF).  Embassy has already has had initial and 
positive contacts with these NGO's and we judge them as 
useful potential vehicles.  Both institutes would 
subsequently work through their existing party connections, 
particularly for phase 2, and have potentially indicated they 
could work in separate geographic regions, ultimately 
covering the whole country.  They have proposed to proceed in 
a coordinated manner.  We understand that NDI may propose 
other activities, of which we judge work with party election 
poll watchers to be promising.  We would otherwise hope they 
could concentrate on the women. 
 
¶5. (SBU) While budgeting is not finalized, a project of 
between USD 500,000 and USD one million would likely be 
required, divided among implementers.  This would provide for 
concentric circles of train the trainers, in order to reach 
at least a large majority of the districts and ultimately as 
many as 10,000 or more potential women candidates, while also 
reaching out to the public.  We will assist in coordination 
with other donors, which should also be incorporated.  This 
project would complement other efforts we make to support 
democracy through the local elections.  It would also help 
build, even among the losers. a pool of women civil society 
activists, better prepared to engage with the political 
structure. 
 
¶6.   This message has been coordinated with USAID Mission. 
 
 
 
 
 
***************************************** 
Visit Embassy Rabat's Classified Website; 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/rabat 
***************************************** 
 
Riley