06AITTAIPEI3509
MEDIA REACTION: DPRK NUCLEAR TEST, CAMPAIGN TO OUST
Fri Oct 13 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0005
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #3509/01 2860923
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 130923Z OCT 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2566
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5765
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 6980UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 003509 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - DAVID FIRESTEIN 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: DPRK NUCLEAR TEST, CAMPAIGN TO OUST 
PRESIDENT CHEN SHUI-BIAN 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused their 
coverage October 13 on a Taipei City Police Department decision 
Thursday to revoke permission for the "Oust Bian" campaign to 
assemble in front of the Presidential Office starting this coming 
Saturday; on the vote in the Legislative Yuan today over the motion 
to recall President Chen Shui-bian; and on the plane crash of New 
York Yankees pitcher Cory Lidle Wednesday.  Both the 
pro-independence "Liberty Times," Taiwan's largest-circulation 
daily, and the pro-unification "United Daily News" reported on 
inside pages a U.S. Congressional Research Service report released 
Tuesday, which said Washington worries that "the level of anti-Chen 
sentiment being whipped up by some of Chen's opponents may lead to 
more violent protests or to extra-judicial measures for addressing 
the corruption allegations." 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, a column in the 
mass-circulation "Apple Daily" commented on North Korea's recent 
nuclear test, saying the move has made China anxious and outraged, 
but Beijing was unable to complain about it, like a mute person 
tasting bitter herbs.  With regard to the campaign to oust President 
Chen, an editorial in the limited-circulation, conservative, 
pro-unification, English-language "China Post" said the majority of 
the Taiwan people have spoken their minds about Chen's abuses of 
power and no longer consider him as their leader.  An editorial in 
the limited-circulation, pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan 
News," on the other hand, urged the "Oust Bian" campaign to stop and 
allow the judiciary and constitutional system to decide whether Chen 
has abused his power.  End summary. 
 
¶3. DPRK Nuclear Test 
 
"Like a Mute Person Tasting Bitter Herbs, Beijing Is Unable to 
Complain" 
 
Columnist Antonio Chiang noted in the mass-circulation "Apple Daily" 
[circulation: 500,000] (10/13): 
 
"... North Korea's nuclear test came as a great encouragement for 
Iran's development of nuclear weapons.  But more importantly, the 
nuclear test has drawn China, Japan, and South Korea closer to each 
other; it is rare for the three countries to find a consensus, and 
they now have to join hands together to deal with this challenge. 
... 
 
"The key purpose for Pyongyang to possess nuclear weapons is to use 
them for nuclear deterrence, and without a doubt, its main target is 
the United States.  But since the United States is a long distance 
away, and it has interception ballistic missiles, it can sleep in 
peace for a while.  But the neighboring countries of North Korea, 
such as Japan, South Korea, and, of course, China, are those which 
really feel the threat because there is no eternal friendship 
between nations.  Once Beijing and Pyongyang are on bad terms, North 
Korea may switch its target of deterrence to China. 
 
"When it comes to the problem of North Korea, if China chooses to 
side with South Korea, it is akin to carrying two burdens on its 
back - North Korea and South Korea.  Also, once China forms an 
alliance with South Korea, the alliance between the United States 
and South Korea will surely collapse.  [Should this be the case,] 
Washington will definitely seek to strengthen its alliance with 
Japan, which will create an impact on Beijing-Washington ties and 
may not be so favorable for China.  This nuclear test is shaping 
Asia's geopolitics.  Japan gets really nervous, while Washington's 
uneasiness is merely sham; China is both anxious and outraged, but 
like a mute person tasting bitter herbs, it is unable to complain." 
 
 
¶4. Campaign to Oust President Chen Shui-bian 
 
A) "Chen Already Judged a Loser" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (10/13): 
 
"... Knowledgeable people will say that, when a spate of evidence 
unmistakably has shown that the present judicial system is neither 
independent nor upholds justice, 'letting the people decide' should 
be the best and most democratic way to resolve the current deadlock 
between pro- and anti-Chen camps.  And, indeed, there is no 
legitimate reason for Chen, a politician who has always boasted of 
being a champion of democracy, to refuse to face such a public vote 
of confidence if he still firmly believes he is innocent and 
supported by the majority of the people. 
 
"But, the fact is that all DPP legislators, understandably with the 
president's consent, do not agree to this democratic suggestion, 
with the result that the recall proposal cannot be passed.  When a 
popularly elected head of state in a democracy is afraid of being 
PRESIDENT CHEN SHUI-BIAN 
 
tested by public opinion, it means he realizes that he has lost 
popular support.  Hence President Chen is no longer a credible 
supreme leader even if he is digging himself in the Presidential 
Office and manages to preserve his precarious presidency through 
exploiting legal technicalities.  ... 
 
"Few believe that President Chen, with his determination and 
audacity, will ultimately be forced to relinquish his power by a 
'peaceful' movement.  But, the majority of the people have spoken 
their minds against his abuses of power.  Deep in their hearts, they 
no longer consider him as their leader, which should be the most 
painful humiliation to a popularly elected supreme leader in a 
modern democracy. ..." 
 
B) "Time to Go Home and Wake up" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" [circulation: 
20,000] editorialized (10/13): 
 
"We sincerely urge Shih Ming-teh and other leaders of the misnamed 
'Million Voices against Corruption' campaign to depose President 
Chen Shui-bian to take the advice offered by the Democratic 
Progressive Party Wednesday and go home. ...  The last month has 
indeed been enlightening, but enough is enough.  Mr. Shih, please do 
everyone a favor:  Go home.  We finally hope that the thousands of 
people who jumped into Shih's campaign will reflect on their 
experiences, allow our judiciary and constitutional system to handle 
the question of whether President Chen has abused his powers and 
wake up to the fact that they have again been used by unscrupulous 
politicians." 
 
YOUNG