07USEUBRUSSELS1537
NO EU UNITY GOING INTO REVIEW OF COMMON POSITION
Tue May 08 00:00:00 +0200 2007
CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN
USEU Brussels
VZCZCXRO9152
PP RUEHAO RUEHCD RUEHGA RUEHGD RUEHHA RUEHHO RUEHMC RUEHNG RUEHNL
RUEHQU RUEHRD RUEHRG RUEHRS RUEHTM RUEHVC
DE RUEHBS #1537/01 1281716
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 081716Z MAY 07
FM USEU BRUSSELS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY
INFO RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHWH/WESTERN HEMISPHERIC AFFAIRS DIPL POSTS PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 USEU BRUSSELS 001537 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/08/2017 
TAGS: PREL PHUM EAID EUN BR CU
SUBJECT: NO EU UNITY GOING INTO REVIEW OF COMMON POSITION 
ON CUBA 
 
 
BRUSSELS 00001537  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
Classified By: Political Officer Vincent Carver for reasons 1.5 (B/D). 
 
SUMMARY 
- - - - - 
 
¶1.  (C/NF) EU and member state officials told visiting WHA 
DAS Madison and Cuba Coordinator McCarry May 2-3 that the EU 
has not yet reached consensus on what parts of its Common 
Position on Cuba will be renewed in June.  Contacts agreed on 
the need for Cubans to decide their future with encouragement 
from the international community.  The EU appears split, 
however, regarding what strategy to use regarding Cuba. 
Several EU and member state contacts confirmed to DAS Madison 
and Coordinator McCarry that Spain, with support from the 
German MFA, France, and Italy want to drop the suspended 
sanctions when renewing the EU's Common Position on Cuba in 
June.  Poland, the Czech Republic, and to a lesser extent, 
Hungary oppose dropping the sanctions.  END SUMMARY 
 
 
CUBANS PLAYING ON EU LACK OF UNITY 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2.  (C/NF) Karl Buck, Council Secretariat Latin America Unit 
Head, noted that discussions over renewal of the EU's common 
position on Cuba is just beginning; in a veiled reference to 
Spanish FM Moratinos' visit and a not-so-veiled criticism of 
Czech positions, he lamented the potential "loss" of EU unity 
regarding Cuba and therefore a decrease of EU credibility in 
Cuba.  Madison and McCarry stressed that the GOC seeks to 
create division among EU member states and divide the EU and 
the U.S.  They underscored that a united IC stand on human 
rights and the release of all political prisoners on the 
island, as well as continued engagement of Cuba's democratic 
opposition, is critical. 
 
EU WORKING GROUP ON LATIN AMERICA: 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶3.  (C) The German Presidency hosted a Latin America Working 
Group (COLAT) session (21 member state representatives 
attended) which Madison and McCarry addressed.  Madison and 
McCarry noted that repression in Cuba has increased in the 
past several months, is broad based, particularly targets the 
young, and appears more systematic.  Castro, while 
incapacitated, continues to remain a strong factor in the 
minds of both Cuban authorities and the opposition.  They 
underscored that the U.S. wants to work with the EU and other 
partners, including Brazil, to support a sovereign and 
democratic Cuba that is reintegrated in the Western 
Hemisphere.  More specifically, they emphasized that USG 
seeks to think creatively with partners on how to push for 
the release of all political prisoners in Cuba and to create 
the space necessary for a genuine dialogue on the island. 
This process, they added, should be directed by the Cuban 
people. 
 
¶4.  (C) In a discussion of the current situation in Cuba, 
several member state representatives made interventions 
regarding the Cuban economy, role of the military, and 
promotion of human rights.  The Spanish rep outlined the 
"results" of FM Moratinos' visit and noted that there "is a 
will for change" in Cuba and for "progress toward 
normalization of relations with the EU."  The Commission rep 
observed that Commission assistance projects to Cuba have 
largely ceased to operate as a result of Havana's decision to 
reject Commission funding  -- a decision he characterized as 
the GOC's response to EU criticism of the regime. 
 
¶5.  (C) DAS Madison highlighted Cuba's efforts to create 
division within the EU and between the EU and the USG.  To 
address some Cuban efforts to create division by working 
through third parties, the USG informed CUBINT that should 
they have something to say to the USG, they should do so 
through the Interests Section channel.  She underscored that 
countries should be mindful of Cuban nationalism and noted 
that the Unity for Freedom statement from the democratic 
opposition states that they do not believe that their human 
rights or their future should be subject to the state of 
their government's relations or negotiations with another 
government.  She underscored that the opposition was feeling 
particularly vulnerable at this time and that engaging them 
directly would continue to be essential. 
 
¶6.  (C) Nicolas Pascual de la Parte, Council Secretariat 
Policy Unit Head for Latin America, opined that neither the 
U.S. embargo nor the EU's critical dialogue with Cuba has 
brought desired results.  No one, he added, knows what the 
rapid changes -- which the Cubans interpret as changes within 
the regime -- on the island truly mean.  He agreed with 
 
BRUSSELS 00001537  002.2 OF 003 
 
SUBJECT: NO EU UNITY GOING INTO REVIEW OF COMMON POSITION 
ON CUBA 
Madison and McCarry that it is up to the Cuban themselves to 
determine their path to democrcy.  He also agreed that the 
opposition's "Unity for Freedom" document is "of utmost 
importance."  A united opposition will be the main factor 
generating change in Cuba, "and we should support it," he 
stressed. 
 
¶7.  (C) Madison and McCarry noted the U.S.-EU Summit language 
on Cuba, emphasizing the role of the international community 
in supporting the peaceful, democratic opposition in Cuba. 
Several member state reps, including the Dutch rep, reviewed 
potential technical support, with the Hungarian rep stressing 
that Budapest is "ready to actively share" Hungary's 
transition experiences and the Polish rep saying Warsaw 
"totally shares your (U.S.) evaluation" of the situation. 
The German Presidency observed that, while the EU and the 
U.S. may take different approaches at times regarding Cuba, 
we share a common goal -- helping the Cubans establish a 
democratic and free system.  "It should be possible to 
support each other and work together," she concluded. The 
discussion with EU COLAT representatives continued with a 
smaller group over lunch hosted by USEU, with Pascual de la 
Parte expressing frustration that the EU has been unable to 
get Latin American countries to take common positions with 
Brussels on Cuba and many other issues.  According to Pascual 
de la Parte, Mexico and several other Latin American states 
hesitate to criticize Havana in order not to provoke leftist 
parties in their own countries. 
 
BUT WATCH THE SPANISH ... AND THE GERMANS 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶8.  (C/NF) In a separate meeting May 2, Pascual de la Parte 
told Madison and McCarry that Spain is pushing to lift the 
political "sanctions" (technically suspended) from the EU's 
Common Position.  According to Pascual de la Parte, the 
Spanish and Germans may have struck a gentlemen's agreement: 
Madrid accepted the U.S.-EU Summit language on Cuba and in 
return, would obtain German support for lifting the political 
sanctions.  He added that the German MFA appears to support 
this move.  The German Chancellery has not yet gotten 
involved.  Pascual de la Parte added that Spain is supported 
by France, Italy, Greece, and Cyprus.  Poland, the Czech 
Republic, and to a slightly lesser extent, Hungary firmly 
oppose softening the Common Position.  The UK and the 
Netherlands are undecided.  Pascual de la Parte agreed with 
Madison and McCarry that lifting the suspended sanctions now 
would send the wrong signal to both the Cuban Government and 
the Cuban opposition, and would create a rift between the EU 
and the U.S. when closer coordination was critical.  Madison 
and McCarry noted that it would be de facto legitimization of 
an unelected successor government. 
 
COMMISSION:  CONFIRMING THE SPLIT 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶9. (C/NF) Madison and McCarry also outlined U.S. views to 
Commission Director for Latin America Tomas Dupla del Moral 
and Desk Officer Javier Nino Perez,  The Commission officials 
complained about their lack of activities and sources of 
information in Cuba, given the GOC's restrictions on 
Commission funding and movement, calling this an "untenable 
situation."  They confirmed Pascual de la Parte's observation 
that there are two camps forming in the run-up to debate over 
the EU's Common Position -- those member states who want to 
lift the suspended sanctions, and those who oppose such a 
move.  Dupla del Moral said that the Commission is searching 
for an opening in Cuba and lifting the sanctions might be one 
(but not the only) instrument for ultimately showing support 
to the opposition.  Madison and McCarry strongly disagreed, 
emphasizing that lifting the suspended sanctions now would 
send the wrong message, hurt and demoralize the opposition, 
and provide the Cuban regime a political boost. 
 
INCOMING PORTUGUESE PRESIDENCY:  WISHING THE ISSUE WOULD "GO 
AWAY" 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- - 
 
¶10.  (C/NF) Madison and McCarry outlined U.S. policies and 
views May 3 to the Political and Security Committee (PSC) 
ambassadors of Portugal (incoming President) and Slovenia 
(President Jan.-June 2008).  In yet another indication that 
the incoming Portuguese Presidency may be a weak follow-on to 
the German Presidency, Portuguese PSC Ambassador Durrant Pais 
told Madison and McCarry May 3 that, "We were rather 
optimistic that Cuba would go away."  With a debate beginning 
over the Common Policy, this may not be the case.  Durrant 
Pais characterized Moratinos' visit as "controversial," but 
added that Spain had demonstrated flexibility in agreeing to 
 
BRUSSELS 00001537  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
the U.S.-EU Summit language on Cuba.  Slovenian PSC 
Ambassador Ipavic stressed the need for the EU and for the EU 
and U.S. to maintain a united position on Cuba. 
 
CENTAL EUROPEANS AND BRITS:  MORE SUPPORTIVE OF U.S. VIEWS 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶11.  (C/NF) In a separate meeting, the Czech and Polish PSC 
ambassadors and UKEU Mission reps told McCarry that their 
countries support renewing the Common Position.  The Pole, 
noting that the U.S.-EU Summit language on Cuba was "highly 
controversial" for some member states, said Warsaw 
nevertheless sought EU-U.S. convergence on Cuba. UK reps said 
there was general agreement within the EU for a twin-track 
approach, promoting discussions with both the government and 
the opposition.  For its part, the UK would like to see a 
dialogue between Cuba and the EU, including on human rights. 
The Lithuanian PSC Ambassador noted parallels between Cuba 
and Belarus.  The Czech Ambassador said Prague is willing to 
propose even tougher language in the Common Position and 
would welcome U.S. advice.  He predicted "an intensive, not 
easy debate" in the run-up to the EU's June decision, 
stressing that, "Only one country is enough to (block 
consensus and) drop the sanctions.  This would be quite a 
nightmare."  McCarry reviewed U.S. policies and underscored 
that dropping the sanctions would send the wrong signal at 
the wrong time and would play into the Cuban regime's hands. 
 
 
¶12.  (SBU) Konrad Adenauer Stiftung (KAS) Development Policy 
Director Peter Koeppinger outlined a report by several 
European NGOs supported by KAS, in which the NGOs recommended 
that the EU take concrete measures to pressure Havana on 
human rights and democracy.  The report also called for 
further EU support for civil society in Cuba and for the EU 
to work with the U.S., the UN, and Latin American states on a 
common approach to Cuba.  Madison and McCarry welcomed the 
report's call for concrete actions and made suggestions on 
ways to drive the recommendations into the EU process, where 
interlocutors were clearly looking for ideas on next steps. 
 
¶13.  (C/NF) In the run-up to the European Council in June, 
USEU will closely monitor and lobby member state 
representatives to maintain the EU's Common Position without 
dropping the suspended sanctions. 
 
¶14. (U) DAS Madison and Coordinator McCarry have cleared this 
message.  Their meeting with Belgian MFA reps reported septel. 
MCKINLEY 
.