08MANAGUA2
NICARAGUAN GOVERNMENT PLEDGES TO PROVIDE MORE INFORMATION
Wed Jan 02 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #0002/01 0021947
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 021947Z JAN 08
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1887
INFO RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS MANAGUA 000002 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, EB/IFD/OIA AND L/CID 
STATE FOR WHA/EPSC 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO USTR 
TREASURY FOR INL AND OWH 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV ECON USTR KIDE NU
SUBJECT: NICARAGUAN GOVERNMENT PLEDGES TO PROVIDE MORE INFORMATION 
ON PROPERTY CLAIMS IN 2008 
 
REF: A) MANAGUA 2581, B) MANAGUA 2615, C) MANAGUA 2324, D) MANAGUA 
 
2442, E) MANAGUA 2494 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) In a December 21 meeting with the Ambassador, Attorney 
General Estrada outlined the Government of Nicaragua's (GON) "plan 
to resolve all property claims by 2011."  The Ambassador asked the 
GON to ensure a fair and transparent process as it seeks to resolve 
claims, especially in those cases where the Ortega administration is 
reviewing files accepted by previous governments for ironclad 
evidence that the claimant once exercised domain over a property and 
that the GON had expropriated the property.  Throughout the meeting, 
the Ambassador pressed Estrada for more communication outside of the 
monthly Working Group meeting as the best way to renew cooperation 
on case resolution.  While Attorney General said his office will 
remain the only channel of communication between the Embassy and 
GON, but he did promise to provide the Embassy a list of U.S. 
citizen claims that the GON will prioritize in 2008.  The Ambassador 
and Estrada agreed to meet in early 2008 to discuss the GON's 
progress in resolving Embassy registered claims during the 2007-08 
waiver year. 
 
GON AMENDS TIMETABLE TO RESOLVE OUTSTANDING CLAIMS 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶2. (SBU) In a December 21 meeting with the Ambassador, Attorney 
General ("Procurador") Hernan Estrada outlined the Government of 
Nicaragua (GON) "plan to resolve all outstanding property claims by 
2011."  Estrada's 20-minute presentation on the four-year plan 
suggested that the GON planned to resolve as many as 163 
Embassy-registered claims each year.  The Ambassador cautioned that 
the GON and USG consider a case resolved according to very different 
criteria.  The Ambassador asked the GON to implement a fair and 
transparent process as it seeks to resolve those outstanding 
property claims, noting that cases dismissed without due process 
would remain in our registry. 
 
AMBASSADOR CHALLENGES REVIEW OF APPROVED CLAIMS 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶3. (SBU) In particular, the Ambassador challenged the GON's decision 
to review cases accepted by previous administrations for ironclad 
evidence that both the claimant exercised domain over a property and 
that the GON had actually expropriated the property.  The GON has 
offered a list of 18 cases summarily dismissed for failure to meet 
these criteria, the so-called "no ha lugar" decisions (Ref A).  The 
Ambassador explained that during the Chamorro, Aleman, and Bolanos 
administrations, claimants provided utility bills, property tax 
receipts, and/or inventory lists -- as opposed to certified title 
documents -- to demonstrate proof of ownership.  He noted that many 
records were destroyed during the war, and that in many cases 
claimants fled their homes, leaving all of their possessions behind. 
 The Ambassador concluded that the Ortega administration was 
applying a higher threshold for proof of ownership and/or 
expropriation than the law required.  Estrada replied that the 
Ortega administration "sought only to enforce the law," which he 
asserts requires that a claimant show proof of ownership with an 
original property title or cadastral records. 
 
¶4. (SBU) The Ambassador also complained that granting a claimant 
only ten days to respond to a "no hay lugar" decision is simply 
unrealistic and that any person -- and particularly those who may 
reside abroad -- would need more time to assemble the additional 
information needed to defend a claim (Ref B).  Estrada argued that 
Presidential Decree 52/1992 established the ten-day period for a 
claimant to appeal the GON's decision.  [Note: Decree No. 52 allows 
a claimant ten days to appeal a settlement offer from the Office of 
Assessment and Indemnification.  It is unclear how the GON 
interprets this law to apply to a claimant's right to appeal a "no 
hay lugar" decision.  End note]. 
 
¶5. (SBU) The Ambassador explained that some claimants must go to 
local courts or a notary public to prove they had ownership of their 
property or assets, and these legal processes rarely take less than 
10 days.  He also noted that it normally takes more than 10 days for 
domestic mail delivery; for mail to reach a claimant in the United 
States would require much more time.  To give a claimant only ten 
days to respond to a "no ha lugar" decision is simply unfair, the 
Ambassador concluded. 
 
¶6. (SBU) The Ambassador asked Estrada to facilitate further 
discussion between the Embassy and the GON on this issue.  He asked 
the GON to clarify the criteria by which claimants demonstrate proof 
of ownership and/or expropriation and the period during which they 
may appeal a "no ha lugar" dismissal.  He asked the GON to publish 
this information on the Internet and in the local press alongside 
the list of claims it will review in 2008.  Estrada replied that the 
GON will be fair and transparent throughout the process, but he 
emphasized that claimants will not enjoy an indefinite period to 
provide information about their cases. 
 
ESTRADA PROMISES TO SHARE INFORMATION ON 2008 PRIORITY CLAIMS 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Throughout the meeting, the Ambassador pressed Estrada for 
more communication other than the monthly Working Group meeting, 
noting that once-monthly sessions are not sufficient to discuss and 
resolve claims.  Estrada stated that his office will remain the only 
channel of communication between the Embassy and GON to curb corrupt 
practices that, he asserted, flourished under previous 
administrations.  The Attorney General said that the Embassy 
Property Office and GON should use the monthly Working Group meeting 
to focus on analyzing Embassy-registered claims.  Estrada alleged 
that some claimants received double compensation (receiving their 
property and indemnification bonds), while others colluded with 
their lawyers and former GON officials to overvalue their assets to 
obtain additional indemnification bonds (Ref B). 
 
¶8. (SBU) In response to the Ambassador's pressure to ensure that the 
administrative process would be fair and transparent, the Attorney 
General said that he would publish a list of all the claims that the 
GON would work on in 2008 on the website of his office and in a 
local newspaper.  Estrada noted that publishing the list of claims 
will provide claimants an opportunity to take the necessary steps to 
defend their rights.  The Ambassador suggested that the Embassy 
could help the GON with U.S. citizen claims if we receive a copy of 
the list before its publication.  The Ambassador explained that the 
Property Office is prepared to review claims with the GON and 
contact claimants to provide instructions on how to submit 
information the National Confiscations Review Commission claims is 
missing. 
 
SIX MONTH REVIEW IN JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2008 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) The Ambassador told Estrada that they should meet in 
January to assess the GON's progress in resolving Embassy registered 
claims during the 2007-2008 waiver year.  Estrada agreed that this 
mid-year review is important and each side should "put their cards 
on the table" to avoid any surprises or misunderstandings.  Estrada 
asked the Ambassador if the meeting could take place after 
mid-January since the GON would be busy "closing out" 2007. 
 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) We will press GON officials to uphold Estrada's 
commitments to share more information on U.S. citizen claims and 
provide clarity about the criteria for acknowledging legitimate 
ownership and expropriation claims.  We will also reiterate that the 
Embassy seeks to help the GON resolve Embassy registered claims -- 
but not without our full involvement in a fair and transparent 
process. 
 
TRIVELLI