05MADRID1117
SPAIN COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR EUR DEPUTY SECRETARY
Tue Mar 22 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Madrid
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

221552Z Mar 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MADRID 001117 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
STATE FOR S/ES-EX:T.MUSHINGI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AMGT OVIP ZOELLICK ROBERT
SUBJECT: SPAIN COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR EUR DEPUTY SECRETARY 
ZOELLICK AND PARTY 
 
REF: STATE 47243 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Embassy warmly welcomes and grants country 
clearance to Deputy Secretary of State Robert B. Zoellick; 
Acting Assistant Secretary for Bureau of European and 
Eurasian Affairs Robert Bradtke; Executive Assistant Ross 
Wilson; Special Assistants Christine Davies, Campbell 
Marshall and Gene Young; and Executive Secretariat Management 
Officer Tuli Mushingi, to visit Madrid, April 2-3. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) EMBASSY CONTACT INFORMATION 
 
--Control Officer is Economic Officer Carl Schonander, Office 
PH: (34)91-587-2295; H: (34)91-561-6641; Cell: 34-6994-66473; 
Fax (34) 91-587-2292; e-mail: schonanderce@state.gov. 
 
 
--Public Affairs Control Officer is John Law, Office PH: 
(34)91-5872509; H: (34)91-564-3716; Cell: 34-6709-13910; 
e-mail: lawj@state.gov. 
 
--MGMT/Baggage Control Officer is Margaret Kurtz-Randall 
(Liaise with T. Mushingi), Office PH: (34)91-587-2223; H: 
(34)91-564-1229; Cell: 34-6998-37384; e-mail: 
kurtz-randallmx@state.gov 
 
--RSO contact is Michael Malamud, Office PH: (34) 
91-587-2549; H: (34)91-350-6675; Cell: 34-6393-41359; e-mail: 
malamudh@state.gov. 
 
--Embassy address is:  Calle Serrano 75, 28006 Madrid - 
Embassy Switchboard is: (34)91-587-2200; Post 1: (34) 
91-587-2355. 
 
--CELL PHONES:  Embassy control officer cell phones can be 
accessed by dialing 0034 and then the number. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) LODGING:  Reservations have been made for the night 
of April 2 at the Palace Hotel, address:  Plaza de las Cortes 
7, 28014 Madrid - PH: (34) 91-360-800; Fax: (34) 91-360-7774. 
 The hotel is close to Retiro park, which is suitable for 
running. 
 
 
¶4.   (U) Visitors are reminded that bearers of diplomatic and 
official passports coming to Spain on official business need 
to obtain a Spanish visa prior to arrival to Spain. 
 
 
¶5.  THREAT ASSESSMENT: 
 
(U)  In general, Spain is safe.  However, Madrid, Barcelona 
and other large cities in Spain --including resort/convention 
areas such as Benidorm-- attract a large number of criminals 
and pickpockets and frequent incidents of crime of 
opportunity against the unwary do occur.  Carry only 
essential items including a photocopy of your passport's 
photo page.  Visitors can protect themselves against crime by 
being street-smart, alert and aware of their surroundings. 
In the event you are victimized by crime, or experience any 
security-related incident, please contact the Embassy's 
Regional Security Office at 91-587-2550 or after hours at 
91-587-2355.  Official visitors to the Embassy in Madrid or 
the Consulate General in Barcelona are encouraged to receive 
a security briefing from the RSO office at their earliest 
convenience.   Additional information regarding safety and 
security in Spain is available on the U.S. Department of 
State's website (www.embusa.es). 
 
Travelers are encouraged to review the most recent Worldwide 
Caution issued by the Department of State. As the Department 
of State continues to develop information on any potential 
security threats to Americans overseas, it shares credible 
threat information through its Consular Information Program 
documents, available on the Internet at 
http://travel/state.gov.  In addition to information on the 
Internet, U.S. travelers can hear recorded information by 
calling the Department of State in Washington, D.C. at 
202-647-5225 from their touch-tone telephone, or receive 
information by automated telefax by dialing 202-647-3000 from 
their fax mach