05QUITO720
FM ZUQUILANDA TO ATTEND OAS SPECIAL SESSION
Thu Mar 31 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Quito
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS QUITO 000720 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PLEASE PASS USOAS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AORC PREL EC
SUBJECT: FM ZUQUILANDA TO ATTEND OAS SPECIAL SESSION 
 
REF: A. QUITO 506 
 
     ¶B. QUITO 364 
     ¶C. QUITO 280 
     ¶D. QUITO 121 
 
¶1.  In a wide-ranging March 31 conversation with Ecuadorian 
Foreign Minister Patricio Zuquilanda (Septels), the 
Ambassador reiterated USG support for Paco Flores, the former 
El Salvadoran president and current OAS secretary general 
candidate.  Understanding Ecuador had come out publicly in 
support of Chilean candidate Jose Miguel Insulza, she pressed 
Zuquilanda for second-round support of Flores, should the 
Chilean fail to advance. 
 
¶2.  The FM claimed Ecuador remained firmly committed to 
Insulza.  Only a South American candidate could understand 
GoE interests, Zuquilanda maintained; he did not reveal 
Ecuador's intentions should Insulza fall out.  Zuquilanda 
personally would chair Ecuador's OAS delegation at the April 
7 special session to elect the next secretary general. 
 
¶3.  In a same-day conversation, MFA Multilateral Affairs 
Undersecretary Jose Piedrahita told PolCouns that Mexican 
candidate FM Luis Derbez was considering withdrawing from the 
OAS SYG race.  Piedrahita's source, the GoE's envoy in 
Mexico, claimed that Derbez now believed his victory chances 
slim and would bow out in Washington.  Under this scenario, 
Piedrahita continued, the elections could be delayed one 
month, allowing countries that backed the Mexican time to 
reconsider their votes; Caribbean votes would determine the 
outcome. 
 
¶4.  COMMENT:  Zuquilanda will travel to Washington days 
before the SYG vote and expressed interest in meeting the 
Secretary or other senior Department officials on the margins 
 
SIPDIS 
of the OAS session.  We support the request, believing face 
time better than telephone diplomacy in swinging the 
Ecuadorians to our side.  Such a meeting would allow us to 
promote Flores and lobby Zuquilanda hard for an Ecuadorian 
yes vote on the UNHRC Cuba resolution.  If confirmed, we 
should also raise our concerns on Ecuadorian democracy, free 
trade, and other issues.  END COMMENT. 
KENNEY