05TAIPEI872
MEDIA REACTION: HUMAN RIGHTS REPORT
Thu Mar 03 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TAIPEI 000872 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/RSP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - 
ROBERT PALLADINO 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW TIP
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: HUMAN RIGHTS REPORT 
 
Summary: Two limited-circulation English-language 
newspapers in Taiwan raised the issue of the State 
Department's 2004 Human Rights Report on their 
editorial pages March 3, but one only did so as a 
jumping-off point for a complicated analysis of local 
politics. The editorials of the other major Taipei 
dailies continued to focus completely on local 
politics. 
 
The editorial of the pro-independence, English-language 
"Taipei Times," after comparing Taiwan's human rights 
record with that of China's, said the advice offered by 
the United States regarding Taiwan's human rights 
condition is friendly and well-intentioned but its 
comments about the Taiwan media deserves some 
criticism.  End summary. 
 
"Taiwan Outshines China in Rights" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" 
[circulation: 30,000] noted in its editorial (3/3): 
 
". Since the US [Human Rights] report contains a 56,000- 
word section on China and an 11,000-word section on 
Taiwan, a detailed comparison of their human-rights 
record is a time-intensive procedure.  But even a 
superficial review makes it clear that Taiwan and China 
are very different countries.  China is demonstrating 
yet again what kind of country it is - with a regime 
that does not respect the opinion of 23 million 
Taiwanese, wants to include Taiwan in its territory by 
legislative flat and plans to provide a legal basis for 
military attacks on Taiwan. 
 
"However, the US report deserves some criticism itself 
when it comes to its comments about the media here.  It 
cites pan-blue friendly sources saying that because 
Taiwan's market is not mature enough to support a 
massive media industry, certain media outlets that 
depend on media placement by the government and loans 
from government-controlled banks may not be neutral in 
their news coverage.  What is ignored in this report is 
that due to the manipulations by the former Chinese 
Nationalist Party (KMT) government and a majority of 
media workers being Mainlanders, a large sector of the 
media has long favored the pan-blue camp.  To make its 
voice heard, the Democratic Progressive Party 
government must rely on advertising to defend itself. 
 
"All in all, the advice given by the US is friendly and 
well-intentioned.  For many years, it has been such 
friendly admonishments from Washington, together with 
the pride of the Taiwanese, that have turned Taiwan 
into an advanced country in terms of human rights. 
Chen's recent announcement that a future constitutional 
amendment will include a `National Council of Human 
Rights' was made as a response to the expectations of 
the international community and is just one more step 
toward improved rights for everyone." 
 
KEEGAN