05TRIPOLI51
U) LIBYA - FIFTH ANNUAL TIP REPORT SUBMISSION
Tue Mar 01 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tripoli
P R 011643Z MAR 05
FM USLO TRIPOLI
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0138
INFO USLO TRIPOLIUNCLAS TRIPOLI 000051 
 
 
STATE FOR NEA/MAG SBUTLER; NEA/MAG AWELLS; G/TIP FASSEFA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM SMIG LY
SUBJECT: (U) LIBYA - FIFTH ANNUAL TIP REPORT SUBMISSION 
 
REF: STATE 273089 
 
¶1. (U) The U.S. Government resumed direct bilateral relations 
with Libya on June 28, 2004, after a 24-year gap, following 
Libya's decision to eliminate its weapons of mass destruction 
programs and Missile Control Technology Regime-class missiles. 
 
¶2. (U) Libya remains among the countries considered special 
cases because although press, media, and NGO reports indicate a 
significant human trafficking problem within its territory, the 
USG has not been able to verify these reports directly because 
of its long absence from Tripoli.  During the reporting period, 
Libya engaged with affected countries, particularly in Europe, 
to combat illegal migration, smuggling and human trafficking. 
Until this reporting period, the Libyan Government had denied it 
had any problem with immigration and trafficking in persons. 
 
¶3. (U) There are an estimated 1.5 million non-Libyans resident 
in Libya, most from North African and Sub-Saharan African 
nations.  This intricately mixed migrant community makes 
identification of the various groups and the circumstances under 
which they arrived in Libya difficult.  According to most 
reports, Libya is a transit country for men, women, and children 
from Africa and Asia who hope eventually to migrate illegally to 
Europe. A large number of Africans arrive via the arduous 
journey through the Sahara across Libya's porous borders with 
Chad, Niger, Sudan, and Egypt, although many reportedly die in 
the desert before reaching Libya. Libya's porous 1100-mile 
(1,770 km) coastline is a route also used by traffickers in 
North African countries. Those attempting to reach Europe 
through Libya are exploited by smugglers who promise employment 
in Libya so that they can earn the $800-$1,000 per person fee to 
cross the Mediterranean.  However, some may be forced to work as 
prostitutes, laborers, and beggars to pay the debt to 
traffickers because jobs are not readily available. 
 
¶4. (U) African, Libyan and European smugglers reportedly operate 
much like an organized crime syndicate using deception to entice 
would-be migrants from their country of origin. Hundreds are 
reported to have perished in the waters of the Mediterranean 
when their boats, supplied by smugglers, capsized or when they 
were left afloat in boats that were in poor condition. In 2004, 
there were reports of thousands of Africans arriving into Italy 
each month by boat. 
 
Government Action 
----------------- 
¶5. (U) Due to lack of information, the extent of the Libyan 
Government's efforts to fight trafficking is not clear, but it 
has begun joint and active collaborations with other affected 
countries, particularly Italy, indicating that Libya recognizes 
it has a problem and is making an effort to fight human 
trafficking. In June 2004, the Libyan Government organized a 
conference of regional governments that are facing similar 
problems. In October, the Government invited the International 
Organization for Migration to Tripoli to discuss migration 
management. The Government considers all foreigners to be 
economic migrants and does not stipulate whether they are 
refugees, asylum seekers or trafficked persons. 
 
¶6. (U) In February 2004, the Libyan Government extradited a 
major Eritrean human trafficker to Italy, after the Italian 
Government issued a warrant for her arrest. In 2004, the 
Nigerian police handed over 20 of its nationals to Nigerian 
anti-trafficking authorities for further investigations and 
prosecution. The victims were on their way to Libya via the 
Niger Republic. 
 
Areas for Improvement 
--------------------- 
¶7. (U) The Government of Libya, given the extensive trafficking 
within its territory, should conduct research to determine the 
extent of the problem and continue cooperating with neighboring 
countries. It should work with source and destination countries 
on anti-trafficking efforts by sharing information as well as 
tracking and evaluating its anti-trafficking efforts. Libya 
should similarly combine forces with the International 
Organization for Migration and NGOs active in the fight against 
human trafficking. 
 
 
BERRY