08DURBAN69
CONGRESS OF THE PEOPLE (COPE) STRUGGLES IN KWAZULU NATAL
Fri Nov 21 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Durban
VZCZCXRO6745
RR RUEHBZ RUEHJO RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHDU #0069/01 3261502
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 211502Z NOV 08
FM AMCONSUL DURBAN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1361
INFO RUCNSAD/SADC COLLECTIVE
RUEHDU/AMCONSUL DURBAN 0734UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 DURBAN 000069 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR AF/S, INR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV SF
SUBJECT: CONGRESS OF THE PEOPLE (COPE) STRUGGLES IN KWAZULU NATAL 
 
REF: A) DURBAN 66; B) PRETORIA 2407 
 
DURBAN 00000069  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
(U) This cable is Sensitive But Unclassified (SBU).  Not for 
Internet Distribution. 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: The Congress of the People (COPE) is finding 
it difficult to establish a presence in KwaZula Natal (KZN). 
Only a few lower-ranking ANC members have publicly declared 
their support for COPE in KZN, and support from senior ANC 
leaders is so far elusive. Worse still, an apparent coup for 
COPE from an endorsement by a revered ANC leader turned to an 
embarrassment, when the leader subsequently denied the 
endorsement.  Even those senior ANC members in KZN faithful to 
former President Mbeki have so far been reluctant to shift 
allegiance to COPE, due largely to party unity in the province, 
under the leadership of ANC Provincial Chairman Dr. Zweli 
Mkhize. The situation might change, however, with the finalizing 
of ANC lists for provincial parliament seats. End summary. 
 
Appeal Limited 
 
¶2. (SBU) So far in KwaZulu Natal province, only lower-level ANC 
officials have left the ANC to join the new COPE party led by 
former National Chairman of the ANC Mosioua Lekota and former 
Premier of Gauteng Mbazima Shilowa. These include Phillip 
Mhlongo and Nhlanhla Buthelezi, who were staunch Thabo Mbeki 
supporters before the December 2007 ANC National Conference in 
Polokwane. No senior ANC leader in the province has declared 
support for the new party.  The ANC Provincial Secretary Senzo 
Mchunu is reported to have declared KZN a "no-go area" for the 
new party. 
 
Intimidation Tactics 
 
¶3. (SBU) Mosiuoa Lekota visited the province in mid-November, 
and was met by angry ANC members who tried to block his meetings 
with his supporters in Chatsworth and Verulam. The situation in 
Verulam became violent as ANC members aggressively disrupted the 
COPE meeting and intimidated attendees, and police had to 
intervene to calm the situation. Another planned appearance by 
Lekota at the University of KwaZulu Natal was called off at 
short notice, and COPE accused the ANC of putting pressure on 
the university to cancel the meeting. Comment: Space for free 
political activity by ANC members in KZN is not as open as it is 
in other provinces. Political intolerance and violence continues 
to be a factor in KZN, and the ANC seem to be allowing its 
members to intimidate COPE members and supporters in the 
province by disrupting their meetings. ANC local leaders such as 
councilors were reportedly involved in the disruptions of COPE 
meetings, although the ANC officially denied involvement. End 
comment. 
 
Failed "Coup" 
 
¶4. (SBU) Lekota met on November 13 with Professor Fatima Meer, a 
stalwart of the ANC and a personal friend of Nelson Mandela. 
After the meeting, Lekota told the press that Meer had endorsed 
the new party. This could have been a major coup for COPE in 
Jacob Zuma's home province.  However, the ANC acted quickly and 
Prof. Meer on November 16 denied Lekota's claim and issued a 
statement -- uncharacteristically, read to the press by her 
brother rather than by Meer herself -- denying that she had 
joined COPE and recommitting herself to the ANC. This put Lekota 
in the awkward position of having to apologize for claiming that 
Prof. Meer had endorsed COPE. For COPE, this was a serious 
set-back and an embarrassment. 
 
Comment 
 
¶5. (SBU) COPE's failure to establish a presence in KZN, despite 
strong efforts, is due mainly the ANC's unified support for Zuma 
in the province. ANC Provincial Chairman Dr. Zweli Mkhize is an 
effective leader who has worked hard to unify the party since 
taking over leadership from Premier Sibusiso Ndebele. He is seen 
as a voice of reason and conciliation in a province where 
tempers are high amid talk of the new break-away party and 
promises from some pro-Zuma senior ANC leaders to make KZN a 
"no-go area" for COPE. Strong cooperation between Dr. Mkhize and 
Premier Ndebele (who is a known Mbeki supporter) is another 
factor that has kept the ANC united and is making it difficult 
for COPE to make inroads in the province, among senior leaders 
and rank-and-file members. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Minister of Agriculture and Environmental Affairs and 
former provincial spokesperson of the ANC, Mr. Mtholephi 
Mthimkhulu, and former Deputy Provincial Secretary and current 
chairman of the portfolio committee on local government and 
traditional affairs Mr. Mbuso Kubheka, both strong Mbeki 
supporters pre-Polokwane, have been expected to resign from the 
ANC to join COPE, according to Consulate contacts, but they have 
so far not made a move. This might change as the ANC list 
 
DURBAN 00000069  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
process starts. Those provincial ANC leaders in the province who 
supported Mbeki at the Polokwane conference are likely to be 
excluded from the list of members of parliament of provincial 
legislatures for 2009 general elections, and at that point may 
decide to shift their allegiance to COPE. 
DERDERIAN