08HARARE1019
HARARE: POLICE DISCONTINUE COVERAGE OF U.S. EMBASSY DUE TO
Fri Nov 14 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Harare
P 141509Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY HARARE
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3689UNCLAS HARARE 001019 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR DS/IP/AF, DS/IP/ITA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC AMGT ZI
SUBJECT: HARARE: POLICE DISCONTINUE COVERAGE OF U.S. EMBASSY DUE TO 
OFFICERS' COMPLAINTS 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  Zimbabwean Republic Police (ZRP) have suspended 
police coverage of the U.S. Embassy due to complaints of working 
conditions by the assigned officers.  Two (2) police posts have been 
vacated.  ZRP coverage continues at USAID and the Public Affairs 
Annex.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (SBU) In late October, RSO Harare communicated to ZRP 
Headquarters that the two (2) assigned police officers to the U.S. 
Embassy (Support Unit/Police Protection Unit) were periodically 
late, disappearing for 1-2 hours, and on one occasion left a loaded, 
automatic weapon unattended at their post. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Approximately one (1) week later, ZRP mid-level supervisory 
officers requested a meeting with the RSO to discuss the complaint. 
In defense of their officers, the ZRP raised the issue of respect 
and unacceptable working conditions at the US Embassy.  The specific 
complaint was that the assigned officers were forced to request 
permission to enter the compound via the Embassy's contract guard 
force and be escorted to/from the restroom.  They also mentioned 
that the officers were not permitted to carry their weapons (AK-47 
type) while entering the Embassy.  RSO Harare addressed these 
various issues and in general terms explained our access control 
policies to all of our properties.  RSO highlighted the security 
risks of having a weapon brought onto our compound, the rotating 
staffing of ZRP officers every 3-4 days, and the location of the 
bathroom being adjoning to the CAA building.  RSO also mentioned 
that the ZRP officers raise these issues approxiately every six 
months, and compare the acces rules to the other Embassies in 
Harare that thy cover. (RSO Note: Some Embassies allow unescorte 
access with weapons, other provide stipends or free meals.)  The 
meeting concluded amicably, with the agreement that the ZRP would go 
back to headquarters and draft a request for a reasonable solution. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Two weeks ago, RSO was advised by a low-ranking police 
sergeant that the ZRP Commissioner would be recalling police 
coverage.  He claimed he could offer no more information and that we 
could call for specifics.  The next morning, our FSNI was enroute to 
Police Headquarters and noted that both police posts were vacated 
(RSO NOTE: the ZRP only work day-shift at the Embassy). 
 
¶5. (SBU) MGT Officer and RSO contacted and met with the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs soon afterwards, and were advised that the ZRP 
Commissioner had passed the same complaints to the MFA and asked 
that the MFA address the issues with the US Embassy.  The MFA 
officer responded very positively and agreed that some of the ZRP 
allegations were unreasonable.  He stated he would contact the ZRP 
leadership and discuss the situation and present our positions on 
access and security.  He completely understood our rationale on 
bringing weapons into the Embassy, and the justification of having 
exterior postings for the only two (2) entrances to the Embassy. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Today, two weeks later, the ZRP have not returned to the 
Embassy, although they continue to cover USAID and PAS without 
issue.  This lack of support may be political in nature, or an 
attempt to obtain food or money by the ZRP. 
 
¶7. (SBU) The Embassy has delivered a Diplomatic Note of protest and 
will continue to pursue this issue with the MFA.