08WARSAW1278
BLUE LANTERN SITE VISIT TO WB ELECTRONICS POST
Thu Nov 06 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Warsaw
VZCZCXYZ0003
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHWR #1278 3111144
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 061144Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY WARSAW
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7270UNCLAS WARSAW 001278 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DTC FOR WATKINS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC KOMC PL
SUBJECT: BLUE LANTERN SITE VISIT TO WB ELECTRONICS POST 
SHIPMENT CHECK ON LICENSE 050101261 
 
REF: STATE 92512 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: Staff from Embassy Warsaw, including Political 
Officer Duncan Walker, DHS/ICE official Glenn Spindel, and 
ODC representative Lt. Marek Strosin, accompanied Blue 
Lantern team on site visit to WB Electronics (WBE).  Team met 
with WBE representative Justyna Dytrych who verified order, 
provided background information on export request and 
business operations, and facilitated team,s inspection of 
warehouse where the presence of 108 military radios was 
visually confirmed.  Based on verification of order and 
documentation establishing Polish MOD as final end user, team 
was confident that WBE is a reliable recipient of USML items. 
 
¶2.  Blue Lantern team visited WBE as part of its larger 
outreach visit to Poland.  The objective of the team,s site 
visit was to verify the bona fides of WBE, confirm its 
receipt of Harris military radios exported on license 
050101261, and verify its relationship with the Poland 
Ministry of Defense (MOD). 
 
¶3.  WBE representative explained that WBE,s main business 
was to purchase parts and components for its military 
clients.  It also does a smaller business in integrating such 
items into larger systems.  Most of WBE,s clients are 
military end users, including the Polish Army, Swedish Army, 
Hungarian Army, and Indian Army.  WBE does not do business 
with any proscribed countries and expressed familiarity with 
International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) governing 
the use of U.S.-origin defense articles and technology. 
 
¶4. With this order, WBE confirmed that it ordered 153 radios 
from Harris and that it has received 108 to date.  WBE 
provided documentation from the Polish MOD, a clear purchase 
order establishing its need for the items in question.  The 
radios will be used in the Polish Army,s Armored Personnel 
Carrier Vehicles (APCV) for communication purposes.  The 
radios will assist in NATO inter-operability during ultimate 
mission in Afghanistan.  In this case, WBE will not provide 
integration services; it is only acting as a purchaser for 
the Polish Army which will outfit the radios onto the 
vehicles. 
 
¶5. WBE allowed Blue Lantern team to access the warehouse and 
visually confirm receipt of radios from Harris Corporation in 
the United States.  The warehouse was a secure facility, with 
limited entry, requiring badge/key to access and guarded with 
cameras and security personnel.  The radios were still stored 
in boxes displaying shipping information clearly marking them 
as originating from Harris Corporation in the U.S.  The team 
viewed the radios in the open boxes and confirmed that the 
items matched description on license application. 
 
¶6.  As a result of site visit to WBE, the Blue Lantern team 
is confident that WBE is a reliable recipient of 
ITAR-controlled items, is familiar with requirement banning 
re-export or retransfer of items without prior approval, and 
that the export of 153 military radios is a legitimate 
transaction. 
 
ASHE