05BRASILIA2994
BRAZILIAN RESPONSE TO DATES FOR FOURTH PLENARY
Thu Nov 10 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Brasilia
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS BRASILIA 002994 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PGOV BR ARCH PY
SUBJECT: BRAZILIAN RESPONSE TO DATES FOR FOURTH PLENARY 
MEETING OF THE 3 PLUS 1 GROUP 
 
REF: STATE 202017 
 
¶1.  Poloffs delivered reftel dip note November 10 to Marcos 
Pinta Gama, Director of the Office to Combat Illicit 
Transnational Activities (COCIT) at the Brazilian Ministry of 
External Relations (MRE).  Pinta Gama told Poloffs that the 
MRE still intends to hold the meeting on December 5-6. 
However, he noted, Paraguay has requested that the meetings 
occur on December 13-14, saying that a MERCOSUR summit that 
begins on December 8 in Asuncion would make it difficult for 
them to attend a December 5-6 session.  Pinta Gama said he 
had send the Paraguayan request to the Brazilian embassy in 
Washington for the purpose of discussions with the USG. 
Reiterating that Brazil still prefers December 5-6, he 
suggested the USG may want to engage directly with Paraguay 
to bring them around to our position.  Pinta Gama plans to 
chair the 3 plus 1 plenary meeting. 
 
¶2. Pinta Gama said he hoped to have the agenda finalized by 
early next week.  At present, it includes: 
 
-- Initial Remarks 
 
-- Discussion of the December 2004 Washington Plenary: 
According to Pinta Gama, participants will discuss last 
December's meetings and the results of activities that 
occurred as a result of the meeting, such as the recent FIU 
meeting in Asuncion.  The GOB also plans to address the 
current situation at the tri-border area, drugs and arms 
trafficking, contraband smuggling, money laundering, 
terrorism, and other issues. 
 
-- Discussion on the development of an information exchange 
program for the tri-border region. 
 
-- Discussion on developing and maintaining training and 
institution building programs. 
 
-- Discussion of future meetings and activities, including 
FIU meetings:  Pinta Gama envisioned planning future FIU 
meetings during this discussion. 
 
-- Adoption of a joint communique. 
 
Pinta Gama noted that he expects to send the proposed agenda 
to Brazilian embassies in Buenos Aires, Asuncion, Washington 
today for their approval.  Pinta Gama said he expects to 
receive a finalized agenda by early next week. 
 
CHICOLA