05PARIS7905
MEDIA REACTION REPORT - President Bush to Asia
Mon Nov 21 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PARIS 007905 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR; IIP/RW; IIP/RNY; BBG/VOA; IIP/WEU; AF/PA; 
EUR/WE /P/SP; D/C (MCCOO); EUR/PA; INR/P; INR/EUC; PM; OSC ISA 
FOR ILN; NEA; WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC/WEUROPE; DOC FOR ITA/EUR/FR 
AND PASS USTR/PA; USINCEUR FOR PAO; NATO/PA; MOSCOW/PA; 
ROME/PA; USVIENNA FOR USDEL OSCE. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR FR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REPORT - President Bush to Asia 
U.S. Debate - Congressional Vote - Allegations of Torture 
PARIS - Monday, November 21, 2005 
 
 
(A) SUBJECTS COVERED IN TODAY'S REPORT: 
 
President Bush to Asia 
U.S. Debate - Congressional Vote - Allegations of Torture 
 
B) SUMMARY OF COVERAGE: 
 
Domestic social issues dominate today's lead stories: the 
threat of a national train strike tomorrow, the first stock 
market quotation of EDF shares and the aftermath of the past 
few weeks' suburban unrest. The conclusion of the Socialist 
Party's national congress is featured on the front-page of Le 
Figaro which concludes: "A Unity of Faade" but predicts that 
the present leader, Francois Hollande, will retain his 
leadership. 
 
Le Journal du Dimanche carries the latest popularity poll 
showing that President Chirac loses three percentage points 
down to 35 percent, while PM Villepin gains five points up to 
53 PERCENT. 
 
In international news, President Bush's Chinese trip is 
featured in Le Figaro in a report titled: "In China, Bush Hits 
the Snag of Human Rights." Philippe Gelie comments: "The U.S. 
President admonished Beijing about civil liberties and 
democracy; in return he only got Boeing orders." Muriel 
Lamotte analyzes the "economic inter-dependency of the two 
nations," while Jean-Jacques Mevel writes: "The American 
assaults on democracy worry Beijing. Bush's repeated sermons 
are accentuating the besieged feeling of the Chinese 
leadership." In La Croix, Francois d'Alancon comments: "China 
Resists Bush's Pressures But Buys Boeings." (See Part C) 
 
Le Monde carries on its front page: "Torture: American 
Intelligence Accused in the U.S. and Around the World." 
Inside, the article carries a photo of a kneeling and 
blindfolded detainee. Corine Lesnes writes: "Condemnation of 
the U.S. intervention in Iraq and what has ensued is spreading 
in the U.S. and around the world." She comments on the results 
of the Pew Research Center poll: "The military, with 49 
percent of respondents against torture, is generally the most 
hostile to such practices."  In Le Parisien Thomas Cataloube 
titles his report: "Bush More Unpopular Every Day" as he 
reports on President Bush's falling popularity rates and the 
Congressional battle. Another feature story looks at Senator 
MacCain, "the man who triggered the debate on torture." Gilles 
Delafon in Le Journal du Dimanche devotes his commentary to 
last week's Senate vote: "Concretely, the Congressional 
rebellion does not change much. But it is a source of concern 
for the President. The present administration does seem to be 
collapsing." (See Part C) 
 
The Balkans and the negotiations on a final status for Kosovo 
are reported in Liberation and Le Figaro which also interviews 
the Romanian President, Traian Basecu, on the occasion of his 
first official visit to Paris: "Europe cannot by itself 
guarantee its own security. It is not in its interest to have 
a contentious transatlantic relationship." Le Figaro devotes 
several op-eds to Kosovo: for Isabelle Lasserre, Kosovo is on 
the way to "an inevitable and dangerous independence," while 
Monique Papon writes: "Europe cannot tolerate on its doorstep 
a geographic entity dominated by organized crime and anarchy." 
 
In Le Figaro Alexandrine Bouilhet writes about a "mini 
revolution" in Europe's defense sector: EU Defense ministers 
will be adopting an "Anglo-Saxon-style code of conduct" to 
liberalize the "opaque" and "protected" weapons sector. 
 
(C) SUPPORTING TEXT/BLOCK QUOTES: 
 
President Bush to Asia 
 
"The Human Rights Snag in China" 
Philippe Gelie in right-of-center Le Figaro (11/21): "On 
several occasions yesterday President Bush had the opportunity 
of looking his Chinese counterparts in the eye. Each time he 
was confronted with the assertiveness of major powers and 
which has usually been the stance adopted by the Americans. 
The pickings in Beijing were slim, except for a contract for 
Boeing. This was a political gesture from Beijing as the trade 
deficit with Washington continues to grow. Little indeed was 
achieved in terms of reforms for the Yuan. With so little 
achieved, it was not surprising then, if as the day 
progressed, the attacks on human rights became more violent." 
 
"U.S. Assaults on Democracy Worry Beijing" 
Jean-Jacques Mevel in right-of-center Le Figaro (11/21): "The 
attacks on civil liberties launched twice by President Bush 
are a great source of annoyance for Hu Jintao. As if he wanted 
to make a point, and before the start of the official visit, 
President Bush began his trip to China with a religious 
service. The Chinese response was to say that China enjoyed 
democracy but the message lacked conviction. In fact this is 
an issue that has the Chinese particularly worried. Human 
rights were significantly forgotten in the U.S. approach 
immediately after 9/11, but seem to be back with a vengeance, 
especially in Congress." 
 
"Bush Torn Between Business Deals and Politics" 
Pierre Haski in left-of-center Liberation (11/21): "The trade 
deficit, the Yuan, religious freedom, Tibet and political 
dissidents: President Bush enumerated all of these questions 
during the most hectic day of his China trip. He managed 
results in economic trade but received a firm and definitive 
`no' on political issues. The most notable result involved 
Boeing: Beijing's needs in commercial aviation are huge and 
China is maneuvering knowingly between the Europeans and the 
Americans. But on all political issues the polite dialogue was 
closer to a deaf-mute conversation. On the one hand the U.S. 
President was playing his habitual role when he attended a 
religious service. while the Chinese officials listened 
politely to the U.S. admonitions but without reacting. Hu 
Jinato's comments about a democratic system `with Chinese 
characteristics' was a polite way of telling President Bush to 
mind his own business." 
 
"China Resists Bush's Pressures But Buys Boeings." 
Francois D'Alancon in Catholic La Croix (11/21): "Despite the 
tension between China and the U.S., both nations seem decided 
to manage their differences pragmatically while developing 
their partnership: in a gesture aimed at toning down America's 
concerns on the trade deficit, eight Chinese airlines will be 
buying 70 Boeing 737s for a total value of 4 billion dollars." 
 
U.S. Debate - Congressional Vote - Allegations of Torture 
 
"Bush Drops, McCain Rises" 
Gilles Delafon in right-of-center Le Journal du Dimanche 
(11/20): "Last week in Washington politics seemed to take 
over. After four years of playing follow the leader, Senators 
and Congressmen criticized the war on Iraq and more generally 
the post 9/11 stance as never before. Between the President's 
falling popularity and the Senate vote, it appears clear that 
the Americans no longer have faith in their leader. More 
symbolically, the adoption of the McCain amendment in a nation 
where 44 percent of the population supports torture is very 
telling. Congress has chosen to follow McCain rather than the 
Vice President, contending that the use of torture debases 
America to the level of its worst enemies. Concretely, this 
Congressional rebellion does not change much. But for the 
President it is a serious matter for concern because it 
signals a change of attitude. While it is usually the midterm 
election that signals the presidential race, this time it 
appears that the present administration's collapse has sounded 
the start of the campaign." 
 
"Bush Increasingly Unpopular" 
Thomas Cantaloube in right-of-center Le Parisien (11/21): 
"During his Asian tour, President Bush spent more time 
defending his position in Iraq than promoting economic 
cooperation and human rights. With falling popularity ratings, 
Bush has become a tempting prey for his Democratic 
adversaries, but also his Republican friends. The war in Iraq 
and allegations of torture are darkening the President's 
horizon. The man who has triggered the debate is Senator 
McCain: after four years of a `war against terror,' the 
Americans themselves are questioning their own darkest 
practices." STAPLETON