05PARIS7595
PARIS EMERGENCY ACTION COMMITTEE MEETING REGARDING
Mon Nov 07 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

071652Z Nov 05UNCLAS PARIS 007595 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DS/ITA AND DS/IP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC FR
SUBJECT: PARIS EMERGENCY ACTION COMMITTEE MEETING REGARDING 
CONTINUED ARSON ATTACKS IN FRANCE 
 
 
¶1.  DCM convened the Paris CORE EAC this date to discuss the 
continuing spread of arson attacks throughout France. 
Attendees included; DCM, DCM UNESCO, RSO, CG, ACS, MGT, ORA, 
FBI, POL, PA, OSI, ICE, TSA, DATT, and ECON. 
 
¶2.  FOR BACKGROUND: RSO reiterated that over the last week 
there have been countless incidents of arson involving parked 
vehicles (thousands), some businesses, schools and churches. 
These acts originated in the suburbs NE of Paris where there 
is a large concentration of first and second generation 
immigrants, largely from north and sub-Saharan Africa.  These 
incidents began spreading and have now reached every corner 
of France, to include downtown Paris. Personal injuries 
during these arson attacks have been remarkably few given the 
number of vehicles burned.  Although there have been hundreds 
of arrests, the vast majority of these arrests have been 
minors, current information available indicates most of the 
arsonists are young teenagers. 
 
¶3.  The CORE EAC was in general agreement in the assessment 
that these attacks are NOT riots, they are acts of arson and 
for the most part remain crimes of opportunity perpetrated by 
disaffected youth from the immigrant communities around the 
larger cities.  There has been massive reinforcement of 
police and gendarmerie in the areas where attacks have 
occurred, but the random nature and unpredictable nature of 
the attacks make prevention very difficult. 
 
¶4.  EAC ACTION ITEMS: 
 
a.  Consular has crafted an updated warden announcement that 
will be forwarded to CA for clearance and eventual 
distribution to the Paris ACS warden network.  That notice 
will reiterate the previous warning that the train line 
between Charles de Gaulle airport and Paris be avoided; that 
AmCits avoid large spontaneous gatherings at night, and use 
caution when out during evening hours. 
 
b.  The embassy's country clearance telegram is also being 
updated to include information concerning these recent arson 
attacks and unrest. 
 
c.  RSO, Legat and others will maintain regular liaison with 
appropriate security and law enforcement authorities to 
ensure up-to-date information. 
 
d. CORE EAC was reminded that any significant information 
regarding these events should be shared with RSO immediately. 
 
 
 
Please visit Paris' Classified Website at: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/eur/paris/index.c fm 
Stapleton