05WELLINGTON900
NEW ZEALAND RESPONSE ON DPRK FLAG OF CONVENIENCE
Mon Nov 21 00:00:00 +0100 2005
SECRET
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T WELLINGTON 000900 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NP, ISN, EUR, EAP/ANP 
TREASURY FOR OFAC 
NSC FOR STEPHENS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: UPON KOREAN REUNIFICATION 
TAGS: KNNP MNUC PARM PREL EWWT PHSA KN NZ
SUBJECT: NEW ZEALAND RESPONSE ON DPRK FLAG OF CONVENIENCE 
ISSUE 
 
REF: STATE 204250 
 
(U) Classified by Political-Economic Counselor Katherine B. 
Hadda.  Reasons: 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1. (S/REL NZ) Summary: The New Zealand government does not 
consider Maritime Mutual Insurance Association NZ (MMIA) to 
be an insurance company.  Although MMIA is incorporated in 
New Zealand, the government says that it has advised the 
Japanese government that the company does not meet New 
Zealand's legal requirements for issuing insurance.  The New 
Zealand government recognizes that it needs to change its 
law, which as now written does not allow it to halt MMIA's 
activities or withdraw its incorporation. The government says 
it will be unable to do so until 2007.  End summary. 
 
¶2. (U) Econoff delivered reftel points November 10 to Gavin 
Quigan of the Ministry of Economic Development's Insurance 
and Superannuation Unit and Bruce McCallum of the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs and Trade's North America Division. 
 
¶3. (S/REL NZ) Quigan stated that MMIA is not a bona fide 
insurance company under New Zealand law.  The Insurance 
Companies (Deposit) Act 1953 requires insurers to post a 
deposit with the Public Trustee before they can undertake 
insurance business in New Zealand.  The amount of the deposit 
depends on the type of insurance being offered, but generally 
is NZ $500,000.  MMIA has made no such deposit. 
 
¶4. (S/REL NZ) Quigan said that the Japanese government, 
through its embassy in Wellington, has been advised that the 
New Zealand government does not recognize MMIA as a 
legitimate insurance provider.  Quigan suggested that 
information might be sufficient for the Japanese to deny 
entry to North Korean-flagged ships relying on insurance 
provided by MMIA.  He compared MMIA to three New 
Zealand-incorporated companies that are being prosecuted in 
the United States for selling insurance fraudulently.  The 
New Zealand government has provided prosecutors with 
documents showing that the companies had not fulfilled New 
Zealand's legal requirements for transacting insurance. 
 
¶5. (S/REL NZ) Quigan said the New Zealand government had 
virtually no ability to prevent MMIA from selling insurance 
overseas, even if fraudulently.  It also could not shut down 
the company.  Under the Companies Act 1993, companies face 
almost no restrictions to incorporate in New Zealand, beyond 
the payment of a NZ $100 fee.  The registrar of companies can 
remove a company from the registry only if it fails to file 
an annual return.  That return is easy to fill out, requiring 
a listing of the company's addresses and directors, and can 
be submitted via e-mail.  MMIA filed its last annual return 
on August 2, 2005.  (The return can be accessed via the New 
Zealand Companies Office website, 
www.companies.govt.nz/pls/web/dbssiten.main; search the 
register for company number 1521418.) 
 
¶6. (S/REL NZ) Quigan said the government does not want the 
name of New Zealand misused in this way and will have MMIA in 
mind when drafting revisions to the Insurance Companies Act 
¶1953.  However, with consultations on the revision not 
expected to begin until 2006, it is unlikely that an 
amendment would be enacted before 2007, Quigan said. 
 
¶7. (S) Quigan said he had no information on the Korean 
Foreign Insurance Company.  Meanwhile, the New Zealand 
Security Intelligence Service (NZSIS) has investigated MMIA. 
Post will report septel if NZSIS uncovered additional 
information about the company.  MMIA's website is at 
www.maritime-mutual.com. 
McCormick