08DUBLIN389
BRIAN COWEN: NO SOLUTION TO THE LISBON CRISIS BUT
Fri Jun 27 00:00:00 +0200 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Dublin
VZCZCXRO5090
PP RUEHAG RUEHROV
DE RUEHDL #0389/01 1791440
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 271440Z JUN 08
FM AMEMBASSY DUBLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9298
INFO RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 DUBLIN 000389 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/26/2018 
TAGS: EAIR ECON ENRG ETRD EUN PGOV PREL EINV
SUBJECT: BRIAN COWEN: NO SOLUTION TO THE LISBON CRISIS BUT 
CONTINUED SUPPORT FOR U.S. INITIATIVES 
 
REF: A. DUBLIN 384 AND PREVIOUS 
     ¶B. 07DUBLIN 919 
     ¶C. DUBLIN 306 
     ¶D. DUBLIN 228 
     ¶E. DUBLIN 54 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Thomas C. Foley; Reasons 1.4 (B) and (D). 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  (C) During the Ambassador's meeting with Irish Prime 
Minister Brian Cowen on June 26, 2008 (their first formal 
meeting since Cowen assumed his new position as Taoiseach), 
Cowen affirmed continued Irish support for U.S. activities in 
Shannon and expanded CBP pre-clearance operations.  Cowen 
urged a swift conclusion to the negotiations to expand CBP 
operations in Ireland.  Regarding the two issues which have 
garnered the majority of local media attention over the past 
several weeks: rejection of the Lisbon Treaty and the 
economic downturn, Cowen provided limited insight into likely 
next steps by either the Irish government or the European 
Union.  The Taoiseach indicated that lack of a resolution on 
the issue of undocumented Irish in America remained a 
pressing bilateral issue.  Finally, he expressed interest in 
spurring private philanthropy, but cautioned that the 
economic climate could complicate government efforts.  End 
Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
Shannon Airport/CBP Operations - Continued Support 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶2.  (C) Cowen stressed that as long as he is in office, the 
United States can count on continued support for its military 
flight activities at Shannon airport.  (Note: Spurred by a 
recent Amnesty International report, Irish media have again 
focused national attention on the alleged use of Shannon for 
extraordinary renditions.  end note)  The Taoiseach urged the 
Ambassador to press for a swift conclusion of the 
negotiations on the agreement to expand pre-clearance 
operations, noting that he strongly believed that adding 
pre-clearance capabilities to Shannon would bring a large 
economic boost to western Ireland.  The Ambassador pointed 
out that he understood that a significant sticking point is 
the required legislation in Ireland that may delay until 2009 
the launch of the expanded CBP operations. Mr. Cowen replied 
that his staff would investigate to determine if the 
legislation could be fast tracked. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------------- 
Undocumented Irish - Potential To Harm "Special Relationship" 
--------------------------------------------- ---------------- 
 
¶3.  (C) The Taoiseach told the Ambassador that the unresolved 
issue of undocumented Irish in America could affect bilateral 
relations in the future if young Irish no longer have the 
opportunity to go to America to work. While he sees the 
proposed new exchange visa as helpful, he is concerned about 
those who are already in America and urged the U.S. to 
develop a means by which the undocumented Irish could return 
to Ireland and somehow apply for permanent residence status. 
He stressed that the special relationship between Ireland and 
the U.S. is a result of generations of Irish workers in the 
United States, some of whom stayed, others who returned to 
Ireland.  He said he would be "concerned for the 
relationship" if that flow stopped for ten or twelve years. 
When questioned about the status of immigration reform in the 
U.S., the Ambassador indicated that it is a priority for the 
current administration but the outlook is poor for passing 
immigration legislation before the President leaves office. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
Lisbon Treaty Aftermath- No Clear Direction 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (C) Cowen was generally non-committal and genuinely 
appeared to be unsure of the way forward in light of the 
recent Irish rejection of the Lisbon Treaty.  He indicated 
that amending the treaty would be unlikely, as that would 
require re-ratification by all member states.  Cowen 
suggested that the only option available would be to vote 
again on the same treaty, an option he couldn't be optimistic 
about, and one which, at the very least, would require the 
passage of considerable time.  As such, he is adopting a 
"wait and see" attitude. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Economy- Exaggerated Media Reports 
---------------------------------- 
 
 
DUBLIN 00000389  002 OF 002 
 
 
¶5.  (C) While he did acknowledge a significant downturn in 
the current year, Cowen believes that media reports are 
exaggerated and he is "not too worried" about it.  He 
believes that based on demographics, new construction will 
rebound to 65,000 homes next year.  He stated that many 
adults in Ireland have never experienced a down economy and 
that the onus is on the government to develop a "political 
narrative" for them.  He briefly discussed alternative energy 
sources, and shares Post's belief that Ocean energy provides 
Ireland with a good investment and job creation opportunity. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
Philanthropy Stimulation- Support, But Difficult Political 
Environment 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
¶6.  (C) Cowen indicated that he is interested in the issue of 
Philanthropy and that he supports the U.S.'s efforts in 
Ireland (see Reftel).  However, he expressed concern that the 
economic climate may make it difficult for the government to 
implement tax incentives in the near term that could be seen 
as favoring the rich.  He believes that there is a general 
consensus that the wealthy should not benefit from tax breaks 
and believes that in order for opinion to shift, prominent 
NGOs are best situated to make the case for new tax 
incentives.  The Taoiseach is in agreement with tasking the 
National Economic and Social Forum to make policy 
recommendations for stimulating philanthropy in Ireland.  At 
the conclusion of this discussion, the Ambassador provided 
the Taoiseach with a memorandum on the issue (sent to Desk 
separately).  He then suggested that creating an environment 
to stimulate philanthropy in Ireland would be an excellent 
legacy opportunity for some leader and that he hoped Mr. 
Cowen would make it one of his. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶7.  (C) Brian Cowen has a very different style from his 
predecessor.  He is very knowledgeable on the issues and is 
willing to engage in dialogue at the policy level.  He is 
more approachable than his predecessor and offers the 
opportunity for closer personal relationships with Embassy 
personnel.  Staffers expressed interest and excitement in a 
possible connection between Barack Obama's ancestors and the 
Taoiseach's home county of Offaly. 
FOLEY