06KHARTOUM811
Arab League Summit:  Khartoum Declaration
Sun Apr 02 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO9685
PP RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHKUK RUEHMOS RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #0811/01 0921313
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 021313Z APR 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2147
INFO RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVE
RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 KHARTOUM 000811 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/SPG, NEA/RA, AND IO 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL SOCI AL US SU
SUBJECT:  Arab League Summit:  Khartoum Declaration 
 
Ref:  Khartoum 00791 (notal) 
 
¶1.  The Arab League Summit took place March 28-29 in 
Khartoum (reftel).  The Khartoum Declaration was printed 
on March 30 by the daily London Al-Quds Al-Arabi in 
Arabic. 
 
¶2.  The text of the Arab League Khartoum Declaration per 
FBIS translation of the Al-Quds Al-Arabi publication is 
as follows: 
 
(Begin text) 
 
Following is the full text of the final statement issued 
by the Arab summit held in Khartoum two days ago: 
We, the Arab countries' kings, presidents, and amirs, 
meeting as the Arab League Summit Council in its 18th 
regular session in Khartoum, capital of the Republic of 
Sudan, on 28 and 29 Safar 1427 of the Hegira, March 2006, 
have made a comprehensive assessment and a profound study 
of the circumstances surrounding the Arab situation, Arab 
relations, the conditions through which the nation is 
passing, and the serious and imminent threats and dangers 
that surround the Middle East process. 
 
Taking into account the changes in the global order and 
the major challenges that international developments pose 
to the regional Arab order, 
 
Reasserting our commitment to the principles and goals of 
the Arab League Charter and our wish to implement them in 
a way that guarantees Arab society's cohesiveness, 
progress, and prosperity and helps achieve a 
comprehensive revival, 
 
And clinging to the noble objectives enshrined in the UN 
Charter to ensure the establishment of a world of 
freedom, equality, justice, and a united destiny, declare 
the following: 
 
We are fully committed to the Arab nation's united 
destiny and goals and to the defense of its values and 
entrenched traditions of liberation, independence, and 
national sovereignty.  We adhere to Arab solidarity as a 
goal, a means, and a final objective to preserve Arab 
national security and safeguard every Arab country's 
security, sovereignty, and legitimate right to defend its 
national sovereignty, resources, and destiny. 
We reaffirm our commitment to the Arab League Charter and 
the Arab agreements that seek to strengthen the bonds 
among the Arab countries and people and that provide for 
settling disputes peacefully through constructive 
dialogue and diplomatic negotiations in a way that 
guarantees the persistence of the strongest ties among 
the sons of the Arab nation. 
 
We call for further efforts to develop the Arab League 
Charter, modernize the organization of collective Arab 
action, and energize its methods to enable it to keep up 
with the rapid changes on the world scene, allow it to 
adopt developed and self-renewing policies to build an 
Arab society that is fully integrated in its resources 
and capabilities, and achieve lasting and comprehensive 
development in a way appropriate to the coming era's new 
challenges.  These efforts should enable the Arab League, 
its apparatuses, and organizations to renew their working 
methods, develop their rules, fulfill pan-Arab 
requirements, and keep up with new developments on the 
regional and international scenes. 
 
We assert our determination to implement Arab integration 
by energizing the methods of collective Arab action and 
implementing economic integration projects, particularly 
the Arab Free Trade Region Agreement in a way that 
enhances Arab commerce and enables it to remedy the 
existing imbalances in the global trade system to reduce 
the threats that face Arab industries as a result of 
these imbalances, develop more partnerships, increase 
mutual investments, and establish joint production 
projects. 
 
Adherence to the Arab Initiative 
 
We reaffirm the Arab commitment to the option of 
attaining a just and comprehensive Middle East peace.  We 
renew our adherence to the Arab peace initiative to solve 
the Arab-Israeli conflict that was adopted by the Beirut 
Arab summit in 2002, establish a just, comprehensive, and 
lasting peace based on the return of all the occupied 
Arab territories to their rightful owners in accordance 
 
KHARTOUM 00000811  002 OF 006 
 
 
with the land-for-peace principle and the Madrid 
conference's terms of reference in the context of the 
principles of international legitimacy and on the basis 
of the relevant UN resolutions. 
 
The Palestinian Elections 
 
We declare our full support for the democratic exercise 
in occupied Palestine.  We commend the fairness and 
transparency of the legislative elections and declare our 
full support for the Palestinian National Authority under 
the leadership of brother President Mahmud Abbas in its 
constant endeavor to maintain the Palestinian people's 
national unity.  We call on the international community 
to respect the Palestinian people's free choice of their 
leader and to refrain from meddling in their internal 
affairs.  We reassert our firm belief that the 
Palestinian National Authority is a full partner in the 
peace process and our rejection of the unilateral Israeli 
measures that seek to terminate the peace process. 
 
We call on all international parties to adhere to the 
principles of the UN Charter which provide for equality 
of rights and self-determination for nations, and urge 
them to implement the UN resolutions pertaining to the 
Middle East peace process, especially UN Security Council 
Resolutions 242 of 1967, 338 of 1973, and 1515 of 2003. 
We also call for the implementation of the Madrid term of 
reference that includes the land-for-peace principle, the 
Arab peace initiative, and the immediate and complete 
implementation of the road map in a manner that 
guarantees the establishment of a comprehensive and just 
peace in the Middle East and the elimination of the 
causes of tension and instability in the region. 
 
We urge the Quartet members to make efforts to implement 
the road map in accordance with its declared objectives 
of establishing an independent state that has sovereignty 
over the entire territories occupied in 1967 and has 
Jerusalem as its capital.  We remain, meanwhile, 
committed to a comprehensive solution and the need to 
continue the peace process on all negotiating tracks. 
We support the International Court of Justice's verdict 
regarding the legal consequences of the establishment of 
the racial separation wall in the occupied Palestinian 
territories and the ICJ's assertion that self- 
determination today is every nation's right.  Seeing that 
Israel's building of a separation wall in the occupied 
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem, 
strongly hinders the Palestinian people's right to self- 
determination, as the ICJ concluded, we renew our call to 
the international community to demand that Israel remove 
the separation wall immediately and without delay. 
 
A Just Peace 
 
We reaffirm our view that a just and lasting peace in the 
Middle East cannot be established without full Israeli 
withdrawal from the occupied Arab territories in the 
Syrian Golan Heights and the Lebanese Shab'a Farms up to 
the 4 June 1967 borders.  We assert that regional 
security and stability hinge on Israel's definite 
commitment to the principle of the inadmissibility of the 
seizure of the territories of others by force.  We call 
for the implementation of the relevant resolutions of 
international legitimacy and building on the already made 
achievements in the context of the Madrid peace 
conference. 
 
We appreciate the Arab countries' efforts to establish 
the Al-Aqsa and Al-Quds Intifadah Fund and also the 
efforts made by other Arab funds, financial and economic 
establishments, and the institutions of collective Arab 
action to extend financial aid to the Palestinian people. 
We urge them to increase this aid.  We appeal to the 
donor countries to implement their commitments regarding 
financial aid to the Palestinian people and direct it in 
such a way that it will fulfill its declared objectives 
of rehabilitating the Palestinian economy, consolidating 
its native capabilities, and ending its dependence on the 
Israeli economy as a contribution to the effort to 
establish an independent Palestinian state. 
 
Opposition to Attacks on Religions 
 
We stress the need for cooperation, dialogue, and mutual 
respect among all nations and cultures and the 
establishment of a world of openness and tolerance.  We 
declare that respect for religious sanctities and beliefs 
is a crucial factor in building mutual trust and 
 
KHARTOUM 00000811  003 OF 006 
 
 
extending bridges of friendship among nations.  We 
express our firm rejection and emphatic condemnation of 
any attack on religions, religious symbols, and spiritual 
values and call on the world's countries to enact laws 
that criminalize assaults on religious sanctities.  We 
stress the importance of respecting freedom of opinion 
and expression without encroaching on the firm belief 
systems of nations. 
 
We affirm the need to entrench a culture of dialogue 
among civilizations and religions to promote global peace 
and security and consolidate the values of tolerance and 
peaceful co-existence.  We advocate working with all 
governments and international and regional organizations 
to promote the methods of learning about and respecting 
other cultures.  We stress the need to pass a UN 
resolution that will criminalize assaults on the 
sanctities and symbols of all religions. 
 
Darfur 
 
We welcome again the signing of a comprehensive peace 
agreement in the Republic of Sudan to end the conflict in 
that country and call on all concerned regional and 
international parties to make efforts to restore security 
and stability to Sudan and extend aid and assistance to 
rebuild the areas that were damaged during the war.  We 
exhort the international community and the donor 
countries to fulfill their commitments to promote 
comprehensive economic development in Sudan. 
 
We call on the Sudanese parties participating in the 
peace talks over Darfur to redouble their efforts to 
reach a comprehensive and definitive agreement to solve 
the Darfur crisis.  We affirm our support for the African 
Union's mission in remedying the Darfur problem and 
supervising the cease-fire there.  We oppose the dispatch 
of any other military forces to that region without the 
Sudanese Government's prior approval.  We declare our 
intention to increase the size of the Arab contingent 
within the African Union's forces and to extend the 
necessary financial aid to allow them to continue their 
mission. 
 
Rejection of Sanctions on Syria 
 
We express our total solidarity with fraternal Syria 
versus the US sanctions and express our astonishment and 
anxiety over the US Congress' adoption of the so-called 
Syria Accountability Act and consider it a circumvention 
of international law, the UN resolutions, and the Arab 
League Charter.  We highly commend Syria's position that 
advocates recourse to dialogue and diplomacy as a means 
of reaching understanding among countries and settling 
their disagreements. 
 
Support for Lebanon 
 
We support fraternal Lebanon's sovereign right to 
exercise its political options in the context of 
constitutional provisions and institutions and we back 
its free decision to establish and strengthen its 
relations of brotherhood, coordination, and cooperation 
with the fraternal Arab countries.  We demand that Israel 
end its occupation of the Lebanese territories in line 
with UN Security Council Resolution 525 and back 
Lebanon's firm right to resist occupation by various 
means until it liberates its territories from Israeli 
occupation.  We assert our support for Lebanese national 
dialogue and call for uncovering the circumstances of the 
criminal assassination of the martyr Rafiq al-Hariri, 
former Lebanese prime minister and his colleagues, in 
addition to uncovering the crimes that preceded and 
followed that assassination.  We back the adoption by the 
Lebanese authorities of the necessary legal and judicial 
procedures to impose just punishment on those who 
perpetrated those crimes. 
 
The UAE Islands 
 
Wishing to maintain, bolster, and develop the fraternal 
ties between the Arab countries and Iran, we call on the 
Iranian Government to withdraw from the three Arab 
islands and restore them to UAE sovereignty.  We commend 
the position adopted by the United Arab Emirates in 
pursuing peaceful means and procedures to regain the 
three islands. 
 
Somalia 
 
 
KHARTOUM 00000811  004 OF 006 
 
 
We welcome the positive developments and achievements of 
the Somali national reconciliation process and express 
hope that the Somali brothers will complete rebuilding 
their state institutions, entrench the process of 
national reconciliation, and lay down the foundations of 
national stability.  We urge prompt assistance to the 
Somali Government to enable it to carry out its tasks. 
 
Iraqi Sovereignty 
 
We reassert our solidarity with the Iraqi people and 
their elected government and urge respect for Iraq's 
sovereignty, territorial integrity, freedom, and 
independence.  We oppose intervention in its domestic 
affairs and declare our respect for the Iraqi people's 
free will, democratic choices, and the need to allow them 
to determine their future by themselves.  We express our 
full condemnation of the terrorist acts that targeted 
Iraq's hallowed shrines and tombs, mosques, and other 
houses of worship and call on all segments of the Iraqi 
population to cling to national unity and prevent anyone 
from undermining the country's security and stability. 
We urge full respect for the freedom of mosques, tombs, 
and sanctities of all religions and sects. 
 
We urge that the search continue to uncover the fate of 
all Kuwaiti captives and missing persons and the fate of 
the missing citizens of other countries in Iraq.  We 
express our heartfelt condolences for the families of the 
victims whose remains have been identified.  We express 
our continued concern for those persons whose whereabouts 
remain unknown and urge that efforts be made to learn 
their fate. 
 
Union of the Comoros 
 
We declare our support for the positive developments in 
Comoros, particularly in connection with the ongoing 
implementation of the Moroni agreement for national 
reconciliation and welcome the positive results of the 
donor countries' conference and urge the prompt 
allocation of funds to help the Union of the Comoros' 
economic development. 
 
Natural Disasters 
 
We appeal to the Arab League member countries, the 
concerned organizations of collective Arab action, donor 
countries, and all international organizations to send 
urgent relief food shipments to the inhabitants of 
certain regions that face disastrous drought and 
desertification in Niger, Somalia, Kenya, and Ethiopia. 
 
Arab-African Cooperation 
 
We assert the need for Arab-African cooperation and the 
need to energize and revive its institutions and remove 
the obstacles in its pth so that it will contribute 
positively to the growth of Arab-African relations and 
hasten economic development and progress in the Arab- 
African region. 
 
Weapons of Mass Destruction 
 
We urge the international communidy todecl!re the MaddleQU`S|!A&2egiooQbrmdpn_lwa!t.~uofq`S|dQ| ees*4UQ1Qs|iu@b(I3oenS&R"grOeB-$Tu9QQbn{fQted Nations 
 
We stress the need to reform the international order in a 
way that will enable the United Nations to enhance its 
competence and capabilities to confront the challenges 
that the world is facing.  We call for the establishment 
of a balanced leadership and administrative structure 
that will boost the United Nations' leadership capability 
in a way that will ensure the establishment of global 
peace and security.  We also demand the expansion of the 
UN Security Council's permanent membership to allow the 
world's various geographical regions and cultures to 
participate in managing the world order competently and 
capably in a way that reflects the principle of global 
cooperation and ensures justice, fairness, and 
transparency. 
 
Terrorism 
 
KHARTOUM 00000811  005 OF 006 
 
 
 
We declare our condemnation of all forms of terrorism 
because it undermines a society's structure, 
capabilities, and hard-earned gains.  We regard the 
crimes perpetrated by terrorist groups as serious 
violations of people's political rights and a persistent 
threat to the Arab countries' national security and 
stability.  We call for holding a UN-sponsored conference 
that will agree on a definition of terrorism, distinguish 
between Islam and terrorism, and differentiate between 
terrorism and nations' rights to resist occupation. 
 
National initiatives 
 
We commend the Arab countries' consistent efforts to 
promote democratic practices and competent management 
including the establishment of transparent, responsible, 
and accountable governments that allow the people to 
participate in power.  We call for the promotion of such 
practices that fulfill the wishes of the Arab countries 
and their populations.  We declare our support for all 
the national initiatives that seek to expand the base of 
popular participation in government and official 
departments in a way that guarantees national accord and 
domestic peace. 
 
Millennium Goals 
 
We urge the global community to cooperate in promoting 
the implementation of the millennium objectives including 
the eradication of poverty and the fair distribution of 
resources in a way that achieves all the internationally 
agreed upon goals of attaining economic development and 
eradicating poverty.  This would include redoubling 
financial aid especially to the less developed countries 
and boosting the international efforts to cancel or 
reduce their debts.  We call for narrowing the gap 
between the levels of economic and social development 
between rich and poor nations and urge the Arab Social 
Affairs Ministerial Council to continue its efforts to 
implement the goals and principles of the Arab 
Declaration of Millennium Goals until it fulfills its 
objectives. 
 
Discrimination Against Women and the Handicapped, and the 
Right to Education 
 
We assert the need to continue the efforts seeking to end 
discrimination against women, make initiatives to spread 
awareness of the Islamic and Arab principles that 
guarantee a woman's natural rights and her role in 
society, and pass the necessary legislation to protect 
women and safeguard their status. 
 
We call for adopting the necessary measures to ensure 
that handicapped persons will enjoy equal rights with 
other persons including the right to education, good 
health care, and freedom from discrimination.  We also 
call for measures that will assist them to participate in 
their society's activities.  We urge the implementation 
of the Arab contract for handicapped persons. 
 
We emphasize all persons' right to education on the basis 
of equal opportunity and absence of discrimination by 
making elementary education compulsory and free.  We 
should also ensure that secondary education is available 
to everybody on the basis of equal opportunity. 
 
Scientific Research 
 
We approve of measures to support scientific and 
technological research, allocate and increase the 
necessary funding for research, and boost cooperation 
among the Arab countries' scientific and research 
centers.  The purpose of this is to provide the Arab 
countries with the necessary scientific and technological 
knowledge to boost comprehensive development and 
advancement.  We urge prompt measures to develop 
scientific research with the aim of increasing production 
capacity, facilitate the establishment of an information 
technology society, and close the gap with the developed 
world.  We call for enabling young people to participate 
actively in society's economic, social, and cultural 
activities and giving them the right to express their 
ideas and hopes so that they may participate in society's 
political life.  We should also provide them with 
employment opportunities. 
 
We wish to address special thanks and appreciation to His 
Excellency President Abdelaziz Bouteflika, president of 
 
KHARTOUM 00000811  006 OF 006 
 
 
the People's Democratic Republic of Algeria, for his 
valuable efforts and great contributions since he chaired 
the former Arab summit, which helped promote and develop 
the process of collective Arab action. 
 
We express great thanks and gratitude to His Excellency 
President Umar Hasan Ahmad al-Bashir for his competent 
management of this summit and his perspicacity in 
directing its deliberations.  We express our total 
confidence that during his chairmanship collective Arab 
action will make further achievements and develop in a 
way that will serve the Arab nation especially as 
President Al-Bashir is known for his wisdom, experience, 
and desire for renewal. 
 
We express our great gratitude to the Republic of Sudan 
and its generous people for the warm welcome and 
hospitality that they have accorded us and for their 
excellent organization of the meetings of the 18th 
session of the Arab League Summit Council.  We greatly 
appreciate their fine performance and good preparation 
and the intensive consultations that they held with all 
the Arab countries to ensure the summit's success and to 
hold it in the best possible and most fortuitous 
circumstances. 
 
We also express our appreciation for and take pride in 
the efforts made by Arab League Secretary General Amr 
Musa in this regard. 
 
(End text) 
 
STEINFELD