06KHARTOUM2571
Sudan/UN:  Text of MFA Letter to UNSYG SR Pronk
Sun Oct 29 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO3263
PP RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #2571/01 3021436
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 291436Z OCT 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5052
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 002571 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/SPG, AF/RSA, AND S/CRS 
 
E.O.12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPKO UN SU
SUBJECT:  Sudan/UN:  Text of MFA Letter to UNSYG SR Pronk 
 
REF:  KHARTOUM 2539 
 
¶1. On October 26, post received a copy of the following letter from 
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to UN Special Representative of the 
Secretary General for Sudan Jan Pronk. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
¶2. The text of the letter, received from UNSYG SR Pronk's office, is 
as follows: 
 
(Begin text) 
 
REPUBLIC OF THE SUDAN MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS 
The Minister 
Date: 22 October 2006 
 
Excellency, 
 
The Government of National Unity in the Republic of the Sudan 
recognizes with gratitude the vital role of the United Nations in 
peace building and peacemaking and appreciates the exemplary 
cooperation existing between the Sudan and the United Nations in 
safeguarding the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace 
Agreement.  That cooperation paved the way for the Agreement between 
the Government of the Sudan and the United Nations concerning the 
Status of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan concluded in 
Khartoum on 28 December 2005, and the creation of the office of the 
United Nations Special Representative in the Sudan, which is held by 
Mr. Jan Pronk. 
 
Yet, during the past period since Mr. Jan Pronk assumed his duties 
as your Special Representative in the Sudan, his actions and 
behavior, especially in relation to the situation in Darfur, 
prompted a number of protests on part of the Government of National 
Unity in the Sudan.  Those protests were due to unwarranted 
interferences in matters that do not fall within his mandate.  In 
many occasions he has, in our opinion, acted in a way incompatible 
with the impartial and international nature of his duties or 
inconsistent with the spirit of his assignment. 
 
Regrettably, Mr. Jan Pronk had developed a history of a pattern of 
hostility against the Government of the Sudan and its armed forces. 
He has repeatedly abused the powers of his office, violated his 
terms of engagement as a Special Representative to the United 
Nations Secretary General in the Sudan.  The statement issued by the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Sudan on 20 February 2006 enlists 
some of the said repeated violations by Mr. Jan Pronk.  He has been 
repeatedly approached by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs about his 
damaging and negative statements to the media and in his own 
website, the most recent of which the disinformation he volunteered 
about the National Armed Forces of the Sudan. 
 
Recently on 18 October 2006, Mr. Jan Pronk visited the area of 
Tawila in Darfur where he toured AMIS premises and an IDP camp. 
There, he made statements that the Government of the Sudan did not 
implement the Darfur Peace Accord "DPA" and is deceiving those who 
signed the DPA casting doubts about its achievements.  He also 
stated that the Government of the Sudan is biased and is siding with 
the Arab Janjaweed with the purpose of cleansing the African tribes. 
 As such, we regret to state that Mr. Jan Pronk is now enticing, 
aiding and abetting the armed groups, signatories to the DPA to 
break away from the peace process.  It is ironical that in his 
recent visit to Tawila he did not bother to address activities of 
humanitarian organizations or the humanitarian situation. 
 
It is now evident to us that Mr. Jan Pronk has actually engaged in 
activities incompatible with his status and had needlessly and 
recklessly endangered and undermined the nascent Darfur peace 
process. The ultimate effect of his recent actions, including the 
discrediting information about the Sudanese Armed Forces and his 
statements in Tawila, abrogates the legal and moral responsibilities 
of his position as a Special Representative, violates the UN Charter 
and compromises the neutrality and integrity of the United Nations. 
It is under these circumstances that his negative comments about the 
armed forces became public. 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of the Sudan 
concludes from the foregoing that the United Nation's Secretary 
General Special Representative to the Sudan, Mr. Jan Pronk had 
flagrantly violated paragraph 5 of section IV of the Agreement 
between the Government of the Sudan and the United Nations 
concerning the Status of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan 
concluded in Khartoum on 28 December 2005, which provides:  IIUNMIS 
and its members shall refrain from any action or activity 
incompatible with the "...impartial and international nature of 
their duties or inconsistent with the spirit of the present 
arrangements...etc..". 
 
While appreciating the support and assistance of the international 
community as represented by the United Nations, and reassuring the 
United Nations and the international community of Sudan's continued 
cooperation and commitment, the Government of the Sudan is of the 
 
KHARTOUM 00002571  002 OF 002 
 
 
view that the purposes of realizing peace and stability can better 
be served by other international civil servants who are dedicated 
and ready to adhere to the objectives of the United Nations Charter, 
possess the ability and determination to respect international law 
and sensitive to the sovereignty and integrity of the nations in 
which they serve. 
 
Therefore, the Government of National Unity in the Republic of the 
Sudan considers the mission of Mr. Jan Pronk as Special 
Representative of the United Nations Secretary General in the Sudan 
terminated and Mr. Jan Pronk is hereby requested to leave the 
territory of the Republic of the Sudan within 72 hours effective 
12:00 noon of Sunday 22 October 2006. 
 
The Government of National Unity in the Republic of the Sudan 
remains committed and will cooperate with a replacement of Mr. Jan 
Pronk in accordance with the agreements concluded with the United 
Nations and the recognized principles of international law. 
 
Please accept Excellency, the assurances of my highest 
consideration. 
 
(signed) 
Dr. Lam Akol Ajawin 
Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of the Sudan 
 
Addressed to: 
HE Kofi Annan 
Secretary General of the United Nations New York 
 
SIPDIS 
 
(End text) 
 
WHITAKER