06KHARTOUM1082
Sudanese Government Sends Mixed Signals on UN
Sun May 07 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO6398
OO RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #1082/01 1271441
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 071441Z MAY 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2668
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 001082 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/SUDAN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV KPKO PREF UN AU SU
SUBJECT:  Sudanese Government Sends Mixed Signals on UN 
Peacekeeping Operation in Darfur 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Following the May 5 signing of the Darfur 
peace agreement, the Sudanese Government is giving mixed 
signals to the international community regarding UN 
peacekeeping operations in Darfur.  On May 5, a Ministry 
of the Interior spokesman stated that there was "no 
problem" with UN peacekeepers coming to Sudan.  On May 7, 
however, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs Spokesman stated 
that a decision remained up to the Government, and would 
be decided following an assessment of the situation.  A 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs press release of May 7 
credited the African Union for its role in helping Africa 
to solve African problems, but made no reference to a UN 
peacekeeping operation.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  On May 5, Sudanese Government Secretary General for 
External Affairs in the Ministry of Information Bakri 
Mulah told AP, "We heard the appeal of the UN Secretary 
General (for UN peacekeepers to join those of the African 
Union)...Now there is no problem...There would be no 
problem to have the support of the United Nations and 
other partners, the U.S., and EU, to help in 
implementation." 
 
¶3.  However, in a May 7 statement, Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs Spokesman Jamal Muhammed Ibrahim told Reuters 
that reports that Sudan would welcome UN peacekeeping 
operations were not correct.  He said, "This is not 
accurate.  I don't know who made this statement...It has 
to come after an assessment by the Sudan government.  If 
the need arises then Sudan may decide to do so. 
Otherwise no one has the right to impose foreign forces 
on Sudan...The situation is, after the signing of the 
peace accord, Sudan may look into any proposals to 
helping prevent tragedy...In this context if there is any 
possibility for UN forces to replace the African forces 
already in Darfur, this is the decision of Sudan and it 
is not going to be imposed on Sudan." 
 
¶4.  Ibrahim's remarks followed a press conference, during 
which the Ministry issued a press release that credited 
the African Union, but which made no mention of the 
United Nations or further peacekeeping efforts.  The text 
of the release is as follows: 
 
(Begin text - informal Embassy translation) 
 
MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS 
 
STATEMENT ON THE PEACE AGREEMENT IN DARFUR 
MAY 5, 2006 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs sincerely congratulates 
the Sudanese people for the great historic achievement 
accomplished by signing Darfur Peace Agreement in Abuja, 
on Friday, May 5, 2006. 
 
This agreement comes as an outcome of patient serious 
dialogue of long months; it asserts the Sudanese 
capability of resolving their differences and reaching 
common denominations that ensures fair political and 
economic sharing for all, devotes national unity and 
maintains the sovereignty of the country and safety of 
its territory. 
 
Accordingly, the Government of Sudan has expressed its 
approval - associated with remarks and reservations- of 
the agreement document since April 27, 2006; then the 
Sudan Liberation Movement, chaired by Mini Arkoy and Dr. 
Abdel Rahman Musa, SLM's senior negotiators (Abdel Wahid 
Mohamed Nour's faction) signed on the agreement on 
Friday, May 5, 2006. 
 
This agreement has responded to aspirations and hopes of 
the participants in the negotiation process.  Hopefully, 
all the rest of the armed movements would join the 
agreement soon to commence implementation of the 
agreement on the ground. 
 
The Ministry appreciates the great efforts exerted by the 
negotiators from the part of the government and the Sudan 
Liberation Movement for their persistence, patience, and 
capability of inventing creative solutions. 
 
The Ministry expresses its great gratitude and 
appreciation for the sisterly State of Nigeria and His 
Highness President Obasanjo for hosting all the 
negotiations sessions between the government and the 
armed movement throughout the past two years; the 
Ministry also thanks the African Union Commission and its 
Chairman Alpha Konare, the senior mediator Dr. Salim 
 
KHARTOUM 00001082  002 OF 002 
 
 
Ahmed Salim, and the mediation team that made this great 
achievement possible. 
 
The Ministry expresses its great appreciation to the 
international partners from the African Union and the 
representatives of the United States, Britain, Canada, 
United Nations, Arab League, and also the brothers from 
the Libyan Jamahirya, the Arab Republic of Egypt, and 
Eritrea; their good efforts had a great role in signing 
this agreement. 
 
Singing the peace agreement in Darfur under the umbrella 
of the African Union and the direct auspices of the 
Chairman of the African Union in its former session, 
President Obasanjo and the present Chairman of the 
African Union, Sassou Nguesso, President of Democratic 
Congo, proves that the people of the continent of Africa 
are capable of resolving their problems by themselves- 
however their complicity was - and the international 
community has to assist them in doing that. 
 
The peace agreement in Darfur would represent the 
greatest achievement for the African Union in the domain 
of mediation and making peace similarly to the 
comprehensive peace in Southern Sudan, the greatest 
achievement of another African Organizations:  the IGAD. 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs extends its appeal to the 
other armed movements in Darfur to resort to wisdom and 
common since and to join the peace procession, to drop 
arms, and to head toward consolidating pillars of 
stability in Darfur. 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs reiterates commitment to 
work with all brothers, friends and the concerned 
international parties to make the peace process 
successful in Darfur and to support rehabilitation and 
construction efforts. 
 
It considers this great achievement as an incentive to 
double efforts to restore the regional and international 
role of Sudan and to remove any distortion and confusion 
from the image of Sudan. 
 
MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS - KHARTOUM 
May 6, 2006 
 
(End text) 
 
STEINFELD