07KHARTOUM1861
AEC PLENARY: VRAALSEN URGES PARTIES TOWARD GREATER CPA
Tue Nov 27 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO6731
RR RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #1861/01 3311330
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 271330Z NOV 07
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9325
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 001861 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KSCA OTRA EAID CDC SU
SUBJECT: AEC PLENARY: VRAALSEN URGES PARTIES TOWARD GREATER CPA 
IMPLEMENTATION 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:  At the November 27 monthly plenary session of the 
Assessment and Evaluation Commission (AEC), departing Chairman Tom 
Vraalsen used his farewell statement to warn of the dangers of the 
current stalemate on implementation of the Comprehensive Peace 
Agreement (CPA).  He urged the AEC's working groups to begin working 
immediately towards the mid-term report, and made one last plea for 
greater independence for the chairmanship.  True to form, the NCP 
used its only statement to find fault with a minor technical point 
involving the status of the minutes of the last meeting.  The SPLM 
rep expressed guarded optimism about ongoing talks between his party 
and the NCP over Abyei and other CPA implementation issues.  End 
Summary. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
NCP continues nitpicking on technicalities 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶2. Chairman Tom Vraalsen opened the November 27 plenary with what is 
usually a mere formality, the approving of the minutes.  However, 
true to form in its attention to legalistic details, the NCP spoke 
up to challenge the status of the minutes.  The NCO rep said the 
minutes should not be made public as part of the AEC's two-year 
status report, approved at the last plenary session.  He was assured 
by Vraalson that the minutes would not be part of the report. 
 
¶3.  Comment:  The NCP's objection was not merely nitpicking as part 
of its general foot-dragging strategy on CPA implementation - 
although it was that as well.  In negotiations over drafting of the 
Wealth Sharing Working Group, the NCP had persuaded the SPLM to 
consign some of its concerns on implementation of the wealth sharing 
protocol to the minutes.  The SPLM did not object to not including 
the minutes with the report: they may not have realized the 
importance of the minutes in this case because their representatives 
at this meeting had not attended previous meetings.  End Comment. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
Chairman's farewell warning directed at both parties 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶4.   Vraalsen then gave what he noted was his final remarks to the 
Commission, warning that he was "deeply concerned" about the pace of 
CPA implementation.  While Vraalsen is often harder on the NCP's 
intransigence, his remarks were directed at both parties.  Referring 
to NCP-controlled media use of the status report, he said "The AEC 
has never said that the CPA is 90% implemented.  This is about the 
future of the nation - it's not a percentage game."  He continued, 
"the alarm bells are ringing louder and louder.  The parties claim 
to be partners," but no spirit of partnership is evident to outside 
observers. He noted that VP Ali Osman Taha had recently underscored 
the importance of the CPA during his speech on the current SPLM 
cabinet crisis.  Neither of the two parties responded to Vraalsen's 
remarks. 
 
------------------------------------- 
SPLM guardedly optimistic about Abyei 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  When Vraalsen invited the two parties to brief the Commission on 
"recent political developments," as the agenda phrased it, the NCP 
declined comment.  The SPLM representative, Malik Agar, Deputy 
Secretary General of the SPLM and Governor of Blue Nile state, said 
 
SIPDIS 
in a very low-key manner that a recent high-level meeting between 
the two sides was "positive," and "so there is some reason for 
hope."  However, he warned that "we are now at the last call for 
resolving some of these issues," chief of which was Abyei, and there 
was still plenty of room for the talks to fail. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Coordinators report: ready to move ahead 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  Vraalsen urged Working Group Coordinators immediately to begin 
drafting the mid-term evaluation and assessment report, due July 9, 
¶2008.  The AEC Coordinators each then gave a brief report on their 
working groups.  The Italian Ambassador said his Embassy has been 
trying to arrange a power sharing working group meeting with the 
Border Commission, but had not yet received a response to its 
proposal.  In his own farewell remark, he seconded the Chairman's 
grave concern over CPA implementation.  He urged the two parties to 
move forward, saying that the CPA was a mainstay not just for Sudan, 
but for the region. 
 
¶7.  The American CDA noted that the Wealth Sharing Working Group had 
not met since the presentation of its two-year report, but was ready 
to continue with meetings if the two parties agree.  The Embassy is 
trying to obtain agreement on the next meeting as a brainstorming 
session to focus on transparency issues, he said.  (On the margins 
of the meeting, an NCP rep again put off giving Embassy PolOff a 
response to this proposal.)  Vraalsen expressed satisfaction with 
this approach, and urged the other Coordinators to follow the U.S. 
example. 
 
 
KHARTOUM 00001861  002 OF 002 
 
 
¶8.  The Norwegian Ambassador used his time to speak on the general 
importance of the AEC, which he said was "now in a critical phase," 
as the only forum where the two parties could come together 
regularly with representatives of the international community. 
(Note:  The Ambassador did not address the work of his Three Areas 
working group.  However, his Embassy is preoccupied with a December 
visit by the Dutch Foreign Minister). 
 
¶9.  The UK DCM said the Security Working Group had also not met 
since the two-year report, but noted some encouraging developments 
in the area of Security.  The Cease Fire Commission will soon be 
meeting, he said.  He added that his Embassy would be proposing 
working group meetings on final deployments, and on support for the 
Joint Integrated Units (JIUs), including training. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
Vraalsen urges more power for AEC Chairmanship 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶10.  Vraalsen concluded the meeting by making a strong pitch, 
obviously directed at the NCP, for granting the post of AEC Chairman 
more power and independence.  The AEC has accomplished a great deal, 
he said, but it has not been "visible in the public domain."  While 
he did not believe in "megaphone diplomacy," there was a valid role 
in keeping the public informed.  "The Chairman needs to be given 
more freedom of expression," he said.  "He must be able to speak the 
truth, even if it could be construed as criticism of one party." 
The work of the Commission should be transparent, and its documents 
made available to the public. 
 
¶11.  Comment:  Vraalsen concluded his frustrated tenure as AEC 
Chairman by appealing to both sides for flexibility and by urging 
the Coordinators to keep up their pressure on the two parties.  We 
will continue working with the other Coordinators to push both 
parties toward progress on CPA implementation, to the extent 
possible.  The Coordinators will soon present their proposal to the 
parties (and the NCP in particular) to allow greater independence to 
the new chairman, though this will no doubt face resistance. 
 
FERNANDEZ