08KHARTOUM1791
IVLP COUNTRY ALLOCATON FOR SUDAN: REQUEST INCREASE
Tue Dec 16 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHKH #1791 3510958
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 160958Z DEC 08
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 2540UNCLAS KHARTOUM 001791 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR R JCURTAIN, AF/FO, AF/PDPA FOR PEHRNMAN, R/A FOR JMOYES, 
ECA-IIP/EX/G, AF/SPG, ECA FOR MCROUCH AND RBRADLEY, ECA/A/E/AF, 
ECA/PE/V/R/N, ECA/PE/V/, OIG 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPAO SCUL OEXC ASIG SU
SUBJECT: IVLP COUNTRY ALLOCATON FOR SUDAN: REQUEST INCREASE 
 
REF: A) STATE 114917, B) STATE 022899, C) KHARTOUM 001739, D) 
KHARTOUM 001753, E)KHARTOUM UNCLAS 001781 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  By geographic area, Sudan is the largest country 
in Africa.  It has a population of over 40 million, and due to the 
terrible humanitarian and political crises in Darfur plus the 
importance of reaping peace dividends through implementation of the 
2005 Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) ending Africa's longest 
civil war, Sudan is the USG's highest policy priority on the 
continent.  There is an opportunity right now in Sudan, with the 
country's first nation-wide elections scheduled for 2009 and a 
crucial referendum on southern Sudan's possible independence in 
2011, to use the IVLP to tremendous advantage for U.S. national 
security interests at a pivotal moment in Sudan's history.  Last 
year, the post submitted twenty IVPL nominees.  ECA approved a final 
slate of only eight. Post is requesting that figure be doubled for 
FY-2009, for a total slate of sixteen.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (U) The International Visitor Leadership Program is normally one 
of a range of exchange offerings at post by the Bureau of 
Educational Affairs (ECA). In Sudan, however, IVLP is the premier 
exchange program, as the Fulbright Program, Hubert H. Humphrey 
Fellowships and Youth Programs Division are not currently open to 
Sudan through ECA.  In the 1980s, when the U.S. had strong bilateral 
relations with Sudan, the IVLP reflected the latter in the large 
numbers of grantees who traveled to the United States.  Over the 
years, Sudanese returnees rose to influential positions in critical 
fields and regions (southern Sudan and Darfur among them.)  When the 
bilateral relationship soured in the 1990s, however, those numbers 
declined precipitously. 
 
¶3. (U) The closure of our Embassy from 1995 to 2002 due to security 
reasons resulted in lost IVLP opportunities to influence a 
generation of future Sudanese leaders.  When the U.S. Embassy 
reopened in 2003, the IVLP remained a shadow of what it had once 
been.  This has been true despite the enormous opportunities the 
Comprehensive Peace Agreement affords the Mission in putting 
together slates that truly reflect Sudan's political, economic, 
racial, ethnic and religious diversity. 
 
¶4. (U) There is an opportunity right now in Sudan, with the 
country's first nation-wide elections scheduled for 2009 and a 
crucial referendum on southern Sudan's possible independence in 
2011, to use the IVLP to tremendous advantage for U.S. national 
security interests at a pivotal moment in Sudan's history.  Last 
year, post submitted twenty nominations.  ECA approved a final slate 
of just eight. Post is seeking to double that figure in FY-2009, for 
a total slate of sixteen. 
 
¶5. (U) During Sudan's 2007 inspection, the Office of the Inspector 
General (OIG) recognized the importance of the IVLP when it noted: 
"The post is eager to expand its International Visitor Leadership 
Program (IVLP). It has nominated ten candidates for FY 2007, but it 
is unclear how many slots will be funded. The post has been active 
in debriefing visitors and, in December 2006, re-created a 
mission-wide IVLP selection committee. Despite these efforts, 
funding for Sudan's IVLP has remained flat." 
 
¶6.  (U) The Mission is committed to resuscitating this crucial 
program and to nominating the very best and most promising 
candidates.  IVs from southern Sudan and from the Three Areas 
(Southern Kordofan, Blue Nile and Abyei) would help work toward 
balanced development in Sudan. Yet, if our numbers remain at under 
ten grantees a year, such efforts will not be nearly enough to make 
a difference here. With an increase in the country allotment for 
Sudan, ECA can assist in paving the way for the next generation of 
leaders in Sudan. 
 
¶7. (U) Before departing post on annual leave, CDA Fernandez approved 
this request. 
 
ASQUINO