09KHARTOUM1216
USAID Acting Administrator Meeting with NGO Steering
Thu Oct 29 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO3417
OO RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHKH #1216/01 3021311
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 291311Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4649
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/CJTF HOAUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KHARTOUM 001216 
 
NSC FOR MGAVIN, LETIM 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/SUDAN 
ADDIS ABABA ALSO FOR USAU 
GENEVA FOR NKYLOH 
UN ROME FOR HSPANOS 
NEW YORK FOR DMERCADO 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID PREF PGOV PHUM SOCI SMIG UN SU
SUBJECT:  USAID Acting Administrator Meeting with NGO Steering 
Committee in Khartoum 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  On October 24, USAID Acting Administrator Alonzo 
Fulgham and Acting Assistant Administrator for USAID's Bureau for 
Democracy, Conflict, and Humanitarian Assistance (USAID/DCHA) Susan 
Reichle met with the Khartoum-based Non-Governmental Organization 
(NGO) Steering Committee as part of an October 24 to 27 delegation 
visit to Sudan.  The committee emphasized the importance of 
humanitarian neutrality and described the crippling effect of 
insecurity on relief efforts in Darfur.  End summary. 
 
--------------------- 
HUMANITARIAN OVERVIEW 
--------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) USAID Acting Administrator Alonzo Fulgham opened the 
meeting by thanking the NGO Steering Committee for the efforts NGOs 
had made in Sudan, particularly since the early March expulsions. 
Acknowledging that the expulsions immediately created large gaps in 
services, NGO representatives noted that the work of the UN and the 
NGOs had temporarily addressed these gaps and averted an acute 
humanitarian crisis.   However, the Steering Committee noted that 
the lack of an effective monitoring system made determination of 
remaining and emerging needs difficult.  Although the Government of 
Sudan (GOS) and the UN developed a monitoring mechanism during the 
April joint assessment in Darfur, NGOs said that no real indication 
of an effective monitoring mechanism existed at the field level.  In 
addition, gaps in protection, child health, and other critical 
sectors remained largely unmeasured. 
 
------------------- 
SECURITY AND ACCESS 
------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) NGO representatives added that although the recent public 
statements indicated an improving Darfur security situation, 
security continued to worsen rather than improve for NGO workers. 
The number of security incidents may have decreased, but this 
decrease was likely in direct proportion to the lessened NGO 
presence in Darfur post-March 4. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) NGOs voiced significant concerns regarding the recent 
trend of international staff kidnappings.  The October abduction of 
an International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) staff member was 
the sixth such kidnapping of international staff in Darfur since 
March 4 and occurred only four days following the release of two 
Irish NGO (GOAL) staff members held since July.  In addition, at 
least 15 threats or near misses have occurred during that time 
period. The kidnapping threat compounds ongoing security concerns 
regarding carjackings and NGO compound raids.  NGOs noted that 
rumors have circulated regarding payment of ransoms during 
kidnappings.  They said such rumors fuel new abductions.  Impunity 
for attacks against humanitarian workers remains a key concern for 
NGOs, as the assailants remain at large or are released shortly 
after arrest. 
 
¶5. (SBU) As a result of the prevailing insecurity, NGO field 
presence in Darfur is steadily eroding.  Lessened field presence 
outside state capitals affects NGOs' ability to remain impartial in 
provision of assistance to all types of beneficiaries in need, 
particularly limiting assistance to nomadic populations, host 
communities, and conflict-affected individuals in rural areas.  In 
addition, NGOs noted that IDPs remain distrustful of the operations 
of the United Nations-African Union Mission in Darfur (UNAMID). 
IDPs frequently cite the inability of UNAMID to protect its own 
staff and compounds as an example that UNAMID cannot effectively 
protect NGOs and IDPs. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Steering Committee members also raised concerns regarding 
the hostile media environment for NGOs, particularly since March 4. 
NGOs noted recent positive statements regarding the humanitarian 
community made privately by government officials to NGOs without 
corresponding public statements in the media.  Positive media 
messages are necessary to combat negative press, to which the 
general public and individuals not benefiting from NGO programs are 
susceptible.  NGOs have taken steps to distribute human interest 
stories and other positive information to quietly provide 
alternatives to negative media coverage. However, Steering Committee 
members noted reluctance among some NGOs to be in the media 
spotlight, even as the subject of positive human interest stories, 
given the lingering fear of expulsion. 
 
------- 
RETURNS 
 
KHARTOUM 00001216  002 OF 003 
 
 
------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) The Steering Committee noted that, while always a GOS 
priority, IDP returns had become an increasingly significant topic 
of discussion since June and July 2009.  The GOS stated that 900,000 
IDPs have returned to date; however, humanitarian agencies have not 
observed a concomitant reduction in the number of IDPs in camps or 
those receiving food rations.  While Sudanese media coverage 
indicates that international NGOs do not support returns, NGOs 
expressed support for returns that fulfill universal humanitarian 
principles, including: identification of the voluntary nature of the 
returns; sufficient security in areas of return; and absence of pull 
factors enticing IDPs to return to unsafe areas. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Acting Administrator Fulgham requested that NGO 
representatives enumerate the incentives for IDP return to areas of 
origin, given the level of assistance in camps.  NGOs stated that 
some IDPs would prefer to return to farming livelihoods, should 
security permit, while others may never return to areas of origin. 
Committee members described the migration pattern of IDPs to Darfur 
towns as a form of compressed and violent urbanization, noting that 
conflict, desertification, and lack of livelihoods have all 
contributed to population movement in Darfur.  Some IDPs may 
permanently settle in or near urban areas, others may practice 
seasonal cultivation, and some of these may split families between 
camps and urban/camp settings to maximize livelihoods opportunities. 
 In the Committee's view, the GOS, donors, and humanitarian agencies 
cannot expect that returns in Darfur will simply mean that all camp 
dwellers will return to villages of origin or to GOS-supported model 
villages.  When asked whether the GOS would accept some urbanization 
of IDPs rather than strict return to villages, NGOs expressed 
uncertainty. 
 
------------ 
SUDANIZATION 
------------ 
 
¶9. (SBU) Under the Voluntary Act of 2006, international NGOs were 
mandated to partner with national NGOs.  International NGOs have 
been working in coordination with line ministries, some national 
NGOs, and some community-based organizations (CBOs); however, the 
GOS has recently pressed international NGOs to work only with NGOs 
registered with the GOS.  This step has added an additional layer to 
an already cumbersome technical agreement (TA) approval process, and 
limits the types of organizations with which international NGOs can 
partner, particularly affecting partnerships with faith-based 
organizations. 
 
¶10.  (SBU) The Steering Committee emphasized that international NGOs 
are already working to build local capacity in appropriate ways, 
through coordinating programs with GOS line ministries and 
community-based organizations (CBOs).  In addition, Sudanese staff 
members comprise approximately 75 percent of international NGO 
staff.  Committee members stated that NGOs are not against 
Sudanization, but that a clear mechanism must be developed for 
determining which of the approximately 3,300 national NGOs are truly 
working according to humanitarian principles and with the necessary 
standards mandated by donors.  The Steering Committee also noted 
that IDPs have not generally accepted national NGOs in camps since 
the expulsions. 
Representatives noted that full support for only GOS-registered NGOs 
would compromise neutrality in an already politicized aid operation. 
 At the same time, some CBOs that are not recognized by the GOS are 
keen to support elections-related initiatives in Darfur but lack 
access to adequate donor resources. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
BUREAUCRATIC IMPEDIMENTS AND ASSET DISPOSITION 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶11. (SBU) Turning to discussions of the bureaucratic impediments 
impeding NGO operations, the NGO Steering Committee expressed 
concern regarding the upcoming December 31 expiration of the 
Moratorium on Restrictions, which facilitates NGO work in Darfur. 
NGOs opined that the Moratorium should be extended and expanded 
beyond Darfur to the rest of Sudan, as humanitarian agencies face 
challenges obtaining visas and travel permits for work in the Three 
Areas and Eastern Sudan as well.  However, committee members noted 
that the proposed introduction of northern entry and exit procedures 
in Southern Sudan would result in reduced humanitarian access. 
 
¶12. (SBU) According to the Steering Committee, the Ministerial 
 
KHARTOUM 00001216  003 OF 003 
 
 
Decrees issued in connection with  U.S. Special Envoy to Sudan (SE) 
General Scott Gration's  agreement with the GOS have had  little 
effect on facilitating travel to field locations, as travel 
notifications perform a similar function to the previously required 
travel permit.  NGOs typically must submit travel notifications up 
to three days in advance of planned visits. 
 
¶13. (SBU) The Mercy Corps/Scotland (MC/Scotland) representative 
highlighted that the affiliate NGO has not received any assets of 
the expelled organization Mercy Corps/US, despite the agreement with 
SE Gration and promises by the GNU that assets would be released. 
This situation is hindering the start-up of the USAID-funded BRIDGE 
program in the Three Areas.  While the GOS has signed all but one 
MC/Scotland TA, rehiring of national staff is proceeding slowly, as 
the organization must undergo the same laborious recruiting 
procedures as all new NGOs.  The Steering Committee noted 
inconsistencies regarding disposition of expelled NGO assets to 
affiliate NGOs.  Affiliate NGO CARE International Switzerland (CIS) 
has obtained some CARE/US assets from the GOS; however, CIS staff 
may not use the former CARE/US vehicles, as they lack license plates 
registered under the CIS name. 
 
¶14. (SBU) Summarizing continuing bureaucratic challenges, the NGO 
Steering Committee stated that the GOS has not faithfully 
implemented the agreement reached with SE Gration and subsequent 
ministerial decrees.  Noting the history of GOS non-compliance with 
previous agreements, committee members emphasized the importance of 
active engagement with the GOS on these issues.  Committee members 
expressed concern that no public follow-up or monitoring mechanism 
is in place to ensure that the GOS is abiding by its commitments 
under the SE Gration-GOS agreement, including regarding assets, 
visas, and travel.  (Note: USAID/OFDA continues to monitor 
implementation of SE's agreements with the GNU through the 
"stoplight" tracker, issued monthly.  NGOs are working on 
bureaucratic impediments through the Tripartite Joint Technical 
Committee but this of course does not specifically track the 
agreements of the GOS and SE Gration. End Note) 
 
¶15. (U) The USAID delegation cleared this cable prior to departure. 
 
WHITEHEAD