05AMMAN7661
WELCOME CODEL HARMAN
Mon Sep 26 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Amman
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 007661 
 
SIPDIS 
 
ATTN H AND RM/F/DFS/FO/AA/CAA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OREP OTRA AMGT ASEC IZ JO
SUBJECT: WELCOME CODEL HARMAN 
 
REF: STATE 175247 
 
¶1.  Embassy Amman warmly welcomes the visit of Representative 
Jane Harman, Member of the House Permanent Select Committee 
on Intelligence (HPSCI), and her delegation to Amman, Jordan 
from September 29-30, 2005, as requested reftel. 
 
¶2.  Control officer for this visit will be Regional Affairs 
Officer Brian Watenpaugh, office 962-6-590-6589; mobile 
962-79-580-0337; fax 962-6-592-7653, or email at 
WatenpaughBE@state.gov.  Embassy will provide airport 
expediter services and transportation to and from the hotel 
as required. 
 
¶3.  Valid visas are required for entry into Jordan.  Visas 
may be obtained at the Queen Alia Airport.  However, Embassy 
suggests visitors obtain their visas prior to arrival, as 
there can be long lines for visa issuance at the airport. 
Money can be exchanged at the Queen Alia Airport. 
 
¶4.  Hotel reservations have been made at the Four Seasons 
Hotel (tel 962-6-550-5555 or fax 962-6-550-5556) for the 
night requested at a rate within per diem, with breakfast 
included.   Due to security concerns in Jordan (para 6) 
visitors and TDY personnel are assigned hotels on a 
rotational basis.  Therefore, Embassy Amman will make the 
final decision on hotel accommodations for all visitors. 
 
¶5.  Each visitor, regardless of length of stay, must have 
fiscal data to pay for direct costs of the visit.  Each 
agency, organization, or visiting delegation will be charged 
for the actual costs attributed to the visit.  Direct charge 
costs include, but are not limited to:  American and LES 
overtime (for such services as airport expediting, cashier 
accommodation exchange, control room staffing, 
representational event support), travel and per diem costs 
incurred by post personnel in support of visitors' field 
travel, rental of vehicles and other equipment, long distance 
telephone calls, office supplies, gasoline and other vehicle 
maintenance costs, departure tax, and other airport fees. 
 
¶6.  Threat assessment: 
 
Since late 1999, there has been a series of serious, 
confirmed terrorist threats and disrupted terrorist plots 
targeting U.S. interests in Jordan.  Transnational terrorist 
groups, as well as less sophisticated local elements, have 
demonstrated the capability to pose threats here. 
Anti-western sentiment, though less pronounced since the end 
of Operation Iraqi Freedom, has been sparked on occasion by 
regional events, particularly those related to the 
Israeli-Palestinian conflict and, to a lesser extent, Iraq. 
 
In May 2004, two men were arrested for plotting to 
assassinate diplomats in Amman, including an American Embassy 
employee.  In April 2004, Jordanian authorities disrupted a 
plan to attack the American Embassy and Jordanian government 
buildings with explosive-laden vehicles. 
 
In September 2003, 13 were arrested for plotting attacks 
against U.S. and Jordanian targets, including the American 
Embassy in Amman. In May 2003, three persons connected to the 
Zarqawi network were arrested for planning attacks against 
foreigners and tourist sites.  The October 28, 2002 
assassination of a U.S. diplomat in Amman outside his 
residence was ultimately linked to the Zarqawi network. 
Jordanian authorities arrested the assassins in December 
¶2002.  The most recently published U.S. government security 
alerts state that extremist groups continue to plan terrorist 
attacks against U.S. interests worldwide. 
 
Crime is generally not a serious problem for travelers in 
Jordan, although petty theft is common in the downtown Amman 
Hashimiyah Square area and near the Roman amphitheater.  In 
the narrow streets of the old city and at some of the more 
popular tourist sites, crowded conditions invite pickpockets 
and other petty criminals.  We urge travelers to be more 
guarded in these areas so that they do not present easy 
opportunities to criminals.  Purse snatchings in central and 
western Amman are reportedly on the increase.  In several 
cases, thieves in moving vehicles snatched pedestrians, 
purses and drove off.  In some instances, victims were 
injured when they were unable to free themselves from their 
purses. When carrying a purse, it would be wise to conceal it 
if possible, to avoid walking near the road within reach of 
passing vehicles, and to walk towards the flow of traffic. 
 
¶7. Travel guidelines: 
 
American citizens traveling in Jordan should exercise 
caution, be alert and stay informed of regional and local 
events that could quickly impact the security environment in 
the country.  Travelers should avoid large crowds and 
demonstrations and take measures to avoid areas where they 
are most likely to occur (city centers, universities, refugee 
camps), particularly during periods of increased tension.  It 
is also recommended to maintain a low profile and not 
establish predictable patterns of movement, even if only 
visiting for a short period. Recent worldwide USG security 
announcements continue to alert American travelers that 
terrorists do not distinguish between official and civilian 
targets.  Therefore, facilities where Americans or foreigners 
are likely to congregate such as hotels, nightspots, 
restaurants, and places of worship should be considered as 
potential targets.  Travelers should stay alert when 
attendance at such locations is necessary.  Taxis are the 
only form of public transportation that is recommended. 
 
As Jordan is a predominantly Muslim country, cultural 
sensitivities should be observed.  Female travelers should 
dress conservatively and not travel alone, particularly in 
areas where western visitors are uncommon. Western visitors 
and residents have reported incidents of sexual harassment, 
assault and unwelcome advances of a sexual nature.  Such 
incidents, while troubling, are not common. 
 
¶8.  For further information, see the State Department's 
Consular Information Sheet for Jordan at 
http://travel.state.gov/jordan.html and link from that site 
to the most recent Public Announcement on Travel in the 
Middle East and South Asia and the most recent Worldwide 
Caution. 
HALE