07USUNNEWYORK495
SECURITY COUNCIL STATEMENTS ON LEBANON
Tue Jun 19 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO8864
PP RUEHBC RUEHBZ RUEHDE RUEHKUK RUEHROV
DE RUCNDT #0495/01 1700038
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 190038Z JUN 07
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2094
INFO RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 USUN NEW YORK 000495 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL UNSC IS SY LE
SUBJECT: SECURITY COUNCIL STATEMENTS ON LEBANON 
 
¶1. (U)  During the past week, the Security Council has issued 
three statements on the situation on Lebanon.  The Council 
issued a press statement June 18 condemning the rocket attack 
from Lebanon into Israel; a Presidential Statement (PRST) 
June 13 condemning the assassination of Lebanese 
parliamentarian Walid Eido; and a PRST June 11 following UN 
envoy Roed-Larsen's latest report on implementation of UNSCR 
1559, including attention to the issues of militias and arms 
smugglimg.  (Text of the statements begins in para 3 below.) 
 
¶2. (SBU) In the next two weeks the Security Council expects 
to receive reports from the UN Secretariat on the Lebanon 
Border Assessment Team mission, which recently visited 
Lebanon to review the issue of arms smuggling, and a periodic 
report on implementation of UNSCR 1701, which is also 
expected to address the question of Sheba'a Farms.  The form 
of a Council reaction to these scheduled reports is not yet 
determined.  Since the May 30 vote on UNSCR 1757 (which 
provided for the establishment of the Special Tribunal to 
investigate the assassination of former Lebanese Prime 
Minister Rafiq Hariri), several delegations that abstained on 
that measure -- including Russia, South Africa, Qatar, and 
Indonesia -- have displayed increasing reluctance to support 
Council action in favor of the Siniora government.  They also 
allege that the Council affords disproportionate attention to 
Lebanese issues when compared with Council action on other 
Middle East crises. 
 
¶3.  (U)  BEGIN TEXT: PRESS STATEMENT 18 June 2007 
 
The members of the Security Council strongly condemned the 
rocket attack launched against Israel from Southern Lebanon 
on 17 June 2007, which constitutes a serious breach of the 
cessation of hostilities and a flagrant violation of 
Resolution 1701 (2006). 
 
The members of the Security Council noted the condemnation of 
this attack by the Government of Lebanon and commended the 
determination and commitment of the Government of Lebanon to 
bring to justice the perpetrators of this attack. 
 
The members of the Security Council reaffirmed their full 
support to the Lebanese Government and army in their efforts 
to ensure security and stability throughout Lebanon. They 
reiterated their call upon all parties concerned to respect 
the Blue Line in its entirety and to exercise utmost 
restraint, and underlined the need for full implementation of 
SCR 1701 (2006), including through the full support to UNIFIL 
in carrying out its mandate. 
 
END TEXT OF PRESS STATEMENT. 
 
¶4. (U)  BEGIN TEXT:  PRST LEBANON 13 JUNE 2007 
 
The Security Council unequivocally condemns the terrorist 
attack in Beirut on 13 June 2007 which killed at least nine 
persons, including Member of Parliament Walid Eido, and 
injured several others. The Security Council expresses its 
deepest sympathy and condolences to the families of the 
victims and to the people and Government of Lebanon. 
 
The Security Council commends the determination and 
commitment of the Government of Lebanon to bring to justice 
the perpetrators, organizers and sponsors of this and other 
assassinations and underlines its determination to support 
the Government of Lebanon in its efforts to this end. 
 
The Security Council condemns any attempt to destabilise 
Lebanon through political assassination or other terrorist 
acts. The Security Council reiterates its full support to the 
ongoing efforts by the Government and people of Lebanon to 
combat terrorism, solidify democracy and institutions through 
national dialogue, and extend the authority of the Lebanese 
government throughout its territory. 
 
The Security Council calls upon all parties in Lebanon and 
the region to show restraint and a sense of responsibility 
with a view to preventing any further deterioration of the 
situation in Lebanon. The Security Council urges all States, 
in accordance with its resolutions 1373 (2001), 1566 (2004) 
and 1624 (2005) to cooperate fully in the fight against 
terrorism. 
 
The Security Council reaffirms its previous calls upon all 
parties concerned to cooperate fully and urgently with the 
Security Council for the full implementation of all relevant 
resolutions concerning the restoration of the territorial 
integrity, full sovereignty and political independence of 
Lebanon. 
 
The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to 
continue to follow closely and report regularly to the 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000495  002 OF 002 
 
 
Council on the situation in Lebanon. 
 
END TEXT OF 13 JUNE PRST. 
 
¶5.  (U)  BEGIN TEXT: 5TH UNSG REPORT ON IMPLEMENTATION OF 
RESOLUTION 1559 
 
The Security Council recalls all its previous resolutions on 
Lebanon, in particular resolutions 1559 (2004), 425 and 426 
(1978), 520 (1982), 1680 (2006), and 1701 (2006), as well as 
the statements of its president on the situation in Lebanon, 
in particular the statements of 18 June 2000, 19 October 
2004, of 4 May 2005, of 23 January 2006, of 30 October 2006, 
of 12 December 2006 and of 17 April 2007. 
 
The Security Council welcomes the fifth semi-annual report to 
the Security Council of 7 May 2007 on the implementation of 
resolution 1559 (2004). 
 
The Security Council reiterates its full support for the 
legitimate and democratically-elected Government of Lebanon, 
calls for full respect for the democratic institutions of the 
country, in conformity with its constitution, and condemns 
any effort to destabilize Lebanon.  The Security Council 
calls upon all Lebanese political parties to show 
responsibility with a view to preventing, through dialogue, 
further deterioration of the situation in Lebanon. 
Recognizing the need to hold free and fair presidential 
elections in conformity with the Lebanese constitution and 
without any foreign interference and influence, the Security 
Council urges political parties in Lebanon to relaunch a 
national dialogue with the aim to reach an agreement to 
settle all political issues. 
 
The Security Council reaffirms its strong support for the 
territorial integrity, sovereignty, unity, and political 
independence of Lebanon within its internationally recognized 
borders and under the sole and exclusive authority of the 
Government of Lebanon. 
 
The Council condemns the ongoing criminal and terrorist acts 
in Lebanon, including those perpetrated by Fatah al-Islam, 
and fully supports the efforts carried out by the Lebanese 
Government and army to ensure security and stability 
throughout Lebanon.  The Council underlines the need to 
protect and give assistance to the civilian population, 
notably the Palestinian refugees. The Council reiterates that 
there should be no weapons in Lebanon without the consent of 
its Government and no authority other than that of its 
Government. 
 
The Security Council notes with appreciation that further 
progress has been made towards the implementation of 
resolution 1559 (2004), in particular through the extension 
of the authority of the Government of Lebanon throughout its 
territory, particularly in the South, but it also notes with 
regret that some provisions of resolution 1559 (2004) have 
yet to be fully implemented, particularly the disbanding and 
disarming of Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias, the strict 
respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity, 
and political independence of Lebanon, and free and fair 
presidential elections conducted according to the Lebanese 
constitutional rules, without any foreign interference and 
influence. 
 
The Security Council reiterates its deep concern at mounting 
information by Israel and other states of illegal movements 
of arms into Lebanon, and in particular across the 
Lebanese-Syrian border, and looks forward to the conclusions 
of the Lebanon Independent Border Assessment Team. It 
reiterates its call for the strict respect for Lebanon's 
sovereignty and territorial integrity, including its air 
space. 
 
The Security Council reiterates its call for the full 
implementation of resolution 1559 (2004) and urges all 
concerned states and parties as mentioned in the report to 
cooperate fully with the Government of Lebanon, the Security 
Council, and the Secretary-General to achieve this goal. 
 
The Security Council reaffirms its support to the 
Secretary-General and his Special Envoy in their efforts and 
 
SIPDIS 
dedication to facilitate and assist in the implementation of 
all provisions of resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1680 (2006) and 
looks forward to the Secretary General's next report on 
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) and to his further 
recommendations on the relevant outstanding issues. 
 
END TEXT OF 11 JUNE PRST. 
WOLFF