08USUNNEWYORK1189
UNGA ADOPTS SECOND COMMITTEE RESOLUTIONS AND TWO
Fri Dec 19 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
USUN New York
VZCZCXYZ0014
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUCNDT #1189/01 3541957
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 191957Z DEC 08
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5555UNCLAS USUN NEW YORK 001189 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR IO/EDA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN ECIN AORC SENV KPAL UNGA LE IS
SUBJECT: UNGA ADOPTS SECOND COMMITTEE RESOLUTIONS AND TWO 
OTHERS 
 
REF: A. USUN 1172 
     ¶B. USUN 1152 
 
¶1. Summary: On December 19, the United Nations General 
Assembly (UNGA) took final action on the remaining draft 
resolutions and decisions adopted by the Second Committee 
(Economic and Finance) -  approving three resolutions by vote 
and adopting 31 resolutions and one decision by consensus. 
The UNGA also adopted two plenary resolutions by consensus. 
The General Assembly voted on fewer Second Committee 
resolutions this year than in past years, in large measure 
because many of this year's resolutions were procedural in 
nature.  This year's Second Committee resolutions are notable 
for the large number of high-level meetings or events they 
call for from 2009-2013.  End Summary. 
 
THREE SECOND COMMITTEE RESOLUTIONS APPROVED BY VOTE 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶2. At its December 19 meeting to take action on all remaining 
Second Committee resolutions, the UNGA took a vote on 
resolution A/63/410, "Permanent sovereignty of the 
Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, 
including East Jerusalem, and of the Arab populations in the 
occupied Syrian Golan over their natural resources," 
submitted under Agenda item 38.  The resolution was adopted 
164-8(U.S.)-5. 
 
¶3. Under Agenda item 49, the UNGA approved the resolution 
contained in A/63/414, section III entitled, "Oil Slick on 
Lebanese Shores," by a vote of 165-7(U.S.)-2. 
 
¶4. The UNGA also approved the resolution submitted under 
Agenda item 51(a) and contained in A/63/416/Add.1, section 
III entitled, "Towards a New International Economic Order," 
by a vote of 123-1(U.S.)-52. 
 
31 SECOND COMMITTEE RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED BY CONSENSUS 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶5. The UNGA adopted the following 31 resolutions, listed by 
Agenda item, by consensus.  The resolutions contained no 
Program Budget Implications (PBIs). 
 
-- Agenda item 46: A/63/411 entitled, "Information and 
communication technologies for development." 
 
--Agenda item 47(a): A/63/412/Add.1, section I entitled, 
"International trade and development," and A/63/412/Add.1, 
section II entitled, "Report of the twelfth session of the 
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development." 
 
--Agenda item 47(b): A/63/412/Add.2 entitled, "International 
financial system and development." 
 
--Agenda item 47(c): A/63/412/Add.3 entitled, "External debt 
and development: towards a durable solution to the debt 
problems of developing countries." 
 
--Agenda item 47(d): A/63/412/Add.4 entitled, "Commodities." 
 
--Agenda item 48: A/63/413(Part II) entitled, "Follow-up 
International Conference on Financing for Development to 
Review the Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus." 
 
--Agenda item 49: A/63/414, section I entitled, 
"International Year of Chemistry," and A/63/414, section II 
entitled, "Reliable and stable transit of energy and its role 
in ensuring sustainable development and international 
cooperation." 
 
--Agenda item 49(a): A/63/414/Add.1 entitled, "Implementation 
of Agenda 21, the Program for the Further Implementation of 
Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable 
Development." 
 
--Agenda item 49(b): A/63/414/Add.2, section I entitled, 
"Follow-up to and implementation of the Mauritius Strategy 
for the Further Implementation of the Program of Action for 
the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing 
States," and A/63/414/Add.2, section II entitled, "Towards 
the sustainable development of the Caribbean Sea for present 
and future generations." 
 
--Agenda item 49(c): A/63/414/Add.3, section I entitled, 
"International cooperation to reduce the impact of the El 
Nino phenomenon," A/63/414/Add.3, section II entitled, 
"International Strategy for Disaster Reduction," and 
A/63/414/Add.3, section III entitled, "Natural disasters and 
vulnerability." 
 
 
--Agenda item 49(e): A/63/414/Add.5 entitled, "Implementation 
of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in 
Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or 
Desertification, Particularly in Africa." 
 
--Agenda item 49(f): A/63/414/Add.6 entitled, "Convention on 
Biological Diversity." 
 
--Agenda item 49(g): A/63/414/Add.7 entitled, "Report of the 
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Program 
on its tenth special session." 
 
--Agenda item 50: A/63/415 entitled, "Implementation of the 
outcome of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements 
(Habitat II) and strengthening of the United Nations Human 
Settlements Program (UN-Habitat)." 
 
--Agenda item 51(a): A/63/416/Add.1, section I entitled, 
"Role of the United Nations in promoting development in the 
context of globalization and interdependence," and 
A/63/416/Add.1, section II entitled, "Development cooperation 
with middle-income countries." 
 
--Agenda item 51(b): A/63/416/Add.2 entitled, "International 
migration and development." 
 
--Agenda item 51(d): A/63/416/Add.4 entitled, "Preventing and 
combating corrupt practices and transfer of assets of illicit 
origin and returning such assets, in particular to the 
countries of origin, consistent with the United Nations 
Convention against Corruption." 
 
--Agenda item 52(a): A/63/417/Add.1 entitled, "Implementation 
of the Brussels Program of Action for the Least Developed 
Countries for the Decade 2001-2010." 
 
--Agenda item 52(b): A/63/417/Add.2 entitled, "Groups of 
countries in specific situations: specific actions related to 
the particular needs and problems of landlocked developing 
countries: outcome of the International Ministerial 
Conference of Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries and 
Donor Countries and International Financial and Development 
Institutions on Transit Transport Cooperation." 
 
--Agenda item 53(a): A/63/418/Add.1, section I entitled, 
"Role of microcredit and microfinance in the eradication of 
poverty," and A/63/418/Add.1, section II entitled, "Second 
United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty 
(2008-2017)." 
 
--Agenda item 53(b): A/63/418/Add.2 entitled, "Industrial 
development cooperation." 
 
--Agenda item 54: A/63/419, section I entitled, "Operational 
activities for development," and A/63/419, section II 
entitled, "High-level United Nations Conference on 
South-South Cooperation." 
 
--Agenda item 110: A/63/420 entitled, "Draft program of work 
of the Second Committee for the sixty-fourth session of the 
General Assembly." 
 
¶6. The UNGA also adopted draft decision A/63/416/Add.5 on, 
"Report of the Secretary-General on the integration of the 
economies in transition into the world economy," under Agenda 
item 51(e). 
 
TWO PLENARY RESOLUTIONS ALSO ADOPTED BY CONSENSUS 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶7. Delegates also approved two plenary-generated resolutions 
by consensus: 
 
--Agenda item 44: A/63/L.29/Rev.1, entitled, "International 
Labor Organization Declaration on Social Justice for a Fair 
Globalization." 
 
--Agenda item 114(s): A/63/L.56 entitled, "Cooperation 
between the United Nations and the Pacific Islands Forum." 
The United States co-sponsored this resolution. 
 
SIX SECOND COMMITTEE RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED EARLIER 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶8. Earlier in its 63rd session, the UNGA adopted the 
following six Second Committee resolutions: 
 
-- Agenda item 48: A/63/413(Part I) and Corr.1, section I 
entitled, "Arrangements and organization of work of the 
Follow-up International Conference on Financing for 
Development to Review the Implementation of the Monterrey 
 
 
Consensus (Doha, 29 November-2 December 2008)," A/63/413(Part 
I) and Corr.1, section II entitled, "Provisional rules of 
procedure for the Follow-up International Conference on 
Financing for Development to Review the Implementation of the 
Monterrey Consensus (Doha, 29 November-2 December 2008), 
A/63/413(Part I) and Corr.1, section III entitled, 
"Provisional Agenda for the Follow-up International 
Conference on Financing for Development to Review the 
Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus (Doha, 29 
November-2 December 2008)," A/63/413(Part I) and Corr.1, 
section IV entitled, "Accreditation of intergovernmental 
organizations to the Follow-up International Conference on 
Financing for Development to Review the Implementation of the 
Monterrey Consensus (Doha, 29 November-2 December 2008)," 
A/63/413(Part I) and Corr.1, section V entitled, 
"Accreditation of non-governmental organizations to the 
Follow-up International Conference on Financing for 
Development to Review the Implementation of the Monterrey 
Consensus (Doha, 29 November-2 December 2008)." 
 
--Agenda item 49(d): A/63/414/Add.4 entitled, "Protection of 
global climate for present and future generations." 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶9.  Whereas six Second Committee resolutions were voted upon 
during last year's sixty-second General Assembly, only three 
were adopted by vote this session.  The reduction is largely 
due to the procedural nature of this year's resolutions - a 
consequence, in part, of the Second Committee's actions being 
taken in parallel with negotiations over the Doha Financing 
for Development Conference Outcome Document.  This year's 
Second Committee resolutions are notable for the large number 
of high-level meetings or events they call for, despite the 
best efforts of the United States and like-minded countries. 
By our estimates, the Second Committee resolutions call for 
approximately 10 such events between 2009-2013 on a range of 
topics.  These would be in addition to the existing UN 
calendar of high-level conferences. 
 
Khalilzad