08USUNNEWYORK697
UN BRIEFS ON UNAMA'S STRUCTURE, EXPANSION, AND
Mon Aug 04 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO2785
OO RUEHPW RUEHTRO
DE RUCNDT #0697/01 2171516
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 041516Z AUG 08
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4747
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHBUL/AMEMBASSY KABUL IMMEDIATE 0241UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 USUN NEW YORK 000697 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV UNSC AF
SUBJECT: UN BRIEFS ON UNAMA'S STRUCTURE, EXPANSION, AND 
BUDGET 
 
¶1. (SBU) ACTION REQUEST AND SUMMARY: On 30 July, the UN 
briefed members of the Joint Coordination and Monitoring 
Board (JCMB) on the United Nations Assistance Mission to 
Afghanistan (UNAMA), specifically with regard to UNAMA's 
budget proposal, UNAMA's expansion, and aid coordination and 
effectiveness.  UNAMA's recently submitted 2009 budget will 
retain its two-pillar structure (headed respectively by a 
DSRSG for Political Affairs and a DSRSG/Resident 
Coordinator/Humanitarian Coordinator).  The UN reported that 
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 
(OCHA) would retain its current position under the 
DSRSG/RC/HC.  OCHA will increase in size to address urgent 
humanitarian issues.  Russia, Iran, India, the UK, Italy, and 
France all expressed support for SRSG Kai Eide, UNAMA, and 
the decision to keep OCHA within UNAMA.  The proposed UNAMA 
budget will be twice the size of the current 86 million USD 
budget, primarily due to a 40 percent increase in staff, 
security costs, and the costs associated with opening up six 
new provincial offices.  Before the end of 2008 UNAMA will 
open two new provincial offices in Tirin Kot (Uruzgan 
province) and Pul-i-Khumri (Baghlan province).  By early 2009 
UNAMA will open two more offices in Sar-i-Pul (Sar-i-Pul 
province) and Ghazni (Ghazni province).  The last two offices 
will open by late 2009 in Lashkar Gah (Helmand province) and 
Farah Center (Farah province). 
 
¶2. (SBU) Summary continued: After the UN's brief, Afghanistan 
PermRep Tanin expressed the government of Afghanistan's high 
regard for SRSG Eide, saying that Eide had "established 
himself as an effective leader" and "energized the offices of 
UNAMA with a revised structure."  Tanin commended Eide on his 
regional efforts and his ability to align with Afghan leaders 
of government, and suggested that things are "moving in the 
right direction."  ACTION REQUEST:  During the meeting, the 
UN asked all JCMB countries to identify geographic locations 
in Afghanistan where we would like the UN Country Team to 
prioritize its efforts.  Additionally, the UN would like to 
know whether we would prefer to fund various aid agencies 
individually or through a central trust fund.  END ACTION 
REQUEST AND SUMMARY. 
 
¶3. (SBU) On 30 July, the UN briefed members of the Joint 
Coordination and Monitoring Board (JCMB) on the United 
Nations Assistance Mission to Afghanistan (UNAMA), 
specifically with regard to UNAMA's budget proposal, UNAMA's 
expansion, and aid coordination and effectiveness.  UNAMA's 
recently submitted 2009 budget will retain its two-pillar 
structure (headed respectively by a DSRSG for Political 
Affairs and a DSRSG/Resident Coordinator/Humanitarian 
Coordinator), said Scott Smith, the UN's team leader on 
Afghanistan.  Under this two-pillar structure, the aid 
coordinator, Mark Ward, will have a senior-level position, 
although it will be under the DSRSG/RC/HC.  Ward will also 
gain a direct reporting line to Eide. 
 
¶4. (SBU) The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian 
Affairs (OCHA) will retain its current position under the 
DSRSG/RC/HC rather than assuming a quasi-independent role 
separate from UNAMA (as OCHA and other NGOs wanted).  OCHA 
will increase in size from 36 personnel (16 international and 
20 national) to 96 personnel (36 international and 60 
national).  The U.S., UK, India, Russia, and Iran all 
commended the decision to keep OCHA under UNAMA. 
 
¶5. (SBU) The proposed 2009 UNAMA budget will be approximately 
twice the size of the current 86 million USD budget, 
primarily due to a 40 percent increase in staff, security 
costs, and the costs associated with opening up six new 
provincial offices.  Smith estimates that the budget will be 
approved by November.  He also reported that the UNAMA job 
vacancy rate is trending down, partially due to the positive 
effect of the recently approved UNAMA special allowance. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Smith said that before the end of 2008 UNAMA will 
open two new provincial offices in Tirin Kot (Uruzgan 
province) and Pul-i-Khumri (Baghlan province).  By early 2009 
UNAMA will open two more offices in Sar-i-Pul (Sar-i-Pul 
province) and Ghazni (Ghazni province).  The last two offices 
will open by late 2009 in Lashkar Gah (Helmand province) and 
Farah Center (Farah province).  Smith acknowledged that it 
will take some time to fill the personnel requirements for 
each of these new offices. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Smith reported that at the July JCMB meeting in 
Kabul, a decision was made to streamline consulted groups by 
developing three standing committees (one for security, one 
for governance/human rights/human law, and one for social and 
economic issues).  Each standing committee will consist of a 
representative from UNAMA and the Afghan government.  These 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000697  002 OF 002 
 
 
three committees will establish ad hoc task forces to address 
specific issues.  UNAMA and the Afghan government are still 
addressing exactly how these standing committees will operate. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Tanin stressed that the framework for the 
implementation and coordination of the Afghanistan National 
Development Strategy (ANDS) must be effective and capable of 
being monitored.  He asked UNAMA to help the Afghan finance 
ministry with the implementation of the ANDS.   Tanin 
expressed the government of Afghanistan's high regard for 
SRSG Kai Eide who he said has "established himself as an 
effective leader" and "energized the offices of UNAMA with a 
revised structure."  Tanin commended Eide on his regional 
efforts and his ability to align with Afghan leaders of 
government, and suggested that things are "moving in the 
right direction."  Tanin also applauded the decision to keep 
OCHA under UNAMA, saying that it is essential that the UN's 
operations in Afghanistan fall under a unified UNAMA. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Russia, Iran, India, the UK, Italy, and France 
expressed their support for SRSG Eide, UNAMA, and the 
decision to keep OCHA within UNAMA.  Iran commended Eide for 
his regional efforts, particularly his recent visit to Iran. 
Iran recommended that each JCMB member country bring a budget 
representative to the next JCMB meeting to help facilitate 
the approval of the 2009 UNAMA budget. 
Wolff