08USUNNEWYORK396
UNAMI AND MNF-I BRIEFING TO THE SECURITY COUNCIL
Fri May 02 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO4371
OO RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK RUEHTRO
DE RUCNDT #0396/01 1232102
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 022102Z MAY 08
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4206
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 USUN NEW YORK 000396 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV UNSC IZ
SUBJECT: UNAMI AND MNF-I BRIEFING TO THE SECURITY COUNCIL 
 
¶1. (U) Summary: As mandated by resolution, the Security 
Council held a debate April 28 to discuss the United Nations 
Assistance Mission to Iraq (UNAMI), as well as the 
Multi-National Force in Iraq (MNF-I).  Undersecretary-General 
for Political Affairs Lynn Pascoe briefed for the UN, and 
painted a largely optimistic picture of the situation in Iraq 
and the UN's role, observing that the "UN,s reputation (in 
Iraq) is growing."  Ambassador Khalilzad briefed on behalf of 
MNF-I, and noted that Iran,s illegal aid to armed groups in 
Iraq poses a serious threat to Iraqi and multinational 
forces.  The UK, France and Iraq made similar statements 
calling on Iraq,s neighbors to cease interfering in its 
internal affairs.  All Council members applauded UNAMI,s 
increased capability, and many members expressed concern 
regarding human rights in Iraq, especially Iraqi and 
Coalition detention centers.  Russia and South Africa noted 
the expectation that the MNF-I mandate will not be renewed, 
and called for clarity regarding future arrangements.  The 
Russian PermRep also criticized the UN's analysis of the 
situation in Iraq as selective.  End summary. 
 
UN, U.S. BRIEF THE COUNCIL 
 
¶2. (U) After visiting Baghdad and attending the third 
expanded ministerial meeting of Iraq and its neighbors on 
April 22, U/SYG Pascoe told the Security Council that 
political and security improvements in Iraq have opened a 
window of opportunity for sustained progress.  He called on 
Iraqi leaders to "maintain that positive momentum and take 
further steps to resolve other fundamental issues that 
continue to divide Iraqis."  Pascoe said the UN is doing its 
part, in keeping with its expanded mandate under UNSCR 1770. 
Its "top priority" is the resolution of disputed internal 
boundaries.  In this regard, it had conducted field visits to 
several disputed areas and is working to build confidence and 
momentum among the parties.  Other key areas for UNAMI are 
election preparations, humanitarian assistance to alleviate 
"the suffering of Iraq,s refugees and internally displaced 
persons," and reporting on human rights.  Pascoe said three 
UNHCR personnel have deployed to Baghdad.  Furthermore, the 
ceiling for UNAMI staff has grown to 140 international staff 
in Baghdad, and 40 international staff in Irbil.  It has also 
re-established its presence in Basrah, and is considering 
expanding its presence to Najaf, Ramadi and Kirkuk.  In order 
to assist the UN in this expansion, Pascoe called on states 
"to provide additional financial and logistical resources for 
the Mission, including funding for the new integrated United 
Nations facility in Baghdad, and additional required security 
arrangements, in particular the provision of additional 
military advisers to UNAMI." 
 
¶3. (U) Ambassador Khalilzad spoke on behalf of MNF-I, and 
agreed with Pascoe that there have been security, political 
and economic gains.  He cautioned that "progress has been 
uneven in certain fronts, and many challenges remain."  MNF-I 
and UNAMI "must work to sustain the momentum achieved." 
Security incidents and related violence has decreased, except 
for a rise during the recent violence in Baghdad and Basrah. 
The Ambassador said this violence "highlighted Iran,s 
destabilizing influence and actions" and noted that Iran,s 
actions pose a "significant threat to Iraqi and multinational 
forces and to the stability and sovereignty of Iraq."  He 
also stated that "These transfers of arms are fundamentally 
inconsistent with the restrictions to such transfers to Iraq 
adopted by this Council under its Chapter VII authority."  An 
hour later, the Iranian Mission circulated a letter to the 
Security Council (e-mailed to the Department) that rejected 
these statements, calling them "unfounded allegations." 
 
COUNCIL MEMBERS, IRAQ REACT 
 
¶4. (U) The majority of member states acknowledged the 
progress being made, raised concern regarding the recent 
violence in Baghdad and Basrah, and thanked UNAMI for its 
efforts.  Most members, including Libya, China, Indonesia, 
Belgium, and France, expressed concern about refugees and 
internally displaced persons, as well as the human rights of 
detainees in detention centers.  Several countries, including 
Libya and Panama, called for the legal rights of detainees to 
be respected "in all detention facilities," a reference to 
MNF-I detention facilities. 
 
¶5. (U) France, the UK and Iraq all implicitly echoed 
Ambassador Khalilzad,s criticism of Iran,s actions in Iraq. 
 Ambassador Ripert of France said, "any direct or indirect 
intervention by a neighboring country in Iraq can only lead 
to greater instability and risks for all."  He also called on 
more countries to open diplomatic missions in Baghdad. 
Ambassador Pierce of the UK added "any external links to 
armed groups in Iraq outside the political process, either 
through the supply of weapons, training or funding, are 
unacceptable."  Iraqi Ambassador Bayati echoed the Prime 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000396  002 OF 002 
 
 
Minister's call on neighboring countries to prevent terrorist 
infilitation into Iraq and to block funding for terrorist 
groups. 
 
¶6. (U) Russian PermRep Churkin gave a noticeably negative 
intervention, asserting that the recent UNAMI report 
"objectively reflects the situation in Iraq, although at the 
same time, despite its minute attention to facts, there is an 
obvious attempt to tone down or side-step the most acute 
problems in present day Iraq."  He also asked why the UNAMI 
report no longer addressed the issue of security contractors 
in Iraq.  Churkin expressed Russia,s gratitude for UNAMI,s 
humanitarian and electoral work, but urged great caution with 
regard to disputed internal boundaries, especially Kirkuk. 
Churkin, along with South African PermRep Kumalo, noted that 
the MNF-I mandate will expire at the end of the year, and 
asked for greater clarity on future plans.  He said many 
Iraqis consider MNF-I to be "occupying troops" and warned 
that replacing the MNF-I mandate with a bilateral agreement - 
in other words, a "mere change of signs" - would not meet 
with Russian approval.  Finally, Churkin and Kumalo reminded 
the UN that they expected a briefing regarding the 
Development Fund for Iraq, which Churkin called a "closed and 
opaque structure." 
 
¶7. (U) Iraqi Ambassador Bayati gave a comprehensive report on 
the situation in Iraq.  He noted the ratification of the 
Justice and Accountability Law, the General Amnesty Law, and 
the UN Convention against Corruption.  Regarding the recent 
military operations in Baghdad and Basra, Bayati said "it is 
a message to all outlaws that they can no longer be above the 
law - the message reflects the justice and neutrality of the 
Iraqi Government and its non-sectarian orientation in 
punishing all outlaws and sustaining those who abide by State 
law."  On the diplomatic front, Bayati said Iraq was looking 
forward to the International Compact meeting in Stockholm at 
the end of May, and urged all countries to reopen their 
embassies in Iraq. 
Khalilzad