08USUNNEWYORK222
LEBANON: COUNCIL DIVISIONS HARDEN ON UNSCR 1701
Tue Mar 11 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO1725
OO RUEHAG RUEHAST RUEHDA RUEHDF RUEHFL RUEHIK RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHLN
RUEHLZ RUEHPOD RUEHROV RUEHSR RUEHTRO RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUCNDT #0222/01 0711518
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 111518Z MAR 08
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3881
INFO RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 USUN NEW YORK 000222 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PTER KPKO UNSC SY IS LE
SUBJECT: LEBANON: COUNCIL DIVISIONS HARDEN ON UNSCR 1701 
IMPLEMENTATION AMIDST LEBANESE POLITICAL CRISIS 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary.  During closed UNSC consultations on March 
10, senior UN Secretariat officials reported that the 
continuing Lebanese political crisis had blocked meaningful 
progress on UNSCR 1701 implementation.  They praised 
continued UNIFIL-LAF cooperation; noted the significant 
increase in Israeli overflights which they said violated 
UNSCR 1701 and undermined the GOL, LAF and UNIFIL; and 
reported that recent Israeli information on cluster bombs in 
south Lebanon is of "very limited value" and does not/not 
satisfy the SYG's request for detailed strike data.  Although 
UNIFIL General Graziano did not brief member states, he did 
respond to questions.  He praised the LAF, although he noted 
its need for assistance; lauded the tripartite mechanism 
between the UN, LAF, and IDF; and expressed hope that Israel 
would soon accept UNIFIL's new plan to facilitate IDF 
withdrawal from the northern part of the village of Ghajar 
(which is north of the Blue Line and in Lebanese territory). 
In his intervention, Amb Khalilzad expressed concern about 
Syrian obstruction of the Lebanese presidential election and 
decried continuing political assassinations.  He expressed 
deep concern about illegal arms transfers from Syria into 
Lebanon, called on Hizballah to disarm, and for border 
delineation between the two countries.  He also welcomed a 
follow-on mission by LIBAT and criticized Hizballah for its 
failure to provide any information about the abducted Israeli 
soldiers. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Summary cont'd.  Although all other delegations 
called for an early resolution to Lebanon's political crisis, 
Russia criticized the U.S. naval deployment near Lebanon as a 
"negative" example of foreign interference in Lebanese 
affairs.  Despite Israeli charges of UNIFIL negligence in the 
face of Hizballah re-armament in south Lebanon, nearly all 
delegations voiced general support for UNIFIL, and several 
member states expressed satisfaction with the situation in 
south Lebanon.  The issue of reported illegal arms transfers 
from Syria to Lebanon generated the most controversy during 
the consultations.  Although European delegations expressed 
concern about violations of the arms embargo, Libya, South 
Africa, and Russia attacked the veracity of Israel's 
allegations and directly or indirectly criticized the 
Secretariat for including them in the SYG's report.  Several 
 
SIPDIS 
delegations, including Russia, did support a follow-on visit 
by LIBAT.  Most delegations explicitly called on Israel to 
cease its overflights of Lebanon and criticized Hizballah for 
its failure to provide proof of life or release the abducted 
Israeli soldiers.  Many delegations called on Israel to 
withdraw from Ghajar and to provide the SYG with the required 
information on cluster bombs immediately.  Discussion of the 
Sheba'a Farms was muted, with European delegations calling 
for greater progress on the issue, and South Africa and Libya 
repeating old arguments about Israeli occupation of the area. 
On next steps, DPA Under Secretary-General Pascoe said the UN 
is waiting to hear the reaction of the GOL and GOI to the 
UN's provisional geographical definition.  End Summary. 
 
¶3. (SBU) COMMENT AND ACTION REQUEST:  After assessing the 
consultations, the French delegation shared with USUN and the 
UK Mission a draft of a Presidential Statement (PRST) on 
UNSCR 1701, to be issued as soon as possible.  (Note: 
E-mailed to IO/UNP, NEA/ELA, and L.  End Note.)  Based on the 
conflicting views of the situation presented during the 
consultations, the French proposed that the PRST be as short 
as possible, and reaffirm the importance of full 
implementation of UNSCR 1701 and Council support for UNIFIL. 
The French did not/not address the specific issues of UNSCR 
1701 -- illegal arms transfers, disarmament, overflights, 
cluster bombs, Sheba'a -- expecting that Council delegations 
would deadlock over how to characterize these issues.  USUN 
shares the French assessment that we are highly unlikely to 
reach agreement on a comprehensive PRST, and recommends 
favorable consideration of the French draft. 
 
Secretariat Laments Lebanese Political Crisis 
 
SIPDIS 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Briefing the Council at the start of consultations, 
DPA U/SYG Pascoe and DPKO A/SYG Mulet reported that the 
continuing Lebanese political crisis had blocked meaningful 
progress on UNSCR 1701 implementation.  (Note: Transcripts of 
their remarks were e-mailed to IO, NEA, and L. End Note.) 
Although they said the prevailing calm in south Lebanon was a 
"major success," especially in light of the increased burden 
on the LAF across the country, they warned that this 
"relative calm" is still threatened by hostile elements. 
Despite bellicose rhetoric from Hizballah, Pascoe expressed 
hope that recent statements by the group that it does not 
want war with Israel are sincere, but said actions on the 
ground must match words.  Turning to UNIFIL issues, Mulet 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000222  002 OF 004 
 
 
said UNIFIL and the LAF have established at least two 
co-located checkpoints along the Litani river, and plan soon 
to operate them 24 hours a day.  He decried the 282 Israeli 
overflights in February (compared to 40-50 per month over the 
past year) as violations of UNSCR 1701.  In a view echoed by 
many delegations, Mulet said the overflights undermined the 
authority of the GOL, LAF, and UNIFIL.  While Mulet noted 
that the IDF had recently provided new information on cluster 
bombs in south Lebanon, he said they were of "very limited 
value," and repeated the SYG's request for detailed strike 
data.  On LIBAT, Pascoe said the Secretariat is now 
discussing terms of reference for a follow-on visit with PM 
Siniora, but suggested the team would focus on assessing 
Lebanon,s border management capacity and put forward 
additional ideas to implement LIBAT recommendations. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Although UNIFIL Force Commander General Graziano did 
not brief Council members, he did respond to questions at the 
end of the briefing.  Recalling that UNIFIL's "end state" is 
to strengthen the LAF so it can manage without international 
assistance, he praised the force, suggesting that "no other 
army could have done better in the situation."  He called for 
member state assistance to the LAF, and said he would report 
his assessment of specific LAF needs to UNSC Ambassadors in 
Beirut, noting the force is short of food, fuel, ammunition, 
and training.  On overflights, Graziano recalled that 
although he always tells the IDF that overflights are 
violations of UNSCR 1701 and cannot be justified by 
reconnaissance needs -- especially the recent overflights by 
fighter planes -- the IDF always insists that it will 
continue its overflights until the two abducted soldiers are 
released and its security needs are addressed.  Graziano 
praised the tripartite mechanism, noting that the three sides 
meet monthly and seem to treat the meetings with importance, 
and that the exchanges appear to have increased mutual trust. 
 But he lamented lack of progress on Ghajar, noting that it 
is a "very sensitive" issue and that Israel's continued 
occupation of the northern part of the village is a violation 
of UNSCR 1701.  Graziano said UNIFIL had developed a new 
proposal to resolve the issue, in which the IDF would 
withdraw and UNIFIL would police the town, and the LAF would 
not enter it until the three sides had agreed on the 
necessary details.  He said the GOL had accepted the new 
UNIFIL plan and expressed hope that Israel would soon do the 
same. 
 
U.S. Highlights Arms Transfers and Disarmament 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶6. (SBU) Amb Khalilzad expressed concern that Syria and its 
allies were using preconditions to block presidential 
elections in Lebanon, and noted that until a new president 
takes office, the U.S. fully supports the legitimate and 
democratically-elected GOL.  He decried the continuing 
targeted attacks in Lebanon over the past three months, 
including the attack against the Embassy Beirut vehicle. 
Turning to UNSCR 1701 implementation, Amb Khalilzad 
reiterated deep concern about illegal arms transfers across 
the Syrian-Lebanese border, recalled Hizballah's statements 
that it has re-armed, and underscored the need for the 
disarmament of all militia in Lebanon.  He called on Syria 
and Iran to respect the arms embargo in UNSCR 1701. 
Expressing concern about PFLP-GC and Fatah al-Intifada 
positions along the Syrian-Lebanese border, Amb Khalilzad 
called for full border delineation between the two countries. 
 He welcomed the SYG's proposal to send the LIBAT team back 
to Lebanon, commended UNIFIL for its efforts to carry out its 
mandate, and called for greater international support to the 
LAF.  Amb Khalilzad also urged greater trilateral efforts on 
Ghajar, unexploded ordnance in south Lebanon, and the marking 
of the Blue Line.  He decried Hizballah's refusal to provide 
any information about the abducted Israeli soldiers and 
called for their immediate and unconditional release. 
 
Elections: Support for Arab League and GOL 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶7. (SBU) Despite universal calls for an early resolution to 
Lebanon's political crisis, member states offered different 
opinions on the nature of foreign interference in the 
electoral process.  Several delegations, including France, 
the UK, Croatia, Burkina Faso called for immediate elections, 
expressed support for the Arab League plan, and underscored 
their support for the "legitimate" GOL under PM Siniora until 
a new president takes office.  The UK and Croatia criticized 
Syria for obstructing the electoral process and called on the 
Syrian Government to support a consensus Lebanese president. 
Russia, however, argued that Lebanon's political crisis could 
be resolved only by the Lebanese themselves without any 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000222  003 OF 004 
 
 
foreign interference -- and cited the U.S. naval deployment 
off the coast of Lebanon as such an example of a 
counter-productive "demonstration of force."  Citing the 
"negative reaction" by all Lebanese parties, including PM 
Siniora, to the U.S. deployment in "Lebanese territorial 
waters," Russian PR Churkin said the deployment recalls 
difficult historical memories.  South Africa said it would be 
"imprudent" for any international parties to interfere in 
internal Lebanese politics. 
 
South Lebanon: Satisfaction with UNIFIL 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) Despite Israeli charges of UNIFIL negligence in the 
face of Hizballah re-armament in south Lebanon, including an 
informal briefing by visiting Israeli officials to Council 
members on March 5, nearly all delegations voiced general 
support for UNIFIL, and several member states expressed 
satisfaction with the situation in south Lebanon.  France and 
Croatia said they were pleased with the "new strategic 
reality" created by UNIFIL in south Lebanon, and praised 
LAF-UNIFIL cooperation and joint patrols.  But they 
criticized recent Hizballah statements, especially those 
threatening open war against Israel after the assassination 
of Imad Mugniyeh, and argued that the UNSC had an obigation 
to respond.  Although Italy acknowledged that attacks against 
UNIFIL mean there are still unauthorized armed elements in 
the AOR, it welcomed comments in the SYG's report that UNIFIL 
has found no evidence of new arms or military infrastructure 
(introduced after the August 2006 war) in south Lebanon.  In 
light of Israeli allegations and hostile statements by 
Hizballah, Italy called for increased international support 
for UNIFIL.  Libya expressed regret that the SYG's report had 
tried to "blame Lebanon" for the launching of two rockets 
against Israel on January 8, 2008, despite a joint LAF-UNIFIL 
investigation that showed the "Israeli claims were false." 
Libya also argued that IDF allegations about Hizballah 
training had not been confirmed. 
 
Arms Transfers: Source of Major Disagreements 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) The issue of reported illegal arms transfers from 
Syria to Lebanon generated the most controversy during the 
consultations.  While France called for respect for the arms 
embargo in UNSCR 1701, after expressing concern about 
Hizballah statements that it has re-armed, the UK and Croatia 
went further in criticizing Syria for complicity in these 
transfers.  Croatia argued that while the GOL should increase 
its capacity to control its border, this does not diminish 
Syria's responsibility.  China said arms transfers merit the 
UNSC's attention and took note of the various letters sent to 
the Council and the SYG (from Israel, Lebanon, and Syria) in 
this regard.  Libya, South Africa, and Russia attacked the 
veracity of Israel's allegations and directly or indirectly 
criticized the Secretariat for including them in the SYG's 
report.  Describing any arms "smuggling" as simply "criminal" 
in nature, Libya said the SYG should treat them the same way 
as inadvertent crossings of the Blue Line by shepherds.  It 
added that neither the GOL nor LIBAT had confirmed any 
reports of arms smuggling.  South Africa argued that the 
reports of illegal arms transfers should have accompanied by 
evidence, and criticized the SYG for presenting "mere 
allegations" that are detrimental to peace and security in 
the region.  The South African PermRep further asserted that 
Israel raises these allegations, which are then investigated 
by the UN and "found to be false."  Russia, although it said 
it was interested in any information on arms smuggling, 
emphasized that the UNSC should work only the basis of 
"confirmed data." 
 
LIBAT: Support for a Return Trip 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) Several delegations either took note of or 
expressed support for the SYG's intention to send a follow-on 
LIBAT mission to Lebanon.  In this regard, France said it was 
waiting for "gestures from Syria" to fulfill its LIBAT 
requirements.  Italy and the UK welcomed the good work by the 
GOL in implementing its LIBAT recommendations and welcomed a 
follow-on mission.  Indonesia took note of the SYG's 
intention to dispatch a new team.  Russia, which argued that 
effective border management should be carried out by Lebanon 
but that Syria could contribute as well, said it awaits more 
information on the border from the new LIBAT team.  Indonesia 
said it took note of the Secretary-General's views on the 
matter. 
 
Overflights: Familiar Criticism 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000222  004 OF 004 
 
 
------------------------------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) Nearly all delegations explicitly called on Israel 
to cease its overflights of Lebanon, which they said were 
undermining UNIFIL's role, and which they characterized as 
violations of both Lebanese sovereignty and UNSCR 1701.  The 
European delegations gave Israel the gentlest treatment, with 
 the UK,  Croatia, and Italy making only passing references 
to overflights. France, recalling that the goal is to 
strengthen the GOL's control of its territory, expressed 
concern that the overflights undermined the GOL.  Belgium 
called first for their reduction and then their elimination. 
Libya criticized the "deliberate, dangerous, and continued 
air violations, on a daily basis, including those targeting 
UNIFIL."  South Africa said violations of UNSCR 1701, 
including both overflights and statements by Hizballah 
threatening war with Israel, undermine trust and 
implementation of the resolution.  Russia, Indonesia, and 
Vietnam condemned the overflights as affronts to UNIFIL and 
UNSCR 1701.  Panama asked the Secretariat whether it had 
discussed alternatives to overflights with Israel; Graziano 
said no. 
 
Ghajar: Calls for Israeli Withdrawal 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶12. (SBU) A majority of delegations addressed the issue of 
Ghajar, and in so doing, called on Israel to withdraw from 
the part of the village in Lebanese territory forthwith. 
Belgium emphasized the need to resolve the issue of Ghajar 
quickly to demonstrate progress in implementing UNSCR 1701. 
Italy suggested that UNIFIL should play an active role in 
resolving the issue, possibly by stationing troops there as 
an interim measure.  Indonesia criticized the "Israeli 
occupation" of Ghajar as a violation of UNSCR 1701.  Russia 
called on Israel to withdraw immediately from the Lebanese 
portion of the village. 
 
Cluster Bombs: IDF Maps Are Inadequate 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶13. (SBU) After DPKO A/SYG Mulet's description of the new 
Israeli information on cluster bombs as constituting "limited 
value," Libya, France, Belgium, South Africa, Vietnam, 
Indonesia, Costa Rica, and Panama expressed concern about the 
lack of progress on this issue, and called on Israel to 
satisfy the SYG's request for detailed strike data. 
 
Soldiers: Calls for Hizballah Action 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶14. (SBU) Most delegations criticized Hizballah's refusal to 
even provide proof of life for the abducted Israeli soldiers 
and called for their immediate release.  Libya supported the 
SYG's comments on the prisoner issue, referring to both the 
Israeli soldiers and Lebanese prisoners detained in Israel. 
The UK, Italy, and Croatia expressed regret about the lack of 
progress on the prisoner issue and called on Hizballah to 
take action.  Vietnam, on the other hand, expressed concern 
about the fate of Lebanese prisoners in Israel. 
 
Sheba'a Farms: Muted Support for 7-Pt. Plan 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶15. (SBU) The issue of the Sheba'a Farms did not receive as 
much attention during the consultations as it has during past 
discussions of UNSCR 1701.  France reiterated its support for 
the SYG's call to find a solution to the issue, and welcomed 
Syrian willingness to begin delineating its northern border 
with Lebanon.  French PR Ripert also called on all parties to 
work with the SYG on the basis of the GOL's seven-point plan. 
 Libya argued that delineation of borders can be accomplished 
only by bilateral agreement between Syria and Lebanon after 
an end to Israeli occupation.  Belgium said the UNSC should 
support the SYG in moving forward with the seven-point plan 
while focusing on disarmament as well.  South Africa repeated 
its position that the Sheba'a Farms is occupied territory 
from which Israel should withdraw immediately.  In response 
to a question from Panama on the status of the issue, DPA 
U/SYG Pascoe said the UN is awaiting a formal response from 
the GOL and the GOI on the UN's provisional geographic 
definition. 
KHALILZAD