09USUNNEWYORK738
SECURITY COUNCIL UNANIMOUSLY RENEWS UNAMID MANDATE
Fri Jul 31 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO1700
PP RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUCNDT #0738/01 2122304
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 312304Z JUL 09
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7012
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 USUN NEW YORK 000738 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KPKO SU AF
SUBJECT: SECURITY COUNCIL UNANIMOUSLY RENEWS UNAMID MANDATE 
 
REF: SECSTATE 79326 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: The Security Council on July 30 unanimously 
adopted Resolution 1881 to extend the mandate of the hybrid 
United Nations/African Union Mission in Darfur (UNAMID) until 
July 31, 2010.  Unanimity on the UK-drafted text was achieved 
after intensive negotiations to arrive at a compromise, 
wherein the UK agreed to drop language referring to the 
Government of Sudan,s March 4 expulsion of non-governmental 
organizations in exchange for Libya agreeing to withdraw its 
proposed amendment referencing the International Criminal 
Court (ICC) indictment of Sudanese President Bashir.  There 
were no explanations of vote, nor did Sudan make a statement, 
and the tone of the adoption was low-key.  The text of 
Resolution 1881 follows in paragraph 4.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) On July 30, the Security Council unanimously adopted 
UNSCR 1881, extending UNAMID's mandate until July 31, 2010. 
No country made an Explanation of Vote (EOV), and the 
Government of Sudan did not make a statement.  The most 
contentious issue during negotiations was Libya,s proposed 
amendment referencing the African Union,s (AU) call for 
Article 16 deferral of the ICC indictment against Bashir and 
the recent AU decision of July 1-3 2009 calling for AU member 
states to refrain from cooperating with the ICC on the arrest 
warrant against Bashir. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The United States maintained a firm position that 
no reference to the ICC indictment in the UNAMID mandate 
would be acceptable, noting that the U.S. abstained from the 
UNAMID mandate renewal in July 2008 due to the inclusion of 
such language.  After the US, France and the UK sent 
demarches to Council members, in the third round of expert 
negotiations, it became clear to the Libyan delegation that 
there was insufficient support for its proposed amendment. 
The UK brokered a deal in which the UK dropped strong 
language condemning the Government of Sudan,s March 4 
expulsion of NGOs in exchange for Libya agreeing to drop its 
controversial amendment. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Begin text of UNSCR 1881: 
 
United Nations S/RES/1881 (2009) Security Council Distr.: 
General 30 July 2009 
 
Resolution 1881 (2009) Adopted by the Security Council at its 
6175th meeting, on 30 July 2009 
 
The Security Council, 
 
Reaffirming all its previous resolutions and presidential 
statements concerning the situation in Sudan, 
 
Reaffirming its strong commitment to the sovereignty, unity, 
independence and territorial integrity of Sudan and its 
determination to work with the Government of Sudan, in full 
respect of its sovereignty, to assist in tackling the various 
challenges in Sudan, 
 
Recalling also its previous resolutions 1674 (2006) on the 
protection of civilians in armed conflict, which reaffirms, 
inter alia, the relevant provisions of the United Nations 
World Summit outcome document, 1612 (2005) on children in 
armed conflict, 1502 (2003) on the protection of humanitarian 
and United Nations personnel, and 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) 
on women, peace and security, 
 
Taking note of the report on Children in Armed Conflict in 
Sudan dated 10 February 2009 (S/2009/84), including his 
recommendations, and the report on Children in Armed Conflict 
in the Sudan (S/2007/520) dated 29 August 2007, and recalling 
the conclusions endorsed by the Security Council Working 
Group on Children in Armed Conflict in Sudan (S/AC.51/2008/7), 
 
Welcoming the important role of the African Union, 
 
Welcoming the report of the Secretary-General of 14 July 
S/2009/357 on the AU/UN Hybrid peacekeeping operation in 
Darfur (UNAMID), 
 
Stressing the need for the Council to pursue a rigorous, 
strategic approach to peacekeeping deployments, 
 
Expressing concern, two years after the adoption of 
resolution 1769 (2007), at the continued seriousness of the 
security situation and deterioration of the humanitarian 
situation in Darfur, and at the recurring attacks on the 
civilian population, reiterating its condemnation of all 
violations of human rights and international humanitarian law 
in Darfur, calling on all parties to comply with their 
obligations under international humanitarian and human rights 
law, emphasizing the need to bring to justice the 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000738  002 OF 003 
 
 
perpetrators of such crimes and urging the Government of 
Sudan to comply with its obligations in this respect, 
 
Reaffirming its concern over the negative effect of the 
ongoing violence in Darfur on the stability of Sudan as a 
whole as well as the region, noting with concern the negative 
effect of ongoing tensions between the Governments of Sudan 
and Chad, reiterating that a reduction in these tensions and 
rebel activity in both countries must be addressed to achieve 
long-term peace in Darfur and in the region, and encouraging 
Sudan and Chad to engage constructively with the Dakar 
Contact Group and the international community, 
 
Expressing its strong commitment and determination to promote 
and support the political process in Darfur, and the efforts 
of the Chief Mediator, and deploring the fact that some 
groups continue to refuse to join the political process, 
 
Determining that the situation in Sudan constitutes a threat 
to international peace and security, 
 
¶1.    Decides to extend the mandate of UNAMID as set out in 
resolution 1769 (2007) for a further 12 months to 31 July 
2010; 
 
¶2.    Underlines the need for UNAMID to make full use of its 
mandate and capabilities, particularly with regard to (a) the 
protection of civilians across Darfur, and (b) ensuring safe, 
timely and unhindered humanitarian access, the safety and 
security of humanitarian personnel and the protection of 
humanitarian convoys; 
 
¶3.    Commends the contribution of troop and police 
contributing countries and donors to UNAMID; calls on United 
Nations Member States to pledge and contribute the remaining 
helicopter, aerial reconnaissance, ground transport, medical 
and logistical units and other force enablers required; 
underlines the need for capable battalions effectively able 
to carry out UNAMID,s mandated tasks; in this regard 
requests the continuing assistance of donors in ensuring 
battalions are suitably trained and equipped; and further 
requests UNAMID to examine how it could maximise the use of 
its capabilities in Darfur; 
 
¶4.    Welcomes the improvement in the Government of Sudan,s 
co-operation with UNAMID, commends the credible work of the 
Tripartite Commission, calls on all parties in Darfur to 
remove all obstacles to the full and expeditious deployment 
of UNAMID and the proper discharge of its mandate, including 
by ensuring its security and freedom of movement; and in this 
regard calls on the Government of Sudan comply with the 
Status of Forces Agreement fully and without delay, 
particularly the timely provision of visas for UNAMID 
personnel and of flight and equipment clearances; 
 
¶5.    Reiterates its condemnation of previous attacks on 
UNAMID by armed groups; underlines that any attack or threat 
on UNAMID is unacceptable; demands that there be no 
recurrence of such attacks; and stresses the need to enhance 
the safety and security of UNAMID personnel; 
 
¶6.    Stresses the importance of achievable and realistic 
targets against which the progress of United Nations 
peacekeeping operations can be measured; and in this regard 
requests the Secretary General, following consultations with 
the African Union, to: 
 
(a)   submit, for the Council,s consideration, a strategic 
work plan containing benchmarks to measure and track progress 
being made by UNAMID in implementing its mandate, 
(b)   include in his next report an assessment of progress 
made against these benchmarks, as well as consequent 
recommendations regarding UNAMID,s mandate and 
configuration, and 
(c)   report to the Council every 90 days thereafter on 
progress made towards implementing UNAMID,s mandate across 
Darfur, as well as on progress on the political process, on 
the security and humanitarian situation and on all parties 
compliance with their international obligations; 
 
¶7.    Demands that all parties to the conflict in Darfur 
immediately end violence, attacks on civilians, peacekeepers 
and humanitarian personnel, and comply with their obligations 
under human rights and international humanitarian law; calls 
for an immediate cessation of hostilities and for all parties 
to commit themselves to a sustained and permanent ceasefire; 
request the Secretary General to consult with relevant 
parties with a view to developing a more effective ceasefire 
monitoring mechanism; and underlines the need for UNAMID to 
report on major instances of violence which undermines the 
parties, full and constructive efforts towards peace; 
 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000738  003 OF 003 
 
 
¶8.    Reiterates there can be no military solution to the 
conflict in Darfur and that an inclusive political settlement 
and the successful deployment of UNAMID are essential to 
re-establishing peace; reaffirms its full support for the 
AU/UN led political process for Darfur and the work of Joint 
Chief Mediator Mr. Djibrill Yipn Bassol; demands that all 
parties to the conflict, including all rebel groups, 
immediately engage fully and constructively in the peace 
process without preconditions, including by entering into 
talks under the mediation of Mr. Bassol with a view to 
finalising a Framework Agreement; welcomes the work of Qatar 
and Libya in this regard and the support of other countries 
in the region; calls on UNAMID to support the Joint Chief 
Mediator and the Joint Mediation Team; and underlines the 
need for the engagement of civil society, including women and 
women-led organizations, community groups and tribal leaders 
in order to create a conducive environment for peace and 
security through constructive and open dialogue; 
 
¶9.    Calls on Sudan and Chad to abide by their obligations 
under the Doha Agreement of 3 May 2009, the Dakar Agreement 
of 13 March 2008, and previous bilateral agreements; and 
reaffirms the need for both countries to engage 
constructively with the Dakar Contact Group with a view to 
normalizing relations, ceasing support for armed groups, 
strengthening actions to combat armed trafficking in the 
region, the establishment of effective joint border 
monitoring, and co-operating through diplomatic means to 
establish peace and stability in Darfur and the wider region; 
 
¶10.   Notes that conflict in one area of Sudan affects other 
areas of Sudan and the wider region; and urges UNAMID to 
co-ordinate closely with other United Nations, missions in 
the region, including the United Nations Mission in Sudan 
(UNMIS) and the United Nations Mission in the Central African 
Republic and Chad (MINURCAT); 
 
¶11.   Requests UNAMID, consistent with its current 
capabilities and mandate, to assist and complement UNMIS, 
efforts in preparing for credible national elections through 
the provision of advice and assistance where required; 
 
¶12.   Expresses its serious concern at the continued 
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in Darfur, calls 
for the full implementation of the Communique between the 
Government of Sudan and the United Nations on Facilitation of 
Humanitarian Activities in Darfur; and demands that the 
Government of Sudan, all militias, armed groups and all other 
stakeholders ensure the full, safe and unhindered access of 
humanitarian organizations and relief personnel and the 
delivery of humanitarian assistance to populations in need; 
 
¶13.   Demands that all parties to the conflict in Darfur 
create the conditions conducive to allowing the voluntary, 
safe, dignified and sustainable return of refugees and 
internally displaced persons, 
 
¶14.   Demands that the parties to the conflict immediately 
take appropriate measures to protect civilians, including 
women and children, from all forms of sexual violence, in 
line with resolution 1820 (2008); and requests the 
Secretary-General to develop a comprehensive strategy for 
providing protection to women and girls from sexual violence 
and Gender Based Violence and to ensure that the relevant 
provisions of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 are 
implemented by UNAMID and to include information on this in 
his reporting to the Council; 
 
¶15.   Requests the Secretary-General to ensure (a) continued 
monitoring and reporting, as part of the reports referred to 
in paragraph 6 above, of the situation of children and (b) 
continued dialogue with the parties to the conflict towards 
the preparation of time bound action plans to end the 
recruitment and use of child soldiers and other violations of 
international humanitarian law against children; 
 
¶16.   Decides to remain seized of the matter. 
 
End Text. 
 
RICE