09USUNNEWYORK1067
UNSC LAUDS COUNTER-PIRACY COOPERATION, CALLS FOR
Mon Nov 23 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO6461
OO RUEHIK
DE RUCNDT #1067/01 3272312
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 232312Z NOV 09
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7691
INFO RUEHZO/AFRICAN UNION COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHDS/AMEMBASSY ADDIS ABABA PRIORITY 2151
RUEHAE/AMEMBASSY ASMARA PRIORITY 1854
RUEHDJ/AMEMBASSY DJIBOUTI PRIORITY 0009
RUEHKV/AMEMBASSY KYIV PRIORITY 0079
RUEHML/AMEMBASSY MANILA PRIORITY 0345
RUEHNR/AMEMBASSY NAIROBI PRIORITY 0798
RUEHPL/AMEMBASSY PORT LOUIS PRIORITY 0151UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 USUN NEW YORK 001067 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV UNSC PTER MARR PHUM SO
SUBJECT: UNSC LAUDS COUNTER-PIRACY COOPERATION, CALLS FOR 
FOCUS ON ROOT CAUSES 
 
USUN NEW Y 00001067  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: On November 18, Special Representative for 
Somalia Ould-Abdallah briefed the Security Council on the 
status of the piracy problem off the coast of Somalia, 
emphasizing that the international community must build 
regional capacity and address root causes in conjunction with 
its security strategy.  Delegations urged continuing 
international naval force cooperation, including NATO 
Operations Allied Protector and Ocean Shield, Combined Task 
Force 151 and the European Union's Operation Atalanta.  Most 
delegations addressed the need for effective prosecution of 
pirates, although tactics differed, with some preferring a 
regional, rather than domestic approach. Somali Permanent 
Representative Duale urged the Security Council to renew the 
authorities of UNSCRs 1846 and 1851 and expressed thanks to 
those that have supported the Transitional Federal Government 
(TFG) and AMISOM. Sweden noted the EU's plans to extend the 
Atalanta naval operation through 2010; other non-Council 
members noted their particular 
concerns, including hostage-taking and the impact of piracy 
on tourist revenue. 
 
Council Debates Piracy Resolutions 
--------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) In his November 18 address to the Security Council, 
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia 
and Head of the United Nations Political Office for Somalia 
(UNPOS), Ahmed Ould-Abdallah characterized piracy as a 
sophisticated criminal operation, with outlets in the region 
and beyond.  He welcomed the proposal by the 
Intergovernmental Authority for Development to establish a 
blockade of known ports that are supporting piracy.  Although 
naval deployments to the East African region have reduced the 
number of successful hijackings, Ould-Abdallah emphasized 
that the international community must create a long-term 
strategy "complimentary to security," to build regional 
capacity and address root causes.  He described efforts by 
the UN Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) to assist regional 
states in pirate prosecutions, and highlighted the IMO's 
capacity building initiatives via the Djibouti Code of 
Conduct. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Somali Permanent Representative Elmi Ahmed Duale 
expressed hope that the Security Council would renew the 
authorities of UNSCRS 1846 and 1851 and stated that he was 
grateful to those international organizations and States that 
have supported the Transitional Federal Government (TFG), 
including AMISOM and IGAD.  Duale announced the TFG's 
creation of a 1,000 person-strong coastguard, with plans to 
expand to ten thousand.  This force will fight piracy at 
local levels, and combat illegal fishing, toxic waste dumping 
and arms and drug smuggling.  Duale also urged international 
support for the TFG to better guard Somalia's ports against 
piracy. 
 
Council Members Speak in Unison 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶4.     (SBU) Delegations unanimously lauded international 
naval cooperation to prevent piracy and armed robbery off the 
coast of Somalia, including NATO Operations Allied Protector 
and Ocean Shield, Combined Task Force 151 and the European 
Union's Operation Atalanta, and urged continuing and enhanced 
international coordination.  All SC members acknowledged the 
link between piracy at sea and the root causes on shore and 
encouraged support for TFG and AMISOM's efforts to stabilize 
the security situation. Many delegations suggested that the 
same level of determination focused on fighting pirates at 
sea be applied to solving land-based problems in Somalia. 
Delegations also welcomed the work of the Contact Group on 
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia (CGPCS), the entry into force 
of the IMO's Djibouti Code of Conduct, and the work of UNPOS, 
UNODC and the UN Office of the Legal Adviser to build Somali 
institutions and enhance the judicial capacity of regional 
states.  Most Council members urged the international 
community to contribute to both the IMO Djibouti Code of 
Conduct Trust Fund, as well as the CGPCS trust fund.  Many 
delegations paid tribute to Kenya's efforts to prosecute 
suspected pirates and praised the Seychelles plans to do the 
same.  Libya noted that Somalia's waters should be protected 
against illegal fishing, and France stated that Atalanta may 
 
USUN NEW Y 00001067  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
enhance its support to the TFG. 
 
¶5. (SBU) U.S. Alternate Representative for Special Political 
Affairs Rosemary DiCarlo echoed these sentiments and 
highlighted issues that are of particular importance in 
combating piracy, beginning with the renewal of the core 
counter-piracy authorizations contained within UNSCR's 1846 
and 1851. She noted that sharing information and best 
practices, adopting "no concessions" policies, and 
encouraging prosecutions are also critical.  Ambassador 
DiCarlo stated that a focus on Somalia's economic 
development, political stability and humanitarian needs is 
essential and encouraged efforts to support the TFG in 
developing security institutions and creating viable 
livelihoods. 
 
Ideas for Cooperation and Prosecution 
------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) The UK said the cooperation of international naval 
forces was "impressive and unprecedented" and called for 
intelligence measures to counter the widening range of 
pirates.  China urged expanded maritime escort operations 
with a clear geographic delineation of responsibility.  China 
noted its November 6 conference in Beijing dedicated to 
maritime escorts and emphasized its continuing support of 
international efforts to combat piracy.  Sanctions were also 
mentioned as a tool to combat piracy.  France suggested that 
"pirates and their supporters be sanctioned personally," and 
Russia stated that it supported the extension of sanctions 
and comprehensive measures to halt piracy at sea. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Many delegations emphasized the importance of 
bringing pirates to justice, although specific tactics 
differed.  Turkey noted the importance of exploring all legal 
options, and called for the establishment of regional 
mechanisms to support prosecutions.  Russia echoed this 
sentiment, stating that, "greater attention should be paid to 
prosecutions(within existing human rights standards." 
Russia stated that additional mechanisms should be studied, 
which could compliment national efforts to prosecute pirates. 
 Libya recommended that the TFG sign direct agreements with 
governments in the region to prosecute and carry-out 
sentences, while France encouraged states to amend domestic 
legislation in order to try acts of piracy within their own 
jurisdiction.  Several delegations, including Burkina Faso, 
welcomed the initiatives of Somaliland and Puntland to bring 
pirates to justice. 
 
Non-Council Members Note their Particular Concerns 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶8. (SBU) Speaking on behalf of the European Union (EU), 
Sweden noted the establishment of an efficient coordination 
mechanism (SHADE) between the multinational, regional and 
national naval forces operating in the region.  Sweden stated 
the importance of improving dialogue on maritime issues with 
the local Somali communities, including on illegal fishing 
and dumping.  Sweden welcomed Kenya's significant 
contribution on detaining and prosecuting pirates and noted 
the Seychelles agreement to prosecute pirates apprehended by 
the EU.  Sweden noted the EU's plans to extend the Atalanta 
naval operation through the end of 2010 subject to the 
extension of the authorities in UNSCR 1846.  Finally, Sweden 
addressed the importance of focusing on the root causes of 
piracy and its effect on delivery of humanitarian aid, and 
announced that the EU is considering a possible mission to 
train TFG security forces. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Both Ukraine and Philippines noted the risk 
increased piracy posed to their citizens employed by the 
shipping industry.  Currently 24 Ukrainians are being held 
hostage by pirates and 120 of the 300 hostages held in the 
first quarter of 2009 were Filipino.  The Philippines has 
offered assistance to strengthen the capabilities of the 
Somali Coastguard and has invited a Somali delegation to 
Manila this month to discuss capacity-building exercises. 
Spain noted the wider range of pirate activity and stated the 
importance of increasing protection for humanitarian aid and 
commercial activity.  Spain announced its intention of 
holding an international conference to focus on a global 
 
USUN NEW Y 00001067  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
strategy for Somalia. 
 
¶10.  (SBU)  The Seychelles gave a dramatic intervention 
focusing on the country's unique vulnerability to piracy 
attacks.  Seychelles is comprised of 150 islands spread 
amongst a vast sea territory of 1.4 square kilometers.  The 
country has been forced to divert funds used for economic and 
social programs to anti-piracy activities.  Seychelle's 
fishermen now fear going to sea and the revenue from fishing 
has declined by more than fifty percent over the last year. 
Cruise ships have cancelled trips, lowering tourist revenue, 
and cargo ships, which Seychelles depends on for eighty 
percent of its food consumption, are by-passing the area. 
Seychelles made an urgent plea for financial assistance and 
to strengthen AMISOM and the TFG, stating that "peace will 
not return to Seychelles until it returns to Somalia." 
 
¶11. (U) The following non-Council members spoke during the 
debate: Norway, Philippines, Seychelles, Spain and Ukraine. 
Sweden delivered the statement on behalf of the European 
Union. Note: A transcript of the debate is available on the 
Security Council section of the UN website, www.un.org, under 
"Meetings." 
RICE