09USUNNEWYORK916
THE SECRETARY-GENERAL'S 14 OCTOBER LUNCH WITH THE
Thu Oct 15 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXYZ0004
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUCNDT #0916/01 2882108
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 152108Z OCT 09
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD IMMEDIATE 2530
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7354
INFO RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS USUN NEW YORK 000916 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV UNSC PHUM PK GV AF SU
SUBJECT: THE SECRETARY-GENERAL'S 14 OCTOBER LUNCH WITH THE 
SECURITY COUNCIL 
 
¶1. (SBU) This is an Action Request. Please see para 7. 
 
¶2. (SBU) In the monthly UN Security Council luncheon with 
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, the SYG discussed Guinea, 
Sudan, Afghanistan, and Pakistan with PermReps. The lunch was 
hosted by Vietnamese PermRep Le Luong Minh, in his capacity 
as President of the UNSC for October. Ambassador Wolff 
attended on behalf of the United States. 
 
Guinea 
------ 
 
¶3. (SBU) The SYG said that those responsible for the recent 
violence in Guinea must be held accountable. He said that he 
is prepared to support the creation of a commission of 
inquiry (COI), (which he noted following other's 
interventions enjoys broad UNSC support), and that members 
also need to be ready to support a peacebuilding process for 
Guinea after elections. Libyan PermRep Shalgam said he was 
"shocked" by the violence in Guinea and described his 
country's efforts to urge the Guineans to investigate the 
acts, adding that some family members cannot find the bodies 
of their loved ones.  Shalgam also said that the  UNSC needs 
to help ensure that elections, reconciliation, and an 
investigation all occur.  French PermRep Araud endorsed 
Libya's comments and said that the legal and political 
processes underway need to play out to calm the situation. 
Araud also noted that it would be helpful if the SYG made 
himself available on the matter.  Burkinabe Charge 
Tiendrebeogo appreciated the UNSC's quick response on the 
violence in Guinea (referring to Ambassador Rice's remarks to 
the press on September 30 in her capacity as UNSC President) 
and said he was eager to work together on a COI.  Chinese 
PermRep Zhang underlined two priorities: all parties need to 
cooperate on national reconciliation; and the ground needed 
to be prepared for fair and just elections. 
 
Sudan 
----- 
 
¶4. (SBU) The SYG said that "we need to ask the Sudanese to do 
more," particularly in regard to elections preparation.  He 
added that the UN would undertake a "fundamental 
reevaluation" of CPA implementation, and lamented that the 
situation in southern Sudan had regressed.  He pleaded for 
strong UNSC support of Joint Chief Mediator Bassole, who he 
said was becoming frustrated.  Ugandan PermRep Rugunda 
indicated that the situation in Sudan was worsening and that 
the conditions for elections are not present.  He emphasized 
that a plan to "reinforce the UN presence" in Sudan was 
necessary.  Zhang said that southern Sudan deserved "serious 
and immediate attention," adding that UNMIS and UNAMID needed 
to prepare the country for elections. 
 
Afghanistan 
----------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) The SYG expressed his support for both the 
Independent Election Commission (IEC) and the Electoral 
Complaints Commission (ECC), and said both were proceeding 
well, although he is concerned about Afghan ECC official 
Maulavi Mustafa Barakzai's resignation. The IEC was 
finalizing election results which it may release as soon as 
this weekend (17-18 October).  He also said that ballots had 
been printed and the UN, if necessary, could hold an election 
run-off quickly.  In anticipation of the potential unrest 
that such a run-off might cause, the Secretariat has a 
task-force ready to assist.  The SYG also supported the 
UK-German-French initiative to develop a post-election 
strategy.  Turkish PermRep Apakan described Afghanistan as 
being in a "very delicate" political situation, noting that a 
runoff might not be the best thing for a country that was not 
used to having elections. 
 
¶6. (SBU) The SYG told UNSC members that UNAMA would open an 
additional three offices by year end, with a goal of opening 
11 more by the end of 2011.  The SYG also said that he may 
have to seek additional resources to strengthen UNAMA and 
open additional offices.  Other Perm Reps expressed support 
for additional funding. 
 
Pakistan 
-------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) SYG Ban is supportive of continued and deepened UN 
engagement in Pakistan and is concerned with the increased 
violence there. He asked for more resources for the UN to do 
its work, including physical and financial support for the UN 
presence in Pakistan.  OCHA official Rashid Khalikov, also in 
attendance, spoke about a number of armored UN vehicles that 
 
recently arrived in Karachi. Apparently, he noted, local 
officials were over-charging exorbitant storage fees for 
these vehicles.  Khalikov asked for Western State 
interventions with the Pakistanis on this point. Post 
requests Department ask Embassy Islamabad if it would be 
constructive to ask local officials to waive, or at least 
lower, this fee. 
RICE