05BAGHDAD3158
SECURITY BRIEFING TO DIPLOMATIC MISSIONS IN IRAQ
Sun Jul 31 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 003158 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
FROM AMBASSADOR KHALILZAD TO THE SECRETARY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PTER
SUBJECT: SECURITY BRIEFING TO DIPLOMATIC MISSIONS IN IRAQ 
TO PROVIDE GUIDANCE AND RECOMMENDATIONS ON METHODS TO 
PROTECT PERSONNEL AND FACILITIES 
 
REF: BAGHDAD 3137 
 
¶1. (SBU) On Tuesday, August 2nd, the U.S. Embassy Iraq will 
offer an expansive "how to" security session to members of 
the diplomatic community in Baghdad.  This briefing, will 
be conducted by Post's Regional Security Office, Political 
Military Office, U.S. Military, and Iraqi Police and 
Military.  This briefing will cover the full range of 
physical, technical, procedural, and personnel security 
measures necessary to operate safely and effectively in 
Iraq's current security climate.  More than 50 missions, 
including Coalition, Arab, and other diplomats , have been 
invited, and a large number are expected to attend.  Post 
believes that this session will communicate our commitment 
to assist the diplomatic community in countering the 
threats directed against them. 
 
¶2. (SBU) The topics to be presented include: 
 
--Overview of the Security Environment: Current threats and 
trends by the Anti-Iraqi Forces (AIF) and insurgents in the 
greater Baghdad area and throughout Iraq. 
 
--Physical Security of Facilities and Residential 
Compounds: The use of physical barriers to deter 
vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices and unauthorized 
access, as well as those designed to minimize damage and 
casualties caused by explosions, indirect fire, small arms 
fire, and other methods of attack common to Iraq.  In 
addition, the importance of effective training and 
deployment for uniformed security in and around diplomatic 
facilities. 
 
--Access Controls and Badging: The use of badging and other 
identification media to deny unauthorized access, including 
an overview of proper procedures to employ at checkpoints. 
This topic will also include an explanation of current U.S. 
Mission badging procedures. 
 
--Protective Security Details (PSDs) The importance of and 
proper uses for personal protective details, including 
tactics and techniques developed by various PSDs to counter 
the multitude of different threats directed against 
diplomatic personnel moving outside the International Zone. 
 
 
--Surveillance Detection Practices and Techniques: 
Effective techniques and programs for detecting and 
responding to possible hostile surveillance of both 
facilities and individual diplomatic members. 
 
--Technical Security Equipment: An explanation of best 
practices in employing locks, alarms, walk-thru and 
hand-held metal detectors, explosive detection equipment, 
and cameras to enhance the overall security posture of a 
diplomatic facility and/or residence. 
 
¶3. (SBU) The briefings will be presented by the Regional 
Security Office personnel who possess extensive experience 
in the day-to-day operations of Post's security program. 
Brigadier General Horst, 3rd Infantry Division, Assistant 
Division Commander for Maneuver, will be addressing the 
group.  His Division has responsibility for the greater 
Baghdad area, where most of the Diplomatic Missions to Iraq 
are located.  BG Horst will discuss the overall security 
environment and will provide guidance on who to contact for 
help in an emergency.  Major General Razak, the Baghdad 
Chief of Police and other senior members of the Iraqi 
military units from the area will also be invited to attend 
and meet the diplomatic community. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Post has cast a wide net in developing a list of 
invitees and nearly all of Baghdad's diplomatic community 
is expected to attend.  A full list of attendees, as well 
as a report of the proceedings, will be sent septel after 
the session. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Mission and MNF-I are engaged now in an intensive 
effort to identify capabilities that would be offered to 
foreign diplomats to help them improve their security. 
Given recent attacks directed specifically at non-U.S. 
diplomatic personnel in Iraq, Post fells strongly that this 
event will provide our diplomatic colleagues with 
much-needed guidance in developing effective security 
programs. As stated in reftel, FM Zebari raised the 
possibilitty 
of allowing some of the diplomats to move into the 
International Zone. On July 29, Ambassador raised the issue 
with PM Jafari-who responded favorably to the idea. He will 
instruct his people to see what they can find in the 
International Zone. 
Khalilzad