05JERUSALEM3317
WB/G SITREP: JULY 28, 2005 (1700 HOURS LOCAL) --
Fri Jul 29 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Jerusalem
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 JERUSALEM 003317 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FO; NEA/SA/EX FOR AUSTIN-FERGUSON; DEPT FOR 
DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/MUSTAFA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PBTS PHUM KWBG KPAL IS ASEC
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: JULY 28, 2005 (1700 HOURS LOCAL) -- 
PALESTINIAN BOY KILLED DURING IDF INCURSION IN JENIN, 
SENIOR PIJ OFFICIAL ARRESTED; PALESTINIAN GIRL WOUNDED IN 
GAZA. 
 
 
This is a joint ConGen Jerusalem/Embassy Tel Aviv cable. 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  In the West Bank, according to Palestinian 
security sources, a 15-year old Palestinian wqas shot and 
killed by the IDF  when IDF troops entered into Jenin July 
¶27.  The IDF arrested a senior Palestinian Islamic Jihad 
(PIJ) official during the operation.  In Gaza, a 
five-year-old Palestinian girl was critically injured by IDF 
tank fire overnight July 27-28 in the Jeneh area of Rafah. 
One Palestinian was lightly wounded in an exchange of fire 
near an IDF outpost north of Rafah on July 27.  End Summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) ATTACKS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Deaths/Injuries: According to Palestinian sources, a 
15-year old Palestinian, Yusif Hasis, died of wounds incurred 
from IDF fire when IDF troops entered into Jenin July 27 and 
clashed with Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ) and Al Aqsa 
Martyrs' Brigades gunmen.  About 13 other Palestinians, 
mostly militants, were injured during the exchange of fire. 
Two IDF soldiers were also lightly injured.  (See 
&Arrests.8) 
 
-- Arrests: According to Palestinian media, the IDF arrested 
a senior Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ) official during the 
IDF operation in Jenin July 27 (see &Deaths/Injuries8). 
 
-- Arrests: Palestinian newspapers reported that the IDF 
detained a 13-year old Palestinian boy at an IDF outpost near 
the Neguhot settlement in the Hebron area July 27.  The boy 
was allegedly carrying a knife and threatened one of the IDF 
soldiers. 
 
-- Security Incidents:  According to Israeli radio, IDF 
forces thwarted an attack in the Nablus area on Ebal mountain 
July 27, after finding a 15-kilogram device carried by three 
Palestinians who managed to flee the scene.  An army bomb 
squad diffused the device, and embarked on a search for the 
militants. 
 
¶3. (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- According to Palestinian media, there were scuffles and 
clashes July 27 between PA security forces elements  in 
Qalqiliya, Tubas, and Bethlehem.  Confrontations erupted 
after National Security Forces (NSF) officers attempted to 
take over facilities occupied by the "Special Forces."  The 
Special Forces are, by Ministry of Interior order, supposed 
to be consolidated into the NSF, but they thus far are 
resisting real integration. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶4. (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injuries/Shooting: According to UNRWA, a five-year-old 
Palestinian girl was critically wounded by IDF tank fire 
overnight July 27-28 in the Jeneh area of Rafah. 
 
-- Injuries/Shooting: (Follow-up to a report in the 
&Shootings8 section of the July 27 sitrep.)  According to 
an UNRWA, a 21-year-old Palestinian woman sustained shrapnel 
wounds in her back during the previously reported exchange of 
fire between gunmen and IDF soldiers near Rafah Yam on July 
26 at 2035. 
 
-- Injuries/Shooting: The IDF reported that one Palestinian 
suspect was lightly wounded in an exchange of fire near an 
IDF outpost north of Rafah on July 27 at 0900. 
 
-- Rockets:  Israeli media and the IDF reported that three 
Qassam rockets were fired at Sderot during the early morning 
of July 28.  UNRWA put the figure at six rockets directed at 
Sderot and two more against the northern Gaza settlement 
bloc.  No injuries or damage were reported. 
 
-- Rockets: UNRWA reported that three Qassams were fired at 
Neve Dekalim overnight July 27-28. 
 
-- Missiles: UNRWA reported that an anti-tank missile was 
fired at an IDF bulldozer opposite Block J in Rafah overnight 
July 27-28.  According to the UNRWA report, PA National 
Security Forces pursued the attackers, but then came under 
IDF tank fire along with the attackers.  The attackers 
escaped.  No injuries were reported. 
 
-- Mortars: The IDF reported four instances of mortar 
shelling between 2320 on July 27 and 0435 on July 28.  No 
injuries were reported.  Three of the shells, fired around 
0200, targeted the Nativ Ha,asara and Meffalsim kibbutzim in 
Israel.  Individual shells were fired at an IDF APC about six 
kilometers south of Kissufim junction at 2320; at Elei Sinai 
at 0200; and at an IDF outpost near Morag at 0435.  UNRWA 
reported a mortar fired at Ganei Tal overnight. 
 
-- Shootings: The IDF reported five incidents of gunfire 
directed at IDF soldiers on July 27 (in addition to the 
incident reported in &Injuries/Shooting8 above).  Gunmen 
fired at soldiers in an IDF outpost west of Khan Yunis at 
1230; in an IDF outpost north of Rafah at 1350; in an IDF 
vehicle near an outpost north of Rafah at 1400; in an APC 
approximately 4 kms NE of Nahal Oz crossing at 1530; and in 
an IDF outpost west of Khan Yunis at 1545.  No injuries were 
reported from any of these five incidents. 
 
-- Explosions: Nil. 
 
(SBU) ARRESTS:  UNRWA reported that IDF soldiers arrested 
four members of the Shanalakh family north of Netzarim at 
1930 on July 27. 
 
¶5. (SBU) INCURSIONS/DEMOLITIONS: Nil. 
 
¶6. (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS: 
 
-- No Palestinians except those holding Jerusalem ID cards 
are currently allowed to use the Erez crossing.  The crossing 
is open for international travelers. 
 
-- The Abu Houli internal crossing was reopened on July 27 
but closed overnight from 1930 to 0800. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone was closed. 
 
-- The Karni terminal was partially open. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open in both directions, but closed to 
Palestinian males between the ages of 16 and 35 traveling to 
Egypt. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers but open 
for construction materials. 
 
-- Netzarim Junction at Salahadeen Road was closed. 
 
-- The Netzarim Coastal Road was open. 
WALLES