05QUITO1753
MEDIA REACTION: ECUADORIAN RELATIONS WITH
Tue Jul 26 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Quito
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS QUITO 001753 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, WHA, WHA/AND, WHA/PDA 
DIRONDCP FOR PA 
EMBASSIES FOR PAO/IO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL OPRC KIRC KPAO EC
SUBJECT:  MEDIA REACTION: ECUADORIAN RELATIONS WITH 
VENEZUELA;LONDON TERRORIST ATTACKS 
 
 
¶1.  "A Ghost Named Chavez," a column (07/25) by Grace 
Jaramillo in Quito's leading centrist "El Comercio" 
(circ. 70,000) 
 
Quote:  "One week of debate over the pros and cons of 
associating with Chavez. . . about how the risk that 
getting closer to Chavez might distance us from the 
U.S., is evidence of our deep provincialism in 
international matters. 
 
"The Venezuelan president is an excellent leftist. . 
. at least, in his speeches.  A more detailed 
analysis of his administration reveals clearly that 
his programs more resemble those of a populist 
leadership from the beginning of the twentieth 
century. . .than a leftist revolutionary government. 
He has neither changed the structure of Venezuelan 
production, nor has he distributed the wealth, and 
his social programs. . . are merely patronizing 
initiatives . which instead of empowering the poor, 
legitimize the current conditions of paternalism and 
dependence. 
 
"The only revolutionary thing about Chavez is his 
verbal confrontations with Washington, which is 
really more intelligent when addressing the Latin 
American masses and media than the approach of 
declaring oneself `the best friend of the U.S.'. . . 
 
"It is not easy to say all this.  Many academics keep 
quiet for the fear of being dubbed sacrilegious by 
leftist hordes. . . 
 
"What does Chavez want in South America?  To buy 
power via debt bonds (Argentina and Ecuador for now) 
and to legitimize himself as the uncontestable leader 
of the `Anti Imperialistic Latin American Left'. . . 
 
¶2.  "The Global Threat," an editorial (7/24) in 
Quito's left, populist "La Hora" (circ. 120,000) 
 
Quote:  "The attacks in London-hit twice in less than 
15 days-show that nothing stops terrorism.  The fact 
is that neither the invasion of Iraq, nor the 
continued occupation of Afghanistan, has succeeded in 
making the world a safer place to live. 
 
. . . the key question is what do we have to do to 
end terrorism aside from implementing security 
measures?  All security measures adopted will be 
insufficient to thwart terrorist acts, if the causes 
or pretexts behind them are not addressed as well." 
 
¶3.  "Against Terrorism, Justice," an opinion column 
(07/23) by Xavier Cano in Guayaquil's conservative 
"El Telegrafo" (circ. 8,000) 
 
Quote:  ". . . poverty, social exclusion, the lack of 
education and the systematic humiliation of 
impoverished people are the culture broth for the 
surfacing of terrorism . . .  [Tony Blair] stubbornly 
denies any relationship between the London attacks 
and the role of Great Britain in Iraq's invasion and 
occupation. . . 
 
". . . There isn't a cause in the world that would 
justify terrorism. . . Terrorism is not just 
disgusting, but also cowardly and miserable, but it 
cannot be used as the pretext for repealing rights 
and freedoms achieved over centuries. . ." 
 
MEMMOTT