05TELAVIV4482
WB/G SITERP: PA-HAMAS CLASH IN GAZA AS
Tue Jul 19 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEL AVIV 004482 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FRONT OFFICE; NEA/SA/EX FOR RICHIE; DEPT FOR 
DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/MUSTAFA; 
USAID FOR DCHA, DCHA/FPP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG PHUM PREL PTER ASEC CASC GZ IS
SUBJECT: WB/G SITERP: PA-HAMAS CLASH IN GAZA AS 
MORTAR/ROCKET ATTACKS CONTINUE AT A LOWER LEVEL; IDF KILLS 
TWO AND ARRESTS SEVEN IN THE WEST BANK -- JULY 19, 2005 
(1600 HOURS) 
 
¶1. (U) This is a joint ConGen Jerusalem/Embassy Tel Aviv 
cable. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Summary:  Up to twelve Palestinians were injured in 
an extended PA-Hamas clash in the Gaza Strip on July 19.  One 
Palestinian was reported dead due to IDF warning fire when a 
car tried to force its way through a closed Israel checkpoint 
near the Katif junction.  Mortar and rocket fire continued in 
Gaza, albeit at a lower level than on the weekend, injuring 
one Israeli, two foreign workers, and two Palestinians. 
Israeli police and military units continued to block 
anti-disengagement demonstrators from entering the Gaza 
Strip.  IDF soldiers on July 19 shot and killed two 
Palestinian brothers, reportedly members from either the 
Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ) or the al-Aqsa Martyrs' 
Brigades, near Nablus.  IDF soldiers continued to conduct 
operations in Tulkarm and entered Qalqilya, Nablus, and 
Bethlehem and arrested seven Palestinians.  End summary. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths/Shootings:  According to the IDF, soldiers fired 
warning shots near the Katif junction on July 18.  UNRWA 
reported that a 14-year-old Palestinian was killed in the 
incident when a group of Palestinians tried to drive through 
a closed IDF checkpoint. 
 
-- Injuries/Shootings/Rocket: UNRWA reported that on July 19 
PA security forces attempted to arrest a Hamas leader in 
Jabalia, leading to a firefight between Jabalia and Beit 
Lahia and involving a PA APC.  Hamas militants -- using 
either a homemade rocket or two RPGs -- destroyed several PA 
cars in Beit Lahia and allegedly took as hostages (and later 
released) three PA officers.  UNRWA said that fighting 
continued around the Al Awda hospital when PA security forces 
followed wounded Hamas militants there.  Hamas then attacked 
two PA security officials as they returned home from the 
operation in Gaza City.  In total, twelve injuries were 
reported.  According to the Israeli press, five PA officials 
and two Hamas militants were injured.  The press also said 
that al-Aqsa Martyrs' Brigade militants assisted the PA 
forces when they were exchanging fire with Hamas. 
 
-- Injuries/Shooting: UNRWA reported that three cars of armed 
and masked gunmen attacked the Arab Center for Studies and 
Research on Nasser Street in Gaza on July 19, resulting in 
nine injuries. 
 
-- Injuries/Mortars: The IDF reported that two foreign 
workers were lightly injured in mortar attacks.  One was hit 
when two shells landed in Gadid on July 18 and one was hit 
when one shell landed in Ganei Tal on July 19. 
 
-- Injuries/Explosion: UNRWA reported that two Palestinians 
were injured on July 18 when the mortar shell they were 
preparing to launch exploded prematurely. 
 
-- Injuries/Rockets: UNRWA said that the Israeli press 
claimed one civilian was injured when four rockets detonated 
in Atzmona. 
 
-- Rockets: In addition to the attack noted in 
"Injuries/Rockets" above, UNRWA said one homemade rocket was 
fired overnight from Beit Lahiya at Israel. 
 
-- Anti-tank Missiles: The IDF reported two anti-tank 
missiles fired at an IDF outpost north of Khan Yunis, one on 
July 18 and one on July 19. 
 
-- Mortars: In addition to the three shells listed above in 
"Injuries/Mortars," the IDF reported 14 additional mortar 
shells fired at eleven targets.  On July 18, Palestinians 
fired one shell at IDF soldiers near Nahal Oz crossing, one 
at civilians east of Dugit, one at civilians in Ganei Tal, 
five at the IDF and one at civilians in Neve Dekalim, as well 
as two at the IDF and one at civilians in Gadid.  On July 19 
the Palestinians fired two shells at an IDF outpost north of 
Rafah.  UNRWA reported at least 18 mortar attacks in addition 
to the shelling listed above in "Injuries/Mortars:" five at 
Rafiah Yam, five at Neve Dekalim, one at Ganei Tal, one at 
Gadid, four at the IDF camp on the Egyptian border opposite 
Zurub, five at Morag, six at Atzmona, and two at Kfar Darom. 
 
-- Explosive Devices: The IDF reported that two explosive 
devices were found and disarmed by Palestinians police on 
July 18 near the Netzarim junction. 
 
-- Shootings: The IDF reported two shooting incidents in 
addition to the one noted above in "Death/Shooting."  On July 
19, IDF soldiers were targeted by shooters south of Rafah and 
near Kfar Darom (confirmed by UNRWA).  UNRWA reported an 
exchange of gunfire between the IDF and Palestinians near 
Neve Dekalim, as well as IDF shooting at mortar launching 
sites in near Gadid and Al Amal (Khan Yunis) on July 19, and 
at a rocket-launching site near Atzmona on July 18. 
 
¶4. (SBU) ARRESTS: none reported. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS/INTERNAL CHECKPOINTS: 
 
-- UNRWA and Israeli Radio reported that the IDF lifted the 
internal trisection of the Gaza Strip. 
 
-- No Palestinians except those holding Jerusalem ID cards 
are currently allowed to use the Erez crossing.  The crossing 
is open for international travelers. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone was closed. 
 
-- The Karni terminal was partially open. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open on July 18 in both directions, but 
closed to Palestinian males between the ages of 16 and 35. 
 
-- Nahil Oz was operating on July 18. 
 
-- The Abu Houli-Gush Katif Road was re-opened July 19. 
 
-- Netzarim Junction at Salahadeen Road was closed. 
 
-- The Netzarim Coastal Road was reopened July 19. 
 
-- Salahadeen Road was open at Sufa/Morag. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers but open 
for construction materials. 
 
--- The Toufah checkpoint was open in both directions, except 
for males between 16 and 30. 
 
-- The Abu Al-Ajeen bypass road was closed. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Political Developments: 
 
-- The UN cautioned their staff that the ongoing PA-Hamas 
confrontations could escalate. 
 
-- Israeli media reported that Hamas told Egyptian officials 
that they are committed to the "tahdiya" or calm. 
 
-- According to Israeli press, Defense Minister Mofaz has 
ordered security forces to prevent anti-disengagement 
demonstrators from reaching the Kissufim Road.  Large police 
and military units remain deployed in the area to prevent the 
demonstrators from entering Gaza. 
 
-- Mofaz told reporters that the IDF is prepared to carry out 
large-scale ground operations in Gaza if attacks continue. 
He noted, however, that international and Israeli pressure 
had led to a marked decrease in attacks over the past 24 
hours. 
 
-- The IDF is maintaining a general closure of the Gaza Strip. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: IDF soldiers on July 19 shot and killed two 
Palestinian brothers, reportedly members from the Palestinian 
Islamic Jihad (PIJ), during an operation in al-Yamun village, 
northwest of Jenin.  According to Israeli sources, IDF 
soldiers shot the two brothers during an exchange of gunfire, 
after Israeli bulldozers demolished the house where the two 
brothers had hidden.  Palestinian sources in the PA Ministry 
of Interior, however, claimed that the two brothers were 
members of the al-Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades. 
 
-- Shooting/Injury: IDF soldiers on July 18 shot and wounded 
a Palestinian in the leg at a checkpoint near Nablus. 
According to Palestinian sources, the IDF soldiers shot the 
Palestinian to prevent him from passing through the 
checkpoint. 
 
-- Stabbing/Injury: A Palestinian teenager the evening of 
July 18 stabbed an Israeli in the leg near UN Headquarters in 
Jerusalem.  Israeli police are searching for the suspect, who 
fled into an East Jerusalem neighborhood after the incident. 
Israeli police suspect criminal motives for the attack. 
 
¶8. (SBU) ARRESTS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Incursion/Arrests: According to Israeli sources, IDF 
soldiers entered Qalqilya, Nablus, and Bethlehem on July 18 
and arrested seven Palestinians. 
 
-- Security: The IDF has continued to conduct operations in 
Tulkarm following the July 12 suicide bombing in Netanya. 
 
¶9. (SBU) DEMOLITIONS: 
 
-- Israeli bulldozers on July 18 uprooted trees and leveled 
Palestinian lands in Shufa village, east of Tulkarm. 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
CRETZ