06BEIRUT2566
MGLE01: BERRI IS UNDER THREAT DUE TO HIS PIVOTAL
Tue Aug 08 00:00:00 +0200 2006
CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN
Embassy Beirut
VZCZCXRO4298
OO RUEHAG RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHKUK
DE RUEHLB #2566/01 2201654
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 081654Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY BEIRUT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4951
INFO RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUCNFB/FBI WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO PRIORITY 0039
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 0918C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 BEIRUT 002566 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
SIPDIS 
 
NSC FOR ABRAMS/DORAN/SINGH/HARDING 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/08/2016 
TAGS: MOPS PREL PTER SY IS LE
SUBJECT: MGLE01: BERRI IS UNDER THREAT DUE TO HIS PIVOTAL 
ROLE 
 
 
Classified By: Jeffrey D. Feltman, Ambassador.  Reason: Section 1.4 (d) 
. 
 
SUMMARY 
-------- 
 
¶1.  (C)  Ambassador and TDY poloff met with several Lebanese 
politicians of different confessions on August 8 in order to 
guage attitudes toward the draft UN resolution and sense 
whether there is a strategy for moving ahead in Lebanon 
following a ceasefire.  In addition to Maronite former 
President and Kata'eb party leader Amine Gemayel (septel), 
meetings were with former Prime Minister Najib Mikati 
(Sunni), Nabih Berri aide Ali Hamdan (Shiite), and Minister 
of Telecommunications and Walid Jumblatt ally Marwan Hamadeh 
(Druze).  Mikati, Hamdan, and Hamadeh all believe that 
Hizballah is ready for a cease-fire but that the success or 
failure of the cease-fire deal, as well continued as 
Sunni-Shia harmony, hinges on Speaker of Parliament and Amal 
Party leader Nabih Berri.  In a worrying development, Hamdan 
said that his office had seen a list showing the Speaker as 
the number one target for assassination.  In a break from his 
previous sentiments, Mikati said that it might be time to get 
rid of President Emile Lahoud following a cease-fire and LAF 
deployment to the South.  He believes that Berri will sign on 
to this plan.  Hamadeh gave an overview of last night's 
meeting of the Lebanese Cabinet which decided unanimously to 
deploy 15,000 LAF troops to the South upon an Israeli 
withdrawal behind the Blue Line.  Our interlocutors gave 
different descriptions - ranging from a heated argument to a 
fraternal chat - of the August 7 meeting between Berri and 
visiting Syrian Foreign Minister Walid Mu'allim.  All agreed 
that, once the dust has settled from the conflict, the 
majority of Lebanese will blame Hizballah for provoking the 
destruction and the party will be politically weakened as a 
consequence.  End Summary. 
 
"SOMEONE WANTS TO SOW TROUBLE IN LEBANON" 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C)  Berri's senior foreign policy adviser called the 
Ambassador for an urgent meeting early this afternoon. 
Sitting in a cafe in the Phoenicia Hotel, without lights or 
air conditioning due to power shortages, Hamdan motioned for 
poloff to stop writing and whispered to the Ambassador, "We 
have a list showing targets for assassination, and Speaker 
Berri's name is at the top," adding that others mentioned in 
the list include pro-Syrian MP Suleiman Frangieh and Free 
Patriotic Movement leader Michel Aoun.  He did not bring a 
copy with him, he said, since he did not want to remove it 
from the office.  Hamdan does not know who generated the 
list, only saying that it is from "someone who wants to sow 
trouble in Lebanon."  Noting that Berri is the critical 
backer of the GOL plan to deploy the LAF to the South, Hamdan 
said that his assassination would likely cause the plan to 
fail, leading to the collapse of the Lebanese government and 
enflaming sectarian tensions, particularly among Sunni and 
Shi'a. 
 
¶3.  (C)  When asked about the Lebanese public's perception of 
Hizballah, Hamdan said that "Hizballah had peaked" as an organization sometime before the kidnapping and killing of 
IDF soldiers on July 12.  As long as the conflict continues, 
people will be supportive of Hizballah fighters, but "once 
the dust settles, people will see" the destructive result of 
Hizballah's unilateral adventurism.  Hamdan predicted that 
Amal will be in a much stronger position vis-a-vis Hizballah 
following the conflict.  Regarding the prospect of Berri 
possibly lending his critical support to a constitutional 
move to replace President Emile Lahoud, a step which Berri 
has opposed in the past, Hamdan gave a guarded response, 
saying that Berri hoped to reinitiate the "National Dialogue" 
following a ceasefire and that the issue of the presidency 
"perhaps might be reopened in that context."  Hamdan also did 
not give anything away regarding Berri's August 7 meeting 
with Syrian FM Mu'allim, saying Mu'allim had "simply 
expressed support for the government." 
 
MIKATI SAYS TIME MAY BE RIPE TO GET RID OF LAHOUD 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
BEIRUT 00002566  002 OF 004 
 
 
 
¶4.  (C)  Meeting in his downtown Beirut office, former Prime 
Minister Najib Mikati, who in the past has held firm in his 
belief that Lahoud would end up serving out his three-year 
extension until August 2007, said that following a ceasefire 
may be the right time to get rid of Lahoud.  "I've always 
thought he would stay until the end, but haraam if we need to 
wait a whole year to launch Lebanon on its new path!" 
Mikati, who is close to Berri, believes that the Speaker will 
be on board with this initiative.  "He's good," said Mikati, 
"He will be where we want him," mentioning that Berri 
exchanged heated words with Mu'allim on August 7 and lectured 
him on the Sheba'a Farms issue like "a professor to a 
student."  Mikati, a former Bashar buddy who fell out with 
the Syrian leader last December, suspects Syria is using this 
conflict to "try and hold some cards" regarding the 
international tribunal which is being set up to try suspects 
in the Hariri assassination. 
 
¶5.  (C)  Turning to Hizballah, Mikati estimated the group had 
suffered physical losses of only 25 percent.  Though the 
group still has plenty of reserves, they are ready to find a 
solution to this conflict.  While Mikati supports Hizballah's 
fighters in the current conflict, he added that he wants to 
see the group disarmed and hopes it will be weakened 
politically following a cease-fire, but suspects they will 
keep many of their arms even following a LAF deployment to 
the South.  "They will make a token handover of 500 to 1000 
Katyushas to the LAF, send some back to Syria, and bury the 
rest in underground bunkers."  He said he could guarantee 
that Hizballah would not launch any attacks for at least six 
months following a ceasefire, allowing time to broker a 
permanent political deal.  He added that whatever the 
outcome, Hizballah will portray itself as the victor, but 
noted, "on the Lebanese political scene, it is better to deal 
with Hizballah as a winner rather than as a loser."  In 
reality, Hizballah will emerge from this conflict weaker both 
militarily and politically. 
 
¶6.  (C)  Mikati, who has designs on some day regaining the 
premiership, said that Siniora is under a great deal of 
strain, as he demonstrated during his tearful August 7 
statement during the Arab League ministerial.  Siniora does 
not believe himself to be a real leader, claimed Mikati, but 
rather feels like a caretaker for Saad Hariri.  In fact, the 
deal for the LAF deployment was brokered between Nabih Berri 
and Saad Hariri, with Siniora merely the mouthpiece. 
However, Saad himself is naive and easy to fool, according to 
Mikati, which is why Hizballah doesn't mind working with him. 
 This highlights the lack of real, uniting, charismatic 
leadership of the Sunni Lebanese.  In the event of a 
Sunni-Shi'a clash, which Mikati thinks will grow more likely 
as the conflict continues, the Sunnis will not be able to 
face up to the more united and more armed Shi'a. 
 
¶7.  (C)  On the prospect of 粑 successful LAF deployment to 
the South, Mikati said that though the army is still weak and 
fragmented, it does meet a minimum operational standard and 
will be very well received in the South.  It is important to 
have international support for the army.  Mikati described 
the army commander Michel Sleiman, whom many perceive to be a 
Syrian stooge but who played a critical role in avoiding a 
violent crackdown on the huge anti-Syrian protests in Beirut 
in March 2005, as "a honest and good guy."  Regarding 
humanitarian relief, Mikati expressed concern that, unless 
the United States and others stepped forth quickly and 
generously, Iranian money would fund most of the rebuilding 
in the South. 
 
"MU'ALLIM WAS LIKE AN ORPHAN" 
----------------------------- 
 
¶8.  (C)  Meeting in the Ministry of Telecommunications 
building, Marwan Hamadeh described the August 7 Cabinet 
session which led to the unanimous vote in favor of deploying 
the LAF to the South.  According to Hamadeh, both Hizballah 
ministers Mohammad Fneich and Trad Hamadi were present at the 
meeting, though President Lahoud did not show up.  Defense 
Minister Murr had also not planned to attend, but Hamadeh 
insisted that Murr show up.  "There will be no meeting on 
 
BEIRUT 00002566  003 OF 004 
 
 
deploying the army without the Minister of Defense."  When 
Murr presented the deployment plan to the Cabinet, he said 
that the LAF could not deploy "except in the conditions of 
1992," meaning that all militias must be disarmed and 
dissolved.  Murr said that the LAF would not accept any armed 
militias in the deployment area, on which point the Hizballah 
ministers supposedly hesitated, but, "realizing that they 
needed to catch this instant," ultimately they conceded. 
Fneich also raised the Sheba'a Farms issue, but Hamadeh did 
not elaborate on what was said.  To avoid potential outbreaks 
of violence, most ministers had also wanted to cancel all 
protests until the end of the war, but this was vetoed by the 
Hizballah ministers who (without a touch of irony) said that 
"democratic life" should not be stopped. 
 
¶9.  (C)  At one point in the session, according to Hamadeh's 
account, Minister of Industry Pierre Gemayel asked whether 
the army is perhaps being tricked by certain Lebanese into 
deploying into the South where it could then be dragged into 
a war with Israel.  Hamadeh described Trad Hamadi's reaction 
to this question as "primitive, saying the army would become 
a part of the resistance."  The cooler Fneich appeared 
embarrassed by Hamadi's outburst, and "had to shut him up." 
Judging from the reaction of the Hizballah ministers, Hamadeh 
wonders whether Gemayel's question was in fact right on 
target and worries the Iranians and the Syrians may be 
setting a trap for the LAF.  Hamadeh agreed that Nabih Berri 
would not be part of any game to trap the army, which Berri 
has traditionally supported. 
 
¶10.  (C)  Describing Mu'allim's visit to Lebanon, Hamadeh 
said that Berri was "very frank" during their meeting and 
that Mu'allim met with a cold reception at the Arab League 
foreign minister's luncheon.  "He was like an orphan 
yesterday.  Nobody came over to say hello at the luncheon, so 
he left early, claiming he had a long road home."  While the 
Arab ministers ignored Syria on the issue of showing support 
for Hizballah in the final communique, there were also 
Lebanese protestors outside Mu'allim's hotel and Mu'allim was 
told he was not welcome in the Lebanese coastal town of 
Jbeil, forcing him to move his meeting with Lebanese FM 
Salloukh.  According to Hamadeh, Mu'allim left Lebanon "very 
mad." 
 
¶11.  (C)  Regarding the draft UN resolution, Hamadeh hopes 
that the text can be "Lebanized" and the French prevailed 
upon to accept relatively tough language regarding the 
mandate of an international stabilization force.  Hamadeh 
said he would tell Siniora to push the French to accept, 
while also getting assurances from Hizballah, via Berri, on 
whether they would accept the stabilization force.  Hamadeh 
said that the time for the resolution is now, while Hizballah 
could still save face.  If the IDF advances to the Litani 
River, then Hizballah may just decide to fight it out.  While 
acknowledging that Defense Minister Murr may have a hidden or 
mixed agenda, since it is well known he has been dining 
secretly with his ex-father-in-law Lahoud, Hamadeh believes 
 
SIPDIS 
that Murr sees himself playing "a historic role" in leading 
the LAF back to the South, and can be counted on.  Hamadeh 
also noted that Amr Moussa had been a surprisingly positive 
force during his recent visit to Lebanon, telling some 
ministers not to stand against the international community in 
rejecting a resolution. 
 
¶12.  (C)  As an close ally of Walid Jumblatt, Hamadeh has 
been on the anti-Lahoud bandwagon for some time.  He thinks 
Berri is now ready to support this effort, and that Michel 
Aoun might also be brought on board if his Free Patriotic 
Movement were offered positions in the new government. 
Hamadeh stressed, however, that Aoun would not be offered the 
Presidency. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶13.  (C/NF)  Several common themes emerged from our meetings 
with Hamdan, Mikati, and Hamadeh, and also from our 
discussion with Amin Gemayel (septel).  It is clear that all 
view Nabih Berri as the lynchpin holding this tenuous 
agreement together and bridging the gap between Siniora and 
 
BEIRUT 00002566  004 OF 004 
 
 
Hizballah.  Without him, the whole plan could collapse, with 
the potential for a violent Sunni-Shi'a conflict and 
escalation in the Hixballah-Israeli fighting.  In this 
context, the possible assassination of Berri would present a 
nightmare scenario of government collapse and sectarian 
strife, with Hizballah, having the most arms and best 
organization, stepping in to fill the vacuum. 
 
¶14.  (C/NF)  There was also full agreement that, in the event 
of a ceasefire, Hizballah would emerge from this conflict in 
a weakened political position, which Hamadeh and others vowed 
to exploit.  While a proposal to deploy 15000 LAF troops to 
the South would have been unimaginable on July 11, it is now 
the unanimously-accepted position of the Lebanese government. 
 This would be a significant feather in Siniora's cap, and 
the government could take the lion's share of the credit for 
negotiating a ceasefire which strengthens Lebanon, whereas 
Hizballah would bear the brunt of the blame for provoking a 
conflict which has left over a thousand dead and millions of 
dollars of damage to Lebanon's infrastructure. 
 
¶15.  (C/NF)  Finally, general feeling could swing towards 
removing Emile Lahoud following a ceasefire.  Again, Speaker 
Berri would be the critical player in this, as the addition 
of his Amal bloc to the March 14 MPs would provide the 
two-thirds parliamentary vote needed to remove the President. 
 However, Berri will not move in this direction unless he 
feels stronger vis-a-vis his fellow Shi'a in Hizballah, who 
have leaned on Berri in the past to maintain unity in support 
of Lahoud.  Berri may gain this leverage if he is able to 
successfully implement the planned LAF deployment and achieve 
a lasting cease-fire. 
FELTMAN