04QUITO2690
PRESIDENT SIGNS SUBCONTRACTING DECREE
Tue Oct 05 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Quito
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS QUITO 002690 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SECSTATE PLEASE PASS TO USTR FOR BUD CLATANOFF. USDOL FOR 
JORGE PEREZ-LOPEZ. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB PGOV EC
SUBJECT: PRESIDENT SIGNS SUBCONTRACTING DECREE 
 
 
¶1.  Minister of Labor Raul Izurieta informed LabOff on 
October 5 that the President had signed the long-promised 
subcontracting decree (Executive Decree #2166) late on 
October 4.  The decree will be published in the official 
register next week, he said.  After the decree is published, 
the GoE will hold a press conference to publicize it. 
 
¶2.  Minister Izurieta provided the Embassy a copy of the 
decree, which we have faxed to WHA/AND, WHA/PPC, DRL/IL, 
USDOL/ILAB and USTR.  The decree regulates the use of three 
kinds of third-party contractors: subcontractors for 
temporary services, subcontractors for complimentary services 
and subcontractors who provide primary services indefinitely. 
 For the last category, the number of subcontracted workers 
cannot exceed 75% of the company's total employees.  The 
decree guarantees subcontracted workers' right to collective 
bargaining and states that subcontracted workers will receive 
the same benefits (including profit sharing and social 
security) and salaries as directly hired workers, in partial 
fulfillment of commitments made to the USG under ATPDEA. 
KENNEY