04QUITO2642
ECUADOR LABOR UPDATE
Thu Sep 30 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Quito
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 QUITO 002642 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SECSTATE FOR USTR 
USTR FOR BUD CLATANOFF, USDOL FOR JORGE PEREZ-LOPEZ, DRL/IL 
FOR GREG MAGGIO, EB FOR AMY HOLMAN, GENEVA FOR JOHN 
CHAMBERLIN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB PGOV EC
SUBJECT: ECUADOR LABOR UPDATE 
 
REF: A. GUAYAQUIL 1064 
 
     ¶B. QUITO 2614 
 
¶1.  (U) Summary.  Following are labor-related developments of 
interest: 
 
--MOL to Consult Unions on Subcontracting Decree (para. 2) 
--Rules Proposed for National Labor Council (3) 
--MOL Computers for Child Labor Inspectors (5) 
--National Campaign to Eliminate Child Labor in Trash Sector 
(8) 
--Public Sector Protests Salary Standardization (9) 
--Strike Affects 120 Hospitals (11) 
--Galapagos Park Strike Ends (12) 
--Illegal Peruvian Migrant Workers Deported (13) 
--Profit Sharing Benefits Selected Workers in 2003 (14) 
--Unemployment and Informal Sector Stats (15) 
 
MOL to Consult Unions on Subcontracting Decree 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) The Minister of Labor told LabOff on September 29 
the decree will be signed no later than October 1 by the 
President and published officially the following week. 
Patricio Contreras of the Solidarity Center (AFL-CIO) told 
LabOff that Minister of Labor Izurieta will meet with unions 
again regarding the draft subcontracting decree on September 
¶30. 
 
Operating Rules Proposed for National Labor Council 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶3.  (U) According to the Sandra Jacomi, assistant to Minister 
of Labor Raul Izurieta, the National Labor Council has met 
three times since its creation in July.  Council members have 
been named.  On September 9, the ILO and the Chambers of 
Commerce and Industry separately proposed operating rules for 
the National Labor Council but these are still being studied 
and have not been approved yet.  The MOL has yet to name the 
Technical Secretariat who will staff the National Labor 
Council.  The ILO has proposed a profile for members of the 
Technical Secretariat. 
 
¶4.  (U) The Minister proposed on September 27 that Labor Code 
reform be one of the themes to be discussed in the Council. 
This includes the issues of company retirement and hourly 
work.  There are no proposals pending from the union or 
business sectors on Labor Code reform. 
 
MOL to Provide Computers to Child Labor Inspectors 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶5.  (U) Jenny Cepeda, Technical Secretary of the Division of 
Child Labor in the MOL, told LabOff on September 27 the MOL 
is acquiring computers for the child labor inspectors which 
should be in place by mid-November.  She said the MOL has set 
aside $2000 a month for transportation funds for the 
inspectors.  Currently, two child labor inspectors use the 
Institute of the Child and Family (INNFA) offices in Los Rios 
and El Oro.  Four inspectors use INNFA vehicles in Guayas, El 
Oro, Los Rios and Pichincha.  Bladimir Chicaiza of the ILO 
told PolOff there is a critical lack of resources for the 
rehabilitation of child workers.  In Guayas, Los Rios and El 
Oro provinces, he said, transportation is provided by the 
Association of Banana Exporters. 
 
¶6.  (U) Ruth Mosquera, Director of the Division of Child 
Labor in the MOL, told PolOff on September 28 that two child 
labor inspectors had recently resigned.  She said they will 
work until the end of the month when they will be replaced. 
Chicaiza said two training sessions have provided child labor 
inspectors with adequate knowledge of the legal framework 
related to child labor.  He said there is willingness on the 
part of the MOL to offer further training to the inspectors. 
 
¶7.  (U) To confirm information in Ref A regarding inspections 
of Dole banana plantations, PolOff spoke on September 27 with 
Juanita LaRosa, the child labor inspector for Guayas 
province.  LaRosa said that 18 out of the 55 banana farms she 
has inspected in Guayas since August 2004 have belonged to 
Dole (around 33%).  She said this is because they are located 
close together and the MOL conducts inspections by geographic 
zone.  LaRosa said that there are 50 Dole farms in this zone. 
 Patricia Paez, Undersecretary in the MOL for the Coastal 
Region told PolOff on September 27 that all companies are 
getting equal treatment.  Patricia Hoyos of UNICEF told 
PolOff on September 29 she believes the inspection sites are 
being selected impartially.  Hoyos said there is no way for 
the inspector to know who the owner is of the haciendas 
marked on inspection maps. 
 
National Campaign Focuses on Children 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  (U) Press reported that on September 23, the second phase 
of a national campaign "Child Hope" began which aims to gain 
public support for eliminating child abuse.  The first phase 
of the campaign, developed by UNICEF, focused on eliminating 
child labor in the trash sector by creating 25 
micro-enterprises generating family income, educational 
scholarships and health services. 
 
Public Sector Protests Standardization of Salaries 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶9.  (U) Patricio Contreras of the Solidarity Center (AFL-CIO) 
told LabOff on September 27 that various public sector 
workers were considering protesting the January 2004 Civil 
Service Law on standardizing public sector salaries.  The law 
was proposed by the GoE as part of the last agreement with 
the IMF.  The National Confederation of Public Workers 
(CONASEP) along with electrical, petroleum, 
telecommunication, health and municipal workers is 
participating and Ministry of Government workers announced 
they would strike if the law is not overturned by the 
Constitutional Court.  On September 29, the Court ruled the 
law was constitutional. 
 
¶10.  (U) Unions are against the law because it sets maximum 
salaries that limit collective bargaining.  The law also caps 
severance for fired workers at a maximum of $1000 per year of 
service.  The law also adds new requirements for collective 
bargaining by stating that parties must have the approval of 
the Ministries of Finance and Labor as well as the Prosecutor 
General to begin collective bargaining. 
 
Health Workers Strike - 120 Hospitals Affected 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶11.  (U) Press reported that health workers held a 48-hour 
work stoppage September 27-28 to demand respect of the 2005 
budget and the signing of a ninth collective bargaining 
agreement.  The strike affected 120 hospitals and 14,059 
health workers participated.  The agreement would provide 
higher wages, better work stability and overtime pay.  If no 
solution is reached by October 4, health workers have 
threatened an indefinite strike. 
 
Galapagos Park Workers Strike Ends 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶12.  (U) On September 28, the 19-day strike of 250 
non-unionized workers in Galapagos National Park ended after 
Minister of Environment Fabian Valdivieso replaced Fausto 
Cepado with Victor Carrion as Park Director (Ref B).  The 
Ministry of Environment agreed to issue individual work 
agreements with the park employees, a demand of the 
association of park workers.  Park worker Carlos Macias 
stated to the press that the Government had also promised 
$700,000 for wage increases. 
 
Illegal Peruvian Workers Detained 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶13.  (U) On September 13, Immigration officials detained 118 
Peruvians for violating conditions of the Andean Migration 
Card to work on the sugar plantation Hacienda Sausalito in 
Guayas province, according to press reports.  The Peruvian 
workers claimed they had worked twelve hour days, seven days 
a week for $130 a month.  The workers were deported to Peru 
on September 16. 
 
Profit Sharing For Some Workers in 2003 
--------------------------------------- 
¶14.  (U) Press reported that, according to the Ministry of 
Labor, in 2003, 3,518 companies distributed $102.2 million to 
160,193 employees as mandatory 15% profit-sharing as required 
under the Labor Code.  This represented a six percent 
decrease in payments compared with 2002.  According to 
Ecuadorian law, 10% of a company's profits must be 
distributed to employees and 5% goes to employees' families. 
The largest sum paid to a single worker was $66,616 and eight 
companies paid out over one million dollars to their workers. 
 The portion going to women increased by 129 percent from 
1997 to 2003.  In 2003, 51,861 women received $25.1 million 
in profit sharing. 
 
Unemployment and Informal Sector Statistics 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶15.  (U) The press reported that, according to the Central 
Bank of Ecuador, unemployment in Ecuador has risen from 9.3% 
in December 2003 to 11.53 percent in May 2004.  According to 
the National Institute of Statistics and Census (INEC), 1.5 
million Ecuadorians are currently employed in the informal 
sector. 
KENNEY