06BEIJING23789
NOVEMBER 15 TAO PRESS BRIEFING: ARRESTS ON
Wed Nov 15 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO9422
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #3789/01 3191153
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 151153Z NOV 06
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2115
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 023789 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINR ETRD CH TW
SUBJECT: NOVEMBER 15 TAO PRESS BRIEFING: ARRESTS ON 
MAINLAND FOR SPYING, RESOLVING POLITICAL TURMOIL  DEPENDS 
ON TAIWAN PEOPLE, CHEN SHUI-BIAN AGENT IS  FREE, 
FUJIAN-PENGHU SHIPPING LINK 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
 ¶1.  Key points made at the November 15 Taiwan Affairs 
Office (TAO) press briefing were: 
 
-- Two Taiwan businesspeople have been detained in 
Hunan Province for spying. 
 
-- The spokesman deflected questions about China's 
view of the indictment of Chen Shui-bian's wife, Wu 
Shu-chen, and the questioning of Taipei Mayor Ma Ying- 
jeou. 
 
-- Mainland-based Taiwan businessman, Kung chin-yuan, 
who was accused by a Taiwan legislator of being Chen 
Shui-bian's agent on the Mainland, is "free." 
 
-- The spokesman noted hopes for establishment of a 
direct shipping link between Fujian Province and 
Penghu County.  End summary. 
 
Two Taiwan Businesspeople Detained for Spying 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  Taiwan Affairs Office (TAO) spokesperson Li Weiyi 
confirmed during the November 15 press briefing that 
two businesspeople from Taiwan were detained in 
China's Hunan Province for spying activities and 
stated that their families have been notified.  (Note: 
The online transcript of the briefing deleted the 
reporter's mention of spying as the reason for the 
arrest.  End note.) 
 
End Of Political Turmoil Depends on Taiwan People 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶3.  Asked to comment on the indictment of Chen Shui- 
bian's wife Wu Shu-chen on charges of document forgery 
and embezzling, Li said Beijing is paying attention to 
relevant Taiwan media reports and that the issue must 
be resolved by the Taiwan people themselves.  Asked 
for comment on the questioning of KMT leader and Mayor 
of Taipei Ma Ying-jeou, Li reiterated the attention 
being paid to relevant Taiwan media reports.  China 
will continue to encourage and strengthen cross-Strait 
exchange and cooperation and promote the development 
of peace and stability in Cross-strait relations.  At 
the same time, China will remain alert, will firmly 
oppose and contain "independence" activities, will not 
allow any person to separate Taiwan from China and 
will protect China's sovereignty and territorial 
integrity, the people's interests and the peace and 
stability of the Taiwan Strait and Asia-Pacific 
regions. 
 
Purported "Agent" Kung Chin-yuan is Free 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  Kung Chin-yuan, a Mainland-based businessman who 
was accused by a Taiwan legislator of being Chen Shui- 
bian's "agent" in the Mainland, "is free," Li 
confirmed when asked by a Taiwan reporter if Mr. Kung 
was under the supervision or control of Mainland 
authorities.  The TAO has not had any contact with Mr. 
Kung, Li stated. 
 
"One Country, Two Systems" Zone in Kinmen 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  China welcomes exchanging ideas on peaceful 
unification and the development of cross-Strait 
relations with relevant parties, groups and 
individuals, said Li when asked by a Mainland reporter 
for comment on a suggestion for an experimental "One 
country, Two Systems" zone to be set up in Kinmen. 
 
Taiwan Customs Workers Take Mainland Exams 
------------------------------------------ 
¶6.  Taiwan residents are now eligible to take China's 
customs clearance specialist exam, as announced by TAO 
Director Chen Yunlin on April 15 at the Cross-Strait 
Trade Forum.  Of the 551 Taiwan residents who 
registered for the exam, 421 did so on site in 
Shanghai, Nanjing, Guangzhou and Shenzhen, said Li. 
The exam was held on November 5, and grading work is 
currently underway. 
 
China Values Views of Taiwan Business 
------------------------------------- 
 
BEIJING 00023789  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
¶7.  Asked for comment on a National Taiwan Business 
Federation to be founded at the end of this month, Li 
said that China greatly values the views of Taiwan 
businesspeople.  The TAO will work to strengthen 
services for Taiwan businesses and protect their 
rights and interests, Li said.  Li noted that since 
1990, ninety-nine Taiwan investment and enterprise 
associations have been established, with a total of 
more than 20,000 enterprise members, about one third 
of all Taiwan enterprises on the mainland. 
 
"Three Links" Depends on Taiwan Authorities 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  China hopes that a direct shipping link between 
Fujian Province on the mainland and Penghu County in 
Taiwan can be soon realized to fulfill the wishes of 
the people of Penghu County and all Taiwan 
compatriots, said Li when asked to comment on the 
"blocking" of the link by the Taiwan authorities. 
Successful boat trips in June prove that the 
transportation route is technically sound and can be 
fully implemented, Li said. 
 
Mainland Tourists Illegally Traveling to Taiwan 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶9.  Some mainland tourists traveling illegally to 
Taiwan via third party territories or countries have 
been victims of fraud, Li stated.  Cross-Strait 
professional organizations will continue their 
communication on the issue of Mainland tourists in 
Taiwan. 
 
Scholarships for Taiwan students on mainland 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶10.  This year 1,705 scholarships were awarded to 
Taiwan students for study on the mainland.  The 
recipients included 405 doctorate students, 407 
graduate students and 893 undergraduates.  According 
to the "Provisional Method for Taiwan Student 
Scholarship Management" regulations, Mainland 
scholarships of First, Second and Third Class 
distinctions are offered for up to 2,000 students at 
the undergraduate, graduate and doctorate degree 
levels. 
Randt