06KHARTOUM2768
BASHIR PRESS FORUM
Thu Nov 30 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO2830
OO RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #2768/01 3341545
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 301545Z NOV 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5440
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RHMFISS/CJTF HOA IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 002768 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR AF/SPG, AF/SE, AF/RSA 
NSC FOR PITTMAN AND SHORTLEY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV KPKO AU SU CD UN US
SUBJECT: BASHIR PRESS FORUM 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  In a November 27 press forum in Khartoum 
conducted via satellite, President Bashir emphasized that 
international forces in Darfur should remain under African 
Union (AU) command and that he considered the proposed "third 
phase" of UN support for the African Union Mission in Sudan 
(AMIS) indirect implementation of UN Security Council 
Resolution (UNSCR) 1706.  Bashir indicated that two 
battalions would be sufficient to buttress AMIS forces, that 
security problems in Darfur were limited to a handful of 
localities, and that there had been only 9,000 deaths in 
Darfur.  He also claimed that instability in Chad and along 
the border was the result of President Deby's refusal to 
cooperate with Sudan on security and denied that the Sudanese 
government was supporting Chadian rebel groups.  Bashir was 
criticized the following day by opposition party 
representatives for distorting the humanitarian crisis and 
disrespecting the international community.  End summary. 
 
¶2. (U) The following are excerpts from the press conference 
as reported by the pro-government English-language daily 
"Sudan Vision."  They were verified by an Embassy staff 
member who attended the event. 
 
---------------------------------- 
United Nations' Role and AU Troops 
---------------------------------- 
 
-- "We stated that we should focus on implementing the 
(Darfur Peace Agreement), and that we do not accept 
replacement of African forces by international forces. 
Despite that, resolution 1706 was issued.  It is a 
contradictory resolution.  It talked in its introduction 
about preserving Sudan's sovereignty and unity, but it 
generally violates this sovereignty." 
 
-- "...We are repeating our absolute rejection for this 
resolution (UNSCR 1706).  It does not at all mean that we 
reject a deal with the United Nations.  We are ready to 
cooperate with the United Nations, but this does not mean 
that we should accept this resolution." 
 
-- "The report raised by the African Union Force Commander in 
Darfur to the Peace and Security Council meetings in Addis 
Ababa on the 12th of this month spoke about the positive 
developments in Darfur.  He stated that he is in need of 
adding two battalions to enable African forces to carry out 
their tasks efficiently in achieving stability in Darfur, 
despite that we hear that the additional forces required in 
Darfur are 17,000...What is really required is the material 
and logistics support for Darfur within the framework of 
consultancy between us and the United Nations." 
 
-- "We hear now about a third stage.  It concerns execution 
of Resolution 1706 within this plan.  The United Nations 
stated it would support joint and merged forces.  We say that 
any support should be made to the African Union.  We agreed 
that forces in Darfur should be under the African Union and 
should be under its command.  We welcome any other support 
after that to enable these forces to carry out their duty." 
 
-- "We stated that the forces should be African forces.  Some 
clever people say that they should be African forces under 
the United Nations.  We say that the beret should be green. 
The required number of troops was stated by the African 
forces commander in Darfur...He stated that he needs two 
battalions only to carry out the African Union tasks in 
Darfur." 
 
-- "It is expected that the African Peace and Security 
Council would extend the period of African forces in Darfur 
and should demand support." 
 
------------------- 
Stability in Darfur 
------------------- 
 
-- "The problems taking place are restricted to seven 
localities only...In respect of security, there are regions 
in Darfur where Minni Arcoi Minawi forces were sighted 
together with those of Abdel Wahid (al Nur).  These regions 
are quite secure because Abdel Wahid is committed to the 
ceasefire despite the fact that he did not sign the 
agreement.  All Darfur was secure and stable until the 
(National) Redemption Front started activities.  We can 
safely say that there are only five localities which are 
affected by the conflicts in Darfur." 
 
---------------- 
 
KHARTOUM 00002768  002 OF 002 
 
 
Chadian Question 
---------------- 
 
-- "There is a problem between us and Chad.  At first, he 
(Deby) had a very clear stance toward the Darfur issue on 
account that it will affect Chad.  However, some of the 
senior elements in his government were siding with the 
rebels.  The President's brother was working as coordinator 
for that support." 
 
-- "We gave them (the Chadian rebels) three choices: to hand 
over their arms and we would deliver them to the United 
Nations as refugees; to return to Chad; or we should deal 
with them militarily.  They preferred the third choice and 
went with their weapons inside Chad." 
 
-- "The Tripoli Agreement was the third we had signed with 
President Deby to form joint Sudanese-Chadian forces to 
supervise the borders, but the Chadian side refused to 
execute the agreement...It even started to provide 
considerable support for the Redemption Front through Chad." 
 
-- "Any cooperation with Chad is welcome, as through it we 
can secure those borders through which the main support for 
rebels (passes).  We find that rebels use cars that work on 
petrol.  We don't have these types of cars.  Our cars work on 
gasoline.  The types of weapons used by (Chadian) rebels in 
Darfur include anti-aircraft missiles.  Our armed forces do 
not have such weapons because they are not facing any aerial 
threats in Darfur." 
 
-- "We do not object to African forces to supervise borders." 
 
-- "When I met President Deby in Tripoli...I told him we do 
not have a single element in Chad.  It was pure Chadian 
opposition...On the other hand, Chad's support for Darfur 
rebels is documented by the African Union and the United 
Nations." 
HUME