06NAIROBI5001
KENYA'S IMPLEMENTATION OF THE WOMEN'S JUSTICE AND
Wed Nov 22 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Nairobi
VZCZCXYZ0007
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHNR #5001/01 3261407
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 221407Z NOV 06
FM AMEMBASSY NAIROBI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5659
INFO RUEHCO/AMEMBASSY COTONOU PRIORITY 0377
RUEHLS/AMEMBASSY LUSAKA PRIORITY 4071
RUEHSA/AMEMBASSY PRETORIA PRIORITY 8545UNCLAS NAIROBI 005001 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
INL FOR AMBASSADOR CARL C. CUNDIFF 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID SNAR SOCI PGOV PHUM KE SF BN ZA
SUBJECT: KENYA'S IMPLEMENTATION OF THE WOMEN'S JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT INITIATIVE 
 
REF: A. STATE 50186 
 
     ¶B. NAIROBI 1819 
     ¶C. STATE 163442 
     ¶D. CUNDIFF-POST EMAIL 9/8/06 
     ¶E. STATE 00178861 
     ¶F. NAIROBI 4335 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Post reiterates our firm commitment to 
implementing the WJEI program in Kenya and looks forward to 
implementing an effective initiative to bolster Kenya,s 
capacity to combat violence against women.   Post Mission 
Planning Team (MPT), comprised of USAID, DOJ, RSO, Political, 
and the Front Office, has reviewed the Assessment Team's 
proposed activities (ref A), Post's response to that proposal 
(ref B), and the Department's implementation guidance (refs C 
and E).  Based on this analysis, Post's plan, as requested in 
ref C, is outlined below. 
 
¶2.  Post understands that, at this time, Washington's 
preference is to accommodate a new full-time ICITAP as well 
as a half time OPDAT position. While Post can proceed along 
these lines, Post feels a duty to share an alternative 
approach. Therefore, for Washington's consideration, this 
cable includes proposed alternatives for reprogramming some 
OPDAT personnel costs and outlines the advantages of the 
proposed alternative, both in terms of programmatic impact, 
expedited implementation, and security considerations. 
 
¶3.  There remains an urgent need to articulate an overall 
WJEI Kenya strategy, develop an integrated design document 
and collect baseline data expeditiously.  These overarching 
activities must be effectively accommodated to attain the 
WJEI goal. 
 
¶4.  Under the leadership of the DCM, post will effectively 
coordinate and implement the WJEI program.  Post has outlined 
critical initial activities.  However, a specific timeline 
will depend on staffing for the overall program.  End Summary. 
 
Securing Host Country Buy-In 
---------------------------- 
¶5.  Ref C paragraph 10 requests that Post continue to engage 
host country governments to discuss expectations and desired 
outcomes for WJEI.  Post has not officially engaged the GOK 
following the Joint Assessment Team Mission.  Initially Post 
awaited endorsement of its proposal (ref B), which 
conceptualized a WJEI program based on the Joint Assessment 
Team recommendations.  Given the apparent gap between those 
recommendations and Washington's priorities, Post did not 
undertake further programmatic consultations.  Consequently, 
while Post has not formally engaged the GOK regarding a final 
program, recent experiences suggest that a careful and 
deliberate approach is the most appropriate. Of late, the GOK 
has expressed concern about over saturation of training in 
the criminal justice sector and the heavy commitment of time 
of personnel from various agencies. 
 
Outline for Care and Support and Awareness Components 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
As requested in Ref C paragraph 11, the strategic priorities 
for care and support and awareness are outlined below. 
 
¶6.  Strategic Priority: Care and Support 
 
Program Element 1: Provision of Care and Support Services 
 
Objective:  Create a friendly environment for the management 
of victims of gender-based violence in the Kibera community 
including rape management and post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) 
treatment at health facilities.  Nairobi's Kibera area is the 
largest slum in East Africa.  If sufficient funding were 
available, this project would expand services in Kibera and 
extend them to Western Province, the most appropriate 
province for future expansion of the program. 
 
Strategy:  To provide both specialized medical and 
psychological treatment to victims of domestic violence and 
sexual abuse. The activity will target women and children 
victims of gender violence and offer emergency post-exposure 
prophylaxis (PEP) services. Staff at health facilities and 
community health workers will be trained and sensitized to 
administer proper care to victims of gender-based violence 
and facilitate the development of post-rape support groups. 
This activity will further establish a training framework, 
with the goal of bringing about behavioral change at the 
community level and in health care facilities. One of the 
desired residual impacts will be to strengthen linkages with 
the police and the public awareness activity focused on 
 
gender-based violence in communities. This activity will also 
seek to assist in improving the capacity of community health 
workers, institutions, and government agencies to address 
sexual violence and offer treatment, referral, and supportive 
services to survivors. In addition, this activity will link 
to and work closely with organizations of people living with 
AIDS in order to further strengthen support groups to deal 
with their HIV status. 
 
Budget Scenarios: Under a year one low-budget scenario 
(USD400,000), essential services for care and support would 
only be provided in the Kibera informal settlement area of 
Nairobi. Under a higher-budget scenario (USD2,050,000), more 
comprehensive services would be offered in Kibera and 
extended to one province. Demographic and Health Survey data, 
including information on gender-based violence, suggests that 
Western Province, which has the highest rates of violence 
against women in the country, would be the most appropriate 
region for inclusion into the program. 
 
Desired Output:  Increased numbers of facility and community 
health workers with the skills to provide medical and other 
services to victims of domestic violence and sexual abuse, 
and increased number of individuals participating in support 
groups. 
 
Outcome to be Measured: Number of victims receiving care and 
support services. We expect to experience an ever-growing 
demand for services, including critical medical services with 
a special focus in obstetrics and gynecology. This would 
measure the number of individuals receiving PEP and other 
referral for other services such as family planning and STI 
treatment. 
 
Expected Long Term Impact: Create a friendly environment for 
the management of victims of gender-based violence in the 
community, including rape management and post-exposure 
prophylaxis (PEP) treatment at health facilities. 
 
¶7.  Strategic Priority: Awareness 
 
Program Element 1: Increasing Awareness 
 
Objective:  Increased public awareness of the importance of 
combating gender-based violence and the availability of care 
and support services. 
 
Strategy:  To increase awareness of gender-based violence and 
victims, knowledge of how to access care and support 
services in Kibera through an integrated media campaign and 
community mobilization program.  Implementation will be 
sequenced in two phases. 
 
Phase I ) Assessment and Awareness of Victims, Care and 
Support Services 
 
Phase 1 will begin with an assessment of gender-based 
violence in Kibera. Data will be collected and analyzed to 
assess all aspects of the issue including the current 
attitudes towards gender-based violence; the presence and 
effectiveness of community police and the access and 
availability of victim care and support services; as well as 
awareness of victims, rights under the newly enacted Sexual 
Offences Act. The assessment results will serve two critical 
functions.  First, they will be the basis for designing the 
content of the Phase II awareness component outlined below. 
Second, the assessment will establish baseline data from 
which targets will be identified to measure the impact of the 
awareness component. 
 
To ensure timely implementation of the overall WJEI program, 
the first elements of the awareness campaign will commence 
concurrently with the assessment activities. The initial 
focus will be limited to increasing knowledge of the services 
available for victims of gender-based violence and locations 
where victims can access treatment (including information of 
HIV/AIDS prevention). 
 
Phase II )Awareness of Community Policing, Victims, Rights, 
and Changing Attitudes towards Gender-based Violence 
 
Under phase II, awareness activities will increase in scope 
and depth.  The scope will expand to publicize community 
policing efforts, increase awareness of victims, rights 
under the newly enacted Sexual Offences Act, and seek to 
change the attitudes of targeted segments of the community 
towards gender-based violence.  Awareness activities would 
have a comprehensive mass media campaign effectively 
 
saturating the target audience with key messages. Moreover, a 
civil society program would complement the media campaign by 
integrating a community mobilization and individual behavior 
change focus. Post would award two to five grants to local 
organizations through a competitive process.  These 
organizations would design and implement programs that: 
 
     utilize community and school-based education and 
information campaigns about the availability of medical and 
legal services and the existence of       community policing 
programs aimed at redressing and preventing gender-based 
violence; 
     address gender-based attitudes, relations and violence 
that focus on men, particularly young men; 
     use community-wide meetings, knowledge-building 
workshops, peer group discussions, and possibly theater/drama 
to challenge gender inequities            related to 
gender-based violence; and 
     raise awareness though seminars and workshops with 
students, parents, teachers, government officials, religious 
leaders, and NGOs in relation to    gender-based violence in 
the work place and schools. 
 
Such activities would incorporate young celebrity musicians 
and athletes, as well as respected religious and political 
leaders. 
 
Budget Scenarios:  With funding levels of USD950,000 Phase I 
and Phase II would be sequenced, but both would begin in year 
one.  Under a lower budget scenario, with a budget of 
USD400,000, awareness activities in the first year would be 
limited to those outlined in Phase I.  Simultaneous with the 
assessment, the implementation of the initial awareness 
campaign will begin.  A more limited radio and print mass 
media campaign will be utilized and there will be no 
complementary civil society element in year one. Phase II 
activities will begin in year two applying the same approach 
outlined in the high budget scenario. 
 
Outputs to be Measured: An integrated multi-media awareness 
campaign addressing gender-based violence. 
 
Desired Outcome: Increased awareness of the levels of 
gender-based violent crime in Kibera, increased awareness of 
key provisions of the Sexual Offenses Act, increased 
awareness of community policing efforts as well as increased 
awareness of medical services available to victims of 
gender-based violence. 
 
Expected Long Term Impact: An increase in the percentage of 
gender-based violent crimes reported in Kibera and an 
increase in the number of Kibera residents, who have been 
victims of gender-based violence, seeking care and support. 
At the higher level of funding, over time, Post would also 
expect to realize a decrease in the number of gender-based 
violence offences committed in Kibera. 
 
Proposal for Reallocation of Budget for 
Additional OPDAT Personnel 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶9.  While Post would accommodate Washington's preference for 
a 50 percent OPDAT RLA, as noted in ref F, Post reiterates 
its proposal to use OPDAT staff/expertise on a TDY basis 
rather than engage a 50 percent RLA.   This recommendation is 
grounded in our desire to optimize program impact, our 
ability to maximize existing personnel and programmatic 
economies of scale, and office space and security constraints 
that limit the number of additional full-time/PCS staff that 
post can accommodate. 
 
¶10.  If the budget to support additional personnel were 
reprogrammed for technical assistance and training, the WJEI 
program activities would gain, conservatively, USD300,000. 
This additional savings would translate into the following 
tangible gains for the program: 
 
     An additional 30 specialized training programs for up 
20 prosecutors, per year. Each of these programs would be 3-4 
days in length. These costs   would include those incurred 
for procuring experts who would serve as instructors as well 
as acquiring equipment like video cameras to assist in 
skills development. 
     The training sessions will be critical in that Police 
Prosecutors (lay prosecutors), who prosecute 90 percent of 
the criminal cases in Kenya and     virtually all of the 
crimes that would be the focus of the WJEI program, will be 
incorporated into these training sessions. The lay 
 
prosecutors       are roughly 4-5 times the number of the 
professional prosecutors of the Department of Public 
Prosecutions (DPP). 
     These additional 30 programs would be essential in 
skills development, which in turn would have a direct and 
measurable impact on the ability of       the prosecutors to 
assess evidence and effectively prosecute cases. 
     More intensely and comprehensively trained prosecutors 
will be more effective in using the judicial system to 
protect the rights of women         victims, i.e., seeking 
protective orders to safeguard victims. 
     The additional training will translate to 25-35 percent 
increase in successful prosecutions in the designated region 
of focus. 
     Finally, the additional funding can be used to build 
the DPP,s institutional capacity (i.e., the development of a 
database that would track           prior offenders and prior 
case dispositions) to effectively and efficiently deal with 
rape cases. 
 
¶11.  Not only do we believe it is advantageous to the WJEI 
objectives to redirect the current budget towards technical 
assistance and training, but Post is concerned that the 
estimated personnel budgets submitted may be conservative. 
The OPDAT proposed budget raises several concerns: 
 
     Do costs associated with post differential, cost of 
living adjustment, office furniture, IT equipment, etc. need 
to be added to the budget? 
     Is ICASS under budgeted?  Post estimates increasing the 
ICASS costs by USD5,000 based on projected FSN salary 
increments. 
     Has transportation been adequately considered? Given 
Post's critical threat status for both crime and terrorism 
and current motor pool              constraints, a vehicle 
and driver would need to be budgeted. 
 
Thus, we are concerned that already scarce technical 
assistance and training budgets could be further depleted if 
a new OPDAT half-time RLA was assigned to Nairobi. 
 
¶12.  Post appreciates the valid concern regarding the current 
RLA funding source. Post reassures Washington that CT is our 
first priority as reflected in our MPP.  We would not suggest 
the current RLA cover the WJEI portfolio if we felt there was 
a significant risk that his involvement would diminish his 
effectiveness in Post's CT initiatives.  Three factors 
support our position:  the overlapping nature of the training 
needed for successful rape prosecutions; the current USAID 
support to professionalize prosecution, and the ability to 
tap OPDAT expertise when needed on a short-term basis. 
 
¶13.  First, the current reality in Kenya is that, whether CT 
or other criminal activity, effective prosecution requires 
basic training in prosecutorial skills as a first step. For 
that reason, while CT-centered, the current RLA has been 
authorized to focus on the development of these basic 
prosecutorial skills. The bulk of the current RLA,s work 
therefore has been to identify the gaps in training and to 
design effective training programs to fill those gaps. As we 
conceptualize the OPDAT component of the WJEI program, ninety 
percent of the first year training will focus on the very 
same basic skills. 
 
¶14.  The current RLA,s proposal for skills training for 
2006-07, highlights the necessity to incorporate police 
prosecutors into the training programs to truly be effective. 
Under the WJEI objectives, it will be also be essential to 
ensure that police prosecutors receive this basic training 
since they would be handling more than 50 percent of the 
criminal prosecutions on behalf of the DPP. Thus at the 
current stage of the WJEI initiative, its goals are virtually 
identical to those being pursued by the current RLA at Post. 
No new training designs for basic prosecutorial skills are 
necessary. In addition, current work plans which outline this 
basic training by USAID/OPDAT for the year 2006-07 have been 
reviewed an approved by the DPP and the GOK. 
 
¶15.  Second, USAID currently manages a program to 
professionalize public prosecutions, which pre-dates the 
OPDAT program.  USAID employs a rule of law advisor to 
oversee this assistance and has established a Program 
Coordination Unit within the DPP.  This unit is equipped to 
provide support to USG activities and will be fully engaged 
with the WJEI related training activities.  Thus, we can 
ensure that the current RLA is not inundated with 
programmatic responsibilities for the WJEI activities. 
 
¶16.  Third, for the additional 10 percent of training and 
other specific activities related to the DPP and gender-based 
violence, Post can and will reach out to OPDAT specialists on 
a short-term basis. 
 
Given these factors, Post feels confident that involvement 
with the WJEI activities will not be substantial or dilute 
the current OPDAT RLA,s efforts on CT initiatives. 
 
¶17.  In addition to having the staff to manage the DPP work, 
Post also reiterates its concern on overall staffing 
increases.  Post currently has a number of pending NSDD-38 
requests.  It is clear the New Embassy Compound does not have 
the physical capacity to accommodate all of these new 
positions.  In fact, the resident RLA and DOJ FSN waited six 
months for the assignment of permanent dedicated office 
space.  The current assignment of a single block of space 
will have to be subdivided for the RLA and the program FSN. 
 
¶18.  In summary, given scarce resources available to the WJEI 
program, programmatic benefits of realigning resources, the 
correlation between current program support to prosecutors 
and that proposed under WJEI, and the space and security 
constraints on staffing levels, Post strongly recommends the 
operation of the prosecution component under the current 
staffing structure. 
 
Additional Design and M&E Activities 
Not Addressed in Specific Components 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶19.  Post feels a well-integrated WJEI proposal was submitted 
in April.  However, now four separate program descriptions 
(police, prosecution, care and support, and awareness) exist. 
Going forward, we will require significant flexibility from 
Washington to the field to develop the details of an 
integrated and effective program if we are going to have 
measurable results in three years. Two activities, not 
specifically identified in any current component proposals, 
must happen immediately. First, a strategy and design 
document is critical.  A strategy that reintegrates the 
component parts and articulates the cumulative impact of the 
program must be drafted.  Given the importance of time, this 
document should also include a design for integrating all 
component (police, prosecution, awareness, and support) 
activities in Kibera and obtaining GOK bu-in.  Second, 
baseline data must be collected. Post cannot overstate the 
need to collect credible baseline data in order to monitor 
and evaluate performance under the initiative.  While each of 
the components addresses some specific monitoring and 
evaluation needs, there is a critical need for baseline data 
that will measure the overall impact of the WJEI program.  It 
will be essential to collect the following statistical data, 
or reliable proxies, for Kibera: 
 
     men's perception of gender-based violence; 
     levels of knowledge of victim's rights under the Sexual 
Offences Act; 
     the level of knowledge of care and support services 
available to support victims and the perceptions of such 
services; 
     the level of awareness of community policing efforts 
and the perceptions of these community police officers; 
     the number of rapes perpetrated in Kibera; 
     the number of rapes reported to police; 
     the number of reported rape cases investigated by the 
police; 
     the number of investigations completed; 
     the number of cases opened by the prosecutors; 
     the number of cases the victims declined to pursue; 
     the cases filed in court; 
     the number of cases reaching final judgment; and 
     the number of victims, resident in Kibera, receiving 
emotional and physical support from Kenyatta National 
Hospital. 
 
Once a baseline survey is completed, Post Mission Planning 
Team, chaired by the DCM, will identify performance targets 
for each year of the program for presentation to Washington. 
This survey will be conducted on an annual basis. 
 
¶20.  Unfortunately, the question of how such overarching 
activities will be funded is unclear.  Given the evolution of 
this program, funding was allocated per individual 
components, rather than for the overall initiative.  There 
will be ongoing elements of the program that are cross 
cutting. We urge Washington to consider future funding for 
such activities. While Post is agnostic as to what Agency 
 
budget these funds are allocated to, we feel that recognition 
of the importance of such funds is critical for program 
success. 
 
¶21.  For the three activities identified above, Post suggests 
the following approach.  A lead consultant, with expertise in 
program design in this field, be contracted to work with 
representatives from all Agencies to draft the strategy and 
design documents.  Post estimates such a consultancy would 
require four weeks in the field and cost approximately 
USD60,000. Post suggests that funding from the Care and 
Support component be utilized for this purpose. The initial 
baseline survey will likely cost approximately USD75,000 - 
USD150,000. Post suggests that this be funded by the 
Awareness Component, since this information will be vital to 
developing an effective awareness campaign.  If additional 
resources are not identified in the future, the Post suggests 
that the annual survey be funded by other components in the 
second and third year of the program. 
 
WJEI Mission Management, Coordination and Timelines 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶22.  Post welcomes Washington's request for a statement 
defining Post's intended management structure of the program 
as well as initial responsibilities, initial activities, and 
timeline as outlined in Reftel C, paragraph 11.  The Mission 
Planning Team, comprised of USAID, DOJ, RSO, Political, and 
the Front Office will immediately initiate monthly meetings 
chaired by the DCM.  The DCM will assign roles and 
responsibilities as they arise.  Initial responsibilities 
will include assigning a Coordinator and Team Leaders.  A 
WJEI Coordinator will be responsible for overall program 
coordination and will report on the program directly to the 
DCM.  This individual will oversee development of the 
integrated WJEI strategy and ensure overall program 
monitoring and evaluation to assess the impact of the WJEI 
program.  The DCM will also designate three Team Leaders for 
the program components: Care and Support, Legal/Judicial, and 
Awareness.  These individuals will oversee implementation of 
the various components. They will also be responsible for 
reporting on program progress and will work with the 
Coordinator to ensure compliance with all reporting 
requirements. 
¶23.  Initial activities will include: 
      ¶1.    Develop an integrated strategy and design for the 
integrated Kibera program. 
      ¶2.    Develop SOW and award contract for baseline data 
collection. 
      ¶3.    Award contract for Phase I awareness activities. 
      ¶4.    Develop effective strategy to integrate police 
and DPP prosecution elements. 
 
¶24.  The question of a timeline will depend on Washington's 
decision on Post staffing.  Given the importance of 
evidencing impact under this Presidential Initiative Post 
feels the need to be candid.  If Post's experience is the 
most reliable indicator, implementation would be delayed 
significantly if new ICITAP and/or OPDAT staff were 
designated to implement this program. 
 
¶25.  Utilizing current staff and one immediate virtual team 
member for ICITAP, Post feels that the two activities, 
identified above, could commence immediately with the fourth 
occurring in January.  However, Post is not able to outline a 
concrete timeline for any police assistance without further 
consultations with ICITAP.  This will also affect the 
timeline for implementing Kibera activities that integrate 
health workers, police, and prosecutors. 
¶26.  Post trusts that this plan provides Washington with a 
road map of how we propose to move forward with the WJEI 
program.  We look forward to your response and any queries 
you may have in the near future. 
RANNEBERGER