06BEIJING11382
JUNE 6 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: MILITARY  DEVELOPMENT,
Tue Jun 06 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO9019
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHBJ #1382/01 1570933
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 060933Z JUN 06
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7841
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA IMMEDIATE 0385
RUEHBU/AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES IMMEDIATE 0183
RUEHHE/AMEMBASSY HELSINKI IMMEDIATE 0775
RUEHMD/AMEMBASSY MADRID IMMEDIATE 0690
RUEHOT/AMEMBASSY OTTAWA IMMEDIATE 3791
RHHMUNA/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HI IMMEDIATE
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA IMMEDIATE 1138UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 011382 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM CH JP KN
SUBJECT: JUNE 6 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: MILITARY  DEVELOPMENT, 
TIP, DPRK ENERGY AGREEMENT, TIBET  GENOCIDE CASE, YEN 
LOANS, LAI CHANGXING, MILITARY  PLANE CRASH 
 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  Key points made at the June 6 MFA press briefing 
are as follows: 
 
-- The United States maintains the largest military 
expenditure in the world and has "no reason" to 
criticize China's military development. 
 
-- China is making significant progress in combating 
human trafficking and is prepared to step up 
international cooperation in this area. 
 
-- China and North Korea reached an agreement on oil 
resource development in the Bohai Sea. 
 
-- The "so-called" Tibet genocide case being heard by 
a Spanish court is "complete libel" against China. 
 
-- While yen loans represent a positive factor in 
China-Japan relations, it is unfortunate that some 
people in Japan have turned it into a sensitive issue. 
 
-- China's cooperation with Shanghai Cooperation 
Organization (SCO) members will not undermine other 
countries' interest nor lead to military frictions. 
 
-- China has called on Canada to repatriate fugitive 
Lai Changxing as soon as possible. 
 
-- President Hu Jintao has expressed condolences to 
the families of victims of a military plane crash in 
Anhui Province. 
 
-- The Latin American Parliament will send a 
delegation to China June 12. 
 
-- China will give positive consideration to 
participation in the September 10-11 Asia-Europe 
Meeting (ASEM).  End Summary. 
 
PRC Military Development 
------------------------ 
 
¶2.  Asked during the regular June 6 MFA press briefing 
to comment on Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld's recent 
statements on China's military development, MFA 
Spokesperson Liu Jianchao asserted that the United 
States maintains the largest military expenditure in 
the world and has "no reason" to criticize China. 
Such remarks are unacceptable, Liu remarked.  China's 
military development is of a "defensive nature" and 
does not pose a threat to any other party.  China has 
no history of invading other countries, he stated. 
 
TIP Report 
---------- 
 
¶3.  Questioned about the 2006 U.S. Trafficking in 
Persons (TIP) Report, Liu asserted that China attaches 
great importance to protecting its people's rights and 
combating human trafficking, especially of women and 
children.  The number of human trafficking cases in 
China is dropping, and the country is making 
significant progress in this area.  Noting that TIP is 
an international problem, Liu stressed Beijing's 
willingness to step up international cooperation in 
combating human trafficking, particularly of women and 
children. 
 
DPRK FM's Visit, Joint Energy Exploration Agreement 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶4.  DPRK Foreign Minister Paek Nam Sun's May 30-June 6 
visit to China was a success, Liu commented, noting 
that Paek and Chinese officials exchanged views on a 
range of regional and international issues, including 
the DPRK nuclear issue.  Beijing hopes the parties can 
adopt a flexible and pragmatic attitude in order to 
promote the Six-Party Talks.  Asked by the Reuters 
correspondent about the reported signing of a China- 
North Korea agreement on joint oil exploration in the 
 
BEIJING 00011382  002 OF 003 
 
 
Bohai Sea, Liu remarked that on the basis of equal- 
footed consultations, the two countries reached an 
agreement on oil resource development in the Bohai 
Sea.  Agreements on the specific arrangements will 
also be signed. 
 
Tibet Case Tried by Spanish Court is "Libel" 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  Asked by the Spanish News Agency correspondent 
about a Spanish Court's hearing of a trial on Tibetan 
genocide claims, Liu argued that the "so-called" 
genocide in Tibet is "complete libel" and a 
"fabrication" against China.  The Tibet issue is 
China's internal affair, he asserted, stressing that 
Beijing opposes other countries' attempts to interfere 
in China's internal affairs based on the pretext of 
the Tibet issue.  Beijing hopes the relevant parties 
will understand the "Dalai Lama group's" separatist 
nature and not give it a venue to conduct separatist 
activities.  Liu stressed that China and Spain should 
respect each other on the basis of bilateral 
consensus, remarking that Beijing hopes that this 
episode will not damage bilateral ties. 
 
Resumption of Japanese Yen Loans 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  Asked about Japan's decision to resume low- 
interest yen loans to China and whether the issue was 
discussed by the two countries' foreign ministers in 
Doha, Liu stated that the two FMs did not raise this 
topic.  The loans represent a "positive factor" in 
bilateral relations.  It is unfortunate, however, that 
some people in Japan have turned it into a sensitive 
issue, a move that is not beneficial for either 
country, Liu remarked.  Beijing welcomes the attention 
placed by Tokyo on bilateral relations, but Japan has 
not done enough, he asserted, calling on Japan to take 
concrete and earnest measures.  Asked whether FMs Li 
and Aso will meet at the ASEAN Plus Three meeting in 
Malaysia, Liu replied that the two countries have not 
yet begun discussing the issue. 
 
SCO Cooperation Not Targeted at Any Third Party 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶7.  Asked by the Bloomberg correspondent about 
speculations that energy cooperation within the 
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) could spark 
U.S.-China frictions, Liu asserted that SCO 
cooperation will play a positive role in regional 
peace, stability and development.  Member states have 
agreed that the SCO is an "open" organization and a 
non-alliance which does not target or attempt to 
exclude any third party.  The SCO is prepared to 
establish relations and promote mutual trust with 
other organizations and countries.  Energy is an 
important component of SCO cooperation, which is 
conducted on the basis of mutual benefit and non- 
exclusivity.  China's cooperation with SCO members 
will not undermine other countries' interest nor lead 
to military frictions, Liu concluded. 
 
Li Changxing 
------------ 
 
¶8.  Questioned about a Canadian court's recent ruling 
on fugitive Li Changxing, Liu stated that China has 
called on Canada to repatriate Lai as soon as 
possible. 
 
Military Plane Crash 
-------------------- 
 
¶9.  Asked about a reported Chinese military plane 
crash in Anhui Province, Liu remarked that this was an 
unfortunate incident.  President Hu Jintao has 
expressed his condolences to the victims' families. 
 
Latin American Parliament Delegation 
------------------------------------ 
 
 
BEIJING 00011382  003 OF 003 
 
 
¶10.  Liu noted that the Latin American Parliament will 
send a delegation to China June 12.  The group will 
meet Vice Foreign Minister Li Jinzhang and another 
Chinese leader. 
 
ASEM Summit 
----------- 
 
¶11.  Asked whether President Hu or Premier Wen Jiabao 
will attend the September 10-11 Asia-Europe Meeting 
(ASEM) in Helsinki, Liu noted that the meeting 
convenes at the prime minister-level.  China has 
attended all previous ASEM Summits and will give 
positive consideration to participation this year. 
RANDT