06BEIJING8803
ARF INTER-SESSIONAL MEETING ON COUNTER  TERRORISM
Thu May 11 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO1115
OO RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHNH RUEHPB
DE RUEHBJ #8803/01 1311125
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 111125Z MAY 06
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5009
INFO RUCNARF/ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM COLLECTIVE
RUEHHE/AMEMBASSY HELSINKI 0764
RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD 6347
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 2841
RUEHNT/AMEMBASSY TASHKENT 1044
RUEHVI/AMEMBASSY VIENNA 0201
RHHMUNA/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HI
RUEAHLC/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHDC
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RUEAFVS/OSD WASHDC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
RUEHVEN/USMISSION USOSCE 0096
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 1314UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 BEIJING 008803 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PTER ARR ARF CH
SUBJECT: ARF INTER-SESSIONAL MEETING ON COUNTER  TERRORISM 
AND TRANSNATIONAL CRIME 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: The March 26-28 ASEAN Regional 
Forum Inter-sessional Meeting on Counter Terrorism and 
Transnational Crime focused on discussing  "root 
causes" of terrorism but also gave participants an 
opportunity to exchange views on recent developments 
and national experiences in combating terrorism. 
There was disagreement among participants about the 
notion of "root causes" of terrorism but the meeting 
nevertheless acknowledged the importance of soft 
measures aimed at winning hearts and minds and 
endorsed giving such efforts greater emphasis in the 
future work of the ARF.  Brunei circulated a draft ARF 
Statement on "Promoting A People-Centered Approach to 
Counter Terrorism" for ministers to endorse at the 
13th ARF meeting in July (see paragraph 23).  U.S. 
interventions highlighted the continuing role of law 
enforcement cooperation, including the deportation of 
illegal aliens; terrorist use of transnational 
criminal networks; the problem of arms smuggling and 
financial transfers from Southeast Asia to the Tamil 
Tigers (LTTE); and the importance of effective 
information sharing and interagency cooperation.  The 
U.S. urged participants to consider poverty and 
injustice as examples of the conditions terrorists can 
exploit rather than as causes of terrorism.  Most 
other speakers, however, espoused the view that 
factors such as poverty, illiteracy, injustice, 
foreign occupation, and a lack of respect for Islam 
cause terrorism.  One notable exception was India, 
which made a forceful and eloquent intervention that 
flatly rejected the propriety of entering into any 
discussion of root causes that could elevate the 
status of terrorism.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  (U) China and Brunei co-chaired the Fourth ASEAN 
Regional Forum (ARF) Inter-sessional Meeting on 
Counter Terrorism and Transnational Crime (ISM/CTTC) 
in Beijing April 26-28, 2006.  All ARF participants 
were represented, although East Timor sent only a 
locally engaged Chinese staff member from its Beijing 
mission as an observer.  Staff members of the ARF Unit 
of the ASEAN Secretariat, the Southeast Asia Regional 
Center for Counter-Terrorism (SEARCCT) and the 
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) also took 
part.  State EAP Senior Advisor Steven McGann led the 
U.S. delegation, which included representatives from 
State S/CT, Homeland Security, the U.S. Pacific 
Command, and Embassy Beijing. 
 
Recent Regional Terrorism Developments-The Opening 
Session 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
----- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) As is typical for ARF events, the meeting 
opened with a general exchange of views.  China's 
Assistant Foreign Minister Cui Tiankai, one of the 
meeting co-chairs, summarized the discussion by saying 
"terrorism knows no borders and thus the region must 
configure strategies in a corresponding manner."  He 
noted that despite successful efforts to thwart 
terrorist attacks and to disrupt terrorist cells, 
terrorist organizations in the region have adopted new 
methods and are employing increasingly sophisticated 
technology and techniques that have allowed them to 
stay in operation and have made them even harder to 
detect.  He highlighted agreement that the region 
cannot be divided in its efforts to fight terrorism, 
should mobilize resources and should improve law 
enforcement cooperation and information sharing. 
Fighting terrorism should be the common effort of the 
region regardless of an individual country's 
development level, race, religion or national polity, 
he said.  During the opening session Brunei, China, 
the DPRK, India and Laos made presentations as 
designated lead speakers.  Burma, Japan, Malaysia, the 
United States, Indonesia, Australia and the ROK also 
made interventions. 
 
BEIJING 00008803  002 OF 007 
 
 
 
¶4.  (SBU) China's presentation focused heavily on the 
perceived threat posed by "East Turkistan" terrorist 
forces.  Like other terrorist organizations, the East 
Turkistan forces are changing their strategies and 
have adopted the practice of claiming that their 
activities are resisting ethnic-suppression in order 
to escape from legal punishment.  They are attempting 
to present themselves as victims.  China claimed that 
East Turkistan forces, such as the East Turkistan 
Information Center, are using the Internet to build 
terrorist networks and to incite attacks on Chinese 
interests. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The DPRK stated that the main cause for the 
continued violent cycle of terrorism is "unilateralism 
and high-handedness that denies other states' 
political systems, religions and cultures."  The DPRK 
cited the "proliferation of liberty and democracy" to 
Islamic states in the Middle East as the cause of 
"indignation" and "outrage" that has resulted in the 
people protecting their culture with ever stronger 
resistance.  The DPRK argued that pressure, such as 
sanctions or the use of force against sovereign 
countries "under the cloak of a war against terrorism" 
can not be justified and complained that the labels of 
"terror sponsor states" and "terroristic 
organizations" are being given to sovereign nations 
and liberation movement organizations "in order to 
pursue undesirable purpose." 
 
¶6.  (SBU) India noted the shift in its management of 
the terrorist situation that has taken place over the 
last year.  New Delhi is now focused on the long-term 
implications of terrorism because of the growth of 
"fundamentalism" in the region and extremists' 
expanding influence in India's hinterland.  These 
terrorist groups are working to undermine the Indian 
government by attacking important religious sites to 
foment anger and suspicion between different ethnic 
and religious groups inside India.  The government is 
taking a multi-pronged approach based on the 
democratic and legal process to combat the influence 
of these extremist groups.  India noted the fight 
against terrorism should not be restricted to the 
perpetrators of terrorist acts but should also 
encompass the states that support terrorists. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) The Malaysian delegation head, 
Undersecretary of Foreign Affairs for Policy Planning 
Zulkifli Adnan, attributed the neutralization of 
several important JI cells and operatives to increased 
intelligence sharing with regional counterparts.  He 
suggested that a universally accepted definition of 
terrorism would contribute to the international effort 
to fight it and emphasized that counterterrorism 
efforts should not infringe on the sovereignty or 
integrity of states and must be based on international 
law. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) The head of the U.S. delegation, EAP Senior 
Advisor Steven McGann, stated that the United States 
is increasingly concerned over the collusion between 
global terrorism and transnational crime.  He pointed 
out that terrorists use the same networks utilized by 
transnational criminal groups and exploit the overlap 
between these networks to improve mobility, build 
support for their terrorist agenda and avoid 
detection.  McGann noted that regional states face a 
difficult challenge in thwarting these activities.  He 
suggested that ARF members enhance their awareness of 
maritime areas and increase the operational presence 
of authorities to deter terrorist and transnational 
crime groups.  McGann used the stymied peace process 
in Sri Lanka as an example of the intersection of 
terrorists and transnational crime groups.  The 
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam's (LTTE) war-making 
capability is supported by a network of arms smuggling 
 
BEIJING 00008803  003 OF 007 
 
 
and financial transfers, much of it located in the 
Southeast Asia region.  McGann stated that the United 
States is seeking ARF member cooperation to help 
identify ways to shut down LTTE arms procurement in 
Southeast Asia. 
 
¶9.  (U) The Chinese-drafted Co-chairs' Summary Report 
of the meeting highlighted agreement on the continuing 
threat that terrorism poses to regional peace and 
stability, despite international efforts.  It observed 
that terrorists have reconfigured into smaller cells 
that are difficult to detect.  The Report says that 
members of different terrorist groups are working 
together through unstructured networks of personal 
relationships and that they are taking increasing 
advantage of computer networks and the Internet to 
develop networks, propagate extremist views, and 
coordinate activities. 
 
"Root Causes" 
------------- 
 
¶10.  (SBU) The co-chairs selected "Possible Root 
Causes" of terrorism as a discussion topic and invited 
presentations from Indonesia, Pakistan, Russia, and 
SEARCCT.  In introducing this agenda item, the co- 
chair from Brunei, Deputy Permanent Secretary of 
Foreign Affairs Hajah Maimunah DP Elias, told 
participants that the "hearts and minds" approach is 
more effective than a coercive approach.  After 
reaffirming that all states must have zero tolerance 
for terrorism, she discussed poverty, injustice and 
ignorance as factors that should be addressed as part 
of the struggle against terrorism. 
 
¶11.  (SBU) Pakistan identified foreign occupation, 
defamation of religions and cultures, poverty, 
illiteracy, and socio-economic inequalities as the 
most important root causes, and asserted that "no 
counter terrorism strategy can be effective unless 
causes and conditions that breed, encourage, and 
contribute to terrorism are objectively identified and 
addressed."  "Without a war on political injustice and 
poverty, terrorism cannot be defeated."   Pakistan 
also called for a universally accepted definition of 
terrorism.  These themes were echoed in Indonesia"s 
presentation.  The Indonesian representative noted 
that behind our success in neutralizing terrorist 
actors there may be the emergence of new actors and 
perpetrators of terrorism.  For this reason, we must 
also focus on root causes such as poverty, 
intolerance, and injustice.  Russia focused on the 
need to limit conflicts to prevent them from becoming 
"forges of terrorists" and identified Iraq as the 
current "testing ground" and "production site" of 
terrorists.  The Russian presentation also urged that 
countries address national humiliation and "the grave 
social and economic conditions, the sense of despair, 
and unsettled social conflicts, that nourish the ranks 
of terrorists."   They also recommended that regional 
fora like ASEAN, ARF, APEC & the SCO conduct combined 
CT expert meetings to share lessons & better 
coordinate regional CT efforts. 
 
¶12.  (SBU) The U.S. responded to these presentations 
by emphasizing that poverty, inequality, and 
illiteracy don"t cause terrorism; they are conditions 
terrorists exploit.  Law enforcement and military 
actions alone are not enough.  Countries must work 
together to ameliorate these exploitable conditions. 
 
¶13.  (SBU) India made a forceful intervention that 
underlined the consensus that violence and terrorism 
have no place in a civilized society.  Observing that 
the rationalizations advanced by advocates of "root 
causes" cannot absolve terrorists, the Indian 
representative said that terrorism should be defined 
with reference to the act and not by a description of 
 
BEIJING 00008803  004 OF 007 
 
 
the perpetrator of the act.  In this light, terrorists 
and freedom fighters are indistinguishable.  Terrorism 
should not, he said, be elevated in stature by linking 
it to "so called" root causes.  Those who commit acts 
of terrorism violate the most basic human right--the 
right to life.  "No root cause can justify the 
massacres of innocent civilians.  The right to life of 
innocent people cannot be superseded by a right to 
kill them to redress some real or imagined historical 
wrong." 
 
¶14.  (U) The Co-chairs' Summary Report did not 
indicate any agreement on the question of root causes 
but instead  related that "many participants" were of 
the view that root causes of terrorism are both varied 
and multifaceted and noted that "a range of conditions 
in society may create an environment for terrorism to 
thrive."  The Report says, "Many participants stressed 
that it was essential to address both the symptoms and 
root causes of terrorism.  Successfully eliminating 
terrorism requires a balanced and comprehensive 
approach that includes employing political, economic, 
legal, and other measures, including measures aimed at 
winning the hearts and minds of the people." 
 
Combating Terrorism 
------------------- 
 
¶15.  (U) A number of participants, including the 
United States, were invited to make presentations on 
their strategies and measures to combat regional 
terrorism. The SCO was also invited to present under 
this agenda item. 
 
¶16.  (SBU) Department of Homeland Security Director of 
Strategic Plans Eric Fagerholm gave the U.S. 
presentation on "Law Enforcement as a Tool Against 
Terrorism."  Fagerholm developed the theme of 
partnership and cooperation in law enforcement, in 
particular with regard to border control, and told the 
meeting "law enforcement has a critical role to play 
in counter terrorism."  Noting that illegal migration 
creates vulnerabilities that terrorists can exploit, 
he outlined the Secure Border Initiative, as well as 
new and on-going port and cargo security measures and 
emphasized the importance of securing ARF 
participants" cooperation in facilitating the movement 
of their citizens back home when they are being 
removed from the U.S. as illegal immigrants.  He 
suggested that countries should treat the movement of 
terrorists with the same seriousness that they now 
treat the flow of terrorist financing. 
 
¶17.  (SBU) A representative of the SCO briefed the 
meeting on his organization"s background and on its 
strategy and measures in combating terrorism, 
separatism, and extremism.  Among the principles of 
the SCO strategy he listed were; respect for 
sovereignty, independence, and territorial integrity; 
non-aggression and non-interference in internal 
affairs; no double standards; cooperation, economic 
growth and development, and human rights and 
fundamental freedoms.  Measures being taken by the 
organization include, combating terrorist financing, 
creating a register of suspected terrorists, and 
developing measures to prevent terrorist access to WMD 
and radioactive or hazardous materials.  In discussion 
following the presentation, Russia intervened to 
suggest that ARF act as an umbrella organization for 
combining the counter-terrorism efforts and various 
regional organizations such as APEC and the SCO and 
proposed a combined meeting of counter terrorism 
experts from ARF and SCO countries. 
 
¶18.  (SBU) Several participants also briefed the 
meeting on their counter terrorism emergency response 
plans.  Among these, the Philippines" presentation was 
noteworthy for the extent to which it echoed themes 
 
BEIJING 00008803  005 OF 007 
 
 
developed through sustained U.S. engagement with the 
Philippines" government, armed forces and police. 
General Marlu Quevedo, assistant national anti- 
terrorism coordinator, emphasized the importance of 
interagency effort, articulated the concept of 
"supporting" and "supported" organizations, and 
outlined plans for a more effective and efficient 
anti-terrorism organization under the national 
security advisor. 
 
¶19.  (SBU) Participants were also invited to discuss 
information sharing.  Malaysia explained that its 
emphasis on addressing the root causes of terrorism 
does not diminish the importance of law enforcement 
efforts, which are enhanced through information 
sharing.  Bilateral agency-to-agency contact has been 
the most effective way of sharing information but in 
the future countries will have to find ways to share 
information on a wider scale, which may require 
treaties or agreements.  Information exchange should 
be fair and equal; one country cannot invoke 
bureaucratic obstacles to sharing information while 
urging other countries to disregard their own 
procedures.  The U.S. intervention, made by USPACOM"s 
Joint Inter-Agency Coordinating Group for Combating 
Terrorism (JIACG/CT) Director, Captain Rodger Welch, 
noted the need for a supporting policy framework and 
legal agreements for information sharing both across 
borders and between agencies domestically and offered 
the formation of the Department of Homeland Security, 
The Joint Inter-Agency Task Force-West (JIATF-W) and 
his own organization as U.S. examples of institutional 
arrangements designed to promote information sharing 
and interagency cooperation.  He also proposed an 
inventory of existing information sharing arrangements 
before initiating efforts to construct new 
international arrangements. 
 
¶20.  (SBU) Papua New Guinea"s Ambassador to China took 
the floor during this session, for the first and only 
time during the meeting, to discuss the situation in 
the Solomon Islands.  The ambassador said that the 
recent rioting in Honiara demonstrated how civil 
strife in small vulnerable states can be exploited by 
outside parties, which represents a new security 
challenge.  He condemned the targeting of ethnic 
Chinese residents of the city and said they were 
scapegoats for the indigenous peoples" frustration 
with the way in which they had been marginalized by 
outside actors" exploitation of their country"s 
natural resources and manipulation of its politics. 
 
Institutional Issues 
-------------------- 
 
¶21.  (SBU) Participants agreed to develop action plans 
to implement the recommendations of previous ARF 
counter terrorism statements. They acknowledged the 
importance of soft measures aimed at winning hearts 
and minds and endorsed giving such efforts greater 
emphasis in the future work of the ARF.  Partcipants 
also agreed that the ISM on CTTC shoud have a greater 
role in coordinating ARF counterterrorism efforts. 
(The ISM/CTTC does not now have a coordinating role 
and terrorism related ARF events are proposed and 
considered only in the context of the ARF"s confidence 
building efforts.  For example, as an outgrowth of two 
seminars on Cyber Security and Cyber Terrorism co- 
chaired by the ROK and the Philippines as ARF 
confidence building measures, the Philippines drafted 
a Ministerial Statement on "Terrorist Misuse of Cyber 
Space" that it circulated through the Inter-sessional 
Support Group meeting process.  Neither this draft 
statement nor the seminars they grew out of were ever 
considered by the ISM/CTTC, although Russia argued 
that they should have been.)  Singapore and Japan 
offered to co-chair a 5th ISM/CTTC on the theme of 
inter-faith dialog in Tokyo in the spring of 2007. 
 
BEIJING 00008803  006 OF 007 
 
 
 
Draft Ministerial Statement 
--------------------------- 
 
¶22.  (SBU) At the close of the meeting, Brunei tabled, 
without discussion, a draft ARF Statement on 
"Promoting A People-Centered approach to Counter 
Terrorism" for ministers" approval at the 13th ARF 
meting in July.  Prior to tabling this document, the 
Brunei delegation informally solicited U.S. input to 
their draft, which was largely reflected in the 
document they put forward.  The statement will be 
discussed at the ARF Senior Officials" Meeting (SOM) 
in Malaysia on May 19.  Russia and the EU both voiced 
concern that there is insufficient time to fully 
consider this statement before the SOM, and Russia 
suggested that Brunei hold its draft until next year. 
Brunei, however, expressed its intention to press 
ahead with its proposed Statement. 
 
BEGIN TEXT OF DRAFT STATEMENT: 
 
ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) Statement on Promoting a 
People-Centered Approach to Counterterrorism 
 
The Chairman of the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF), on 
behalf of the participating states and organizations, 
issues the following statement: 
 
RECOGNIZING THAT: 
 
The majority of people in the region are peace-loving. 
 
Terrorism constitutes a serious threat to 
international peace, stability and security. 
 
Any measures to counter terrorism in all its forms and 
manifestations should be consistent with the Charter 
of the United Nations (UN), international law, United 
Nations Security Council Resolutions and UN 
Conventions and Protocols related to counterterrorism. 
 
Terrorism should not be associated with any religion, 
culture, race or nationality. 
 
Successfully eliminating terrorism requires a 
comprehensive approach that includes addressing the 
underlying causes of terrorism without acknowledging 
these as justifications for terrorist and/or criminal 
activities. 
 
Supporting initiatives currently undertaken by 
regional and international organizations on 
counterterrorism, including efforts to promote 
respect, understanding and tolerance among people of 
all religions, beliefs and cultures, forms an 
essential part of the overall ARF efforts to counter 
terrorism. 
 
Strong cooperation exists within the ARF framework in 
the fight against international terrorism and desiring 
to undertake further measures to prevent, disrupt, 
combat and respond to terrorism. 
 
It is vitally important to engage all levels of 
society including the academia, media, non- 
governmental organizations, community groups and other 
relevant institutions. 
 
COMMITTED TO: 
 
Implement the principles laid out in this Statement, 
in accordance with their respective domestic laws and 
their specific circumstances, with the view to the 
full implementation of any or all of the following 
measures: 
 
¶1.  Identifying counterterrorism strategies and 
 
BEIJING 00008803  007 OF 007 
 
 
measures that promote greater tolerance and 
understanding, as well as those aimed at winning the 
"hearts and minds" of the people in order to ensure 
their effectiveness. 
 
¶2.  Inculcating public awareness on the threat of 
terrorism to their safety and well-being. 
 
¶3.  Developing initiatives and programs to promote 
public participation on counterterrorism measures by 
encouraging the constructive roles of the academia, 
media, non-governmental organizations, community 
groups and other relevant institutions. 
 
¶4.  Exploring possible ways and means of sharing 
information and best practices on emergency response 
mechanisms. 
 
¶5.  Identifying ways to enhance partnerships with 
international organizations, regional fora and other 
relevant institutions to promote the above measures in 
the effort to counter terrorism. 
 
¶6.  Reviewing the progress of these and other efforts 
to further strengthen cooperation to counter terrorism 
and other related transnational crimes. 
 
END TEXT OF DRAFT STATEMENT 
 
¶23.  (SBU) In the preamble, in the sentence beginning 
"Successfully eliminating terrorism..." the U.S. has 
proposed that "underlying causes of terrorism" be 
replaced by "conditions exploited by terrorists." 
This draft statement will be discussed at the ARF 
Senior fficials meeting in Malaysia on May 19.  POC 
or the draft statement is EAP/RSP: Joe Murphy (02- 
647-2722). 
 
¶24.  (U) The U.S. delegation cleared this cable. 
RANDT