06BEIJING21528
OCTOBER 11 TAO PRESS BRIEFING: CROSS-STRAIT
Wed Oct 11 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO5513
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1528/01 2841038
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 111038Z OCT 06
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9393
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 021528 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL CH TW
SUBJECT: OCTOBER 11 TAO PRESS BRIEFING: CROSS-STRAIT 
AGRICULTURAL FORUM, NO CONFIRMATION OF HU JINTAO-LIEN  CHAN 
MEETING, CONSTITUTIONAL REFORMS, POSSIBLE MA  YING-JEOU 
VISIT 
 
¶1.  Key points made at the October 11 Taiwan Affairs 
Office (TAO) press briefing were: 
 
-- Following comments on the October 17-18 Cross- 
Strait Agricultural Forum in Boao, Hainan Province, 
the TAO spokesperson deflected a question about a 
possible meeting between President Hu Jintao and 
former KMT Chairman Lien Chan at the Cross-Strait 
Agricultural Forum. 
 
-- China firmly opposes proposed DPP "constitutional 
reforms" relating to territory and sovereignty and 
relations between Taiwan and the Mainland. 
 
-- Chen Shui-bian has gone back on his word, 
repeatedly renouncing his "four noes and one without" 
promises. 
 
-- Regarding a potential future visit by KMT Chairman 
Ma Ying-jeou to the mainland, China will respect Ma's 
views. 
 
Unspecified Leaders to Attend Agriculture Forum 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶2.  Taiwan Affairs Office (TAO) Director General for 
Economics He Shizhong led off the October 11 TAO press 
conference with a lengthy description of the 
arrangements for the October Cross-Strait Agricultural 
Forum to be held at Boao, Hainan Province and related 
events in other cities.  DG He reported that Central 
Party and State Council leaders, leaders from Hainan 
and Fujian Provinces and leaders of the KMT, PFP and 
others would attend the forum.  Spokesperson Li Weiyi 
deflected reporter's questions on a possible meeting 
between President Hu Jintao and former KMT Chairman 
Lien Chan, at the forum, stating that he had nothing 
to add to DG He's information. 
 
Proposed "Constitutional Reforms" 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  China firmly opposes "constitutional reforms" 
proposed by the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) 
involving territory, sovereignty and relations between 
Taiwan and the mainland.  In meetings last year with 
mainland officials, James Soong, Chairman of the 
People's First Party (PFP), said that Chen Shui-bian 
had repeated to him on February 24 the "four noes and 
one without" promise and his guarantee that 
"constitutional reforms" would not include changes to 
"territory," "sovereignty" or the Taiwan straits 
status quo.  China opposes and is highly concerned 
about Chen Shui-bian's going back on his word, 
breaking his promises, continuing with his "de jure 
independence" plot and damaging the stability of 
cross-Strait relations, said Li Weiyi. 
 
Possibility of Ma Ying-Jeoh visiting the mainland 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶4.  "As we have previously expressed, on the question 
of when Ma Ying-jeou might visit the Mainland, we 
fully respect his own views," said Li when asked if 
the mainland might invite Ma Ying-Jeoh, current KMT 
Chairman, to visit after December. 
 
Campaign to Oust Chen Shui-bian 
------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  Asked if anti-Chen protests could impact the 
Cross-Strait Agricultural Forum and, if so, what 
manner of response the mainland would take, Li said 
only that China is paying attention to relevant 
reports in the Taiwan media. 
 
Cross-Strait Agricultural Forum and Exhibition 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶6.  Following the two-day Agricultural Forum in Boao, 
Hainan Province on October 17-18, a cross-Strait 
agricultural exhibition will be held in Xiamen City, 
Fujian Province.  Over 400 cross-Strait 
representatives will attend, including more than 200 
from Taiwan's KMT, PFP, and New Party.  After the 
exhibition, the groups from Taiwan will separately 
visit Shandong, Guangdong and Guangxi provinces, as 
well as the Cross-Strait Agricultural Cooperation 
Experimental District in Fujian and the Taiwan Farmers 
 
BEIJING 00021528  002 OF 002 
 
 
Entrepreneurial Park. 
 
¶7.  The Cross-Strait Agricultural Forum is an 
important result of the exchange and dialogue promoted 
by the Chinese Communist Party and the KMT, Li stated. 
The event has momentous significance in promoting 
cross-Strait exchange and cooperation, achieving win- 
win results and mutual prosperity.  According to 2005 
year-end statistics, over 5000 Taiwan Farmers' 
Enterprises have invested in the mainland, totaling 
US$4 billion. 
SEDNEY