07BEIJING2514
STAFFDEL MIXTER DISCUSSES NORTHEAST ASIAN
Tue Apr 17 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXYZ0016
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBJ #2514/01 1070126
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 170126Z APR 07
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6907
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEAEPA/HQ EPA WASHDC
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHINGTON DC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDCUNCLAS BEIJING 002514 
 
SIPDIS 
CORRECTED COPY - SIGNATURE ADDED 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL SENV CH JA KS KN
 
SUBJECT: STAFFDEL MIXTER DISCUSSES NORTHEAST ASIAN 
POLITICS AND PM WEN'S TRIP TO JAPAN AND ROK WITH 
CHINESE SCHOLAR 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) China Academy of Social Sciences (CASS) Japan 
expert Jin Xide told Staffdel Mixter that Premier 
Wen's visit to Japan aims to enhance China's image in 
the minds of the Japanese public.  Energy, including 
cooperation on energy conservation and the dispute 
over gas in the East China Sea, is a key topic of 
Wen's visit.  Tensions over history between China and 
its Northeast Asian neighbors, including over PM Abe's 
remarks on comfort women and on the ancient Korean 
kingdom of Koguryo, have calmed recently.  PRC-ROK 
relations are very strong and Sino-Japan relations are 
on an improving trend, Jin said, although a visit by 
PM Abe to Yasukuni Shrine would cause severe damage. 
Staffdel member Dennis Halpin raised the likelihood of 
protests over the comfort women issue and asked about 
the impact of China's environmental problems on its 
Northeast Asian neighbors.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Premier Wen Jiabao's visit to Japan is 
designed to improve the Japanese public's view of 
China and enhance Sino-Japanese cooperation, CASS 
Japan Institute scholar Jin Xide told Staffdel Mixter 
in an April 10 meeting.  Premier Wen will focus his 
talks in Tokyo on security issues and joint 
cooperation, Jin said, not on historical issues, 
noting that China "would not be the first to play the 
history card against Abe."  Bilateral tension over 
history sparked by former PM Koizumi's visits to 
Yasukuni Shrine history are being resolved in 
nongovernmental fields, Jin said, offering elites and 
businesspeople in both countries an opportunity to 
work on improving relations.  Chinese elites had an 
improved view of PM Abe after his visit to China in 
October 2006, but the Chinese public remains wary of 
Abe's intentions.  If Abe visits Yasukuni Shrine in 
October to shore up his domestic political support 
after Upper House elections in Japan in July, it would 
do severe damage to otherwise improving bilateral 
relations with both China and the ROK, according to 
Jin. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Staffdel member Dennis Halpin said Japan 
wants a seat on the UNSC, resolution of disputes over 
oil and gas in the East China Sea and Chinese support 
for its position on the abduction of Japanese citizens 
by North Korea.  But, he asked, what does China want 
from Japan?  Jin said Japan's "attitude of dominance" 
is China's biggest difficulty.  Premier Wen would also 
discuss with PM Abe China's concerns about security 
issues, especially as relates to Taiwan.   Jin 
confirmed Halpin's statement that China had wanted 
language on Taiwan inserted into the joint communiqu 
signed during Wen's visit, while Japan had wanted 
language on DPRK abductions.  Neither side got what it 
wanted, Jin noted, so the joint communiqu focused on 
bilateral cooperation on energy and energy 
conservation. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Halpin asked about Chinese views toward the 
ROK and whether dispute continues over some Koreans 
view that ancient Koguryo kingdom once included 
Chinese territory.  Jin said bilateral relations 
between China and the ROK are very good and that few 
people other than historians focused on the Koguryo 
issue today.  The Chinese leadership does not 
understand how sensitive these issues are for Koreans, 
said Jin (noting that he is ethnic Korean).  Jin 
confirmed that CASS has a special research institute 
that looks at border disputes and frontier issues with 
all of its neighbors.  One such institute, the 
Northeast Project, has done significant research on 
Koguryo, Jin said, but the project does not target the 
ROK in any way.  The Chinese government believes 
Koguryo is a question of historical research.  Neither 
Beijing nor Seoul wants this to become a diplomatic or 
territorial issue, Jin said, although he noted that 
ROK President Roh did raise the issue in a bilateral 
meeting on the margins of the East Asian Summit 
earlier this year. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Halpin told Jin that groups in the United 
States were angered by Premier Abe's remarks about 
comfort women and would likely protest during Abe's 
 
 
visit to Washington at the end of the month.  Groups 
were also planning to ask Chinese government 
permission to demonstrate in front of the Japanese 
Embassy in Beijing.  A study group from Japan's LDP is 
interested at looking into history issues, including 
the Nanjing massacre, Halpin said.  Jin expressed 
interest in the developments and said Chinese views 
are divided on the impact of PM Abe's remarks on 
comfort women.  China will wait to see, Jin said, 
whether the remarks reflect a Japanese strategy to try 
to show its strength by denying WWII history or 
whether they are mistaken remarks supported by only a 
few. 
 
Environmental Issues Affect Northeast Asian Affairs 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶6. (SBU) In a separate meeting, Halpin asked about the 
impact of China's environmental problems on relations 
in Northeast Asia.  MFA Treaty and Law (Kyoto Protocol) 
Department DDG Su Wei said dust storms from China that 
affect neighboring countries were better this year 
than last year.  China was very active in planting 
trees to prevent desertification, he said.  In 
response to a question about Premier Wen's visit to 
Japan and the ongoing oil and natural gas dispute in 
the East China Sea, DDG Su said discussions about 
energy in the East China Sea were ongoing and would 
likely be a topic of Premier Wen's visit to Tokyo, but 
added that this is not his area of expertise or 
responsibility. 
 
¶7. (U) This message is SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED and 
should not be distributed outside the USG or posted on 
the Internet.  The Staffdel did not have an 
opportunity to clear this message. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RANDT