08BEIJING1865
MAY 14 TAO PRESS BRIEFING: SICHUAN EARTHQUAKE,
Wed May 14 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO3943
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1865/01 1351030
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 141030Z MAY 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7297
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 001865 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL ETRD ECON CH TW
SUBJECT: MAY 14 TAO PRESS BRIEFING: SICHUAN EARTHQUAKE, 
INAUGURATION, WEEKEND CHARTERS, MAINLAND TOURISM 
 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. The May 14 Taiwan Affairs Office (TAO) press briefing was 
dominated by discussion of the May 12 earthquake in Sichuan: 
 
-- The spokesman addressed the fate of 2,897 Taiwan compatriots who 
were traveling in Sichuan at the time of the quake, stating that 588 
were stranded in Jiuzhaigou, 13 were trapped on a suspended cableway 
in Dujiangyan, and that one three-year-old boy had been killed. 
 
-- The spokesman expressed appreciation for the messages of 
condolence from (Taiwan President-elect) Ma Ying-jeou and others in 
Taiwan and listed significant donations of funds and goods from 
Taiwan organizations and individuals to the relief efforts.  He 
noted that Taiwan's two major civilian religious foundations, the 
Tzu Chi Foundation and Dharma Drum Mountain, had delivered 110 tons 
of food, medicine, blankets and other supplies to the affected 
region. 
 
-- The spokesman said that because of blocked roads and destroyed 
communications, it is difficult to allow relief workers from Taiwan 
into the disaster area.  Taiwan-based groups would be contacted once 
conditions are suitable. 
 
-- Turning to Ma Ying-jeou's May 20 inauguration, the spokesman said 
that improving ties is the hope of both sides of the Strait and that 
joint efforts should made to open a new phase of cross-Strait peace 
and development. 
 
-- Asked for an update on weekend charter flights and Mainland 
tourism to Taiwan, the spokesman merely said that the timing of 
implementation would depend on joint efforts by both sides.  End 
Summary 
 
Taiwan Compatriots in the Earthquake Area 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶2. At the May 14 regular Taiwan Affairs Office (TAO) press briefing, 
TAO spokesman Yang Yi said that more than 100 travel groups from 
Taiwan, consisting of 2,897 individuals, were in Sichuan when the 
earthquake struck.  Of those, 588 are stranded in the Jiuzhaigou 
tourist area because of blocked roads and 13 are trapped on the 
Lingyunyan Cableway in Dujiangyan.  One three-year old boy from 
Taiwan was killed in the quake and two persons suffered minor 
injuries.  The TAO is trying to verify the condition of a 
four-year-old girl.  Twenty-eight Taiwan compatriots who were 
trapped in the Friendship Tunnel between Dujiangyan and Wenchuan 
were rescued and safely made it to Chengdu.  Asked about reports of 
an additional 80 Taiwan persons missing, Yang admitted that these 
were preliminary figures and that as soon as additional information 
is available it will be provided to the media.  He said that every 
effort was being made to rescue the stranded people. Yang did not 
know if contact had been made with the travelers in Jiuzhaigou but 
said he would provide the information as soon as possible.  He 
provided a hotline number for concerned people to call for updates 
on the circumstances of Taiwan people caught in the quake. 
 
Taiwan Concern, Assistance to the Quake Victims 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶3. Yang noted that the KMT Central Committee, Straits Exchange 
Foundation (SEF), (President-elect) Ma Ying-jeou, Honorary KMT 
Chairman Lien Chan, People First Party Chairman James Soong and New 
Party Chairman Yu Mu-ming all had sent letters expressing concern 
and condolences regarding the earthquake.  The SEF provided USD 
300,000 and offered to send professional search and rescue teams. 
The spokesman also noted that Taiwan's two major civilian religious 
foundations, the Tzu Chi Foundation and Dharma Drum Mountain, had 
chartered cargo flights and delivered 110 tons of food, medicine, 
blankets and other supplies to the affected region.  (Note: The 
Taiwan media has commented that China's acceptance of this aid 
resulted from a personal appeal from Lien Chan to Hu Jintao, and 
that this is the first time the religious organizations have been 
allowed to provide disaster relief on the Mainland.) 
 
¶4. Yang said private and corporate donations of cash and goods from 
Taiwan totaled nearly USD 37 million and that the Taiwan Industry 
Association has collected from its members nearly USD 1 million for 
disaster relief.  For those Taiwan compatriots wishing to donate, 
the spokesman urged them to channel their donations through the 
Taiwan Red Cross to the Red Cross of China or directly to the China 
Charity Federation.  Yang expressed heartfelt thanks for all the 
assistance rendered and said it demonstrated the Chinese virtue of 
helping the distressed and assisting those in peril.  This 
outpouring of "love and brotherhood" from Taiwan will help those 
affected by the earthquake return to productive lives and rebuild 
their homes. 
 
¶5. The spokesman acknowledged the many offers from Taiwan of 
disaster relief teams and specialized search and rescue units to 
travel to the disaster areas.  He said that because of the 
 
BEIJING 00001865  002 OF 002 
 
 
seriousness of the disaster, many roads are blocked and 
communication disrupted.  Therefore, it is difficult to access the 
area and difficult to allow Taiwan rescue workers to get to the 
areas to assist with rescue operations.  As soon as circumstances 
permit, Taiwan-based groups would be contacted, he said. 
 
Ma's Inauguration, Charter Flights, Mainland Tourists 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶6. Asked about expectations for (President-elect) Ma Ying-jeou's 
leadership on cross-Strait issues in light of his impending 
inauguration on May 20, the TAO spokesman said the Mainland has 
noticed that since Ma's election on March 22, Ma has many times 
expressed his desire to put into practice the commitments he made 
during the campaign regarding cross-Strait relations.  The peaceful 
development of cross-Strait relations is the common hope and 
interest of both sides.  As Taiwan undergoes a positive change to a 
new circumstance, China hopes that both sides will make efforts to 
build mutual trust, set aside disputes, reserve differences and seek 
common ground, and together create win-win solutions to open a new 
phase of cross-Strait peace and development.  (Note:  This 
formulation refers to President Hu Jintao's 16-character phrase that 
purportedly encapsulates his goals for cross-Strait relations.). 
Asked about progress on weekend charter flights and Mainland tourism 
to Taiwan, Yang said implementing those measures is the expectation 
of compatriots on both sides of the Strait.  China has made active 
efforts in this regard and the timing of implementation will depend 
on joint efforts by both sides. 
 
Other Issues 
------------ 
 
¶7. In response to a question, the spokesman noted that Tuantuan and 
Yuanyuan, pandas at the Wolong Panda Reserve in Sichuan that have 
been designated for Taiwan, are safe.  China has approved two Taiwan 
shipping companies to participate in recently re-opened export of 
sand to Taiwan.  China hopes for fruitful results in joint 
development of energy resources, including oil and gas exploration, 
in the Taiwan Strait. 
 
RANDT