08RIYADH1479
OIL MINISTER ON INTERNATIONAL MARKETS, SAUDI
Sun Sep 28 00:00:00 +0200 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Riyadh
VZCZCXRO3383
PP RUEHDE
DE RUEHRH #1479/01 2721528
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 281528Z SEP 08
FM AMEMBASSY RIYADH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9267
RHEBAAA/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
INFO RUEHHH/OPEC COLLECTIVE
RUEHJI/AMCONSUL JEDDAH 9777C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 RIYADH 001479 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/ARP(HARRIS), EEB/ESC/IEC(SULLIVAN), OES/STC 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/28/2018 
TAGS: EPET PREL ENRG ECON TSPL SA
SUBJECT: OIL MINISTER ON INTERNATIONAL MARKETS, SAUDI 
PRODUCTION, OPEC, AND KAUST 
 
REF: JEDDAH 414 
 
Classified By: Charge d'Affaires David Rundell for reasons 1.4 (b) and 
(d). 
 
¶1. (C) Summary:  Minister of Petroleum and Mineral Resources 
Ali Al Naimi told the Ambassador on September 20 that the 
press conference following the September 9 OPEC meeting in 
Vienna did not accurately reflect members' discussions there 
and that there had been no agreement to cut production or any 
talk of specific "numbers."  He said Saudi policy was 
unchanged and that his government remained committed to 
filling requests from its customers for oil.  The minister 
also provided a briefing on the development of King Abdullah 
University of Science and Technology (KAUST) boards and 
committees, which Saudi Aramco is overseeing.  End summary. 
 
------------ 
OPEC meeting 
------------ 
 
¶2. (C) Ambassador met Minister of Petroleum and Mineral 
Resources Ali Ibrahim Al Naimi September 20 seeking his views 
on energy market developments and a readout on the September 
9 OPEC meeting in Vienna.  Naimi said that recent 
fluctuations in energy prices vindicated the Saudi view that 
speculators bore significant responsibility for the sharp 
increase in oil prices in the last few years, and he said it 
also "gave credibility" to the OPEC decision, a shortfall he 
described as "really not a decision except to abide" by the 
organization's preexisting production ceiling.  Naimi said 
the organization's press conference had miscommunicated the 
discussions during the meeting, especially in that there had 
been no discussion of "numbers" at all. 
 
------------------- 
Saudi energy policy 
------------------- 
 
¶3. (C) Minister Naimi affirmed that Saudi Arabia had the same 
energy policy as it had in June:  "We will honor whatever our 
customers request" in terms of orders for crude oil.  He said 
the country never actually produced as much as 9.7 million 
barrels per day (mbpd) in recent months but had come close, 
which he attributed to a lack of demand.  The minister said 
other problems contributing to this situation stemmed from 
the fact that refineries had been looking for the "wrong 
kind" of crude oil, recent hurricanes had disrupted some 
crude deliveries, and refinery maintenance programs had 
reduced the international capacity to refine Saudi oil.  He 
predicted that in October and November there would be less 
demand from both Asia and the West.  China had accumulated as 
much oil as possible for the Olympics and now was in 
possession of a significant surplus, he said, so its demand 
would fall.  Naimi predicted that Japanese consumption would 
either be maintained or decline, and refinery maintenance 
would cause further disruption to markets. 
 
¶4. (C) The Minister predicted that Saudi production would 
pick up in December in response to rising demand but not 
before.  He said Aramco had no problem producing between 9.3 
and 9.5 mbpd, but as he said he told President Bush during 
his visit to Saudi Arabia in May, "Saudi Arabia can't just 
put crude out on the market, we need customers." 
 
------------------- 
More on speculation 
------------------- 
 
¶5. (C) Naimi referred to the latest U.S. Commodity Future 
Trading Commission report which (he said) showed that 
speculation had become more under control and probably would 
have less of an impact on markets.  However, he said it 
defined oil trades in terms of "commercial and 
non-commercial" transactions, of which the latter type did 
not fully coincide with his own definition of speculation, 
which he did not provide. 
 
¶6. (C) The minister said that the possibility of the USG's 
proposed "$500 billion" infusion of capital into the economy 
had caused "euphoria" that now was driving the price of oil 
higher.  All markets were affected he said, citing America, 
Russia, China, and the Middle East.  Naimi acknowledged the 
need for "regulators" to know the impact that they have on 
markets.  "We're only human," he said, which is why 
governments need "smart people" to figure out what's going on 
in both oil and financial markets.  Regarding what he termed 
the "Freddie Mac nationalization," the oil minister volunteered, "Governments have to do what they have to do." 
 
--------------- 
KAUST structure 
--------------- 
 
¶7. (C) Ambassador asked the minister for a description of 
committees being formed in connection with the King Abdullah 
University of Science and Technology (KAUST), which Saudi 
Aramco is responsible for developing.  Naimi said KAUST would 
have a Board of Trustees (20-25 members, half Saudis and half 
expatriates) with investment management and audit committees. 
 He said KAUST also would have several advisory boards 
(national, international, and technical advisory boards were 
planned). 
 
¶8. (C) The minister emphasized that since King Abdullah wants 
KAUST to be much more than just a university, he was looking 
not just for academics and university administrators but also 
for people with experience working for large research firms, 
national science programs, and science parks, as well as 
finance experts.  Naimi described some KAUST recruitment 
efforts, including specific candidates who had tentatively 
accepted or rejected his offers of board or committee 
membership.  From the descriptions he gave, the candidates 
(many are U.S. persons) are all at the top of their fields 
and represent a wide range of ages (though all he mentioned 
were over 40), levels of notoriety, and field of expertise. 
(Note:  The SAG hopes KAUST will do much more than provide 
education, technology, jobs, and an economic boost for the 
country; it wants the 9,000 acre multi-billion dollar 
research institution to create a space relatively insulated 
from the country's hyper-conservative culture that eventually 
could promote moderation in other parts of Saudi Arabia.) 
 
------------ 
Atmospherics 
------------ 
 
¶9. (C) Naimi expressed interest in the upcoming U.S. 
elections and the financial crisis, and he displayed a 
reasonably sophisticated grasp of U.S. politics and economic 
policymaking.  The minister said he had climbed mountains, 
gone hiking, and "gotten some fresh air" during his trip to 
Europe for the OPEC meeting.  He appeared healthy and was an 
engaging interlocutor but displayed the somewhat low energy 
level typical of Saudis during the Ramadan fast, which he 
said he was observing. 
RUNDELL