05ANKARA3380
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue Jun 14 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

141250Z Jun 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 ANKARA 003380 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, JUNE 13, 2005 
 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Erdogan Gives Bush Administration Warm Messages - Milliyet 
6/11 
Erdogan: A New Era in Turkey-US Ties - Aksam 6/12 
Erdogan: Iraq Becoming a Training Field for Terrorists - 
Milliyet 6/12 
Rice: EU Should Keep Word, Begin Entry Talks With Turkey - 
Milliyet 6/12 
US `Wanted' List for 150 PKK Members - Sabah 6/11 
Nicosia Rejects Direct Trade With northern Cyprus - Hurriyet 
The Observer: Turks Have No Chance of Joining EU - Milliyet 
Bloody Day in Iran: 9 Killed - Sabah 
Nothing New on the Iraq Front: 90 Killed - Milliyet 6/12 
Another Turkish Truck Driver Killed in Iraq - Sabah 6/12 
G-8 to `Erase' 40 Billion USD Debt of Poor Countries - 
Milliyet 6/12 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
New York Times: Turks, Angry With EU, Turn to US - Zaman 
6/12 
Turkey to Sign EU Cyprus Protocol - Cumhuriyet 
Annan Looking for Ways to Facilitate Cyprus Solution - 
Radikal 6/12 
Merkel: EU Not Ready for Turkey - Cumhuriyet 6/12 
Barzani Becomes President of Kurdish Region - Zaman 
Osman Ocalan Quits Active Politics - Yeni Safak 
Bush: Syria Has a `Death List' for Lebanon - Yeni Safak 6/12 
Lebanese Christians Win Third Round of Elections - Yeni 
Safak 
Bombs Shake Iran on Eve of Presidential Polls - Radikal 
Belgrade Bargains With The Hague to Surrender Mladic - 
Cumhuriyet 6/12 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
Erdogan Returns From US:  In an assessment of his visit last 
week to the United States, Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan 
told Turkish columnists on his return flight to Ankara that 
anti-Americanism in Turkey is not as high as some have said. 
The recent visit to northern Cyprus made a positive impact 
in Turkey.  If Americans take action against the PKK, the 
atmosphere will be further improved,' Erdogan said.  US- 
Turkey ties are `multi-dimensional and well tested,' 
according to Erdogan, and they are `strengthened' every day 
with a `vision for the future.'  On Syria, Erdogan noted 
that Ankara and Damascus have been enemies for 40 years. 
`We have turned a new page in bilateral relations with 
Syria.  Turkey will assist any democratic step taken in 
Syria,' he noted.  Erdogan also voiced hope that the 
`positive energy' of his visit to the United States would 
bring `concrete cooperation,' which would yield positive 
results for both countries. 
 
Before leaving for Turkey, Erdogan attended a dinner hosted 
by Ahmet Ertegun, a Turkish businessman living in the US. 
UN Secretary General Kofi Annan and several American 
politicians, journalists, and artists attended the dinner. 
Earlier on Friday, Erdogan met with the editorial board of 
the New York Times (NYT) where he faced criticism regarding 
the postponement of a conference planned by the Bosphorus 
University in Istanbul to debate the official Turkish 
position regarding claims of genocide against Armenians by 
the Ottomans in 1915-17.  Erdogan said that Minister Cicek's 
statements criticizing the conference represented his 
personal views, and not those of the Turkish government: `I 
support these kinds of conferences even though I do not 
agree with the views that were to be expressed there,' 
Erdogan said.  He invited the NYT editors to come to Turkey 
to look at the official archives on the issue.  Erdogan also 
voiced his displeasure over the paper's refusal to publish 
an advertisement by 36 Turkish NGOs rejecting charges of the 
mass killings of Armenians by Ottoman forces.  Editors said 
the decision was made by the NYT advertisement section, and 
they promised to look into the advertisement and inform the 
Turks about the results of their inquiry. 
 
Saturday papers report Erdogan's remarks at a meeting of the 
Foreign Policy Association in Washington, which were seen by 
the Turkish press as messages aimed at `pleasing' the US. 
`Disagreements between Turkey and the United States are 
transitory, but our ties are strong enough to overcome these 
differences,' Erdogan said.  Erdogan noted that the 
leadership of a global power such as the US is necessary to 
handle international problems like terrorism, weapons of 
mass destruction, and demographic imbalances. 
 
Saturday's "Cumhuriyet" claims that Washington was not 
satisfied by Erdogan's messages highlighting the importance 
of Turkey's ties with the US.  The paper reports US 
officials as saying that the Erdogan government is expected 
to demonstrate leadership in boosting strategic cooperation 
with the US.  While Erdogan voiced support for the US 
Broader Middle East and North Africa Initiative (BMENAI), he 
also criticized some aspects of it and defended Turkey's 
close ties with Syria, the paper claims.  Turkey's policies 
with regard to Iran also remain a source of anxiety for US, 
according to "Cumhuriyet." 
 
Erdogan Meets Anti-Defamation League:  The Anti-Defamation 
League (ADL) gave Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan a medal of 
valor to honor Turkish diplomats who saved Jews from Nazi 
Germany's concentration camps during World War II, weekend 
papers report.  Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul, State 
Minister Ali Babacan, and Defense Minister Vecdi Gonul 
joined Erdogan at the breakfast with ADL representatives in 
New York on Friday.  `The genocide committed against the 
Jews is the most unbelievable crime committed in human the 
history.  Millions of Jews became the victims of this 
crime,' Erdogan said, adding that `anti-Semitism is a 
perversion which led to a massacre.  Genocide, ethnic 
cleansing, racism, anti-Islamism, anti-Christianity, 
xenophobia and terrorism are different faces of the same 
wickedness.  If we understand the danger of these calamities 
and fight against them effectively, our children will live 
in a better world.'  Erdogan said that anti-Semitism has not 
been a part of Turkish culture.  `Islam is a religion which 
sees people as equals regardless of whether they are Jewish, 
Christian, or Muslim,' he emphasized.  Erdogan reminded that 
the Ottomans had sheltered Jewish people 500 years ago. 
`Jewish people living in Turkey are respected members of our 
nation.  We have friendly ties with the Jewish people in the 
US, and they always have supported Turkey in difficult days. 
We continue to trust your friendship and you should continue 
trusting our friendship,' Erdogan stressed.  He also noted 
that Turkey is determined to further deepen its partnership 
with the US:  `This partnership is an indispensable common 
initiative that serves honorable aims.  Turkey and the US 
want to launch efforts to achieve a democratic peace by 
stressing shared values and common goals.' 
 
Bush Makes Economic Demands From Turkey:  During his meeting 
with Prime Minister Erdogan, President Bush asked Prime 
Minister Erdogan to address the difficulties faced by US 
firms active in Turkey, particularly lawsuits against the 
agribusiness giant Cargill Inc., Monday's "Cumhuriyet 
"reports.  Bush responded to Erdogan's request for help with 
US investments in Turkey by saying that US companies' 
investment decisions are made according to the respect shown 
to business contracts signed by foreign investors. 
"Cumhuriyet" believes the remarks reflect disappointment 
with the problems faced by Cargill and Motorola in Turkey. 
Turkey is expected to work out lasting legal solutions to 
these problems, sources said.  Erdogan's trip to the US 
failed to make a breakthrough in economic relations between 
the two countries, "Cumhuriyet" comments. 
 
Turkey Agrees to Buy 12 Sikorsky Helicopters:  Turkey agreed 
with the Sikorsky firm to purchase 12 helicopters worth 389 
million USD, weekend papers report.  Defense Minister Vecdi 
Gonul told reporters that Turkey ranked second, after the US 
military, in the list of buyers from Sikorsky, with 125 
helicopters purchased since 1985.  Gonul noted that the 
helicopters will be delivered to Turkey within 3-4 years. 
 
US Issues a `Wanted List' for PKK Members in Iraq:  The 
United States ordered two months ago its units in Iraq to 
capture 150 PKK members, including Osman Ocalan, but no 
action has been taken to that end, weekend papers report. 
Reports claim that the order for the capture of PKK members 
was issued shortly after Iraqi Prime Minister Jafari's visit 
to Turkey.  The US list includes former PKK leaders who 
later founded the Patriotic Democratic Party (PWD) -- Osman 
Ocalan, Faysal Dunlayici, Hidir Tas -- and those who are 
known to be on Kandil Mountain: Cemil Bayik, Murat 
Karayilan, Ali Haydar Kaytan and Hidir Yalcin. 
 
PKK Militants Continue Infiltration into Turkey:  Turkish 
security forces continue operations against PKK groups on 
the Iran-Iraq border, Saturday's "Cumhuriyet" reports.  The 
PKK has intensified its activities by sending new groups 
into Turkey, particularly via Iran.  Military sources said 
that two PKK groups of 20 specially-trained militants 
infiltrated into Hatay, Sivas, and Erzincan provinces as 
well as the Black Sea region.  Military sources estimate the 
number of PKK militants in Turkey as 3,000, and those in the 
Kandil Mountains as 4,000.  Security officials said ten PKK 
bombers have been captured in Istanbul with a total of 30 kg 
of explosives last month, and that new militant groups 
continue to infiltrate into Turkey to carry out bomb attacks 
in major Turkish cities. 
 
Erdogan to Attend Arab Summit in Lebanon:  Prime Minister 
Erdogan is to travel to Beirut June 15-17 to attend the Arab 
Economic Forum meetings in the Lebanese capital, Sunday 
papers report.  At the forum, Erdogan is expected to voice 
support for the US Broader Middle East and North Africa 
Initiative in line with the `soft' messages he issued during 
his visit to the United States. 
 
Bar Associations Warn About New Turkish Penal Code:  Bar 
associations of 13 Turkish provinces issued a joint 
statement warning the nation against the dangers caused by 
changes made in Turkey's draft penal code, Sunday papers 
report.  The statement said that the changes promote the 
establishment and operation of illegal educational 
institutions.  `If the draft becomes law,' the statement 
said, `the way will be opened to separatist terrorist 
organizations, missionary activities, and religious orders 
(tarikats) seeking a state-based on religion in Turkey.' 
 
Turkish-Greek Natural Gas Pipeline:  The prime ministers of 
Turkey and Greece are to join groundbreaking ceremonies for 
the Turkish-Greek natural gas pipeline project on July 3, 
Sunday papers report.  The project, which is to be completed 
in 15 months, will carry natural gas to European countries 
through Greece. 
 
Businessmen Close to AKP on the Rise:  Businessmen close to 
the ruling AK Party (AKP) have started expanding their 
influence in Turkey's business world by taking over the 
chairmanships of influential organizations such as the 
Chamber of Trade and Chamber of Industry in Istanbul, 
Monday's "Sabah" reports.  Most of these businessmen own 
small and medium-scale enterprises, and although their 
capital is limited, the influence they have gained is 
enormous, according to "Sabah."  Monday's "Aksam" carries a 
report about the activities of Islamic holding companies in 
Turkey.  According to the report, which has been submitted 
to the parliament, Islamic business groups have collected 
some 4 billion Euro from shareholders with promises to pay 
generous profit shares.  Most of these holding companies 
subsequently went bankrupt. 
 
Turkish Truck Driver Killed in Iraq:  A Turkish truck driver 
was killed by unidentified attackers in Ishaki, north of 
Baghdad, Sunday papers report.  The identity of the driver 
was not immediately known. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: US-Turkey 
 
"The US-AKP Dance" 
Yasemin Congar wrote from Washington in the mainstream 
"Milliyet" (6/13): "The dance between the US administration 
and the AKP is certainly not a tango, because we can't 
really talk about common emotion or shared passion between 
the two.  Yet after the White House meeting, it seems that 
both sides are determined to continue dancing even though 
they may occasionally step on each other's toes.  This means 
the Bush administration does not have any intention of 
leaning toward a different partner in Turkey and distancing 
itself from the ruling AKP. . Prior to the White House 
meeting, PM Erdogan was welcomed to Washington by 
Undersecretary Zoellick's negative remarks on the bilateral 
relationship.  Zoellick stressed the disappointment, 
concern, and confusion in bilateral relations, and he 
suggested ways to overcome these difficulties.  On the issue 
of anti-Americanism, Washington is not satisfied with 
Erdogan's explanation.  Although Erdogan finally admitted 
there is anti-Americanism in Turkey, he put the blame on 
figures in the opposition, the media, and `marginal groups.' 
Washington wants to see the AKP actively engaged in 
countering anti-Americanism in every possible platform, and 
to speak louder to defend the value of Turkey's friendship 
with the US.  During the White House meeting, PM Erdogan 
expressed support for the BMENAI and did not mention some of 
his former reservations about the project.  But this time, 
Washington wants to see deeds rather than words.  The Bush 
administration is also very impatient about certain 
differences between the two capitals on the fight against 
terrorism.  Syria is certainly the most notable example of 
these differences.  The White House countered Turkey's 
argument on the need to `establishment close relations' with 
Damascus to `encourage reform' by pointing out that such an 
approach is out of step with US policy and the approach of 
the rest of the world.  For Washington, Damascus constitutes 
a direct threat against the lives of US soldiers in Iraq, 
and a threat to the process of democratization in Lebanon. 
Washington is working on several options regarding Syria, 
including diplomatic and economic isolation and `hot 
pursuit' of insurgents from Iraq to Syria.  It looks like 
the Syria issue will soon become a litmus test for the 
strategic relationship between Turkey and the US." 
 
"Turkish Foreign Policy" 
Yilmaz Oztuna observed in the conservative-mass appeal 
"Turkiye" (6/13):  "During his visit to Washington, Prime 
Minister Erdogan did not convey a positive message to 
President Bush on the Syria issue.  President Bush was 
expecting to hear a promise more in line with the US 
approach. On the contrary, Erdogan presented Bush with an 
offer in complete contradiction to Washington's Syria 
policies.  For its part, Turkey has become exceptionally 
sensitive about the PKK issue.  As I wrote in my previous 
columns, the US should have taken concrete steps against the 
PKK if it was expecting to hear something different on 
Syria.  If the US had surprised Turkey by eliminating the 
PKK in Northern Iraq, would the Turkish government have 
acted as a partner to the US on its Syria policy?  The 
answer to this question is uncertain.  But it seems clear 
that issues beyond Syria and Iran are currently outside of 
Washington's field of vision." 
 
MOORE