05BAGHDAD2481
MEDIA REACTION: IRAQ, NATIONAL ASSEMBLY,
Mon Jun 13 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 002481 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, 
INR/P 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAQ, NATIONAL ASSEMBLY, 
GOVERNMENT; BAGHDAD 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: The major themes in the daily newspapers on 
June. 13 were constitution-drafting preparations and the 
latest developments of the security situation. END SUMMARY. 
 
----------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
----------------- 
 
¶A. "The New Iraq" (Al-Sabah, 6/13) 
¶B. "Good and Bad" (Az-Zaman, 6/13) 
 
---------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
---------------------- 
 
¶A. "The New Iraq" (Al-Sabah, 6/13) 
 
Al-Sabah (Iraqi Media Network, non-biased) published a 
front-page editorial by Mohammed Abdul-Jabbar about the 
institutions in the new Iraq: 
 
"We need to develop new theories and descriptions for every 
field of life in our new Iraq after the Iraqi people 
witnessed the last half century living under illegal 
governments and a dictatorial regime. The real meaning of 
"the new Iraq" depends on the success of the political and 
intellectual elites in developing new perceptions and their 
ability to implement these perceptions into new practices, 
traditions, and strong institutions that are active in 
society. This new strategy can be applied in fields of 
politics, economics, social relations, and the media. There 
are many examples of these new perceptions and institutions 
in the new Iraq. 
 
One such example can be derived from the position of the 
armed forces in the political arena. In the new Iraq, the 
armed forces must report to a civilian authority. 
Therefore, the Minister of Defense should be a civilian 
with knowledge of the military. Indeed, under such a 
scenario, both the Army and other armed forces would fall 
under the authority of the civilian political leadership. 
In the past, when we lived under the control of a military 
or quasi-military government, the armed forces were always 
given the first and final word in all societal issues. This 
scenario existed even under the authority of the Baath 
party, which was supposed to be ruled by a civilian 
leadership. Although the leader of the regime was a 
civilian, he nonetheless often wore a military uniform and 
placed the highest military rank on his own shoulders. 
 
Another area of interest in the new Iraq is the media. In 
the former Iraq, the Iraqi people grew accustomed to the 
official media, which was also known as the government's 
media. This official media became the lone source of news 
for the dictatorship. Under this scenario, the media was 
simply a form of propaganda that served and worshipped the 
ruler of the state. However, in the new, federal, 
constitutional, and democratic Iraq, the government will 
not be able to penetrate the media. Liberating the media, 
the financial market, and civil society from governmental 
authority is a basic condition for establishing democracy." 
 
¶B. "Good and Bad" (Az-Zaman, 6/13) 
 
Az-Zaman (independent, lately anti-coalition) published on 
last page editorial by Fatih Abdul Salam about the Baath 
party: 
 
"In spite of all the criticism that is being directed at 
Damascus, President Bashar Al-Assad seems that he has 
decided to go on indefinitely boasting the political name 
of the Baath by describing it as a movement for leading 
both the society and state, as stated under Article 8 of 
the Syrian constitution. Between Iraq and Syria, there 
exists only a superficial borderline. Therefore, the Baath 
Party conference that was held in Damascus sent a clear 
message against the Debaathification process in Iraq. 
 
The Baath party that has been uprooted from power in Iraq 
is very similar to the Syrian Baath party that continues to 
rule that country. The Syrian Baath party has restricted 
all aspects of life according to what Damascus views as 
suitable to its own political situation and strategy. 
However, during the Baath Party's recent conference, the 
Party exhibited a challenging tone to Washington as it 
discussed for the first time in many years cases that were 
previously forbidden to discuss. For example, the Party 
granted citizenship to 200,000 Kurds, established a law for 
alternative political parties, and lightened the security 
restrictions throughout society. 
 
The Baath party of Syria is also considered as an ally to 
Tehran, which currently faces serious challenges from 
Washington. Indeed, it appears that the regimes in Damascus 
and Tehran are both caught in a standoff with Washington. 
Damascus has insinuated in its latest Baath conference and 
Tehran with its presidential elections that they are 
challenging Washington by making steps of undetermined 
reforms. But what should concern the Iraqi people is that 
they will likely face a future crisis with the Syrian 
regime because of the difference in ideology of the two 
countries' regimes -- regardless of whether Damascus is an 
ally of Tehran. We must not forget that the Baath party 
originated in Syria and it is possible that it will 
continue to flow into Iraq via the Euphrates and Tigris 
rivers." 
 
JEFFREY