05JERUSALEM2250
WB/G SITREP: JUNE 2, 2005 (1700 HOURS LOCAL) --
Thu Jun 02 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Jerusalem
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 JERUSALEM 002250 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FO; NEA/SA/EX FOR AUSTIN-FERGUSON; DEPT FOR 
DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PBTS PHUM KWBG KPAL IS ASEC
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: JUNE 2, 2005 (1700 HOURS LOCAL) -- 
CLASHES BETWEEN ANTI-BARRIER ACTIVISTS AND IDF IN WEST 
BANK; PALESTINIAN MILITARY INTELLIGENCE OFFICERS 
DEMONSTRATING IN THE GAZA STRIP 
 
 
This is a joint ConGen Jerusalem/Embassy Tel Aviv cable. 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: Fourteen Palestinian and foreign peace 
activists were injured from tear gas inhalation during 
clashes with IDF troops over construction of the separation 
barrier near the village of Beit Suriq, northwest of 
Jerusalem, June 1.  Israeli security forces arrested 21 
Palestinians in various locations in the West Bank.  Israeli 
authorities arrested three Israeli border policemen and one 
former border policeman on June 1 on suspicion that they sold 
weapons to a Palestinian man from East Jerusalem.  Settlers 
in the Old City of Hebron threw stones at Palestinians and 
painted slogans defaming Islam on some storefronts in the Old 
City June 1.  In the Gaza Strip, UNRWA reported June 2 that 
dozens of PA military intelligence officials were 
demonstrating outside the Palestinian Legislative Council 
(PLC) building against what UNRWA characterized as the 
splitting of PA Military Intelligence between two security 
branches.  End Summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) ATTACKS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injuries: According to Palestinian media, 14 Palestinian 
and foreign peace activists were injured from tear gas 
inhalation during clashes with IDF troops over construction 
of the separation barrier near the village of Beit Suriq, 
northwest of Jerusalem on June 1. 
 
-- Arrests: According to Palestinian sources, IDF troops 
entered Balata refugee camp, near Nablus, and arrested five 
Fatah activists June 1. 
 
-- Arrests: According to Palestinian sources, IDF troops 
apprehended five members of Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ) 
in Idna village, near Hebron, June 1.  The IDF subsequently 
released three of those detained, but two remain in custody. 
 
-- Arrests: According to Palestinian media, the IDF arrested 
one Fatah activist in Beit Ummar, southwest of Bethlehem, 
June 1. 
 
-- Arrests: Palestinian sources reported that, IDF troops 
entered Attil village, near Tulkarm, and arrested two members 
of PIJ and one Fatah member June 1. 
 
-- Arrests: According to Israeli and Palestinian media 
sources, the IDF arrested eight PIJ activists near Hebron 
June 2. 
 
-- According to Israeli media, Israeli authorities arrested 
three Israeli border policemen and one former border 
policeman June 1 on suspicion that they sold weapons to a 
Palestinian man from East Jerusalem.  Two of the suspects 
were released to house arrest, and two were remanded by the 
court. 
 
-- Security Incidents:  According to Palestinian sources, 
settlers in the Old City of Hebron threw stones at 
Palestinians and painted slogans defaming Islam on some of 
the city's storefronts June 1.  No injuries were reported, 
but tensions remained high in Hebron. 
 
-- Security Incidents: According to Palestinian media, 
settlers set on fire 30-40 dunums (approximately 8-10 acres) 
of Palestinian-owned farmland containing olive and almond 
trees near the village of Hussan, not far from Bethlehem, 
June 1. 
 
¶3. (SBU) CLOSURES/CURFEWS 
 
-- According to Palestinian sources, the IDF imposed a curfew 
on the Balata refugee camp, near Nablus, after arresting five 
Fatah activists (see Arrests) on June 1.  The entrance to the 
camp was blocked by dirt and concrete slabs. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶4. (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injuries: Nil. 
 
-- Clashes: Nil. 
 
-- Shooting: The IDF reported that Palestinians shot at an 
IDF outpost east of Rafiah Yam Village June 1.  No injuries 
were reported. 
 
-- Shooting: Palestinians shot at IDF troops approximately 
one kilometer from an IDF outpost south of Rafah June 1, 
according to the IDF.  No injuries were reported. 
 
-- Shooting: A shooting occurred near an IDF outpost 
southeast of Netzarim June 1 in which Palestinians targeted 
IDF troops without resulting injuries, according to the IDF. 
 
-- Missile:  An anti-tank missile was fired at an IDF 
bulldozer in the vicinity of an IDF outpost north of Rafah 
June 1, according to the IDF. 
 
-- Mortar: The IDF reported a mortar shell fired at Israeli 
civilians in the Netzarim Village early June 2.  No injuries 
resulted. 
 
-- Explosions: Nil. 
 
¶5. (SBU) ARRESTS: Nil. 
 
¶6. (SBU) INCURSIONS/DEMOLITIONS: Nil. 
 
¶7. (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS/CHECKPOINTS: 
 
-- Route Four (Salah Ed-Din Road), the main north-south 
traffic artery, was open June 2, but closed at Netzarim 
junction.  The coastal road at Netzarim T-Junction was open. 
 
-- The Erez Crossing was open to internationals, diplomats, 
and Palestinian laborers June 1. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone was open June 1.  According to 
UNRWA, 600 Palestinian laborers entered the zone June 1. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for laborers, but open for 
aggregates used in construction June 1. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was open for the import and export of 
materials June 2. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open without restrictions June 2. 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan checkpoint was closed, and Toufa checkpoint 
was open with restrictions on males age 16-30, June 2. 
 
¶8. (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- UNRWA reported that dozens of PA military intelligence 
officials were demonstrating outside the Palestinian 
Legislative Council (PLC) building against what UNRWA 
characterized as the splitting of PA Military Intelligence 
between two security branches.  The protesters blocked 
several streets in the city while firing heavily into the air 
during the march.  Demonstrations also took place in Rafah. 
UNRWA reported at about 1230 June 2 that the demonstration 
had broken up. 
Connelly