05JERUSALEM2670
WB/G SITREP: JUNE 28, 2005 (1800 HOURS LOCAL) --
Tue Jun 28 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Jerusalem
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 JERUSALEM 002670 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FO; NEA/SA/EX FOR AUSTIN-FERGUSON; DEPT FOR 
DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PBTS PHUM KWBG KPAL IS ASEC
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: JUNE 28, 2005 (1800 HOURS LOCAL) -- 
PALESTINIAN MILITANTS LAUNCH MORTAR ATTACKS IN GAZA; IDF 
CONVICTS SOLDIER IN DEATH OF UK PEACE ACTIVIST 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY:  Palestinian militants launched a total of 
six mortar shells and one Qassam rocket from the southern 
Gaza Strip.  Erez Crossing was open June 27, and 4,200 
laborers and 405 merchants crossed into Israel. An IDF 
military court has convicted a former IDF soldier of 
manslaughter, obstruction of justice and perjury in the death 
of UK peace activist Tom Hurndall.  The PA cabinet met in 
Gaza on June 27 and discussed a number of steps that will be 
implemented to control the security situation.  END SUMMARY. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injuries: Nil. 
 
-- Arrests: Palestinian media reported that the IDF arrested 
three Palestinian minors who were carrying firebombs and a 
knife. 
 
-- Arrests: According to Palestinian sources, three 
Palestinians were hit with rubber-coated bullets and a fourth 
was arrested during a protest against the building of the 
security barrier In the village of Yatta, south of Hebron, on 
June 27. 
 
-- Attacks: Shots were fired at an IDF outpost outside the 
settlement of Kadim, near Jenin, on June 27.  The IDF did not 
retaliate, while PA police combed the eastern section of the 
city from which the shots were fired.  No arrests were 
reported. 
 
¶3. (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- PA President Abbas met with heads of the PLC committees 
and discussed the introduction of a PA vice president 
position.  No decision was made during the meeting, but 
public statements by the leadership supported the idea.  The 
Fatah Central Committee (FCC) will discuss the idea when it 
meets in Amman on June 30. 
 
---- 
GAZA 
---- 
 
¶4. (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injuries: Nil. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets/Shootings: The IDF reported that 
Palestinian militants fired a total of six mortar shells and 
one Qassam rocket, and launched three shooting attacks in the 
southern Gaza Strip overnight June 27-28.  No injuries were 
reported in any of these attacks. 
 
-- Tunnels: The IDF on June 26 discovered a tunnel between 
Khan Yunis and Neve Dekalim. According to the IDF, a PIJ cell 
based in Khan Yunis dug the tunnel. 
 
¶5. (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS: 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was closed at Abu Khouli June 28. 
 
-- Erez Crossing was open June 27, and 4,200 laborers and 405 
merchants crossed into Israel.  As of June 26, female PA 
security officers are assigned to the crossing to search 
female Palestinians seeking to cross into Israel. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone was open June 27, and 553 
laborers entered. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers June 28, 
but was open for the import of aggregates used in 
construction. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was open June 28. 
 
-- Rafah was open June 28 for both arrivals and departures. 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan checkpoint was closed June 22.  Toufah 
checkpoint was open for residents of al-Mowassi, except males 
aged 16-30. 
 
¶6. (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- UNRWA reported that some 1,300 PIJ supporters, including 
some 300 masked and armed men, protested in Nuseirat camp the 
evening of June 27. 
 
-- According to Israeli media, an IDF military court on June 
27 convicted a former IDF soldier of manslaughter, 
obstruction of justice and perjury in the death of UK peace 
activist Tom Hurndall.  Hurndall, a member of the 
International Solidarity Movement (ISM), was shot in 2003 
while escorting children from an area of IDF and militant 
activity.  In a coma for the next 18 months, Hurndall died in 
January 2004. 
-- The Palestinian media reported that the PA cabinet met in 
Gaza on June 28 and discussed a number of steps that will be 
implemented to control the security situation. 
PEARCE