05OTTAWA1869
CANADIAN REQUEST FOR TRANSIT RIGHTS THROUGH U.S.
Tue Jun 21 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ottawa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

211758Z Jun 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 OTTAWA 001869 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM EWWT PBTS PHSA PREL CA
SUBJECT: CANADIAN REQUEST FOR TRANSIT RIGHTS THROUGH U.S. 
WATERS FOR CANADIAN COAST GUARD VESSELS WITH ARMED LAW 
ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS ABOARD 
 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action request: see paragraph 5. 
 
¶2. (SBU)  Embassy Ottawa received a diplomatic note dated 
June 20, 2005 from Foreign Affairs Canada.  The note provides 
details of Canadian plans to deploy three joint RCMP/Canadian 
Coast Guard vessels on the Great Lakes and the Saint Lawrence 
Seaway, beginning July 16, 2005.  This is part of Canada's 
maritime security enhancement program. The ships, which will 
carry armed RCMP officers, will be marked as Canadian police 
vessels. The note requests USG concurrence allowing the 
transit of the three vessels through U.S. internal waters. 
It points out that the law enforcement officers seek to 
transit U.S. waters only and are not authorized to use their 
duty weapons or take law enforcement action while in U.S. 
internal waters.  The full text of the diplomatic note and 
the accompanying attachment with details on the vessels is 
provided below. 
 
¶3. (SBU)  (Complimentary opening) and has the honour to seek 
the concurrence of the United States Government to allow 
joint Royal Canadian Mounted Police/Canadian Coast Guard 
(CCG) vessels to transit U.S. internal waters in the Great 
Lakes/Saint Lawrence Seaway System while en route to conduct 
law enforcement/maritime security patrols in Canadian 
internal waters. 
 
The Government of Canada has the further honour to inform the 
United States Government of Canada's intent to deploy three 
joint RCMP/CCG vessels to begin law enforcement/maritime 
security patrols in Canadian waters on the Great Lakes/Saint 
Lawrence Seaway between Thunder Bay, Ontario, and Les 
Escoumins, Quebec, commencing on July 16, 2005, as part of 
Canada's marine security enhancement programme. 
 
Given the geography of the region, the three Canadian vessels 
will need to routinely transit U.S. internal waters including 
seaway locks, shared rivers, and navigable channels along the 
Saint Lawrence Seaway and the Great Lakes as they move from 
one part of Canadian waters to another.  The three Canadian 
vessels will carry identifiable armed peace officers and be 
marked as Canadian police vessels. 
 
The Government of Canada seeks the concurrence of the United 
States Government to allow the transit of the three vessels 
and the armed Canadian peace officers on board through U.S. 
internal waters beginning July 16, 2005.  The Government of 
Canada notes that the Canadian peace officers do not have any 
law enforcement powers outside of Canada and thus, the 
Canadian officers are not authorized to use their duty 
weapons or take law enforcement action while in U.S. internal 
waters.  This concurrence is for transit through U.S. waters 
only. 
 
Should any further information be required, the Department of 
Foreign Affairs and International Trade remains at the 
disposal of the Embassy of the United States of America and 
appropriate United States authorities to facilitate any 
discussion or technical arrangements.  The Government of 
Canada further notes that concurrence with this request will 
not affect or prejudice broader or more lasting solutions to 
marine geographic inhibitors, which are currently being 
explored through the Canada-U.S. Cross Border Crime Forum. 
(Complimentary closing) 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Begin text of attachment. 
 
Marine Security of the Great Lakes/Saint Lawrence Seaway 
System 
 
The Great Lakes/Saint Lawrence Seaway System is a conduit 
providing access for the global maritime shipping industry to 
the heartland of North America.  Canada is committed to 
addressing the capacity for on-water response to combat 
transnational threats, including terrorism, organized crime 
activities such as people and contraband smuggling and 
trafficking, within the Great Lakes/Saint Lawrence Seaway 
System.  As an interim measure, Canada has dedicated three 
vessels to begin joint law enforcement/maritime security 
patrols between Thunder Bay, Ontario, and Les Escoumins, 
Quebec. 
 
These maritime security patrols are a concrete demonstration 
of Canada's commitment to contribute effectively to the 
enhancement of security of North America.  As such, they 
represent one more step towards achieving the common security 
goals established by President Bush, Prime Minister Martin, 
and President Fox in the North American Security and 
Prosperity Partnership announced in March 2005. 
 
Vessels and Crew 
The CCGC Cape Hurd (Official No: 800748; Port of Registry: 
Ottawa; Call Sign: CG2821) will patrol the areas from Lake 
Huron to Port Colborne including the waters of the St. Clair 
and Detroit Rivers from mid-April to early December.  The 
Cape Hurd will have a complement of 4 CCG and 2 law 
enforcement personnel. 
 
The CCGC Isle Rouge (Official No: 395543; Port of Registry: 
Ottawa; Call Sign: CG2637) will patrol the St. Lawrence River 
from Cornwall to Les Escoumins from mid-April to early 
December.  The Isle Rouge will have a complement of 4 CCG and 
2 law enforcement personnel. 
 
The Simmonds (The Simmonds is an RCMP vessel which is in the 
process of getting registered as a Coast Guard ship, and once 
processed, all relevant details will be forwarded to U.S. 
officials) will patrol Lake Ontario and the St. Lawrence 
River to Cornwall from mid-April to early December.  The 
Simmonds will have a complement of 4 CCG and 2 law 
enforcement personnel. 
 
Duration of Law Enforcement/Maritime Security Patrols 
 
These measures will begin July 16, 2005 and will not affect 
or prejudice broader or more lasting solutions to marine 
geographic inhibitors, which are currently being explored 
through the Canada-U.S. Cross Border Crime Forum.  (End text 
of attachment) 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  Action Request:  Mission Canada believes that 
timely approval of this request is very much in our interest, 
but we are not sure what agency in the USG is authorized to 
grant this request.  We note that, because of the limited 
nature of the request, it would not seem to require Title 19 
authorization.  We therefore ask that the State Department, 
after consulting with other interested agencies, provide the 
text of a positive reply that we could forward to Foreign 
Affairs Canada as a diplomatic note. 
 
Visit Canada's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/ottawa 
 
RODDY