05TELAVIV3477
WB/G SITREP: SENIOR FATAH OFFICIAL KILLED IN
Mon Jun 06 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEL AVIV 003477 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NEA FOR BURNS/SATTERFIELD/DIBBLE; 
NEA/SA/EX FOR RICHE; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; 
DEPT FOR DS/IP/ITA; DRL FOR A/S CRANER; 
NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN; 
USAID FOR DCHA, DCHA/FPP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG PTER ASEC PHUM CASC KPAL
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: SENIOR FATAH OFFICIAL KILLED IN 
NABLUS: JUNE 4-6 (1500 HRS LOCAL) 
 
 
This is a joint message from Embassy Tel Aviv and Consulate 
General Jerusalem 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  In the West Bank, the family of an 
alleged Israeli collaborator reportedly killed a senior Fatah 
official and his brother in Nablus, sparking demonstrations 
at the Muqata,a in Ramallah.  An IDF soldier and two foreign 
national protesters were injured near Salfit in clashes 
between the IDF and demonstrators over the construction of 
the Ariel separation fence.  Israeli bulldozers began 
leveling Palestinian-owned lands in Bayt Surik in preparation 
for the construction of the separation barrier northwest of 
Jerusalem.  In Nablus, 40 Palestinian gunmen attacked the 
offices of the governor and  the local Ministry of Interior, 
demanding to be integrated into the PA security services.  A 
group of seventy Israelis entered the Haram al-Sharif (Temple 
Mount) compound under police escort, sparking clashes with 
Palestinians.  The situation calmed down after police removed 
the Israelis. In the Gaza Strip, IDF fire injured a 
Palestinian youth near Neve Dekalim, and one suspected 
militant near Khan Yunis.  Near Rafah, nine armed Fatah 
militants blocked the road into the terminal to protest not 
being paid by the PA for three months.  End summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) ATTACKS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Deaths: According to Palestinian reports, a senior Fatah 
official and his brother were murdered in Nablus on June 3. 
The killers were identified as four brothers, the children of 
an alleged Israeli collaborator killed during the first 
Intifada.  Three of the brothers turned themselves in to 
Palestinian security forces, and are currently in the Jericho 
prison.  The fourth brother surrendered to Israeli 
authorities.  The killings provoked demonstrations at the 
Muqata,a in Ramallah on June 3-4 by family members of those 
killed, and Fatah militants who demanded the execution of the 
suspects.  Palestinian Authority (PA) Prime Minister Ahmad 
Quraya, (Abu Ala,a) met with the protesters and promised 
that the case would be prosecuted in accordance with the law. 
 
 
-- Injuries: According to Israeli and Palestinian sources, an 
IDF soldier and two foreign-national protestors were lightly 
injured during clashes between the IDF and Palestinian, 
Israeli and foreign demonstrators protesting the construction 
of a security fence around Ariel settlement June 3.  The IDF 
detained, but subsequently released, nine demonstrators. 
 
-- Injuries: According to Palestinian reports, two 
Palestinians were injured when the IDF entered the village of 
Dura, near Hebron, to search the house of a Palestinian man 
released on June 2 from an Israeli prison. 
 
-- Injuries:  According to Palestinian media, one Palestinian 
man sustained moderate injuries when he was beaten by IDF 
soldiers as he tried to go through the barrier gate at Nazlat 
 Isa, north of Tulkarm, June 5.  According to Israeli 
sources, the man failed to obey IDF orders. 
 
-- Arrests: Palestinian media sources reported that the IDF 
arrested one Palestinian for throwing a Molotov cocktail at a 
IDF jeep near Bir Zeit, north of Ramallah, June 3. 
 
-- Arrests: According to Palestinian sources, the IDF 
arrested two Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ) members near 
Yatta June 3. 
 
-- Arrests: According to Palestinian media, IDF soldiers 
arrested one PIJ member near Bethlehem June 3. 
 
-- Arrests: Palestinian media reported four Palestinians 
arrested by the IDF at the village of al-Qar,a, north of 
Ramallah, June 4. 
 
-- Arrests: According to Palestinian reports, the IDF 
arrested three Fatah members in Nablus June 4. 
 
-- Arrests: According to Palestinian media, the IDF arrested 
three Fatah and two PIJ members in the villages of Kafr ,Ayn 
and Dayr Husayn, near Ramallah, June 5. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) INCURSIONS/DEMOLITIONS 
 
-- According to Palestinian media, IDF troops entered the 
village of Biddya, near Qalqilya, on June 3, and confiscated 
a stockpile of explosives. 
 
-- According to Palestinian reports, Israeli bulldozers 
started leveling Palestinian-owned lands in preparation for 
the construction of the separation barrier in Bayt Surik, 
northwest of Jerusalem.  During a demonstration held by 
Palestinian, Israeli, and foreign protesters June 4, four 
people suffered from tear gas inhalation. 
 
-- Palestinian press reported that settlers uprooted 200 
olive trees at the village of Marda, near Nablus, June 4. 
 
-- According to Palestinian reports, the IDF demolished one 
house and five barns at the village of Imr Daraj, near Yatta, 
June 5.  According to the IDF, the structures lacked 
appropriate permits, and were located in a closed military 
area. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS 
 
-- Palestinian media reported that 40 Palestinian gunmen 
attacked the offices of the governor of Nablus and the local 
Ministry of Interior on June 4.  The gunmen demanded job 
guarantees, and asked to be incorporated into the Palestinian 
security services.  After the incident, the spokesman for the 
Ministry of Interior said that they would consider the 
demands of the gunmen. 
 
-- According to Palestinian and Israeli reports, a group of 
seventy Israelis, under Israeli police escort, entered the 
Haram al-Sharif (Temple Mount) compound on June 6 to 
commemorate Jerusalem Day.  Israeli police reported that 
Palestinians threw rocks at the group.  According to the 
Israeli media, the police escorted the group from the 
compound, with two of the group members lightly injured. 
Palestinian sources reported that no injuries were sustained 
during the demonstration. 
 
---------- 
Gaza Strip 
---------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injuries/shootings: According to UNRWA, IDF fire injured a 
17-year-old Palestinian male when he approached the Neve 
Dekalim settlement fence with a group of other Palestinian 
youth June 6. 
 
-- Injuries/shootings: According to the IDF, IDF fire injured 
one suspected Palestinian militant near the IDF outpost north 
of Khan Yunis June 5. 
 
-- Mortars: According to the IDF, Palestinian militants fired 
two mortar shells June 4-6, one near Nitzanim settlement and 
one near Erez crossing. 
 
-- Rioting: According to the IDF, Palestinian youths threw 
stones at IDF soldiers and Israeli settlers during a riot 
that took place near the IDF outpost south of Katif 
settlement June 4. 
 
-- Shootings: According to the IDF, Palestinian militants 
engaged in three instances of shooting at IDF soldiers June 
5-6, two west of Khan Yunis and one south of Rafah. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS/CHECKPOINTS 
 
-- Route Four (Salah Ed-Din Road), the main north-south 
traffic artery, was open June 4-6, but closed at Netzarim 
junction. 
 
-- The Erez Crossing was open to internationals, diplomats, 
and Palestinian laborers June 4-6. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone was open June 4-6. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for laborers, but open for 
aggregates used in construction June 4-6. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was open for the import and export of 
materials June 4-6. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open with age restrictions June 4-6 
(see Political Developments below.) 
-- Tel al-Sultan checkpoint was closed, and Toufa checkpoint 
was open with restrictions on males age 16-30, June 4-6. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS 
 
-- According to UNRWA, eight armed Fatah militants blocked 
the route to Rafah terminal June 4 and 5 in order to protest 
not being paid by the PA for three months.  They reportedly 
stopped several high-level PA officials at the entrance to 
the terminal and prevented them from exiting the Gaza Strip 
by confiscating their passports. 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
KURTZER