05VILNIUS627
LITHUANIA SEEKS USG ASSISTANCE ON TWO PRT ISSUES
Wed Jun 15 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Vilnius
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS VILNIUS 000627 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS TO EUR/NB (MGERMANO), EUR/NCE (MSESSUMS), 
EUR/RPM (SWANDERSON) AND PM/PPA (SKWAK) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MOPS MCAP MARR PREF PGOV LH AF HR
SUBJECT: LITHUANIA SEEKS USG ASSISTANCE ON TWO PRT ISSUES 
 
REF: VILNIUS 609 
 
¶1.  (U) This is an action request.  Please see paragraph 6. 
 
¶2.  (U) SUMMARY: The GOL has requested USG assistance in 
concluding an agreement with the Government of Afghanistan to 
establish a Lithuanian Special Mission.  This agreement is a 
necessary precondition for the deployment of civilians to 
Afghanistan to join the brand-new, Lithuanian-led Provincial 
Reconstruction Team (PRT) in Ghowr province (reftel). 
Lithuania looks for the USG to encourage the GOA to move 
swiftly to effect this agreement.  On another PRT issue, 
Lithuania seeks U.S. diplomatic support to encourage the 
Government of Croatia to participate in the PRT.  END SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
LITHUANIA MOVES TO ESTABLISH SPECIAL MISSION IN AFGHANISTAN 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
¶3. (U) The MFA proposes to initiate an exchange of letters 
with the Government of Afghanistan by which the GOA would 
invite and the GOL would agree to establish a Special Mission 
in Afghanistan.  An appendix to the letters constitutes an 
agreement on the status of PRT personnel.  (Text of the 
agreement and appendix to follow by email.)  Foreign Minister 
Antanas Valionis signed a diplomatic note on June 14 to be 
forwarded to the Afghan Embassy in Warsaw, with copies to the 
Afghan Embassy in Washington and the Afghan Mission to the 
UN, to initiate this process.  Lithuanian law precludes 
sending civilians on assignment to Afghanistan without 
authorizing legislation.  Agreement on the Special Mission 
will set the stage for the GOL to seek parliamentary approval 
to deploy civilians.  The exchange of letters and GOL 
approval will allow Lithuania's PRT Political Advisor (POLAD) 
to assume his duties in Chaghcharan, even in advance of 
Parliamentary approval.  It will also enable the GOL to send 
civilian specialists to 
 the PRT in the future. 
 
¶4. (U) Lithuania established diplomatic relations with 
Afghanistan on March 31, 2005, but does not yet have an 
ambassador in Kabul.  The proposed agreement designates the 
head of the Special Mission (the POLAD) as Charge d'Affairs 
Ad Interim.  The annex to the agreement confers immunities 
and privileges on PRT personnel. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
CROATIA CONSIDERS CONTRIBUTION TO CHAGHCHARAN PRT 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Kestutis Jankauskas, Director of the MFA's Security 
Policy Department, told us he had recently discussed with 
interlocutors in Zagreb the possibility of Croatia 
contributing to the Lithuanian-led PRT.  The possibility 
under consideration is for a modest police or civilian 
deployment, probably numbering one to three individuals. 
Jankauskas said the Croatian government will make a final 
decision in late August or early September.  He requested 
that the USG encourage the Government of Croatia to provide 
such a contribution. 
 
-------------------------- 
COMMENT AND ACTION REQUEST 
-------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Enabling Lithuania to deploy the civilian 
complement of the PRT clearly advances USG interests in 
Afghanistan -- and will be welcome news to the U.S. POLAD 
already on the ground.  Post encourages the Department to 
raise this issue with appropriate Afghan Government 
officials, impressing upon them the importance to the 
Chaghcharan PRT of concluding an agreement soonest. 
Additionally, post requests Department consider encouraging 
the Croatian Government to participate in the Lithuanian-led 
PRT.  A Croatian role, however modest, will supplement 
Lithuania's resources and will enhance the multinational 
character of the mission. 
 
Mull