04BRASILIA2763
BRAZIL: RESIGNATION OF DEFENSE MINISTER VIEGAS
Thu Nov 04 00:00:00 +0100 2004
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Brasilia
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRASILIA 002763 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/04/2014 
TAGS: PREL MARR BR POL MIL
SUBJECT: BRAZIL: RESIGNATION OF DEFENSE MINISTER VIEGAS 
 
REF: BRASILIA 2684 
 
Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR DENNIS HEARNE. REASON: 1.4 
(B)(D) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary. Brazilian Minister of Defense Jose Viegas has 
presented his letter of resignation to President Lula da 
Silva, according to a 4 November Defense Ministry 
announcement.  Vice President Jose Alencar will formally take 
over the defense ministry portfolio on 8 November (Minister 
Viegas retains authority until that date).  A senior MOD 
official confirmed that the resignation came as a result of 
months of tensions and disagreements between Viegas and 
senior military commanders over military pensions and other 
institutional problems, culminating in the recent Herzog case 
(see reftel), in which senior army officials had not cleared 
with Viegas a controversial communiqu concerning human 
rights abuses during Brazil's military era.  Viegas has been 
an effective interlocutor with the USG on key issues, notably 
implementation of Brazil's air bridge denial (shootdown) 
program against aerial narcotrafficking.  Mission does not 
view this development as an indication that Brazil's armed 
forces are restive and challenging civilian authority, even 
though Viegas' tenure will not be remembered for reinforcing 
the stature and effectiveness of the civilian MOD. It also 
remains to be seen how his successor will handle challenging 
issues, such as shootdown, Brazil's leadership of MINUSTAH in 
Haiti or complex civil aviation matters.  End summary. 
 
¶2. (U)  Brazilian Minister of Defense Jose Viegas has 
presented his letter of resignation to President Lula da 
Silva, according to a 4 November Defense Ministry 
announcement.  Vice President Jose Alencar will formally take 
over the defense ministry portfolio on 8 November, while 
retaining his duties as vice president. No official reason 
was offered for the resignation in the announcement, but 
there has been media speculation for several months that 
Viegas might depart the ministry soon after Brazil's October 
municipal elections. 
 
¶3. (C) PolCouns spoke on 4 November with Fernando Abreu, 
Viegas' chief of staff.  Abreu confirmed that Viegas' recent 
embarrassment in the Herzog case (see reftel) had been the 
"gota da agua" ("last drop of water," a Portuguese colloquial 
equivalent for "straw that broke the camel's back"), 
following months of tensions and disagreements between Viegas 
and senior military commanders over military pensions, 
budgets and other institutional problems. In the Herzog case, 
the release of a truculent communiqu by the Brazilian army 
that appeared to justify human rights abuses during the 
military era in Brazil, and which had not been cleared by 
Viegas, pointed up his continued difficulty in establishing 
coordination and authority with the armed services.  Abreu 
told PolCouns that the army commander, with whom Viegas has 
had previous difficulties, should have resigned "as a matter 
of honor," and that his continuation as force commander made 
Viegas' remaining as minister unviable. 
 
¶4. (C) Abreu said that the appointment of Alencar is "a good 
solution" and he opined that Alencar may retain the defense 
portfolio indefinitely (but see para 7 below). He did not 
know whether Alencar would physically spend most of his time 
at the MOD or in the vice presidency.  Abreu also confirmed 
speculation that Viegas, a career diplomat, would be posted 
as Brazil's Ambassador in Madrid once the GOB receives 
agrement. 
 
¶5. (C) During the transition period, Abreu said it is 
possible that Viegas, working out of the foreign ministry, 
may be available to work with the USG on resolving the final 
issues in the bilateral effort to revise the 2000 Brazil-U.S. 
Technology Safeguards Agreement on participation of U.S. 
firms in commercial space launches at Brazil's Alcantara 
spaceport.  Abreu and PolCouns agreed that the issue is 
well-advanced with good potential for a successful 
resolution, 
 
¶6. (C) During a lunch at the Ambassador's residence on 4 
November, PolCouns also discussed Viegas' resignation with 
Aldo Rebelo, Lula's Minister for Political Coordination. 
Rebelo opined that the Viegas resignation "had been 
predictable for some time" owing to the tensions between the 
minister and the senior levels of the armed forces.  Rebelo 
said that Viegas had "performed admirably" in many of his 
duties, and he noted specifically Viegas' successful effort 
with the USG on the shootdown issue. 
 
¶7. (C) But Rebelo, who was formerly chair of the foreign 
affairs and defense committee in Brazil's chamber of 
deputies, said Viegas' tenure as DefMin had personified "a 
clash of cultures" between two of Brazil's oldest 
institutions -- its foreign ministry and its armed forces. 
Rebelo said military officers had told him that Viegas, 
trained as a diplomat "to listen, negotiate and compromise," 
was out of step with military services that expect their 
senior leader "to issue orders and get results."  Rebelo said 
the problem is not one of lack of respect in the military for 
civilian authority, but rather the military's preference in 
its civilian minister for a political figure capable of 
engaging with congress and the treasury to secure funding and 
protect perogatives.  Unlike Abreu, Rebelo opined that 
Alencar's assumption of the defense portfolio "could be only 
temporary."  Rebelo has often been named as a possible 
replacement for Viegas, but Rebelo denied that possibility to 
PolCouns, saying such speculation is "media exaggeration." 
 
¶8. (C) Comment.  Viegas has been an effective and reliable 
interlocutor for the Mission and the USG on key policy issues 
in his broad area of responsibility, and he has been 
especially valuable in working with us on shootdown and 
Alcantara.  Alencar, a likable and successful businessman, 
has not been especially distinguished as vice president, has 
no known experience with military matters, and does not 
strike us as having either the intellectual or diplomatic 
skills of Viegas.  It remains to be seen how he will handle 
challenging issues, such as shootdown, Brazil's leadership of 
MINUSTAH in Haiti or complex civil aviation matters that fall 
in the purview of the defense ministry. However,his position 
as vice president and political saavy may make him an 
appealing choice, or at least a neutral one, in the armed 
forces' view.  We do not see this development as an 
indication that Brazil's armed forces are restive and 
challenging civilian authority.  On the contrary, today's 
Brazilian military is thoroughly apolitical.  Nonetheless, 
the civilian ministry remains small and anemic compared to 
the armed services it ostensibly governs, and the Viegas era 
-- despite its accomplishments -- will not be remembered for 
reinforcing the institutional stature and effectiveness of 
the civilian MOD.