05BRASILIA737
BRAZIL: UNHCR-61 AND CUBA
Thu Mar 17 00:00:00 +0100 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Brasilia
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L BRASILIA 000737 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/17/2010 
TAGS: PHUM CU BR PREL CHR
SUBJECT: BRAZIL: UNHCR-61 AND CUBA 
 
REF: A. STATE 42847 
 
     ¶B. STATE 44494 
     ¶C. BRASILIA 681 
 
Classified By: Deputy Political Counselor Lawrence Cohen, 
reasons 1.4 ( 
b & d) 
 
¶1.  (C) Poloff delivered CHR talking points to Christiano 
Figueroa, Acting Chief for an under-manned Ministry of 
External Relations (MRE) Human Rights Division.  Referring to 
press reports regarding GOB Human Rights Secretary Nilmario 
Miranda's not-so-veiled criticisms of the USG in a March 15 
conference in Geneva, Figueroa sought to downplay Miranda's 
remarks, some of which, Figueroa claimed, were "inaccurate." 
"While Brazil continues to have concerns about the 
selectivity of single country resolutions, it does not favor 
the idea of eliminating them," Figueroa said.  However, 
Figueroa buttressed Miranda's call for a global report on 
human rights, most likely under UN auspices. 
 
¶2.  (C) Although he was speaking in an "unofficial capacity" 
since the GOB had refused to accept delivery of the annual 
U.S. Human Rights Report, Figueroa described the recently 
released HRR as balanced and fair.  He believed it portrayed 
well the good and bad aspects of Brazil's human rights 
situation, and he complemented Poloff Bisola Ojikutu with 
whom he shared information.  Brazil's problem with the HRR, 
he added, is with the "principle and procedure," and not with 
its content. 
 
¶3.  (C) Poloff explained that Cuba is again the highest USG 
priority for UNCHR-61.  To bring countries like Brazil on 
board, the USG draft resolution this year takes a minimalist 
approach -- a point Brazil should consider.  Figueroa 
understood the USG strategy.  Brazil's Cuba policy, he 
emphasized, is made at the highest level of government, and 
it is unlikely the GOB would alter its course towards Cuba at 
this time.  Yet, although Brazilian officials have held 
numerous discussions with the Cubans, Figueroa was unaware of 
any GOC intention to table a draft resolution on Guantanamo 
-- unlike in 2004, when Cuba had threatened to table a draft 
but did not.  "Sometimes," Figueroa remarked, "the CHR is 
full of surprises." 
 
¶4.  (C) Echoing Miranda's remarks in Geneva, Figueroa 
explained that the GOB continues to have concerns with the 
"non-applicability" of the Geneva Convention with terrorism 
suspects held under U.S. custody and their long-term 
detention without indictment even within the context of the 
war on terrorism.  Utilizing ref A talking points, poloff 
described detainee policy and the steps taken to assure 
prisoner rights are protected. 
 
¶5.  (C) Comment: Based on Figueroa's subtle comments, Brazil 
will likely support, as it did in 2004, some specific single 
country resolutions where it does not have a dog in the fight 
-- for example, Belarus.  Given the upcoming Arab-South 
American Summit in Brasilia in May, the GOB will not favor 
softening unbalanced Arab-sponsored Middle East resolutions. 
Brazil's behavior on Arab-Israel resolutions will be closely 
observed by Arab delegations.  Brazil will no doubt continue 
its long-standing policy of opposing harsh criticism of 
Cuba's human rights record. 
 
Danilovich