05CAIRO4535
EGYPT:  ARCENT COMMANDER HEARS BRIGHT STAR
Wed Jun 15 00:00:00 +0200 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 CAIRO 004535 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/15/2015 
TAGS: PREL MOPS MASS SU SY CH IZ AF EG
SUBJECT: EGYPT:  ARCENT COMMANDER HEARS BRIGHT STAR 
EXERCISE PLANNING ON TRACK 
 
Classified by Acting DCM Michael Corbin for reasons 1.4 (b) 
and (d). 
 
¶1.  (C)  Summary:  During June 15 meetings with Ministry of 
Defense (MoD) officials in Cairo, ARCENT Commander LTG 
Whitcomb was told that BRIGHT STAR planning was progressing 
well and that MoD saw no outstanding problems (such as 
invitations to the three observer countries which were of 
concern to the U.S.).  Egyptian Chief of Staff Weheba 
reiterated his hope that some U.S. Congressmen would visit 
Egypt during BRIGHT STAR.  On Iraq, Weheba stressed that 
Egypt's offer to train Iraqi troops was still valid and that 
cost was not an issue.  Egypt was willing to meet Iraq's 
training and cost requirements.  He added that eastern bloc 
equipment in Egypt's inventory allowed Egypt to train Iraqi 
soldiers on the type of equipment they were most likely to 
use.  Weheba said Egypt was also open to further U.S. advice 
on how the MoD might contribute to Afghan stability.  He 
cited recent security enhancements in the approaches to the 
Suez Canal (made at our request) as focused on supporting 
U.S. transits.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  (C)  Egyptian Armed Forces Chief of Staff Weheba told 
visiting ARCENT Commander LTG Whitcomb in Cairo June 15 that 
he was pleased with BRIGHT STAR planning.  Whitcomb had just 
come from a meeting with Training Authority Chief MG Mokhtar, 
at which Mokhtar confirmed that invitees of concern to the 
U.S. (Syria, China, and Sudan) would not be invited as 
observers.  Weheba stated that he "did not believe there were 
any problems or issues" which had not been sorted out. 
Weheba was anxious "to see the best BRIGHT STAR" ever 
conducted.  Whitcomb noted that some participant nations 
would be evaluating certain military capabilities "in 
unfamiliar terrain," which gave the exercise added relevance 
to various participants.  Weheba reiterated MoD's interest in 
encouraging U.S. Congressional visitors to observe BRIGHT 
STAR 2005, noting the importance of pre-briefing participants 
to highlight the magnitude of "14 countries training 
together." 
 
¶3.  (C)  Whitcomb reviewed Iraq issues briefly for Weheba, 
noting the importance of continuity in the Iraqi Ministry of 
Defense.  Weheba said Iraq was clearly serious about 
maintaining security and reiterated Egypt's offer to train 
more soldiers.  Weheba said that during an April visit to 
Washington by the MoD White Paper team, MoD had been told 
that Iraq preferred to train its troops in Iraq partially due 
to cost implications.  Field Marshal Tantawi had instructed 
his generals at that point to commit to training at a cost 
which "met the expectations" of Iraq.  He said the GOE wanted 
to show its support for Iraq and was still offering training; 
it was "not a matter of cost," he asserted.  He emphasized 
that the MoD was increasingly flexible in offering training 
that met Iraq's needs and cost requirements.  Weheba said 
that Egypt, which maintains eastern bloc equipment in its 
inventory, could train Iraqi troops on the type of equipment 
that was being donated by eastern European countries. 
 
¶4.  (C)  Finally, on Iraq, Weheba questioned the political 
meaning of a ceremony the previous day naming a "Kurdish 
president."  He asked rhetorically if southern Iraq would be 
getting a Shia leader, which would have negative consequences 
for national unity.  He wondered aloud "who is advising the 
Iraqi government?"  He added, "I do not believe this is the 
right move or the right time." 
 
¶5. (C)  Thanking the MoD for donating arms and ammunition to 
the Afghan National Army (ANA), and for transporting a 
portion of that donation in Egyptian C-130 aircraft, Whitcomb 
reminded Weheba that Afghanistan continued to need external 
security assistance.  Weheba said the Egyptian MoD had taken 
U.S. advice regarding the donation to the ANA and would 
continue to do so in support of stability in Afghanistan.  He 
hoped such efforts would have a positive impact on 
Congressional perceptions of Egypt's regional role. 
 
¶6.  (C)  The Chief of Staff pointed out that Egypt had 
increased security for U.S. ships in the external anchorage 
areas approaching the Suez Canal.  In response to a U.S. 
request for tightened security in those approaches, Weheba 
highlighted that the MoD had taken this "resource-intensive" 
action "only for U.S. ships." 
 
¶7.  (SBU)  Weheba said he and ASD Rodman had agreed to hold 
the next Military Coordination Committee (MCC) in Cairo 
during the second week of November, 2005. 
 
¶8.  (U)  LTG Whitcomb's party did not have an opportunity to 
clear this message before leaving Cairo. 
 
Visit Embassy Cairo's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/cairo 
 
You can also access this site through the 
State Department's Classified SIPRNET website. 
 
GRAY