06HELSINKI725
FINNISH EU PRESIDENCY ON EXTRAORDINARY AUG. 1 GAERC
Fri Jul 28 00:00:00 +0200 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Helsinki
VZCZCXRO4166
RR RUEHAG
DE RUEHHE #0725 2091440
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 281440Z JUL 06
FM AMEMBASSY HELSINKI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2221
INFO RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVEC O N F I D E N T I A L HELSINKI 000725 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/28/2012 
TAGS: PGOV PREL MARR MOPS EUN FI
SUBJECT: FINNISH EU PRESIDENCY ON EXTRAORDINARY AUG. 1 GAERC 
 
 
Classified By: a/dcm Gregory Thome, Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: A/DCM met with Finnish MFA European 
Correspondent Jarno Syrjala to discuss the Aug. 1 
extraordinary GAERC.  Syrjala also offered the latest 
Finnish EU Presidency thinking regarding a potential 
international force for Lebanon.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (C) Regarding the GAERC agenda, Syrjala suggested 
that it will be short, focusing mainly on humanitarian 
issues in Lebanon and Gaza.  At a ministers-only lunch, 
Finnish FM Tuomioja and Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner 
will brief on their trip to the region, and EU High Rep 
Solana may brief on conversations with Secretary Rice in 
Asia.  There is no consensus as to whether the GAERC 
will issue formal conclusions -- apparently a 
contentious issue.  The UK is currently alone in 
actively opposing formal conclusions, but most member 
states agree that hours of debate resulting in a 
"watered down" set of conclusions serves no purpose, 
Syrjala said.  FM Tuomioja is currently of that opinion, 
he added. 
 
¶3. (C) Regardless of whether formal conclusions are 
issued, Syrjala said Solana, Tuomioja and Ferrero- 
Waldner will likely hold a press conference after the 
GAERC.  There is near-unanimity among member states on 
the need to reiterate the EU's call for an immediate 
ceasefire in Lebanon, particularly in response to strong 
public pressure, he said.  They will also likely 
announce aid packages, and perhaps thank Israel for 
assuring humanitarian corridors.  We questioned the 
usefulness of simply repeating over and over the call 
for a ceasefire when conditions on the ground did not 
seem to warrant it yet.  Syrjala said the EU understood 
the US view in that regard, but emphasized that the EU 
line regarding this only continues to become firmer. 
Even the UK, he noted, appeared to be moving in that 
direction (although not there yet).  A/DCM reminded him 
that the Rome meeting had produced different, compromise 
language, which he acknowledged.  However, he noted that 
the recent death of three European peacekeepers -- 
including a Finnish officer -- had hardened even further 
the insistence, both in Finland and the wider EU, that 
an immediate ceasefire is crucial. 
 
¶4. (C) A/DCM noted that increasingly divergent opinions 
between Washington and European partners did little to 
help the international community move forward together 
to resolve the crisis.  Syrjala acknowledged this, and 
offered three ideas to help us move forward together. 
First, he said, productive negotiations (when the time 
is right) regarding an international peace force will be 
very helpful.  The EU is "unanimous" in its opinion that 
NATO cannot take the lead, and the GOF appreciates the 
flexibility the US has shown in this regard.  Syrjala 
reiterated suggestions we've heard from other senior 
Finns that the GOF -- and most in the EU -- would 
welcome a UN or EU force with NATO backing under Berlin 
Plus.  He opined that a French-led force with a strong 
Muslim element (Turkey or perhaps Indonesia, which whom 
the EU has had some discussions) could prove the most 
effective combination. 
 
¶5. (C) Second, Syrjala suggested, the best operational 
approach might be to scrap UNIFIL altogether and begin 
with an entirely new force and a far more robust 
mandate.  This would have to include careful diplomacy 
with the French; they have already asked for a 
"reinforced" UNIFIL, but appear somewhat flexible on 
that, he said.  Finland believes the force should also 
have a strong mandate to enforce UN Res. 1559;  however, 
he warned, several other EU member states will become 
increasingly uneasy the more the concept of 1559 
enforcement is incorporated into the new force's 
mandate. 
 
¶6. (C) Finally Syrjala said, humanitarian assistance 
could also offer a positive way forward.  The GOF and 
the EU welcome Israel's commitment to assuring 
humanitarian corridors, and Syrjala acknowledged 
Secretary Rice's helpful role in this regard during her 
 
SIPDIS 
trip to the region.  The Commission and several member 
states are willing to make significant additional 
financial contributions, he added, which is crucial at a 
time when European public opinion is demanding a strong 
EU humanitarian response. 
WARE