06TELAVIV3370
CRITICISM OVER ISRAELI GOVERNMENT HANDLING OF
Thu Aug 24 00:00:00 +0200 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Tel Aviv
null
Leza L Olson  08/25/2006 02:05:09 PM  From  DB/Inbox:  Leza L Olson

Cable 
Text:                                                                      
                                                                           
      
C O N F I D E N T I A L        TEL AVIV 03370

SIPDIS
CXTelA:
    ACTION: POL
    INFO:   IPSC PD IMO RES ECON DCM DAO AMB AID ADM RSO
            CONS

DISSEMINATION: POL
CHARGE: PROG

APPROVED: AMB:RJONES
DRAFTED: POL:MDPEARLSTEIN/RBL
CLEARED: DCM:GCRETZ, POL:NOLSEN, ECON:BMASILKO, DAO:PJDERMER

VZCZCTVI017
PP RUEHC RUEHXK RHEHNSC
DE RUEHTV #3370/01 2361255
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 241255Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5862
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDCC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEL AVIV 003370 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA/IPA 
NSC FOR WATERS AND LOGERFO 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 8/23/2016 
TAGS: PGOV PREL IS
SUBJECT: CRITICISM OVER ISRAELI GOVERNMENT HANDLING OF 
LEBANON WAR ON THE RISE 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Richard H. Jones; Reasons: 1.4 (B and D). 
 
¶1. (C) Summary and comment: The cease-fire in Lebanon has 
rapidly eroded the strong public and political support for 
the Government's conduct of the war and has left both Prime 
Minister Ehud Olmert and Defense Minister Amir Peretz open to 
an increasingly loud chorus of criticism.  Initial GOI 
attempts to channel criticism through a friendly commission 
of inquiry evoked strong protests and leave Olmert with the 
option of ordering a formal government inquiry or risking an 
independent investigation.  The problems faced by Olmert and 
Peretz are exacerbated by coalition infighting on the budget 
and by political maneuvering within Kadima and Labor, while 
the opposition Likud Party waits for the appropriate moment 
to strike in an effort to increase its own support.  Israelis 
will continue to digest and assess the outcome of the war, 
Olmert's first real test as prime minister, over the next 
weeks and months.  This process will likely determine the 
political futures of Olmert and Peretz.  End summary and 
comment. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
Strong Public Support Drops Following Cease-Fire 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Following the July 12 attack by Hizballah, Israeli 
political leaders and the public rallied around Prime 
Minister Ehud Olmert and his government as they authorized 
extensive air and ground operations in Lebanon.  Olmert's 
approval ratings soared and even the often-acerbic Bibi 
Netanyahu offered support. 
 
¶3. (SBU) As pressure from the international community for a 
cease-fire increased and hostilities came to an -- at least 
temporary -- end, this situation changed.  Embassy contacts 
and the media are all skeptical that the war has removed the 
threat or resulted in anything but a minor setback for 
Hizballah.  To many, this result is inadequate compensation 
for the approximately 180 Israelis (including 110 soldiers 
and more than 70 civilians) killed in the conflict, the 
disruption of economic life from rocket attacks and the 
call-up of the reserves, the high financial cost of 
conducting the war, the destruction of homes and businesses 
in parts of northern Israel, and the failure to obtain the 
return of kidnapped IDF soldiers. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
Olmert Likely to Form a Commission of Inquiry 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) The emerging criticism is exacerbated by a public 
debate over the government's planning and conduct of the war. 
 A small but vocal group of reserve soldiers have called for 
the resignation of Olmert, Peretz, and IDF Chief of Staff LTG 
Dan Halutz.  They blame the political leadership for what 
they say was a grave underestimation of Hizballah's 
capabilities and for a failure to provide Israeli troops with 
the necessary equipment and, in isolated incidents, even 
sufficient food and water. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Such charges played a role in leading Peretz to form 
a commission led by his advisor, former IDF Chief of Staff 
Amnon Lipkin-Shahak, to examine the conduct of the war.  This 
idea, however, drew fire from both the IDF -- which wants to 
guarantee the confidentiality of any military witnesses -- 
and much of the public -- which objects to an investigation 
led by a Peretz supporter -- and the commission has suspended 
its activity.  As he faces increasing pressure for a more 
independent investigation, Olmert has two choices: a 
governmental inquiry over which he would have substantial 
influence, or an independent commission.  While the latter 
option would be more acceptable to the public, any potential 
findings of mismanagement or lack of planning by the GOI 
could potentially bring down senior members of the coalition. 
 In a conversation with congressional visitors from 
Washington on August 20, Supreme Court Chief Justice Aharon 
Barak said that he believed such a commission would be formed 
and hinted that he expects to be chosen to lead it. 
 
------------------------------- 
Coalition and Party In-fighting 
------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) In addition to the public criticism, the government 
has also suffered from coalition infighting, as well as 
internal party disputes in both Kadima and Labor. 
Transportation Minister and former Defense Minister Shaul 
Mofaz abstained from the Cabinet vote on the cease-fire, 
calling UNSCR 1701 "less than satisfactory."  More 
importantly, FM Tzipi Livni and Olmert disagreed on tactics 
during the cease-fire negotiations, resulting in Olmert 
calling off at the eleventh hour Livni's planned trip to the 
UNSC on September 12.  The disagreement was an apparent 
first.  Livni was widely viewed as a real asset to Kadima's 
electoral campaign, and her decision to back Olmert after 
Sharon's stroke precluded any leadership challenge at that 
time. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Peretz faces similar problems in Labor.  His 
performance during the Lebanon war has only strengthened 
criticism that he is unqualified to manage what most Israelis 
feel is the country's most important portfolio.  Former naval 
chief and Shin Bet Director Ami Ayalon and former IDF Deputy 
Chief of Staff Matan Vilnai, both Labor MKs who see 
themselves as future prime ministers, have attacked Peretz in 
public.  Former Prime Minister Ehud Barak has been more 
subtle in his criticism, but is building upon his image as 
the leader who extricated Israel from the last Lebanon war. 
One or more of them is likely to challenge Peretz for the 
Labor leadership in internal party elections scheduled for 
May 2007. 
 
¶8. (C) The two main parties in the coalition, Kadima and 
Labor, have also publicly disagreed on how to finance the 
war.  With Treasury experts now leaking war cost estimates 
exceeding NIS six billion (approximately 1.3 billion 
dollars), the coalition has been unable to reach consensus on 
where to find the funding.  As a result, Kadima caucus chair 
Avigdor Yizhaki publicly threatened to end the coalition, 
telling reporters "the Labor Party is not a coalition partner 
that can be trusted.  Therefore, I am going to propose to the 
Prime Minister that he immediately reshuffle (the Cabinet) 
and enter into new coalition negotiations."  Note: Gabi 
Golan, advisor to the Prime Minister for Planning and 
Development told EconCouns that while the next few months 
will be rocky for the coalition, he does not expect the Labor 
members on the Finance Committee to continue to disrupt 
budget negotiations because, "they know that if the PM 
reshuffles the Cabinet their position will not be any 
stronger."  End Note. 
 
----------------------- 
Likud Waiting to Pounce 
----------------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) To further compound Olmert's difficulties, Likud 
Chairman Bibi Netanyahu is waiting for the right opportunity 
to pounce.  Netanyahu was atypically restrained in his 
comments during the fighting, merely referring in a Knesset 
speech to "hitches" in the conduct of the war.  On August 22, 
however, he told the press that "with this many inadequacies, 
there is no choice but to form a state commission of 
inquiry."  Likud is also attempting to lure former IDF Chief 
of Staff Moshe "Boogie" Ya'alon into the party to bolster its 
claims to the "strong on defense" title. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
Comment: Jury Still Out, but GOI Facing Difficult Time 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶10. (C) Comment: The conflict with Hizballah was Olmert's 
first real test as Prime Minister.  Israelis will continue to 
digest and assess the outcome of the war over the next weeks 
and months.  Their views of the war's achievements -- or lack 
thereof -- will have a long-term impact on his government's 
political standing.  Local perceptions of the deployment 
timing, mandate, and composition of the enhanced UNIFIL 
force, as well as the effectiveness of the arms interdiction 
regime and progress on securing the return of the two 
abducted soldiers, will play a large role in shaping their 
opinion.  These factors will also determine what type of 
inquiry on the war's conduct Olmert will feel compelled to 
order.  In the end, Olmert and Peretz are both likely to face 
increasingly vocal opposition within their own parties. 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
JONES