07HELSINKI351
A CLEAR CHANGE OF TONE: FINNISH FOREIGN MINISTER
Mon May 14 00:00:00 +0200 2007
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Helsinki
VZCZCXYZ0005
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHHE #0351 1341352
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 141352Z MAY 07
FM AMEMBASSY HELSINKI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3347
INFO RUEHZG/NATO EU COLLECTIVEC O N F I D E N T I A L HELSINKI 000351 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/14/2017 
TAGS: PREL PGOV MOPS NATO EUN FI
SUBJECT: A CLEAR CHANGE OF TONE: FINNISH FOREIGN MINISTER 
KEEN ON IMPROVING TRANS-ATLANTIC RELATIONS 
 
REF: HELSINKI 321 
 
Classified By: PolChief Greg Thome, Reasons 1.5 (b) (d). 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: Foreign Minister Kanerva underscored to 
Ambassador Ware the new GOF's intention to improve the US- 
Finnish bilateral relationship, and he highlighted the 
shared foreign policy challenges the US and the EU face in 
Russia.  The Ambassador urged more Finnish funding for 
peacekeeping operations (PKO).  She also encouraged Kanerva 
to use his June meeting with the Secretary to describe 
exactly how Finland intends to become more involved in NATO 
and in collaborating with the US to implement the Freedom 
Agenda in Russia and the new neighborhood.  END SUMMARY. 
 
A Strong NATO is Key to a Strong EU 
----------------------------------- 
¶2. (SBU) On May 11, Ambassador Ware made her first call on 
Finland's new Foreign Minister, Ilkka Kanerva.  Kanerva 
opened by highlighting trans-Atlantic relations and the new 
GOF's attitude toward NATO.  While there are no specific 
bilateral problems, he said, the GOF is committed to 
improving the tone and promoting "the vital nature of the 
Finnish-USA relationship."  The Ambassador thanked Kanerva 
for helping set a new tone for the relationship, noting 
that it was already evident.  She added that when 
differences of opinion did arise, she welcomed addressing 
those frankly and openly, but via diplomatic channels -- 
not through the press.  Kanerva discretely acknowledged the 
allusion to his predecessor, and wholeheartedly concurred. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Within the context of the new GOF's focus on 
improved trans-Atlantic relations, Kanerva said that 
civilian and military crisis management (CM) are a key 
component.  EU and NATO CM efforts must complement one 
another, he continued, because for the EU to be strong and 
promote its values in Europe and beyond, it depends on 
collaboration with NATO.  Although not a NATO member, 
Finland can and will take a more active role in promoting 
EU-NATO collaboration, he added.  Kanerva then established 
a clean break from the previous government, stating clearly 
that "we do not intend to hide our NATO agenda.  We will 
discuss it."  He welcomed the Ambassador's arguments in 
favor of increased annual CM budgets to allow for more 
Finnish peacekeepers in the field, and he also noted that 
the GOF intends to join the Strategic Airlift Consortium. 
 
A Shared Challenge: Russia 
-------------------------- 
¶4. (C) Turning to our shared foreign policy challenges, 
Kanerva said good relations with Russia were an imperative 
for Finland.  However, Moscow's recent behavior toward 
Estonia and Kosovo made this difficult, and EU-Russia 
relations had clearly become strained.  Kanerva underscored 
the GOF's solidarity with Tallinn during the Bronze Statue 
crisis and reminded us of his public calls for a joint EU 
policy response to Russia's heavy-handed tactics.  He also 
referred with some dismay to the strange letter Russian FM 
Lavrov sent to several EU foreign ministers, describing it 
as "unsophisticated" and inappropriately worded.  Clearly, 
he added, the GOF did not agree with Lavrov's version of 
events.  Likewise, the GOF shares US concerns about 
Russia's response in Kosovo and the likelihood that Moscow 
will veto a UNSCR on final status.  Kanerva and the 
Ambassador agreed that the Secretary's visit to Moscow and 
the EU-Russia Summit -- both scheduled for the week of May 
14 -- offered important opportunities for the US and the EU 
to send a unified message to Russia on these and other 
issues of concern. 
 
A Clear Finnish Agenda for June Bilateral 
----------------------------------------- 
¶5. (SBU) Regarding Kanerva's scheduled June bilateral with 
the Secretary, the Ambassador urged him to present a clear 
agenda as to how Finland can show leadership in bolstering 
trans-Atlantic relations; in enhancing crisis management; 
and in collaborating with the US to implement the Freedom 
Agenda.  Highlighting the new GOF's plans to join the NATO 
Response Force (NRF) and the Strategic Air Consortium would 
be a good start, as would confirmation of plans to 
eventually take leadership of a PRT in Afghanistan.  But of 
equal importance would some type of Finnish roadmap 
regarding how the GOF can work with the US to promote 
democracy and transformation in Russia, Belarus, or the 
Balkans.  Kanerva acknowledged that Finland played this 
kind of role in the Baltic states prior to their joining 
the EU, and assured us that he would go to Washington with 
an agenda to share. 
WARE