07MANAGUA583
THE SANDINISTA GOVERNMENT 60 DAYS OUT - AND OUR
Mon Mar 05 00:00:00 +0100 2007
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXRO6157
PP RUEHLMC
DE RUEHMU #0583/01 0642252
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 052252Z MAR 07
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9333
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS PRIORITY 0983
RUMIAAA/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL PRIORITY
RUEHLMC/MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORP WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 05 MANAGUA 000583 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA A/S THOMAS A. SHANNON, WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/05/2027 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM NU PHUM PINR PREL KCOR
SUBJECT: THE SANDINISTA GOVERNMENT 60 DAYS OUT - AND OUR 
RESPONSE 
 
REF: MANAGUA 0357 AND PREVIOUS 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul A. Trivelli.  Reasons 1.4 (B,D). 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary: The FSLN administration is fast reverting to 
its improvisation, secrecy, and centralization of the 1980's, 
forging an operating style more appropriate for a 
revolutionary junta than a modern, democratic state. 
President Ortega appears determined to consolidate his power, 
circumventing legislative restrictions and disregarding the 
constitution to achieve his objective.  Left unchecked, 
Ortega will likely lead Nicaragua along the path of 
Venezuela.  We need to take decisive action and well-funded 
measures to bolster the elements of Nicaraguan society that 
can best stop him before he lulls the majority of the 
Nicaraguan people into complacency, or threatens them into 
silence.  Without our support, our democratic-minded friends 
may well falter.  To keep our place at the table and help 
Nicaraguans keep their country on a democratic path, we 
recommend making an additional investment of about $65 
million over the next four years.  End Summary. 
 
Off to a Bad Start 
- - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2.  (C)  With only two months in power, the FSLN 
administration of Daniel Ortega is fast reverting to its 
improvisation, secrecy, and centralization of the 1980's -- 
forging an operating style more appropriate for a 
revolutionary junta than a modern, democratic state. 
Starting with the January 10 inauguration ceremony, itself 
marred by disorganization, shoddy planning, and tardiness, 
the Ortega government's style has been strictly characterized 
by heavy symbolism, glaring inconsistencies, and a double 
discourse that over the long run will be untenable. 
Presidential meetings are taking on a Fidel-like aura, often 
late-night affairs in a room dominated by a huge mural 
depicting a psychedelic, all-seeing eye gazing from an 
out-sized human palm.  Ministers generally confirm 
appointments only at the last possible minute and are often 
knocked off their agendas by calls from the "Comandante." 
 
¶3.  (C) Our sources tell us that all government decisions are 
being made by a very small cabal at the top of the pyramid -- 
Ortega himself, his wife, and at times economic guru Bayardo 
Arce (although there have been some signs that his influence 
may be fading), former state security chief Lenin Cerna, and 
national security adviser Paul Oquist.  First Lady Rosario 
Murillo personally controls the PR budget for all branches of 
the executive and signs off on all foreign travel.  The new 
government loathes transparency; the President railed against 
the press for printing summaries of agreements reached with 
Venezuela and Iran and the government's communications 
strategy.  Sandinista lawmakers have sponsored a change in 
the criminal code to make illegal the publicizing of private 
communications.  Simple internal administrative memoranda are 
marked confidential, and woe to the Ministry that leaks or 
loses any such missives.  The inner circle consists largely 
of clandestine operators -- paranoid cave dwellers who are 
afraid of the light and openness.  Transparency is their 
worst enemy. 
 
The Cabinet - The Fourth String Takes the Field 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶4.  (C) We have systematically met with all the new ministers 
and many independent agency heads.  Our overtures have 
generally been met by some reserve, but always with typical 
Nicaraguan courtesy and form.  Our impression is that the new 
crew has been completely taken aback by the depth and 
diversity of our assistance relationships with the GON at all 
levels.  It is also clear that most of the ministers have 
little background in their respective portfolios, and were 
likely chosen for their loyalty and malleability.  For 
example, the Minister of Environment is a cranial reflexology 
practitioner and a sociologist, and the new Minister of 
Finance previously served as a junior researcher in the 
Central Bank before ascending to his current position.  Those 
who do have some technical expertise, such as the new 
Minister of Transport and Infrastructure, seem to enjoy 
little influence or connections to the inner circle. 
 
Eating away at Democracy and the Market Economy 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶5.  (C) Even more troubling is the new government's largely 
successful attempts at chipping away at the country's 
democratic institutions and market economy.  While in public 
and private, Ortega claims to embrace democracy and private 
enterprise, his "double discourse" speaks volumes about his 
real intentions -- "Popular" or "direct democracy" really 
means creating new councils whose membership he controls; 
"investment" really means economic control of all profitable 
ventures by his allies. 
 
¶6.  (C) Before assuming office, Ortega engineered a new 
National Assembly Ways and Means Law that forces Nicaraguan 
or foreign citizens residing in the country to appear for 
hearings or possibly face prison.  Independent media and 
opposition contacts fear this provision could be used to 
intimidate and induce self-censorship.  In many respects, the 
independent media have borne the brunt of the Ortega 
administration's attacks thus far, including reducing 
government publicity to opposition-associated media, blocking 
their access to government information and events, and 
threatening to eliminate import exonerations for newsprint 
and other materials and equipment. 
 
¶7.  (C) In the same vein, Ortega rammed through revisions to 
the Executive Authority Law (Law 290) only days after his 
inauguration, allowing him to establish his prized national 
councils.  Although the final revisions did not authorize the 
new councils to oversee the ministries or receive a share of 
the national budget, as Ortega had sought, the President has 
circumvented these limitations by establishing additional 
presidential secretariats to channel the funding to the 
councils.  A defiant Ortega brazenly announced in a speech 
commemorating the Sandinista insurrection against the Somoza 
regime his plans to ignore the National Assembly.  Possibly 
emboldened by his high poll ratings, Ortega declared to the 
audience that the "president is the people" and told the 
faithful that his ministers will take their instructions from 
the councils and "defend the people." 
 
Power is the Prime Directive 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶8.  (C) Ortega also seems to be systematically co-opting, and 
if this tact fails, castigating, those few sectors of society 
which could conceivably oppose him.  He has cursed the press 
for not paying its fair share of taxes and lambasted them for 
maligning his wife, insisting she will occupy any position in 
the government she desires.  He has wagged his finger at the 
National Assembly saying that it must take heed and obey the 
will of the People's Councils.  When PLC lawmakers question 
him, Ortega hints he will incarcerate former 
President/convicted embezzler Arnoldo Aleman.  He has 
threatened to "control" NGO's.  Even his once gentle touch 
with the private sector is on the wane: following his latest 
infusion of Chavez moxy, Ortega threatened to cancel the 
concession of a geothermal energy firm linked to COSEP 
President Kruger and several foreign investment groups, 
including some from the United States.  He has weakened 
ministerial (i.e., civilian) control over the police and the 
army.  In short, he is running through the Chavez playbook at 
break-neck speed. 
 
¶9.  (C) Left-leaning daily El Nuevo Diario's March 5 
think-piece on the direction of the Ortega government 
suggests that the Ortega government has three major policy 
options: impose its direct democracy construct even though 
the majority of Nicaraguans reject it; convoke a consultative 
assembly with the support of the PLC; or, continue operating 
on the fringes of the law.  We expect that President Ortega 
will draw on all three of these arrows in his quiver as it 
suits him.  To the good, unlike Chavez, however, Ortega does 
not enjoy the support of the majority of his people, and the 
opposition has resisted (at times, rather wanly) the GON's 
efforts to "blitzkrieg" its direct democracy concept. 
Notwithstanding this opposition, Ortega will likely continue 
to test his legal limits and skirt the law through 
presidential decrees.  He also may call for a consultative 
assembly, the apparent new weapon of choice of the region's 
authoritarian, neo-populists.  But remember -- Ortega's prime 
directive is to consolidate power and extend FSLN control 
over the GON for the foreseeable future.  He will only try to 
fill his campaign promises of social investment, full 
employment, and reconciliation to the extent that new 
programs contribute to goal number one. 
 
Looking for Love in All the Wrong Places 
- - - - - - - - - - - - -- - -  - - - - - 
 
¶10.  (C) Ortega's deep ties to Venezuela and Cuba are 
painfully obvious.  Chavez dominated his inaugural circus. 
After Ortega paid a semi-secret visit to Caracas on February 
23, he returned feistier than ever.  Venezuelan technicians 
are already semi-embedded in several ministries.  Ortega 
heaps nothing but praise on Venezuelan and Cuban assistance, 
most recently hosting the Cuban Minister of Culture, but 
belittles or downplays our programs.  He has denounced our 
counternarcotics support as "mere crumbs" and makes scant 
mention of our New Horizons program, currently constructing 
clinics and schools for poor Nicaraguans.  Talk of 
"thousands" of Cuban and Venezuelan teachers and doctors 
abound.  We hear that the FSLN is touting a Cuban-sponsored 
literacy campaign and a Venezuelan-funded light bulb exchange 
program to "spread the word" in rural, predominantly 
"Liberal" bastions of the country that we have abandoned 
Nicaragua and only Ortega and his allies can alleviate hunger 
and poverty.  There is no doubt where Ortega's heart lies, 
but even though Chavez will never deliver on all his lofty 
promises, by the time the Nicaraguan people understand that, 
their country's democracy and economy may be lying in tatters. 
 
Our Policy - Avoiding Minefields and Helping our Friends 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶11.  (C) During our early calls on the government, we have 
carefully laid out for the new ministers our willingness to 
continue with our assistance programs and circled in red for 
them those issues, which if not approached correctly, could 
seriously damage bilateral relations.  They have been amply 
forewarned, for example, of the need for progress on such 
subjects as confiscated property resolutions and trafficking 
in persons (TIP) programs.  Whether they choose to 
deliberately step on those mines is another question, but 
some of the early signs are not encouraging.   We are no 
longer receiving counternarcotics information in advance of 
seizures, and information sharing from airport authorities 
has taken a downturn.  Some government employees associated 
with us have been dismissed or sidelined.  Growing 
anti-American sentiment has surfaced in a tourist spot 
frequented by U.S. retirees and tourists.  Ortega's recent 
speech before the National Police included a Chavez-like 
suggestion that even U.S. presidents have been involved in 
narcotrafficking and that the U.S. and its decaying society 
are responsible for many of the ills of the region. 
 
¶12.  (C) The most telling evidence of Ortega's true 
intentions vis-a-vis the United States is his leaked 
administration's communications plan.  Reportedly drafted by 
Ortega's wife in her role of communications and citizenship 
council coordinator, the strategy recognizes that the 
Nicaraguan government's relationship with the United States 
is sensitive, not only for economic considerations, but also 
because Nicaraguans associate their own stability and 
security with the United States.  Thus, the Ortega 
administration must convey a permanent image of desiring a 
policy of openness and close ties with the United States and 
should avoid falling into a cold war reflexively 
anti-American position.  At the same time, the document calls 
for using the media to oppose the Bush government, while 
welcoming U.S. investors. 
 
¶13.  (C) Unless he is checked, we expect Ortega will lead 
Nicaragua along the path of Venezuela, governing by decree 
and co-opting or squelching any opposition to his plan, as 
has his self-described "twin" Hugo Chavez.  If Ortega is 
systematically singling out his perceived enemies for early 
intimidation, we have to be equally strategic and quietly 
single out our friends for support now and through the 2011. 
Our potential allies include the democratic political 
parties, the National Assembly (the only non-FSLN-controlled 
political game in town), academic institutions, the free 
press, a limited number of NGO's (the FSLN controls the 
lion's share), some non-Sandinista unions, and the 
ever-opportunistic and institutionally territorial police and 
army. 
 
¶14.  (C) We must take measures to bolster those elements that 
can best stop him before he lulls the majority of the 
Nicaraguan people into complacency or threatens them into 
silence.  Without our support, our democratic-minded friends 
are likely to falter.  We need additional funds over the next 
four years to keep our place at the table and help 
Nicaraguans keep their country on a democratic path -- 
approximately $65 million above our recent past base levels 
over the next four years -- through the next Presidential 
elections to make this work.  We ask Washington to consider 
finding the means to support the following initiatives: 
 
--Increase AID democracy monies, roughly an additional $4 
million per year, to back political party strengthening, the 
media and democratically minded NGO's. 
 
--$250,000 per year to create a Legislative Exchange and 
Training Program for democratic forces and committees in the 
National Assembly. 
 
--Allocations of an additional $2 million per year of AID 
funds in small infrastructure projects at the municipal level 
-- rebuilding schools, improving water systems, restocking 
clinics, providing zinc roofing for housing, et al -- the 
kind of work that Nicaraguans prize. 
 
--Consider changing MCC legislation to allow nations like 
Nicaragua to sign concurrent compacts, with an eye towards 
replicating what we are doing in Leon and Chinandega in the 
politically sensitive northern departments. 
 
--$250,000 per year for a PD-managed "rapid response" 
Democracy Fund to deliver small, flexible grants on short 
notice to groups engaging in critical efforts that defend 
Nicaragua's democracy, advance our interests, and counter 
those who rail against us. 
 
--$500,000 to establish and run five new American Corners 
Centers with integrated internet "cafes" in strategic areas 
of the country. 
 
--$500,000 per year for a Public Awareness Fund to provide 
air time and column space so the scope of our and our allies' 
activities and positions on issues will be made known to the 
public, and to enhance the technical capabilities of friendly 
radio stations, especially in rural areas. 
 
--$500,000 per year for a comprehensive PR campaign to 
"brand" our contributions to the Nicaraguan people.  Efforts 
will include promoting our "CAFTA Alliance", establishing an 
"Alliance America" campaign for U.S.-affiliated NGOs, 
establishing a Nicaragua-American Friendship Association, and 
producing and disseminating promotional material for all MCA 
projects (flags, banners, etc.). 
 
--$2.5 million/year for INL programs to assist and engage 
further with the Nicaraguan Army and Police in their efforts 
to effectively enforce laws and combat terrorism; corruption; 
narcotics; transnational crime and trafficking in arms, 
people, and dangerous/illegal materials and substances; and, 
the emergence of gangs.  Support would include our RLA 
program. 
 
--The appointment of an in-country DHS agent, to keep an eye 
on suspicious migrant and customs activity. 
 
--$1 million in FMF for light spotter aircraft and $9 million 
in FMF to help the Army recondition its helo fleet with Czech 
help over the next two years. 
 
--Approximately $2 million per year of Southcom Humanitarian 
Team support to construct schools and clinics, and provide 
Medretes in impoverished areas of the country and possibly 
Seabees to pave 50 kilometers of road from Bluefields to 
Nuevo Leon in Nuevo Guinea to improve the quality of life and 
help counternarcotics and other law efforts in a vulnerable 
region of the country. 
 
--$2 million to assist our struggling binational center to 
construct new facilities and improve relations between the 
American and Nicaraguan peoples.  
 
--$2 million in scholarship monies for English language and 
career training at Ave Maria College and other institutions 
over the next four years. 
 
--$1 million to enhance INCAE's infrastructure and increase 
free market-based economic research. 
TRIVELLI