08BERN612
BILATERAL RELATIONSHIPS WITH SWITZERLAND AND THE
Tue Dec 02 00:00:00 +0100 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Bern
R 021439Z DEC 08
FM AMEMBASSY BERN
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 5485
INFO EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE2008-12-02 14:39:00	08BERN612	Embassy Bern	CONFIDENTIAL		R 021439Z DEC 08
FM AMEMBASSY BERN
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 5485
INFO EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
	C O N F I D E N T I A L BERN 000612 
 

EUR/FO FOR A/S FRIED, DAS GARBER, EUR/CE, CA FO, EUR/PPD, 
EUR/EX 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/05/2028 
TAGS: PREL ECON ETRD PHUM EFIN SZ
SUBJECT: BILATERAL RELATIONSHIPS WITH SWITZERLAND AND THE 
PRINCIPALITY OF LIECHTENSTEIN 
 
Classified By: AMB. P. CONEWAY FOR REASON 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
(U) As I approach the end of my two and one-half year tenure 
in Bern, I would like to share a few thoughts regarding our 
relationship with Switzerland and Liechtenstein.  I hope that 
these observations will be helpful to my successor and others 
concerned to better understand the opportunities and 
challenges we face in dealing with these very successful, but 
frequently frustrating alpine democracies. 
 
(U) Special thanks to our dedicated staff of career 
professionals at Embassy Bern and at the EUR/CE Switzerland 
desk in Washington for their contributions to this document 
and their important role in the bilateral relationship. 
 
------------------ 
Historical Context 
------------------ 
 
(U) The quintessential element of Switzerland's foreign 
policy is its centuries-old tradition of neutrality.  In 
Liechtenstein's case, neutrality was adopted after World War 
Â¶I.  This, alongside the country's unique system of direct 
democracy, is considered by the Swiss to be one of the two 
main factors in the country's remarkable historical success. 
During the last century, when the rest of Europe suffered 
horrific human and material losses in wars and revolutions, 
Switzerland remained an island of democratic stability.  In a 
turbulent Europe, the Swiss were at peace.  No Swiss 
factories were bombed, the infrastructure was slowly 
perfected, and the country's banks (and even its real estate 
agents) thrived on its proven track record as a safe haven. 
Gradually over decades, such circumstances and traditional 
Swiss industriousness transformed a resource-poor alpine 
republic into one of the most prosperous societies on earth. 
 
(U) Even now, in the 21st century, with its growing global 
political, economic, and environmental challenges, neutrality 
remains the cornerstone of Swiss foreign policy, a view 
supported by all major Swiss political parties.  Switzerland 
is neither a member of NATO nor the European Union, and the 
Swiss public does not aspire to join either, according to 
public opinion polls.  In a 2001 referendum, the Swiss voted 
to reject full EU membership.  Instead, the Swiss opted for a 
series of so-called 'bilateral treaties' with Brussels to 
increase Switzerland's economic integration with the EU (by 
liberalizing movements of capital, goods, and labor), but 
preserve the country's ultimate sovereignty. 
 
(C)  In a 2002 referendum, 55% of the Swiss voted to join the 
United Nations.  Proponents argued that UN membership would 
allow Switzerland to make its discrete views better heard on 
global issues.  The decision was heavily opposed by the 
conservative nationalist Swiss People's Party (SVP) run by 
Christoph Blocher, which argued it would weaken the country. 
UN membership has forced Switzerland to take positions on a 
range of issues on which it could have previously remained 
silent.  However, when faced with a particularly 
controversial issue, the Swiss often abstain, such as in the 
recent vote on whether to refer the question of Kosovo's 
independence to the ICJ. 
 
--------------------- 
U.S.- Swiss Relations 
--------------------- 
 
(C) U.S.-Swiss relations are correct and cordial, but they 
lack the natural intimacy and trust that stems from a shared 
struggle against Fascism or Communism, a common language, or 
linked history.  U.S. and Swiss soldiers never fought 
side-by-side in a war, no Swiss town felt an emotional bond 
to the U.S. for a past liberation or economic assistance 
program, and no flood of Swiss political dissidents or 
economic migrants had to seek shelter on U.S. shores. 
 
(C)  Despite paying lip service to the useful democratizing 
and stabilizing role the U.S. has played in modern Europe's 
history, the Swiss foreign policy establishment is at heart 
convinced that Switzerland's well-being and success is of its 
own making, and the country owes a debt to no one.  As a 
result, the fabric of emotional and historical ties between 
Switzerland and the United States is thinner than with many 
other countries, and there is no store of historical goodwill 
or accumulated political capital upon which to draw. 
 
(C)  This does not mean that the U.S. and Switzerland cannot 
cooperate effectively in many areas.  However, the ways in 
which the Swiss choose to work with us (such as on global 
economic, environmental or humanitarian issues) are those 
where they believe our rational self-interest coincides and 
which do not require Switzerland to abandon its strict 
neutrality on international armed conflicts. 
 
(C)  Internal debates over Swiss foreign policy tend to focus 
more on the 'style and body language' of its neutrality 
rather than its substance.  Swiss Federal Councilor for 
Foreign Affairs Micheline Calmy-Rey is resented in some Swiss 
circles for her high-profile attempts to offer Switzerland as 
an intermediary in various disputes, which runs counter to 
Switzerland,s tradition of discrete, low-profile diplomacy. 
Thus, for example, Switzerland's recent 'offer' to represent 
Russia's interests in Tbilisi came almost as soon as the hot 
phase of the conflict ended.  However, the Swiss Department 
of Foreign Affairs (EDA) strategists believe the move was an 
effective way to underline Switzerland's status as neutral 
and pose a counterpoint to its representation of U.S. 
interests in Tehran and Havana.  (It also represents Iran's 
interests in Washington). 
 
(C) One of the most recent points of tension between the 
United States and Switzerland was the decision of the Swiss 
gas company EGL to enter into a long-term contract to buy 
natural gas from Tehran.  Swiss Foreign Affairs Councilor 
Calmy-Rey has cited it as one of the achievements of her 
activist style of diplomacy, which has allowed Switzerland to 
win Iran's trust.  While Switzerland has supported UN 
sanctions against states of proliferation, including Iran, in 
Iran's case, the Foreign Ministry has pursued its own "Swiss 
Plan," which has on several occasions sent the wrong message 
to Iran given the Swiss protecting power mandate for the U.S. 
(see Political Issues for important expanded history on the 
Iran Dossier). 
 
------------- 
Liechtenstein 
------------- 
 
 (U) The United States enjoys excellent relations with the 
Principality of Liechtenstein and its hereditary ruling royal 
family.  Despite having only 33,000 inhabitants, the 
Principality is an important banking center, providing 
'offshore' financial services to thousands of foreign 
clients.  The numerous banks and holding companies located in 
the Principality manage more than $150 billion of client 
assets and generate roughly 30% of the country's GDP.  Like 
Switzerland, Liechtenstein has adopted neutrality as its 
foreign policy strategy and often follows Bern's lead on 
international issues.  In many countries, Liechtenstein 
relies on the Swiss Embassy to represent its interests.  For 
these reasons, the U.S. Embassy in Bern devotes only a 
fraction of its time to managing bilateral relations with 
Liechtenstein.  Our most substantive interactions have 
involved seeking ways to improve our cooperation in the fight 
against money laundering and terrorist financing and on how 
to prevent Liechtenstein's bank secrecy laws from being used 
by U.S. taxpayers to evade taxes. 
 
Terrorist Financing 
 
(U) Liechtenstein and the United States signed a mutual legal 
assistance treaty in 2002 focused on jointly combating money 
laundering and other illegal banking activities.  Close 
relations with our Liechtenstein counterparts, such as 
Liechtenstein's Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU), have 
helped the embassy resolve issues before they become 
problematic.  For example, in April 2007, Liechtenstein 
halted the transfer of Boeing MD-80 aircraft from Germany to 
Iran via Liechtenstein.  Since September 11, Liechtenstein 
has also frozen approximately $150,000 in terrorist assets. 
Liechtenstein is a party to the UN Convention on Terrorist 
Financing and in March 2008, Liechtenstein hosted the working 
meeting of the Egmont Group ) the worldwide association of 
national Financial Intelligence Units. 
 
Tax Evasion 
 
(C) Like Switzerland, Liechtenstein draws a fine line between 
banking privacy and secrecy and exempts individuals for tax 
evasion, but not tax fraud, from criminal prosecution.  These 
technical differences have hindered efforts to obtain banking 
information on U.S. citizens suspected of tax evasion. 
Liechtenstein's largest bank, LGT, which is operated by the 
royal family, is under scrutiny (and pressure from the U.S. 
Senate) for allegedly encouraging U.S. citizens to commit tax 
evasion and tax fraud.  As a result, the U.S. and 
Liechtenstein are currently negotiating a Tax Information 
Exchange Agreement, which should provide more open access to 
information and additional avenues for legal cooperation 
where tax fraud is concerned. 
 
-------------- 
Private Sector 
-------------- 
 
(U) Leaders in the private sector (CEOs, CFOs, public affairs 
officers, etc.) and NGO arenas can wield considerable 
influence in political matters when they choose to get 
engaged. 
 
(U) Typically, they are less involved in Switzerland than our 
experience in the U.S., but it is a good investment for the 
COM, DCM, Pol/Econ, Public Affairs, and Commercial officers 
to develop relationships in these sectors.  From programs and 
panels at the WEF, Swiss-American Chamber events, programs, 
and issues, and underwriting of exchange programs like the 
U.S.Fulbright-Swiss Scholarship Program, to general support 
of our Embassy and mission, the private sector and NGOs can 
positively influence our success. 
 
(U) The private sector can also enhance the public's positive 
perception of the U.S. and our policies. 
 
---------------- 
Political Issues 
---------------- 
 
(C)  The decentralized nature of political power in 
Switzerland is unique in Europe.  Far from having a unitary 
Executive, the Swiss government is led by a seven-member 
cabinet -- the Federal Council.  The Swiss presidency is 
largely ceremonial and rotates annually between different 
members of the Federal Council.  Even for those accustomed to 
dealing with the complex political geometries of European 
coalition governments, the Swiss form of decision making can 
be disorienting.  With the exception of the rightist Swiss 
People's Party that opted for an opposition role last year, 
all the major political parties are represented on the 
Federal Council, spanning a broad spectrum from left to 
right.  Each Federal Councilor (Minister) serves at his or 
her own pleasure and enjoys an ill-defined but generally high 
degree of autonomy.  While key policy decisions are taken by 
the entire Council -- sometimes via vote -) its 
deliberations are strictly secret, and the Swiss have a 
long-standing tradition whereby Federal Councilors avoid 
publicly criticizing each other.  The end result is a 
seemingly amorphous policy-making process in which decisions 
are implemented with considerable freedom of interpretation 
by senior representatives of political parties having often 
diverging interests. 
 
(C)  An additional "x factor" in Swiss decision making is the 
ability of the Swiss people to initiate or to strike down 
legislation via an expansive and oft-used referendum 
mechanism.  It only takes 50,000 certified Swiss signatures 
to force a public vote.  The threat of a referendum is a fact 
of Swiss political life that no politician here can ignore, 
and something that Swiss officials frequently flag for us ) 
particularly when we ask them to do something difficult. 
 
(C)  Dealing with these unique elements of the Swiss 
political system demands patience and flexibility but can pay 
important dividends.  Given its international reputation for 
mediation and diplomatic competence, Switzerland,s influence 
on the international stage is significantly greater than one 
would otherwise assume for a country of its size.  Standing 
outside of the EU and NATO, Switzerland sees its comparative 
advantage as working the seams via diverse and variable 
coalitions of convenience.  With enough effort and 
coordination, the Swiss advantage in this respect can 
sometimes become our own, as was the case with the strong 
supportive roles the Swiss have played on Kosovar 
independence, on obtaining the release of American citizens 
wrongfully detained in Iran, on addressing interoperability 
concerns with the Oslo Accord on cluster-munitions, on the 
establishment of the Forum for the Future, and with the 
resolution of the Magen David Adom dispute.  But getting 
successful outcomes requires strategic patience on our part 
and a willingness to take the time to cultivate relationships 
with each of the Federal Councilors, as well as with industry 
leaders.  In doing so, I have come to appreciate that the 
extensive horse-trading endemic to the Swiss tradition of 
political compromise sometimes gives unlikely actors 
influence on issues of interest to us. 
 
(C)  As noted above, the Swiss penchant for equidistance 
sometimes works to our advantage.  However, on one key issue 
of the past two years ) the Iran nuclear problem ) 
Switzerland,s instinct "not to take sides" has harmed 
international efforts.  While many Swiss clearly understand 
and take seriously the threat that Iran's dangerous nuclear 
program represents to our mutual interests, FM Calmy-Rey has 
apparently seen in this dispute an opportunity to raise her 
own profile.  While we and the members of the P5 1 group, the 
EU, and other like-minded states have made considerable 
progress in increasing the pressure on Iran, Calmy-Rey's 
ministry has undercut these efforts at several turns by 
offering an alternative "Swiss Plan" for resolving the 
dispute.  The Swiss Plan and Calmy-Rey's infamous trip to 
Tehran in March to secure a major new gas deal with Iran for 
Swiss firm EGL, have surely given Iran some reason to believe 
that it can continue to resist pressure to meet its 
international obligations. 
 
(C)  Swiss behavior regarding Iran is of particular concern 
because Switzerland has been our Protecting Power in Iran 
since 1980, and since Switzerland was re-elected to the IAEA 
Board of Governors last fall.  It has required much effort on 
our part to contain Swiss activism on Iran, culminating with 
a public endorsement in July of the P5 1 proposal by 
President Couchepin, along with assurances that Switzerland 
would no longer promote its own initiatives for resolving the 
Iran nuclear dispute.  At the same time, the Swiss have taken 
increasingly firm and constructive stances regarding Iran at 
the IAEA, thanks in no small part, I believe, to our lobbying. 
 
(C)  However, President Couchepin's recent declaration, which 
received broad press coverage (see July NZZ Sonntag article), 
"For several weeks the Swiss position in the Iran-Nuclear 
dispute is completely clear.  There is no special initiative 
any more.  We do not look for a special mediation/way. 
Instead we support the position of the P5 plus 1 countries, 
and we hope that Iran will give in," has effectively muzzled 
the Foreign Ministry's determination to pursue its own "Swiss 
Plan." 
 
(C)  If and when this or the new administration wishes to 
explore a diplomatic dialogue on the Iranian nuclear 
proliferation issue, perhaps we could engage the Swiss at the 
outset to truly represent us, with the understanding at that 
point, that they would only deliver our message, and not 
something diluted by independent Swiss thinking.  If and when 
such a dialogue is in our best interests, I believe the Swiss 
and their Foreign Ministry would jump at the chance to truly 
represent us without prejudice and with strict guidelines. 
This idea is worth exploring if an appropriate opportunity 
presents itself. 
 
(SBU)  To reinforce our ability to identify and pursue goals 
of mutual interest, in 2006 we signed a MoU with the EDA 
initiating a so-called "Political Framework for Intensified 
Cooperation."  Though such instruments are always at risk of 
becoming merely talk-shops, the EDA places high importance on 
the Framework, making it a potentially useful tool for us to 
define and achieve USG goals, including in such areas as 
promoting civil society in the Broader Middle East and North 
Africa, human rights, peace support operations in the Balkans 
and Africa, and counterterrorism. 
 
--------------- 
Economic Issues 
--------------- 
 
(U)  Switzerland's highly advanced and diversified economy 
has so far proven comparatively resilient in the global 
financial crisis.  The Swiss government estimates that GDP 
growth will fall from roughly 1.9% in 2008 to a maximum 1.0% 
in 2009.  Switzerland,s GDP in 2007 totaled 512 billion CHF 
($450 billion), resulting in a per capita GDP of about 
$60,000, according to the IMF.  Only three percent of Swiss 
wage-earners take home less that 3,000 CHF per month, and one 
out of five Swiss pensioners has a net worth of more than 
1,000,000 CHF.  Unemployment is 2.3%.  Switzerland is home to 
a disproportionate number of large European multinationals, 
and global companies such as Nestl, Novartis, Roche, Credit 
Suisse and UBS gave the Swiss Stock Exchange a market 
capitalization equal to roughly 2/3 that of Germany's. 
 
(U)  U.S.-Swiss economic ties are robust and long-standing, 
and they contribute most positively to our political 
relationship with Switzerland.  The economic sphere is an 
area where both sides perceive a clear win/win situation. 
Swiss firms have collectively invested over $140 billion in 
the United States and employ nearly 500,000 U.S. workers, 
ranking Switzerland seventh among all foreign investors in 
the U.S.  On the other side, more than 600 U.S. enterprises 
have together invested more than $90 billion in Switzerland, 
providing jobs for 70,000 people (or about 2% of the nation's 
entire labor force.)  Switzerland is a preferred location for 
the European headquarters of a number of top U.S. 
multinationals (Caterpillar, GM, Dow Chemical, DuPont, 
Colgate-Palmolive, etc.), while U.S. citizens head up some of 
Switzerland,s bluest of blue chip companies.  These include 
Brady Dougan at Credit Suisse, Michael Mack at Syngenta, and 
James Schiro at Zurich Financial Services.   The Swiss bank 
UBS actually has more employees in the United States (32,000) 
than it does in Switzerland (27,000). 
 
(U)  Despite the lack of a free trade agreement, U.S. trade 
with Switzerland is largely free outside of agriculture, and 
Switzerland is a strong supporter of global services and 
manufacturing trade liberalization.  In 2007, U.S. 
merchandise exports to Switzerland rose 18.5 percent to $17.0 
billion (making the alpine country our 17th largest export 
market).  At the same time, merchandise imports from 
Switzerland rose 3.7 percent to $14.8 billion.   Key U.S. 
exports to Switzerland included precious stones and metals, 
pharmaceutical products, art and antiques, optical and 
medical instruments, and aircraft, while top U.S. imports 
from Switzerland included pharmaceutical products, clocks and 
watches, machinery, optical and medical instruments, and 
chemicals.  Although most trade and business activity takes 
place entirely in the private sector, the Mission must still 
occasionally intervene with Swiss authorities to defend U.S. 
commercial interests. 
 
(U)  In 2005, Switzerland's Federal Council decided to 
propose exploration of a free trade agreement with the United 
States.  The attempt foundered on opposition from 
Switzerland,s highly-protected farm sector.  Instead, the 
U.S. and Swiss governments agreed to establish a bilateral 
Trade and Investment Cooperation Forum to address small yet 
sensitive trade issues.  Under its auspices, in October 2008 
the two governments signed an 'E-Commerce Declaration,' which 
provides a framework for cooperation to improve trade 
conditions for these services.  In addition, a 'Safe Harbor 
Agreement' to allow free flow and effective protection of 
personal data is in the final states of negotiations and is 
likely to be concluded before the end of 2008. 
 
(U)  Also this year, the U.S. and Switzerland concluded an 
expanded  Open Skies Agreement, and are exchanging 
discussion drafts on a 'Multilateral Convention on 
International Investment in Airlines.'  The U.S., 
Switzerland, and several other countries are also engaged in 
negotiating the  Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement, 
(ACTA), which held its last negotiating round in Tokyo in 
October 2008 and is intended to increase international 
cooperation and strengthen the framework of practices that 
contribute to effective IPR protection. 
 
(U)  Another tool utilized by the Mission to promote trade is 
the U.S.-Swiss Joint Economic Commission (JEC). The JEC meets 
once a year to discuss and resolve bilateral 
misunderstandings. The JEC also holds a panel at the World 
Economic Forum at Davos, the premier international event of 
its kind, as documented in the World Economic Forum section 
below. 
 
(U) The JEC panel, which is organized by the Mission in 
cooperation with the Swiss Department of Foreign Affairs, the 
Swiss-American Chamber of Commerce, and EconomieSuisse, 
allows the mission to publicize USG messages to an 
influential global audience, such as supporting the Doha 
Round at the 2008 panel and addressing the impact on trade of 
the global financial crisis, the topic of the upcoming 2009 
panel. 
 
 
-------------------- 
World Economic Forum 
-------------------- 
 
(U) The World Economic Forum (WEF) annual meeting in Davos, 
Switzerland, is unlike any other event of its kind. Over a 
five-day span at the end of January each year, 2,000 world 
leaders, Fortune 500 chief executive officers, international 
media moguls and nongovernmental organization (NGO) leaders 
gather in the small alpine village of Davos to participate on 
panels, in industry meetings and in "off the record" 
sessions. The WEF meetings in Davos have been a ripe target 
for public diplomacy efforts over the past 38 years, and the 
WEF's founder, Dr. Klaus Schwab, has preserved the original 
intent of the forum in maintaining its focus as a place for 
informal dialogue and debate on major social and economic 
problems. 
 
(U) Davos 2008 was an important milestone for the United 
States. During the final year of the Bush presidency, the 
administration dispatched five cabinet secretaries, three 
deputy secretaries, and numerous undersecretaries to Davos. 
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice, Secretary of Homeland 
Security Michael Chertoff, Secretary of Energy Samuel Bodman, 
Secretary of Education Margaret Spellings, U.S. Trade 
Representative Susan Schwab, and Deputy Secretary of the 
Treasury Robert Kimmitt, participated in five days of panels 
and discussions that covered topics ranging from Middle East 
peace, climate change, and educational reform to immigration, 
financial market stability, and trade liberalization. 
 
(U) Embassy Bern has worked closely with Klaus Schwab and his 
WEF team to include U.S. delegations that not only speak with 
strength and conviction on the global issues of our time, but 
are also internationally recognized experts on the pressing 
issues of the day. 
During the last three years, our Mission has helped shape six 
panels for Klaus and his team. The environment, challenges in 
the global financial arenas, energy security, global 
prosperity, and Muslim outreach are among the topics on which 
we have collaborated with Dr. Schwab. No other nation works 
so closely with the WEF on topics and participants, and no 
other nation has our record of success in organizing panels 
for key officials. 
 
(U) Engaging a skeptical world is not an easy task. Public 
diplomacy is vital if the United States is to correct skewed 
impressions. Communication and public diplomacy are major 
reasons for the success of the World Economic Forum's annual 
meeting in Davos. Klaus Schwab has made Davos media-friendly. 
One of his primary goals each year is to expand the media's 
reach. As a result, world leaders travel to the Swiss Alps to 
deliver addresses aimed at their constituents around the 
world. It has been an effective platform for the United 
States Government and private sector leaders to support and 
advance America's missions and values. 
 
-------------------------- 
Foreign Commercial Service 
-------------------------- 
 
(U) The U.S. Foreign Commercial Service (FCS) has the lead on 
providing promotional support and advocacy for U.S. exporters 
and on attracting Swiss business investment to the United 
States. Thus, it intervened with Swiss authorities in the 
telecom sector to obtain regulatory approvals and in the 
pharmaceutical sector to expand insurance reimbursements. In 
aerospace, FCS and Mission management facilitated export 
licenses leading to millions of dollars in U.S. exports. Over 
the past year, FCS developed programs with multiple U.S. 
universities to attract Swiss students to the U.S.A.  In 
October 2008, it mounted a USDOC-certified U.S.A. Pavilion at 
WorldDidac (an educational fair in Basel).  These activities 
took place at the same time as we were consolidating the 
operations of our FCS Zurich office into the new Embassy in 
Bern. 
 
(U) Our strong relationship with the Swiss-American Chamber 
of Commerce is a vital asset in our efforts to promote U.S. 
business.  The 41-person board of directors of the Chamber is 
a Who,s Who of the Swiss business community led by Executive 
Director Martin Naville who is one of our biggest friends and 
assets in-country. Virtually every board member is a CEO or 
senior officer of a major corporation in his/her own right. 
There is probably no better high-level, pro-U.S. audience in 
Switzerland with which to promote investment in the U.S.  In 
June 2008, I rolled out the Commerce Department's Invest in 
America Initiative in a speech to nearly 400 Swiss AmCham 
members and guests.  In November 2008, the Chamber and FCS 
will co-host an Invest in U.S.A. Seminar with speakers from 
Commerce, Treasury, State, and Homeland Security. Finally, in 
June 2008 FCS consummated its "Transformational Commercial 
Diplomacy" initiative for Switzerland by integrating its 
Zurich office with the Embassy in Bern. 
 
---------- 
Management 
---------- 
 
(U) In June 2008, the Mission completed the sale of the 
government-owned chancery complex and moved to a 
newly-renovated, short-term lease property.  It represents a 
substantial upgrade in embassy habitability, and the new 
building occupies a geographically central location in Bern 
that minimizes transportation movements in our daily 
business.  The USG-owned Chief of Mission Residence (CMR) is 
located next to the new chancery. 
 
------------- 
Post Security 
------------- 
 
(C)  The Mission's overall security posture significantly 
improved with the relocation of the Embassy.  The physical 
security of the building is excellent; it is outfitted with 
modern hardline doors, windows and barriers, and we achieved 
significantly more "setback" from the street.  Moreover, we 
now control all vehicles entering and exiting the compound, 
which was not the case in the previous location.  Technical 
security also improved with better-constructed and 
well-defined CAAs. 
 
(C)  The Regional Security Officer (RSO) faces a challenging 
audience when dealing with Swiss authorities on Post 
security. Many Swiss authorities do not consider the United 
States Embassy in Bern as a high-value target for terrorists; 
this fallacy and its resulting challenges require frequent 
intervention and lobbying by the RSO. Recurring conversations 
and education resulted in positive instances of excellent 
security support.  We succeeded in persuading Swiss 
authorities not to cut the number of posts currently manned 
by either Swiss law enforcement or military. In addition, we 
have requested and received security support for dozens of 
high-level U.S. officials either visiting or transiting 
Switzerland. The response of Swiss authorities to security 
incidents has been commendable. They sent a well-trained 
professional team to the Embassy to deal with a "white 
powder" incident, and on several occasions have controlled 
and mitigated suspicious individuals or vehicles in the area 
of the Embassy. They sent appropriate support for 
demonstrations directed at the Embassy and for special events 
such as the July 4th celebration. On occasion, the RSO has 
requested and received close protection for me at large 
public events. 
 
(C)  The most disappointing security issue was the rejection 
by the Swiss government of our request to deploy a 
surveillance detection team. The decision was made at the 
highest levels (the Federal Council) and was conveyed to us 
by the Foreign Ministry. The chances of reversing that 
decision are poor considering the high level of political 
attention it received. The RSO will continue to work with his 
resources and coordinate with Swiss authorities to provide 
appropriate levels of security support. 
 
---------------------- 
Defense Attach Office 
---------------------- 
 
State of the Partnerships 
 
(U)  Switzerland's continued presence in the Balkans, level 
of engagement in NATO's Partnership for Peace, and its recent 
decision to withdraw the two military officers assigned to 
ISAF reflect a military willing and at least superficially 
able to contribute to regional security but severely 
constrained politically.  As Switzerland tries to find its 
niche on the geo-strategic security stage, it has begun to 
focus limited efforts towards Africa.  Given the current 
turmoil within the Defense Ministry and the recent abrupt 
resignation of the current Defense Minister Samuel Schmid, 
Swiss engagement abroad will increasingly be under the 
auspices of the Foreign Ministry. 
 
Greatest Challenges 
 
(U)  The Swiss military is limited by law to participating 
only in peace support operations (PSOs) -- as opposed to 
peacekeeping or peace enforcement -- and only under the 
auspices of either a UN or an OSCE mandate.  Furthermore, the 
standing posture of the military's involvement in PSOs and 
other military engagements is participation under a 
multilateral umbrella, equally avoiding bilateral 
involvement's with either NATO or the EU. 
 
Contribution to Regional Stability, Democracy, and Foreign 
Assistance 
 
(U)  On September 20, 2007, the Swiss parliament voted to 
double the number of peace support operations troops from 250 
to 500.  While the actual realization of this effort will 
most likely occur beyond the 2010 timeline originally 
attached to the bill, it nevertheless provides insight into 
the Swiss desire to be seen as contributing to regional 
security and stability.  Currently, Switzerland is 
coordinating though DAO Bern to donate medical equipment to 
the Afghan National Army.  And, as mentioned previously, 
Switzerland is increasingly focused on disarmament, 
democratization, and reintegration efforts on the African 
continent. 
 
(U)  Our engagement initiatives with the Swiss military will 
continue to emphasize U.S. desires for them to maintain their 
250-strong peacekeeping contingents deployed in Kosovo and 
Bosnia and broaden their NATO-partnership activities beyond 
Europe, and we will continue to explore cooperative ventures 
for improved regional security and stability in Africa. 
Towards that end, we will work in concert with both U.S. 
European Command (USEUCOM) and African Command (USAFRICOM). 
 
We will continue to maintain a robust defense procurement 
relationship with the Swiss military, even as Swiss budgetary 
constraints manifest themselves in less outlay for 
acquisition.  We will also continue to encourage the Swiss 
military to further utilize military assets -- particularly 
excess defense articles -- in humanitarian relief/aid efforts. 
 
--------------- 
Law Enforcement 
--------------- 
 
Counterterrorism and Law Enforcement Efforts 
 
(U)  The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), Department of 
Homeland Security (DHS), and Drug Enforcement Administration 
(DEA) are the law enforcement entities represented at post. 
Other law enforcement offices are represented through 
regional offices.  Ongoing efforts continue with the 
government of Switzerland to grant the Regional Security 
Office (RSO) law enforcement status. 
 
(U) Switzerland strictly forbids investigative activity 
within its territory by U.S. law enforcement.  Thus, a high 
reliance exists on the Swiss authorities to conduct 
investigations on behalf of the U.S. in Switzerland. 
Obstacles that have continued to hinder full cooperative 
efforts and the free exchange of information in this regard 
include an unfavorable Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty (MLAT) 
that requires Swiss notification to the subject and 
disclosure, and Switzerland,s strict personal privacy 
statutes. 
 
(U) This has reinforced the importance of the development of 
liaison and rapport with Swiss law enforcement authorities by 
U.S. law enforcement agencies at a working level, as well as 
efforts at the ministerial level to invigorate information 
sharing, particularly as it relates to counterterrorism and 
money laundering. 
 
(U)  As a result of these efforts, we have seen a measured 
improvement in overall Swiss cooperation with U.S. law 
enforcement authorities at the federal, cantonal, and local 
level.  In addition, we remain optimistic concerning a new 
version of the Operative Working Arrangement (OWA) recently 
ratified by the Swiss parliament, which allows the formation 
of joint U.S.-Swiss investigative teams to address criminal 
and counterterrorism investigations with a U.S.-Swiss nexus. 
 
(U) Our current challenge exists in continuing to enhance law 
enforcement cooperation, intelligence sharing, and efforts to 
apply the OWA in joint cases. 
 
(U)  Liechtenstein continues to be a model of cooperation for 
U.S. law enforcement, having offered legal assistance on 
important money laundering investigations and the arrest of 
significant U.S. fugitives.  The principality continues to be 
in full compliance with the Financial Action Task Force 
requirements. 
 
---------------- 
Public Diplomacy 
---------------- 
 
(U) The Public Affairs Section (PAS) is lean, with one 
officer and three staff members.  The budget supports limited 
programming, two IVLPs, and one to one-and-one-half I-Bucks 
speakers.  Public Diplomacy outreach focuses on enhancing 
public support for the United States and its goals and on 
improving counterterrorism cooperation.  Mutual understanding 
is advanced through intensive use of the Fulbright and IV 
Programs and alumni; actively engaging media in 
Switzerland,s three major languages; increasing educational 
advising and university relationships; presenting 
multi-culturalism in the United States through Iftar, Black- 
and Women's History Month speakers; and programming American 
terrorism experts in all language regions. 
 
(U) The last published media survey addressing Swiss 
anti-Americanism was Q1 2007.  It ranked Switzerland as 
having the most anti-American levels in Western Europe. 
Moreover, a September 2008 interview with Swiss Ambassador to 
the United States Urs Ziswiler said he was concerned by the 
anti-American attitude of the Swiss.  PAS believes 
anti-Americanism remains high: Inaccurate and/or negative 
stories about the United States or the Embassy continue in 
tabloids, free commuter papers and in the Geneva dailies. 
However, the investment in ramped-up outreach has yielded 
results, including dramatic increases in the number and 
diversity of Fulbright applicants; the number of universities 
hosting Embassy programming; the number of media inquiries 
and accurate stories; and alumni group participation and 
activity. 
 
-------- 
Consular 
-------- 
 
(U) In 2008, the Consular Section led an interagency effort 
to convince the Swiss government to begin negotiations on the 
Terrorist and Criminal Information-Sharing Agreement.  To 
date, the Swiss have shown little interest in this proposal, 
arguing that such an agreement would be incompatible with 
Swiss privacy laws.  The Consular Section is now attempting 
to get Swiss authorities to suggest their own version of such 
an agreement that would be consistent with Swiss privacy laws 
and still fulfill the intent of the U.S. proposal.  We hope 
to lay the groundwork for a Swiss negotiating team to visit 
Washington in early 2009. 
 
(U) The January 12, 2009, deadline for mandatory use of the 
Electronic System for Travel Authorization (ESTA, a DHS 
program for advance registration of travel to the U.S. so far 
aimed at Visa Waiver Program (VWP) travelers) is fast 
approaching.  The Bern Consular Section has been active in 
getting the word out to airlines, tourist agencies, leading 
business groups, and the Swiss traveling public at large that 
ESTA is out there and that its use will be required for all 
Visa Waiver travel as of January 12.  These outreach efforts 
have been assisted by FCS and PAS. 
 
(U) The early arrival (August 2008) of the new Consular 
Section chief, permitting a 3-month overlap with the 
departing Section Chief, temporarily brought the Section's 
officer complement to the full staffing of four officers. 
This enabled Post to greatly reduce its large backlog of NIV 
appointments, which had occurred due to staffing gaps. 
Currently, the waiting period for an appointment is one week. 
As of early November, the Consular Section has found itself 
again short one officer, and only the seasonal drop in NIV 
applications has prevented the backlog from again approaching 
high levels.  The next entry level officer is due to arrive 
in March 2009.  Post is seeking TDY/WAE support in the 
meantime to keep the situation from assuming the unacceptable 
Spring-Summer 2008 proportions. 
 
----------- 
 Conclusion 
----------- 
 
I would like to thank the following dedicated and talented 
career officers at Embassy Bern who have worked with me in 
advancing our mission in Switzerland and Liechtenstein. They 
contributed significantly to this memorandum and remain 
committed to working under the leadership of Deputy Chief of 
Mission and Charg, Leigh Carter, until the next ambassador 
arrives. 
 
Deputy Chief of Mission, Leigh Carter 
Political/Economic section: Richard Rorvig, Chris Buck, 
Leslie Freriksen, Meg Goldfaden, and Diane O,Guerin 
Foreign Commercial Service: Donald Businger 
Management: Jonathan Schools 
Regional Security Office: Brian Murphy 
Defense Attach Office: Colonel Dorothea Cypher-Erickson 
Department of Homeland Security: Michael McCool 
Drug Enforcement Administration: E. Joe Kipp 
Federal Bureau of Investigation: Danny Boyd 
Public Diplomacy: Lisbeth Keefe 
Consular: Ed Birsner 
 
Thank you for this opportunity to serve my country. 
 
Ambassador Peter R. Coneway 
 
 
CONEWAY