08MANAGUA949
HHS SECRETARY LEAVITT'S VISIT TO NICARAGUA TO
Thu Jul 24 00:00:00 +0200 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #0949/01 2062057
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 242057Z JUL 08
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2944
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEAUSA/DEPT OF HHS WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 000949 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, HHS FOR OGHA - BSTEIGER AND RCORREA 
STATE PASS TO EPA/OW - BGRUMBLES AND EPA/OIA - CHILL-MACON 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/24/2018 
TAGS: TBIO KSCA OTRA EAID PREL XK MX NU
SUBJECT: HHS SECRETARY LEAVITT'S VISIT TO NICARAGUA TO 
DISCUSS WATER QUALITY AND FOOD PRODUCT SAFETY 
 
REF: A. STATE 58850 
     ¶B. MANAGUA 450 
     ¶C. MANAGUA 443 
     ¶D. MANAGUA 761 
     ¶E. MANAGUA 361 
     ¶F. MANAGUA 848 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul A. Trivelli for reasons 1.4 (b and d) 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary.  Secretary of Health and Human Services 
(HHS) Michael O. Leavitt met with a calm and polite President 
Daniel Ortega on June 25 and 26 to discuss improving the 
water quality of Nicaragua's two "great" lakes.  Secretary 
Leavitt blended the themes of his regional visit into a 
strong message connecting access to clean water to both 
healthy local consumption and the safety of food products for 
export, while promoting the idea of water quality training at 
the Regional Healthcare Training Center in Panama.  Secretary 
Leavitt and President Ortega visited a public teaching 
hospital together.  Secretary Leavitt and President Ortega 
took a one-hour boat tour on Lake Nicaragua, discussing 
pollution sources and the lake's potential for supplying 
drinking and irrigation water.  Secretary Leavitt and 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Assistant Administrator 
for Water Benjamin Grumbles offered to send an EPA/HHS 
technical team later in July to advise the Government of 
Nicaragua (GON) on its action plan for cleaning up and 
protecting Lake Nicaragua.  Secretary Leavitt also met with 
the local American Chamber of Commerce (AMCHAM) and 
representatives of industrial, pharmaceutical, and 
agribusiness sectors to discuss food safety, the Bush 
Administration's Action Plan for Import Safety and a proposed 
Memorandum of Understanding on product safety between the 
United States and Central American countries.  During a 
luncheon with opposition leaders and economists, participants 
briefed Secretary Leavitt on the increasing political and 
economic tensions around the country.  Secretary Leavitt's 
final stop was a public diplomacy event with some 90 medical 
students at the Nicaraguan National Autonomous University 
(UNAN) in Managua.  Local press coverage of the visit was 
ample and positive.  End summary. 
 
Meeting with the President 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 

¶2. (U) Secretary of Health and Human Services (HHS) Michael 
¶O.  Leavitt met with President Daniel Ortega on June 25 and 
¶26.  Arriving from a Product Safety Summit in San Salvador on 
the 24th and departing for Panama on the 26th to visit the 
Central American Regional Healthcare Training Center, 
Secretary Leavitt came to Nicaragua at the invitation of 
President Ortega to tour Lake Nicaragua (Cocibolca).  The 
visit presented Secretary Leavitt with the opportunity to 
discuss water quality and watershed management issues, and 
their relation to food safety.  Secretary Leavitt was 
accompanied by a high-level HHS delegation and the 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Assistant Administrator 
for Water Benjamin Grumbles. 
 
¶3. (U) Secretary Leavitt's first meeting with President 
Ortega, on June 25 at the Sandinista (FSLN) Political Party 
Headquarters, was attended by Minister of Health Guillermo 
Gonzalez, Vice Minister of Environment Roberto Araquistain, 
President of the National Water Board (ENACAL) Ruth Selma 
Herrera, and other government officials, including First Lady 
Rosario Murillo, Nicaraguan Ambassador to the United States 
Arturo Cruz, President of the National Social Security 
Institute Roberto Lopez, President of the Health Workers 
Union Gustavo Porras, and Chief of the Foreign Affairs 
Ministry's Americas Desk Orlando Gomez. 
 
¶4. (U) A calm and polite Ortega introduced the topic of water 
quality of Nicaragua's two "great" lakes -- Lake Nicaragua 
(Cocibolca) fronting the city of Granada and Lake Managua 
(Xolotlan) fronting the city of Managua -- and their 
importance to economic growth and human health.  The entire 
meeting was broadcast live on national television and radio. 
Ortega described Nicaragua's two principal lakes and their 
tributaries as having been polluted by industrial and 
agricultural waste, aquaculture, and raw sewage.  He 
highlighted the potential of Lake Nicaragua as a source of 
water for irrigation, drinking, hydropower, and as a tourist 
destination.  Ortega recognized the importance of water 
quality to food safety.  Noting the potential for agriculture 
in Nicaragua, Ortega highlighted the need for improved 
technology and foreign investment to raise productivity, and 
to enhance food safety and the human health of agricultural 
workers. 
 
¶5. (U) Secretary Leavitt blended the themes of his regional 
tour into a strong message connecting access to clean water 
to both healthy local consumption and the safety of food 
products for export, while promoting the idea of water 
quality training at the Regional Health Training Center in 
Panama.  He expressed interest in preserving Lake Nicaragua 
and promised U.S. technical expertise to assist Nicaragua's 
efforts to clean it up, comparing the effort to that of the 
United States, in cleaning up the Great Lakes.  Secretary 
Leavitt tied the need for clean water to the growing 
U.S.-Nicaragua trade relationship under CAFTA by highlighting 
the importance of producing clean, high quality food for 
export, as well as local consumption.  He spelled out 
President Bush's Action Plan for Import Safety, which was 
presented at a Product Safety Summit in El Salvador the 
previous day.  He acknowledged the growing importance of 
Central American food exports to the United States, 
specifically highlighting the prevalence of Nicaraguan labels 
in U.S. supermarkets. 
 
¶6. (U) Dr. Jaime Incer Barquero, President of FUNDENIC 
SOS/Fondo Natura, a local nongovernment organization (NGO) 
dedicated to sustainable development and natural 
conservation, made an impassioned plea for environmental 
policies that will preserve Lake Nicaragua as the country's 
most important natural resource.  He warned of the risk of 
desiccation within 25 years as a result of climate change and 
population pressures on the lake.  Dr. Incer stressed the 
first step is to conduct a comprehensive assessment and 
monitoring program to determine the level, composition, and 
source of contamination.  Echoing Secretary Leavitt's theme, 
he stated, "The state of a country's health depends on the 
state of the environment; a sick people equates to a sick 
ecology."  ENACAL President Herrera announced that for the 
past year, ENACAL has been monitoring lake water quality 
along 28 fixed points, in preparation for the construction of 
drinking water pipelines from the lake to three growing 
Pacific Coast communities, including tourism mecca San Juan 
del Sur.  She acknowledged that these pipeline projects could 
begin soon, which will require an immediate effort to protect 
the lake from solid waste -- including plastics and tires. 
She cited ENACAL's legally mandated role as protector of all 
sources of drinking water in Nicaragua. 
 
¶7. (U) EPA Assistant Administrator Grumbles expressed 
willingness to share his agency's legal, regulatory, and 
technical expertise with the GON as it makes plans to clean 
up Lake Nicaragua and Lake Managua.  He emphasized that the 
central focus of any effort should be the prevention of 
pollution through education.  In response to Secretary 
Leavitt's introduction of the Regional Healthcare Training 
Center, Health Minister Gonzalez noted that quite a few 
Nicaraguan healthcare workers had received training there in 
the last year, including participation in a program on avian 
influenza epidemiology.  The Minister discussed a new 
alliance with the Nicaraguan National Autonomous University 
(UNAN) of Leon to develop a quality control laboratory for 
medicines. 
 
¶8. (U) Secretary Leavitt concluded by proposing a product 
safety Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the United 
States and all Central American countries.  HHS's objective 
is to encourage independent product safety certifications for 
exports to the United States that would obviate inspections 
at the port of entry.  The certification program would 
require common food safety regulations and inspection 
standards throughout Central America.  The Regional 
Healthcare Training Center in Panama City would offer courses 
on food safety.  Secretary Leavitt highlighted that having 
certified exports would increase opportunities for 
Nicaragua's agricultural sector.  He used the recent example 
of salmonella-tainted Honduran cantaloupe exports to impart a 
sense of urgency for the MOU.  Ortega welcomed the program 
and all U.S. assistance to Nicaragua in this area. 
 
Hospital Visit 
- - - - - - - 

¶9. (U) Secretary Leavitt, President Ortega, and their 
respective delegations immediately proceeded to Hospital 
Manolo Morales.  (Note: Much to the surprise of Secretary 
Leavitt's security detail, Ortega jumped behind the wheel of 
an SUV and drove Secretary Leavitt to the hospital himself. 
End note.) The facility serves as a public teaching hospital 
specializing in orthopedic medicine and surgery.  Secretary 
Leavitt and the President toured various wards, led by the 
Director General of the Hospital Dr. Ariel Herrera.  Ortega 
and Secretary Leavitt spoke with patients and staff, and paid 
specific visits to the HIV/AIDS inpatient center.  The visit, 
covered in full by GON-invited press, offered Secretary 
Leavitt the opportunity to assess the quality of Nicaraguan 
health care at a typical general practice facility.  Most of 
the patients directed their comments to President Ortega, 
detailing their needs, the hardships endured by their 
families, and the lack of resources at the hospital and in 
regional medical clinics.  Several patients refused to speak 
to President Ortega or Secretary Leavitt. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Throughout the tour the Minister of Health rattled 
off statistics on the decline in Nicaragua's health over the 
last 16 years.  (Comment: This is common FSLN propaganda that 
contradicts the National Demographic Health Survey. 
President Ortega and the FSLN-affiliated media used this 
visit as a propaganda opportunity in response to other media 
criticism earlier in the week regarding the GON's lack of 
support for HIV/AIDS victims.  Several patients during the 
visit specifically complained that anti-retrovirals were out 
of stock.  End comment.) 
 
American Chamber of Commerce Breakfast 
 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 

¶11. (U) On June 26, Secretary Leavitt met with the Nicaraguan 
American Chamber of Commerce (AMCHAM) and representatives of 
industrial, pharmaceutical, and agribusiness sectors to 
discuss product safety and Secretary Leavitt's proposed MOU. 
Secretary Leavitt contrasted the current method of catching 
unsafe products at border inspection points against his 
vision of encouraging in-country certification according to 
international standards by ensuring producers build safety 
into their products right from the start.  He proposed the 
development of a regional MOU within two months, starting 
with a few product lines before expanding to others.  He 
expects the private sector, rather than the government, to 
play a leading role in developing appropriate standards. 
 
¶12. (U) Secretary Leavitt explained the Action Plan on Import 
Safety through two examples.  One, from a Texas processing 
plant, demonstrated the "know your grower" principle, by 
which the supplier must provide information on soil and water 
quality, fertilizer and pesticide use, and delivery and 
transport methods.  The second, from a red pepper farm from 
India, demonstrated the idea "from the ground up."  Labels of 
products made with the peppers contain traceability 
information to fulfill the requirements of a large retail 
chain, which shows how the private sector's response to 
market demands is swifter than government regulation, as 
India's Spice Board is now developing national traceability 
standards. 
 
¶13. (U) Secretary Leavitt emphasized that the idea is not to 
invent new standards, but rather to work with 
already-established standards created by reputable 
organizations.  Once products have earned certification, they 
will enter the U.S. market more quickly; without 
certification, they risk heightened border scrutiny and 
delays.  Secretary Leavitt recognized that producers may have 
to adopt new technology, but the assured market entry should 
offset the investment.  Lastly, he explained that all these 
changes are a direct result of globalization.  There are 
three responses to changes in the global market: 1) resist 
and fail, 2) go along and survive, or 3) lead and prosper. 
 
Lake Nicaragua Boat Tour 
- - - - - - - - - - - - 

¶14. (U) While waiting the next morning for President Ortega 
to arrive at the Port in Granada for a tour of Lake 
Nicaragua, Secretary Leavitt and EPA Assistant Administrator 
Grumbles met with Environment Vice Minister Araquistain, 
ENACAL President Herrera and Dr. Incer.  The group discussed 
the GON's creation of an "environmental network" among the 32 
municipalities around Lake Nicaragua and Lake Managua, called 
AMUCRISAN.  The GON will develop a national action plan for 
cleaning up and protecting the lake based on action plans 
formulated by each municipality.  The action plan will center 
on sustainable development, cleaning up the lakes, protecting 
the environment, and educating the population.  The 
environmental aspects of the plans include reforestation, 
watershed management, soil conservation, and establishing 
protected areas.  Incer requested assistance in conducting a 
baseline assessment of pollutants in the lake and an 
effective response.  Herrera presented ENACAL's plan for 
cleaning up the lake that focused on four key areas: 
elimination/reduction of agrochemicals used by farmers along 
the rivers that feed into the lake (most polluting), 
reforestation, education of producers, and construction of 
waste water treatment infrastructure.  Assistant 
Administrator Grumbles committed to sending a technical EPA 
team augmented by HHS to help the GON with its action plan 
and to share lessons learned and best regulatory practices. 
 
¶15. (U) Secretary Leavitt and President Ortega then took a 
one-hour boat tour on Lake Nicaragua aboard a Nicaraguan Port 
Authority ferry.  Dr. Incer served as guide and discussed the 
history, geographical dimensions, ecological diversity, and 
sources of pollution of the lakes.  He also described the 
lake's potential for supplying water for drinking and 
irrigation.  Vice Minister Araquistain presented the GON's 
efforts to develop the action plan with the 32 municipalities 
around the lakes.  Secretary Leavitt and Assistant 
Administrator Grumbles repeated to Ortega their commitment to 
send an EPA/HHS technical team to offer advice on the lake 
action plan.  They insisted, however, that the GON must have 
a preliminary plan on paper and be ready for detailed 
discussions to make the effort productive.  Secretary Leavitt 
introduced Chief Environmental Health Officer Captain Craig 
Shepherd from the Department's Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention, who highlighted the key role of educating the 
population about water sanitation and waste control.  While 
it takes a generation to show permanent results, education is 
"the best preventative medicine." 
 
¶16. (C) In a final one-on-one meeting with Ortega at the 
dock, Secretary Leavitt recapped the purpose of the visit and 
tied together water sanitation with food safety.  He 
emphasized the need for product safety standards that include 
water used to irrigate crops.  He promised that his staff 
will work with the Ministry of Health regarding an MOU on the 
product/export safety.  In closing, Secretary Leavitt 
emphasized that change is possible when the economy is 
growing since new investors will seize the opportunity to set 
up clean businesses in Nicaragua, develop an industrial base, 
pay taxes, and contribute to Nicaragua's export development. 
Secretary Leavitt warned, however, that investors will only 
come if they believe they will be treated fairly and 
predictably.  Secretary Leavitt told Ortega that he needs to 
send positive signals to investors.  Ortega assured Secretary 
Leavitt that while "there is a lot of noise in Nicaragua, 
investment is up and (the government) is interested in more 
U.S. investment." 
 
Opposition Leader Luncheon 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 

¶17. (C) During a luncheon with opposition leaders and 
economists, Secretary Leavitt learned about the increasing 
political and economic tensions around the country. 
Secretary Leavitt's guests were Eduardo Montealegre, Managua 
mayoral candidate and opposition political leader; Francisco 
Aguirre Sacasa, a leading Constitutional Liberal Party (PLC) 
deputy and President of the National Assembly Economic 
Commission; Mario Arana, Executive Director of the Nicaraguan 
Foundation for Economic and Social Development (FUNIDES) and 
a former Minister of Trade and Central Bank President; Erwin 
Kruger, former President of the Nicaraguan Federation on 
Business Associations (COSEP) and current publisher of the 
finance magazine Dracma; and Roberto Zamora, President of 
Bancentro, Nicaragua's second largest commercial bank. 
 
¶18. (C) The discussion highlighted Nicaragua's current 
economic challenges of high inflation (caused by high food 
and oil prices, and wage hikes), slowing U.S. and Nicaraguan 
growth, a deteriorating investment climate, and management of 
domestic debt (Refs B and C).  Participants noted that there 
are opportunities in high food commodity prices, the banking 
sector is strong, the country is close to major markets, and 
labor costs are low, but politics has hampered growth. 
 
¶19. (C) Montealegre and Aguirre warned that Ortega's goal was 
to eliminate his political opposition and remain in power for 
as long as possible by changing the political system from a 
presidential to a parliamentary one.  Aguirre observed that 
Ortega has two sides, "Like Dr. Jekyll and Mr.  Hyde.  You 
(Secretary Leavitt) have been meeting with Dr. Jekyll; we 
Nicaraguans get Mr.  Hyde."  Montealegre said that the 
political situation is worse than seven years ago, when 
corrupt former President and convicted felon Arnoldo Aleman 
provoked an economic and political crisis.  Ortega is preying 
upon an opposition fractured and distracted by Ortega's and 
Aleman's shared control of government institutions and the 
judiciary.  Political apathy plays into the hands of Ortega. 
Montealegre and Aguirre both agreed that the combination of a 
dangerous economic situation and a "closing of political 
space" through the recent deregistration of two small 
opposition parties (Ref D) could result in political and 
social upheaval.  At one point, Montealegre called Ortega an 
"opportunist .  .  .  interested only in the money."  In 
response to Secretary Leavitt's question as to what the 
United States can do to help, Montealegre and Aguirre agreed 
that the United States needs to remain engaged by sending 
visitors, setting conditions on assistance, focusing on rule 
of law issues, and insisting on accountability. 
 
University Public Diplomacy Event 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 

¶20. (U) Secretary Leavitt's final stop was a public diplomacy 
event with some 90 medical students at the Nicaraguan 
National Autonomous University (UNAN) of Managua.  After 
presenting a biographical sketch, Secretary Leavitt took 
questions from the students.  A question on environmental 
assistance allowed Secretary Leavitt to link clean water, 
health, and safe food exports.  In response to a question on 
health insurance reform, Secretary Leavitt expounded on his 
belief in healthcare competition, the power of the consumer, 
and the role of the market in safely and efficiently 
distributing products.  Secretary Leavitt summed up his 
preventive approach to health care by stating, "If you change 
a heart, you can change a nation." 
 
Media Assessment 
- - - - - - - - 

¶21. (SBU) Coverage of Secretary Leavitt's visit was robust 
across all media.  The "official" Sandinista television and 
radio stations used the hospital and lake tours to portray 
President Ortega as friendly to the United States, in sharp 
contrast to his usual anti-U.S. rhetoric.  Official radio 
broadcast live coverage of most of Ortega's activities with 
Secretary Leavitt, including Secretary Leavitt's visit to the 
FSLN headquarters, the hospital tour, and the boat tour. 
Official television later broadcast hours of video from the 
visit with propaganda voice-over promoting Ortega. 
 
¶22. (U) Independent and opposition media generally treated 
the United States favorably, highlighting Secretary Leavitt's 
commitment to product safety while criticizing 
inconsistencies in Ortega's public messages.  Both major 
print dailies focused on the fact that President Ortega 
personally "chauffeured" Secretary Leavitt from the FSLN 
Secretariat to the Hospital.  Channel 2, cable-only channel 
11, and Pacific Coast-coverage Channel 10 covered the 
hospital visit.  Channels 2 and 10 interviewed HHS Special 
Assistant for International Affairs William Steiger regarding 
the visit, while official Sandinista stations shied away from 
giving U.S. officials air time.  At least 6 national and 
cable TV stations, both major newspapers, and 3 radio 
stations reported on Secretary Leavitt's visit to the 
Nicaraguan National Autonomous University (UNAN) of Managua. 
Center-left national daily El Nuevo Diario (circulation 
30,000) featured an exclusive interview with Secretary 
Leavitt, mainly focused on product safety issues.  The 
article mentioned that Secretary Leavitt's visit was not 
related to the MANPAD missile-medical assistance exchange 
proposal currently under discussion (Ref E). 
 
Comment: Dr. Jekyll, Mr.  Ortega 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 

¶23. (C) As we have seen with other high-level U.S. visitors, 
Ortega shelved his bellicose rhetoric in favor of cordiality 
during Secretary Leavitt's visit.  While Secretary Leavitt 
was treated to "Dr. Jekyll," GON cooperation on organization 
of the visit epitomized the "Mr.  Hyde" characteristics of 
this administration.  Messages came and went through various 
Ministries, the Office of the First Lady, and even the 
Nicaraguan Embassy in Washington, before it became clear that 
First Lady Rosario Murillo was handling the visit herself. 
Murillo limited contact between the Embassy and the GON, and 
waited until the last possible moment to interact.  Decisions 
on a meeting and a joint visit to a hospital were left until 
hours before Secretary Leavitt arrived, and the lake tour was 
left for Ortega and Secretary Leavitt to decide at their 
first encounter.  Ministry officials were completely 
uninformed about their role and relied upon the Embassy as 
their primary source of information. 
 
¶24. (U) Secretary Leavitt's staff cleared this cable. 
TRIVELLI