10MANAGUA19
By Decree Ortega Keeps Control of Key Positions
Tue Jan 12 00:00:00 +0100 2010
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXRO5878
OO RUEHAO RUEHCD RUEHGD RUEHHO RUEHMC RUEHNG RUEHNL RUEHRD RUEHRS
RUEHTM
DE RUEHMU #0019/01 0121548
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 121547Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0513
INFO RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RHMFISS/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL IMMEDIATE
RHMFISS/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
WESTERN HEMISPHERIC AFFAIRS DIPL POSTSC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 06 MANAGUA 000019 
 
SIPDIS 
AMEMBASSY BRIDGETOWN PASS TO AMEMBASSY GRENADA 
AMEMBASSY OTTAWA PASS TO AMCONSUL QUEBEC 
AMEMBASSY BRASILIA PASS TO AMCONSUL RECIFE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 2020/01/12 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM PHUM NU
SUBJECT: By Decree Ortega Keeps Control of Key Positions 
 
REF: A) MANAGUA 5 - OPPOSITION UNITY AND BENCHMARKS 
B) 09 MANAGUA 1137 - OPPOSITION UNITY TALKS 
C) 09 MANAGUA 1035 - COURT PERMITS ORTEGA'S RE-ELECTION 
D) 09 MANAGUA 837 - OPPOSITION UNITY EFFORTS 
 
CLASSIFIED BY: RobertJCallahan, Ambassador, State, Embassy Managua; 
REASON: 1.4(B), (D) 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary: On January 9, President Daniel Ortega issued a 
decree extending the terms of over 20 public officials which are 
set to expire in 2010 if the National Assembly does not elect new 
authorities.  These officials include all 10 of the now-discredited 
Supreme Electoral Council magistrates.  The decree is widely 
considered unconstitutional and unnecessary, as the election and 
appointment of officials to other branches of government and to 
state institutions is the exclusive prerogative of the National 
Assembly.  When taken with the governing Sandinista National 
Liberation Front's (FSLN) plurality of 38 of the 92 votes in the 
Assembly, this new decree ensures that Ortega's party will continue 
to control these state institutions.  The opposition and civil 
society have called Ortega's action a "coup d'C)tat that will lead 
to anarchy."  End Summary. 
 
 
 
An Unconstitutional Decree 
 
 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  On January 9, during a speech to commemorate the third 
anniversary of his administration, President Ortega read a decree 
stating that if the National Assembly failed to elect new officials 
to the various branches of government and state institutions, the 
incumbents in these institutions would remain in office and their 
terms extended for "as long as the National Assembly does not name 
new officials or ratify the current officials."  This decree 
immediately affects the following positions:  two senior positions 
at the Human Rights Ombudsman office, all 10 of the Supreme 
Electoral Council (CSE) magistrates, four of the 16 Supreme Court 
(CSJ) justices, all eight comptrollers, and the Superintendent of 
Banks. NOTE:  The terms of the Human Rights Ombudsman, Omar 
Cabezas, and his deputy expired on December 10, 2009.  The terms of 
two CSE magistrates end in February; the other eight magistrates 
conclude their mandates in June.  In April, the terms of the four 
CSJ magistrates expire, including CSJ Vice President and Ortega 
judicial operative Rafael Solis.  The eight comptrollers conclude 
their terms in April and the Superintendent of Banks finishes his 
term in December. 
 
 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Legal experts, the political opposition and civil society 
have all described the decree as unconstitutional.  Supreme Court 
President Manuel Martinez (aligned with the Constitutional Liberal 
Party, PLC), stated that Article 150 of the Constitution (which 
enumerated the powers of the presidency) does not grant the 
President the ability to "name, remove, or extend the terms of 
public officials," but rather this function rests solely with the 
National Assembly under Article 138.  Moreover, Article 150 grants 
the President power to issue decrees only for "administrative 
purposes."  Similar criticism came from Alejandro Serrano Caldera, 
the former Supreme Court Chief Justice during the first Ortega 
administration and an ex-FSLN member, who commented that one cannot 
defend the Constitution by violating it, and stated that with this 
latest action the Ortega administration became a "de facto 
government."  The Citizens' Union for Democracy (UCD), a collection 
of civil society organizations, described Ortega's decree as a 
"coup d'C)tat that will lead the country into anarchy."  Ortega's 
decree drew criticism from the Catholic church, but also, for the 
first time, from several Evangelical denominations as well.  COSEP, 
the umbrella organization of the Nicaraguan business community, 
also denounced the decree for provoking political uncertainty and 
harming the investment climate. 
 
 
 
¶4.  (C) Opposition members in the National Assembly called for 
various measures to respond to Ortega's decree, including 
presenting legislation to overturn the decree, filing charges for 
 
MANAGUA 00000019  002 OF 006 
 
 
abuse of power with the Public Prosecutor, and introducing 
legislation to depose Ortega as president.  Of these, legislation 
to overturn the decree is the most likely, but ultimately will 
depend on the political will of the PLC, which is instrumental in 
the legislature's administrative process of bringing bills to the 
floor.  The removal of Ortega from office is unlikely as the FSLN 
could easily block such a measure and the Public Prosecutor's 
Office would be unlikely to pursue any abuse of power charge given 
that Ortega loyalists fill key positions in that institution. 
 
 
 
The Implications of the Decree 
 
 
 
¶5.  (C)  While the decree states that incumbents' terms are 
extended only if the Assembly does not elect new officials, in 
effect this ensures that these state institutions will continue to 
be loyal and friendly to Ortega's FSLN.  The election of these 
public officials requires 56 votes of the 92 deputies in the 
legislature.  The FSLN has 38 deputies, which leaves the opposition 
two votes shy of the 56 votes required and technically gives the 
governing party a veto in the election of the public officials. 
The FSLN deputies are very disciplined in their voting and are 
extremely unlikely to vote with the opposition.  Moreover, in 
practice the various "opposition" blocs rarely vote together and 
have difficulty reaching a simple majority of 47 votes.  In the 
past, these public officials were elected through PLC-FSLN power 
sharing agreements known as "El Pacto." 
 
 
 
¶6.  (C) Over the past few months, PLC honorary leader and former 
president Arnoldo Aleman has attempted to publicly distance himself 
from Ortega and the Pacto in an bid to position himself as the 
leader of the opposition ahead of the 2011 presidential elections 
(refs A, B, D).   Members of his PLC party had publicly stated that 
the party would work with a united opposition to elect these public 
officials and that it would not negotiate with the FSLN.  In recent 
weeks, this unity effort appeared to gain momentum and looked to be 
near an agreement among the opposition parties on the selection of 
nominees for the CSE.  These new magistrates, had they been 
"non-partisan," would have been instrumental in shaping procedures 
for upcoming presidential elections in 2011, including election 
cycle dates, voter registration, composition of voter tabulation 
centers, and, possibly, could have challenged the CSJ's recent 
ruling that permitted Ortega to run for re-election (ref C ). 
 
 
 
¶7.  (C) If the opposition's efforts had come to fruition and this 
unity bloc had proposed non-partisan CSE magistrates, this would 
likely have led to a legislative stalemate between the FSLN and the 
opposition, with neither having the 56 votes required to elect its 
members to the various state institutions.  For its part, the FSLN 
required a CSE that would not challenge Ortega's ability to be 
re-elected, and ideally a CSE that would permit electoral fraud 
similar to that of the 2008 municipal elections.  This possible 
stalemate led to the speculation that these various government 
offices would go unfilled as they became vacant.  In December 2009, 
when the Assembly concluded its yearly session, two initiatives 
were publicly proposed to address this possible scenario.  The PLC 
presented legislation to form administrative councils at the 
various state institutions to have the senior technocrats continue 
administering the institutions.  The FSLN, by contrast, had 
publicly discussed legislative initiatives to extend the terms of 
all the incumbents.  With Ortega's decree, the FSLN gained the 
upper hand in its bid to retain control of these state 
institutions, as all the incumbents are guaranteed to continue in 
office until the National Assembly can vote, with a 60% majority 
(56 votes), to remove and replace them with new nominees. 
 
 
 
Comment 
 
MANAGUA 00000019  003 OF 006 
 
 
¶8.  (C) Some government proxies have justified Ortega's actions by 
raising the specter of administrative chaos or a government 
paralyzed by the absence of duly-elected public officials.  But it 
is unlikely that this motivated Ortega's decision for the decree. 
Rather, he likely feared the possibility of a new, "independent" 
CSE that could challenge his ability to run for re-election, and 
that would not countenance a repeat of the electoral fraud in 2011 
as occurred in the 2008 municipal elections.  With this decree, 
Ortega ensures these state institutions, one way or another, 
continue to be dominated with FSLN loyalists who support his 
re-election effort.  We suspect this decree is the latest 
manifestation of the Aleman-Ortega Pacto or at a minimum was 
designed by the FSLN to create strong incentives for Aleman to 
continue to adhere to it.  Ortega's decree permits Aleman to 
squeeze out from under the growing pressure he had faced from the 
opposition to help elect new, "independents" to the various state 
institution posts.  Aleman can continue to profess his indignation 
at Ortega's actions without any further pressure to take 
irreversible steps that would demonstrate his intent to preserve 
and protect democracy.  With the decree, Aleman no longer needs to 
concede anything to the opposition, and at the same time retains 
his piece of the power-sharing pie, as his allies too, remain in 
their various positions.  In return, given the supermajority hurdle 
to replace incumbents, Aleman guarantees Ortega that the PLC 
assembly members, whom Aleman still tightly controls, give no aid 
to any serious opposition effort from the Assembly to replace these 
figures.  The decree reinforces his Pacto co-dependency , ensuring 
his political future and fortunes remain closely intertwined with 
those of Ortega. 
 
 
 
The Decree 
 
 
 
¶9.  (U) Following is an unofficial translation of the decree: 
 
DECREE No. 3-2010 
 
The President of the Republic 
 
By the powers vested in the president by the Constitution 
 
I

CONSIDERING 
 That the State of the Republic of Nicaragua is a democratic, 
independent, participative and representative country, whose 
branches of government are the legislative power, the judicial 
power and the electoral power, all coordinated amongst themselves 
and subordinate only to the principle of preference to the supreme 
interests of the Nation and to that established in the Constitution 
of the Republic of Nicaragua, according to articles 7, 129, 131, 
132, 138, 144, 150, 158, 164, 168, 173. 
 
II 
 
MANAGUA 00000019  004 OF 006 
 
 
That in my capacity as Head of State and Head of Government, the 
Constitution makes me responsible for the harmonious coordination 
of the branches of government and State institutions of Nicaragua 
and before the vacuum of power created by the National Assembly by 
not appointing nor convoking the process to appoint the authorities 
of the branches of government or State institutions prescribed in 
numbers 7, 8 and 9 of article 138 of the Constitution of the 
Republic of Nicaragua it is my duty to avoid the judicial, 
political, economic and social insecurity and instability of the 
nation. 
 
III 
 
That the officials who comprise the judicial, electoral and other 
branches of government and State institutions established by the 
Constitution shall be elected by the National Assembly in the time 
stipulated in order to guarantee the respect for and true and 
material validity of the supremacy of the Constitution and 
therefore the fundamental rights and guarantees of the people of 
Nicaragua. 
 
IV 
 
That according to the Organic Law of the legislative branch, over 
45 days have passed for the convening of the appointment of the 
officials mentioned. Since December 10, 2009, the people of 
Nicaragua find themselves without a human rights ombudsman; and in the coming months the composition of the constitutionally created 
branches of government and State institutions that serve as pillars 
to support the governance of the Nation of the people of Nicaragua 
will become partially or totally incomplete, which due to the lack 
of political will places in risk the economic and social 
development of the nation. These are the electoral branch, the 
judicial branch, the Comptroller of the Republic, the 
Superintendent of Banks, among other institutions. 
 
V 
 
That on February 2, 2010 [sic], the terms of magistrates from the 
Supreme Electoral Council expire and on March 7 of this year are 
the regional elections of the Republic of Nicaragua's Caribbean 
Coast; however the National Assembly has not convened the 
corresponding election for those officials which would complicate 
the proclamation of the citizens elected in the voting stations to 
be carried out in the nation's North Caribbean and South Caribbean. 
Moreover, the electoral branch would be left without a governing 
body on June 1 of the current year, on the eve of the electoral 
process for the national elections of 2011. 
 
VI 
 
That on February 14, 2010, all the comptrollers' terms expire, 5 
titular and 3 alternates, who comprise the Supreme Council of the 
Comptroller General of the Republic, this being a fundamental 
institution to guarantee the correct management of State goods and 
resources including the resources coming from international 
assistance, including multilateral financial organizations such as 
the World Bank and the IDB and the community of donor countries that comprise the budgetary support group; institutions and 
countries that require that the Comptroller General of the Republic 
certify and guarantee the management of these funds in order to 
disburse these same funds. If these authorities are not elected, 
the country is in grave risk of economic and social collapse. 
 
 
 
VII 
 
 
 
That there is legislation in the National Assembly that, violating 
the Constitution, attempts to unconstitutionally name in various 
branches of government and State institutions a council to 
administer these bodies, which demonstrates the lack of political 
will to elect (new authorities) and thereby adhere to the 
Constitution. 
 
VIII 
 
Considering that in the immediate past upon the failure to adhere 
to the constitutional obligation to elect officials, the 
institutions themselves have resorted to their own norms and 
regulations that establish the continuity of the incumbents until 
such time as the appropriate institution elects or ratifies the new 
officials, as was the case of the Central American Court of Justice 
and in the law of the Superintendent of Banks and Other Financial 
Institutions. 
 
IX 
 
In my capacity as Head of State and Head of Government, I ratify 
that as the responsible party for the harmonious coordination of 
all the powers and invoking the mandate given to me by the 
Constitution to comply with and make others comply with the 
Constitution, and that all officials also comply, as stated in 
articles 150 and 129 of the Constitution, the latter which 
subordinates all the powers and bodies of the State to the 
principal of preference to the supreme interests of the Nation, and 
based on all the aforementioned I find myself in the imperious 
necessity to declare the following decree: 
 
DECLARED 
 
The following: 
 
DECREE 
 
Article 1 - It is the obligation of the National Assembly to 
conduct in a timely fashion the elections and appointments of the 
officials established in article 138 numbers 7, 8 and 9 of the 
Constitution of the Republic of Nicaragua. Failure to proceed as 
described beforehand, would lead to a condition of 
unconstitutionality due to a legislative omission and this would 
constitute a crime against the Constitution of the Republic of 
Nicaragua. 
 
MANAGUA 00000019  006 OF 006 
 

Article 2 - In the face of the failure of the aforementioned 
appointments a vacuum of power is created in the branches of 
government and State institutions that impedes the functioning and 
correct performance of these institutions. In virtue of the 
aforementioned and to avoid a vacuum of power, all the officials of 
the State's powers and institutions mentioned in the previous 
article whose mandate ends in the near future are ratified and 
their terms extended for as long as the National Assembly does not 
name new officials or ratify the current officials. 
 
Article 3 - This decree will enter into force upon its publication 
in any nationally circulated media without prejudice by the later 
publication in La Gaceta (Federal Registry), the Official Journal. 
 
Given in the City of Managua, seat of the Government, on the ninth 
day of the month of January in 2010. 
 
//s// 

Daniel Ortega Saavedra 
 
President of the Republic of Nicaragua 
 
//s// 
 
Paul Oquist Kelley 
 
Private Secretary for 
 
Domestic Policy 
CALLAHAN