06PARIS6172
FRENCH COMMEMORATIONS OF 9/11 5TH ANNIVERSARY
Thu Sep 14 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
null
Lucia A Keegan  09/18/2006 10:22:26 AM  From  DB/Inbox:  Lucia A Keegan

Cable 
Text:                                                                      
                                                                           
      
UNCLAS        PARIS 06172

SIPDIS
cxparis:
    ACTION: PAO
    INFO:   POL AMB ARS DCM

DISSEMINATION: PAOX
CHARGE: PROG

APPROVED: DCM:KHOFMANN
DRAFTED: PA:VBORNET, CBARROSS
CLEARED: PA:JBULLOCK (SUBSTANCE)

VZCZCFRI784
RR RUEHC RUEHMRE RUEHSR
DE RUEHFR #6172/01 2571101
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 141101Z SEP 06
FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1321
INFO RUEHMRE/AMCONSUL MARSEILLE 1323
RUEHSR/AMCONSUL STRASBOURG 0180UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PARIS 006172 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/PPD, EUR/WE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPAO FR
SUBJECT: FRENCH COMMEMORATIONS OF 9/11 5TH ANNIVERSARY 
 
REF:  STATE 145167 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  On the occasion of the 5th anniversary of September 11th, Post 
engaged a number of French institutions and government 
representatives to help commemorate this significant date.  Below is 
a listing of the events in Paris and the provinces.  Ceremonies 
included:  a religious service at the American Cathedral; a military 
tribute at the American cemetery of Suresnnes; a 9/11 documentary 
world premiere at the Ambassador's residence; a tour of New York 
photography exhibit hosted by the IVLP alumni group; a 9/11 website 
launching; ceremonies at the Luxembourg gardens and Suresnnes 
American cemetery; and a tri-mission town hall meeting.  End 
Summary. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
DOCUMENTARY SCREENING AT THE RESIDENCE 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  On August 31 Ambassador and the CEO of France Televisions, 
Patrick de Carolis co-hosted the French premiere screening of the 
France 2-Discovery Channel-BBC-RTL docudrama "September 11 Inside 
the Twin Towers."  Key Embassy contacts and French as well as 
Paris-based foreign media gathered at the Ambassador's residence to 
view the film, which interspersed testimony from those who escaped 
the towers, victims' families and other witnesses, with recreation 
of the events transpiring within the towers.  Ambassador and de 
Carolis both made remarks focusing on the upcoming fifth anniversary 
of 9/11, and reflecting on the tragedy and its consequences. Popular 
national daily Le Parisien covered the screening and the 
Ambassador's participation in a poignant article. 
 
------------------------- 
IVLP ALUMNI COMMEMORATION 
------------------------- 
 
¶3.  On september 8, in collaboration with the Cercle Jefferson (the 
French IVLP alumni association) the Embassy organized a special tour 
of the photo exhibit "Landmarks of New York."  The exhibit, which 
celebrates the architectural heritage of New York, is displayed at 
the Mona Bismarck Foundation.  The Cercle Jefferson was formed just 
after the tragic events of 9/11 by a group of energetic French 
professionals who are former participants of the Department's IVLP, 
and who wanted to make a significant gesture of friendship towards 
the United States and its people.  During his remarks to an audience 
of approximately 30 guests, representing a broad sector of French 
national and local government representatives, private enterprise 
and American association presidents, PAO James L. Bullock stressed 
our appreciation of the motivation behind the Cercle's creation.  He 
also underscored the importance of Franco-American cooperation in 
the fight against terrorism. The Cercle's secretary general, Pascal 
Dupeyrat flew to the United States the next day to personally 
present to the American people the French IV alumni's sincere and 
heartfelt expressions of friendship on the occasion of the 9/11 
commemorations in New York. 
 
-------------------------- 
AMERICAN CATHEDRAL SERVICE 
-------------------------- 
 
¶4.  At the request of the U.S. Embassy, the American Cathedral held 
a special 'liturgy of remembrance and peace' on Sunday, September 
10th. The very reverend Zachary W. M. Fleetwood, Dean of the 
Cathedral, gave the homily, which focused on the tragedy and loss of 
9/11 and the need to promote peace and reconciliation.  In tribute 
to the 9/11 observance, OECD Ambassador Connie Morella was one of 
the lectors. Ambassador Stapleton's absence due to conflicting 
schedules, and his support for the cathedral program, were noted in 
the service bulletin.  Economic Minister Counselor represented the 
Embassy at this service, and a number of Embassy staff and American 
community families were also in attendance. 
 
--------------------------- 
SURESNNES CEMETERY CEREMONY 
--------------------------- 
 
¶5.  On September 10th, Ambassador attended a special military 
ceremony organized by the city of Suresnnes and the 40/8 society of 
France.  The ceremony was held at the American cemetery of 
Suresnnes, where thousands of American soldiers are buried. 
Ambassador's remarks in memory of the victims of 9/11 were a key 
aspect of a ceremony that also included a roll call of the list of 
passengers and crew on board flight 93, the French and U.S. national 
anthems, and words by the mayor of Suresnnes, Christian Dupuy and a 
special prayer by the American Cathedral Dean.  Veterans of Foreign 
Wars and American Legion representatives, as well as members of the 
public were present at this moving ceremony. 
 
----------------- 
TOWN HALL MEETING 
----------------- 
 
¶6.  The three U.S. Missions in France held a town hall event in the 
Chancery Atrium on Monday, September 11 at opening of business. 
With USOECD Ambassador Morella and USUNESCO Charge Koss in 
attendance, Ambassador Stapleton delivered remarks reflecting on 
September 11, 2001 and honoring those who lost their lives and those 
who lost them in order to save others.  A local staff member 
delivered an ecumenical prayer she had written specifically for the 
event.  The large assembly arrived and departed in silence, clearly 
moved by the meaningful remembrance service. 
 
---------------------------- 
9/11 CEREMONY OF REMEMBRANCE 
---------------------------- 
 
¶7.  The morning of September 11, Ambassador and Pierre-Christian 
Taittinger, mayor of the 16th arrondissement, laid a wreath at the 
foot of the tree planted at the Place des Etats Unis, on the 
occasion of the first anniversary of 9/11.  A minute of silence was 
observed by all in attendance, including local elected officials, 
diplomatic representatives, and press. 
 
------------------------------- 
9/11 WEBSITE LAUNCHING CEREMONY 
------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  Following the wreath laying ceremony at the Place des Etats 
Unis, Ambassador, Mayor Taittinger and Embassy delegation headed for 
the town hall, where a press conference was held to launch a special 
website dedicated to the victims of 9/11. The audience at this event 
also included representatives of Franco-American institutions and 
French youth. The website, www.mardi11septembre.com, born from an 
initiative by three French NATO tour alumni, is bilingual and 
permits citizens from around the world to freely post their 
testimony on where they were on September 11th, 2001.  The 
apolitical nature of the website is an attempt to pay homage to the 
victims of 9/11, reach out to their families, and celebrate the 
solidarity and friendship between the American and French people. 
Ambassador Stapleton, French Ambassador to the U.S. Levitte and 
former Foreign Affairs minister Michel Barnier, among others, have 
already provided video testimonials for the website. 
 
----------------------------------- 
FRENCH SENAT WREATH-LAYING CEREMONY 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶9.  In a public ceremony attended by hundreds of French 
parliamentarians, members of the diplomatic community, and 
representatives of Franco-American organizations as well as the 
media, the president of the French Senat, Mr. Christian Poncelet, 
and Charge paid tribute to the memory of the victims of 9/11, 
pledging to continue the fight against terror.  The solemn ceremony, 
covered by French and international print and electronic media, 
included a U.S. Marines color guard, numerous Garde Republicaine 
troops, as well as its 85-member military band.  After the national 
anthems and a minute of silence, Senat President Poncelet and Charge 
laid wreaths by the "American tree" planted in January 2002 in 
memory of the victims of 9/11.  The tree is situated next to a 
replica of the statue of liberty in the famous Luxembourg gardens 
adjoining the French senate. 
 
------------------------- 
AROUND FRANCE:  MARSEILLE 
------------------------- 
 
¶10.  Marseille CG Participated in two commemoration ceremonies in 
Cannes and Antibes, both organized by the local municipalities. 
Mayor Brochand of Cannes, who was in New York City on 9/11, and lost 
colleagues in the twin towers, gave an emotional speech that focused 
on the solidarity of the American people in the face of the terrible 
losses they suffered that day.  The ceremony also honored the 
victims of terrorism in the UK, Spain, Russia and Israel.  The 
wreath laying ceremony included the CG and American college students 
in Cannes for an exchange program. 
 
---------------------- 
DOUAI (LILLE DISTRICT) 
---------------------- 
 
¶11.  On September 11 at 15:46 local time, Lille Consul inaugurated 
IIP papershow "Headlines of History:  September 11, 2001" at the 
Douai City Hall.  Mayor Jacques Vernier and IV06 alumnus and member 
of Parliament, Sebastien Huyghe, were in attendance.  The posters 
showcase fifty newspaper front pages from all over the world dated 
September 12, 2001.  They will be displayed at Douai City Hall until 
September 17.  Schools of Douai will be invited to tour this 
temporary exhibit.  Local press La Voix du Nord and L'Observateur du 
Douaisis covered the event.  Then the papershow will be donated to 
Lille Journalism School ( Ecole Superieure de Journalisme de Lille, 
ESJ). 
 
-------------------------- 
METZ (STRASBOURG DISTRICT) 
-------------------------- 
 
¶12.  A minute of silence was observed on September 11, just prior to 
presentations by the IO at Metz City Hall and the Strasbourg 
Synagogue, on the topic of "September 11, five years later."  A 
consular officer on TDY in Strasbourg also appeared on France 3 
regional TV at noon and in the evening of 09/11.  PA Strasbourg also 
assisted France Bleu Alsace radio station in locating Alsatians 
contacts in New York for live broadcasts on 09/11. 
 
------------- 
LYON DISTRICT 
------------- 
 
¶13.  Consul and Senator-Mayor of Saint-Etienne inaugurated 
"Headlines of History" exhibit on September 5 and at Lafayette's 
childhood chateau in Auvergne on September 11. On September 11 
Consul also visited Lyon fire station, which had extended an 
invitation as a way to show solidarity with the FDNY. 
 
------------- 
MEDIA REPORTS 
------------- 
 
¶14.  Throughout France, print and television media covered 9/11 
anniversary commemorations in the U.S., and included interviews with 
mission officials. Popular le Parisien begins its 9/11 commemoration 
series with a headline reading:  "The tragedy that changed the 
world."  Inside, Ambassador Stapleton's interview carries the title: 
 "The terrorists have not given up," a quote taken from the 
interview. Ambassador explained he was Ambassador in Prague at the 
time of the attacks and recalled his first actions to protect the 
American community. That same morning, on FR2, the media review, 
which included the special issue by Le Parisien, prominently showed 
the interview page and the Ambassador's photo. On the evening of 
9/11, Charge gave televised interviews to LCI and BFM. 
 
¶15.  Marseille CG gave an interview to Midi Libre for its September 
11 special report; a live morning news interview to Radio Juive 
Marseille; an evening news interview for local TV station "La Chaine 
Marseillaise" (LCM); an interview to daily "Nice Matin" in 
partnership with the Mayor of Antibes, Jean Leonetti (UMP).  CG 
stressed the progress that had been made in the struggle against 
terrorism, and noted the need to move forward together as much 
remained to be done. 
 
¶16.  Bordeaux Local daily Sud-Ouest Sunday (10th) and Monday (11th) 
had lead front page stories and picture focusing on events of 9/11. 
Sunday's headline was "New York N'Oublie Pas" with a photo of the 
wreckage of the twin towers, and main editorial and four internal 
pages devoted to 9/11 and terrorism. Monday's headline was "Cinq Ans 
Apres le 11 Septembre" and featured a photo of the President and 
Mrs. Bush yesterday at the ground zero ceremony with the main 
editorial and three internal pages devoted to 9/11 and the current 
situation of Al Qaida.  The editorials are at times quite critical 
of U.S. actions since the attacks, but express considerable sympathy 
and concern for what occurred on 9/11. 
 
¶17.  Rennes On September 11th, Consul gave an interview to regional 
TV channel France 3 Ouest, whose journalist focused on how, five 
years after the tragedy, Americans dealt with it on a daily basis 
and how it affected security at the Renees office.  Consul explained 
that 9/11 was a day to remember but that American facilities had 
been targeted in the past, lessons were learnt that they were people 
out there that felt misunderstood and frustrated with the US but 
changing the way we live our lives would mean the terrorists had 
won.  Consul reinforced the fact that we work closely with French 
authorities, that they are doing a great job and that we felt safe 
in Brittany. 
 
¶18.  Lyon's Consul gave interviews on the subject beginning 
September 5 (radio Saint-Etienne), September 8 (radio Lyon, France 3 
television Rhone-Alpes), September 11 (France 3 television 
Auvergne). 
 
------------------- 
MESSAGES OF SUPPORT 
------------------- 
 
¶19.  The mission has also received many messages of support and 
friendship from the public and embassy contacts including USG 
exchange alumni, one of whom wrote: "Five years after these abject 
acts of horror, the world-wide pain and compassion, and the 
world-wide communion with the American people remain intact." 
STAPLETON