05SOFIA1618
BULGARIAN INTERIOR MINISTER DEFENDS CONTROVERSIAL
Mon Sep 19 00:00:00 +0200 2005
SECRET
Embassy Sofia
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.id: 40876
date: 9/19/2005 14:14
refid: 05SOFIA1618
origin: Embassy Sofia
classification: SECRET
destination: 05SOFIA1598
header:
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.



----------------- header ends ----------------

S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 SOFIA 001618 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/16/2015 
TAGS: PREL PGOV ASEC KCRM PINR BG
SUBJECT: BULGARIAN INTERIOR MINISTER DEFENDS CONTROVERSIAL 
APPOINTMENTS, CALLS FOR FORMAL AGREEMENT ON COOPERATION 
 
REF: SOFIA 1598 
 
Classified By: Amb John Beyrle, reasons 1.5(b) and (d). 
 
¶1. (S) SUMMARY. Interior Minister Rumen Petkov argued in his 
first meeting with Ambassador Beyrle for both deeper and more 
formal cooperation on intelligence and law enforcement 
matters.  He called for the signing of a Mutual Legal 
Assistance Treaty (MLAT) or a memorandum of understanding on 
law enforcement cooperation.  One or the other is necessary 
to bring the current level of bilateral information sharing 
into conformity with Bulgarian law, according to Petkov.  The 
Interior Minister defended vigorously his decision to appoint 
a 13-member "advisory council" consisting largely of former 
members of the Communist-era intelligence services, saying 
that the council would  act only as a "transmission belt" 
between the Ministry and the interested public.  Petkov 
summarized the draft legislation to reorganize the MoI, and 
previewed personnel changes, including the replacement of 
Chief Secretary Boiko Borisov by current intelligence-service 
(NSS) director Ivan Chubanov.  Chubanov subsequently turned 
down the appointment. Ambassador emphasized the need for 
strong cooperation in the fight against terrorism and 
cross-border crime.  END SUMMARY 
 
¶2. (S) Amb Beyrle used the occasion of his September 14 
courtesy call on newly-appointed Minister of Interior Rumen 
Petkov to thank Petkov for the Bulgarian intelligence 
services' contribution to the global war on terrorism. 
Cooperation with the previous government in this area had 
been outstanding, and we would like to continue our joint 
efforts against terrorism and proliferation of WMD.  He noted 
that a team would be coming out from Washington the week of 
September 19 to discuss precisely these issues.  On the law 
enforcement side, organized crime, drug trafficking and 
trafficking in persons could only be countered through joint 
efforts. 
 
PETKOV WANTS A TREATY, OR AT LEAST AN MOU 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (C) Petkov began by noting that Bulgaria considers the 
U.S. "a strategic partner."  Personnel changes in the 
Ministry, including the planned promotion of General Chubanov 
to Chief Secretary and his replacement at NSS by Colonel Ivan 
Drashkov, would reflect this partnership.  Both men are 
highly regarded by their American counterparts, according to 
Petkov.  However, in addition to personal relationships, it 
is important to strengthen the formal relationship.  Petkov 
proposed in this context the signing of bilateral agreements 
such as an MLAT or MOU on law enforcement cooperation, 
strongly implying that the current level of informal 
cooperation, at least on law enforcement matters, could not 
continue without some sort of formal agreement on sharing 
classified information.  (When the MoI raised this issue last 
fall, deputy Minister Boiko Kotsev -- who retains his 
position under Petkov -- said the existing agreement on 
sharing of military information was not sufficient under 
Bulgarian law to cover bilateral law enforcement 
cooperation.) 
 
ADVISORY COUNCIL: A ROGUES' GALLERY FROM THE PAST? 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶4. (C) The day before his meeting with Beyrle, Petkov 
announced that he was appointing an advisory council of 
former high-ranking intelligence and law enforcement 
officials.  The 13-member "Citizens Advisory Council" 
includes leading figures from the so-called Generals' 
Movement, a BSP faction launched in 1998 by leading figures 
from the Communist-era intelligence service (First State 
Security Directorate) and political police (Sixth State 
Security Directorate) with strong ties to Russian business. 
The Movement arose as an internal opposition within the BSP 
against the reformist leadership of then-Chairman -- and now 
Bulgarian President -- Georgi Purvanov. Although the 
Generals' influence has waned in recent years, they still 
remain a factor in the BSP, mostly because of their business 
and financial ties, and because of their knowledge of 
information contained in the security-service archives.  The 
founder and informal leader of the Movement, 75 year-old Gen. 
Lyuben Gotsev, and one of its more notorious members, Gen. 
Brigo Asparukhov, are on the MoI advisory council. 
 
¶5. (C) Petkov defended the council, saying that the members 
would have no access to classified information and no role in 
the Ministry's operations.  Publicly, he has said that the 
council will increase the efficiency and transparency of the 
MoI.  Privately, he was dismissive of Gotsev and company, 
saying, "These old frauds just meet every Tuesday to gossip." 
 He told Beyrle that the council will act as the Ministry's 
"transmission belt" in explaining to both the public and the 
MoI's more than 60,000 employees the changes envisioned under 
the new Interior Ministry Act.  "Every one of them is 
colorful in his own way, and they are influential with 
journalists," Petkov said, "but they are far removed from 
reality." 
 
RESTRUCTURING THE MINISTRY 
-------------------------- 
 
¶6. (C) Petkov said that his most difficult task as minister 
will be implementing the draft Ministry of Interior Act, 
proposed by the previous government and soon to be considered 
by parliament.  The act introduces major changes in the 
structure of the Ministry, the status of its employees, and 
the balance between the political and professional 
leadership.  Perhaps most controversial is the consolidation 
of the six existing law enforcement, intelligence and 
fire-fighting agencies into three, and their direct 
subordination to the minister.  The role of the Chief 
Secretary -- traditionally the Ministry's highest-ranking 
 
SIPDIS 
professional -- is correspondingly reduced.  Far less 
interesting to the public and the press, but of direct 
concern to the Ministry's more than 60,000 employees, are the 
law's efforts to bring order, transparency and predictability 
to the MoI personnel system.  A major challenge for the MoI's 
institutional culture will be its "de-militarization," in 
accordance with European Union practice.  Instead of military 
titles, officers will carry the ranks of commissioners, 
inspectors, etc.  Petkov hopes to convince the old Generals 
on his advisory council to support the changes. 
 
¶7. (C)  Petkov insisted that the new structure will result in 
better coordination by consolidating the four existing police 
services -- regular police, gendarmerie, border police, and 
the National Service for Combating Organized Crime -- in a 
single police directorate reporting directly to the 
ministry's political leadership.  He promised that, under his 
leadership, the police would work closely with prosecutors to 
investigate the spate of high-profile gangland killings that 
have plagued Bulgaria.  He also promised to take decisive 
action against police officers who "cross the line" in their 
dealings with criminals.  In response to the Beyrle's offer 
of assistance in the fight against terrorist financing and 
money laundering, Petkov said that he hoped the Financial 
Intelligence Agency, currently under the Ministry of Finance, 
would be moved to the Ministry of Interior. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶8. (S) Though only 43, Petkov is in some ways an old thinker. 
His desire to sign formal agreements, whether or not they 
will have any real operational impact, as well as his 
reference to the advisory council as a "transmission belt" 
for influencing the public, hark back to communist days. 
Nevertheless, Petkov seems to be a pragmatist.  His choices 
to replace Borisov and head the NSS are both individuals with 
proven track records of close cooperation with the U.S., 
especially on intelligence matters.  The choice of members 
for his advisory council, however, indicate that Petkov has 
a tin ear for public relations and perhaps a real weakness 
for old communists and "Red businessmen."  Reactions to the 
appointments range from outrage and cries of "I-told-you-so" 
on the Right, to sheepish embarrassment among members of the 
governing coalition.  Petkov also seems sincere about 
reforming the Ministry and making it run more efficiently, 
but again there is controversy over whether the balance of 
power will tilt too far toward the MoI's political 
leadership, leaving the professionals subject to undue 
influence.  One thing, however, is clear:  for better or 
worse, Petkov will be far more active than his somnambulant 
predecessor in personally running the Ministry. 
BEYRLE