09ABUJA307
STATISTICS OF ARRESTS WITH INL DONATED BODY SCANNERS
Thu Feb 19 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Abuja
VZCZCXYZ0014
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHUJA #0307 0501316
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 191316Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY ABUJA
INFO RUEHOS/AMCONSUL LAGOS 0842
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5322UNCLAS ABUJA 000307 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL/C/CJ, INL/AAE 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: SNAR KCRM ASEC EAID NI IZ
 
SUBJECT:  STATISTICS OF ARRESTS WITH INL DONATED BODY SCANNERS 
HANDED OVER TO THE NIGERIA NATIONAL DRUG LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY, 
(NDLEA). 
 
INL office at Embassy Abuja reports the following statistics for the 
four body scanners donated to National Drug Law enforcement Agency 
(NDLEA) in Nigeria. The scanners are located at the four major 
international airports in Nigeria, Port Harcourt, Kano, Lagos and 
Abuja. Reports from U.S. Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) and NDLEA 
indicate that suspects are intimidated by the scanners and have 
resorted to the ports and land borders, which are porous, to conduct 
their illicit trade. Reports indicate that similar efforts to build 
NDLEA's capacity at these locations could prove equally successful. 
 
 
Â¶I. LAGOS 
The scanner at Lagos International Airport was donated on June 10, 
2008 and NDLEA commenced use immediately. From June 2008 to December 
2008, the scanner has assisted in the arrests of 84 persons 
suspected of ingesting hard drugs and strapping hard drugs on the 
body. DEA reports that the scanners have become a major deterrent to 
traffickers. Delta Airlines has begun direct flights to Lagos partly 
based on increased security provided by the scanners. There are 
about Twenty daily international flights departing from the Lagos 
International Airport of which fifteen have had suspected drug 
couriers checked in to travel to various destinations. The arrests 
on each route included: Air France to Italy 2, Germany 2; KLM Royal 
Dutch Airlines to Germany 8, Spain 7, Italy 2, Austria 2, Poland 2, 
Athens 2 and Amsterdam 5, London 1; Alitalia Airlines to Italy 13, 
Madrid 2; Virgin Atlantic Airlines to London 1, United States of 
America 1; Virgin Nigeria Airlines to South Africa 1, London 4; 
South African Airlines to Johannesburg 1; Southern China Airline to 
Dubai 2; Qatar Airways to Bangkok 2, Japan 1; Ethiopian Airlines to 
Bombay 1, China; Iberia Airlines to Spain 4, China 1; British 
Airways to London 1,United States of America 1; Bellview Airlines to 
Conakry 4; Kenya Airlines to Bangkok 1; Turkish Airline to Italy 1; 
Emirates to Dubai 2. 
 
II. ABUJA 
The scanner at Abuja Airport was donated in March 2008 and NDLEA 
commenced use immediately. Abuja Airport has four flights a week 
going to Amsterdam on KLM-Royal Dutch Airlines, 3 flights to London 
on British Airways, 1 flight to Nairobi on Kenya Airlines and 2 to 
Frankfurt on Lufthansa. From March 2008 to Jan 2009, the scanner has 
successfully detected 65 suspects who have ingested narcotic 
substances. All arrests at Abuja Airport are checked in passengers 
to travel on board KLM Royal Dutch Airlines. Destinations and the 
number of suspects are Germany 13, Spain 23, Amsterdam 9, Paris 3, 
Italy 3, United States of America 1, Poland 1 and Greece 1 
 
III. KANO 
The scanner in Kano Airport was donated along with the Abuja 
scanner. It has recorded one arrest since installation. The low 
figure is of concern to INL. From inquiries made, NDLEA reports that 
narcotics activities have shifted from the airport in Kano to the 
land borders. According to the NDLEA Airport Commander, this shift 
is attributable to the mere presence of the scanners at the airport 
as deterrence to intending drug couriers. Kano International Airport 
has 3 KLM Royal Dutch Airlines flights a week and the only arrest 
from Kano was a checked in passenger to Spain. 
 
IV. PORT HARCOURT 
The Scanner at Port Harcourt Airport was installed along with the 
Lagos scanner and has not recorded any arrests since installation. 
INL has tried to determine the cause, and reports from the field 
have ruled out inability to operate the machine. INL may request for 
the scanner to be moved to Lagos. The Port Harcourt airport 
re-opened late April 2008 has Air France operating from this airport 
and Lufthansa airlines. 
 
SANDERS