08SAOPAULO260
BRAZIL'S ELECTRICITY SUPPLY IN PRECARIOUS EQUILIBRIUM
Wed May 28 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Sao Paulo
VZCZCXRO5186
RR RUEHRG
DE RUEHSO #0260/01 1491424
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 281424Z MAY 08
FM AMCONSUL SAO PAULO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8243
INFO RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA 9370
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE 4109
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO 8724
RUEHBU/AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES 3150
RUEHAC/AMEMBASSY ASUNCION 3398
RUEHMN/AMEMBASSY MONTEVIDEO 2702
RUEHSG/AMEMBASSY SANTIAGO 2398
RUEHLP/AMEMBASSY LA PAZ 3809
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC 3089
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RHEHNSC/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 SAO PAULO 000260 
 
STATE PASS USTR FOR KDUCKWORTH 
STATE PASS EXIMBANK 
STATE PASS OPIC FOR DMORONSE, NRIVERA, CMERVENNE 
DEPT OF TREASURY FOR JHOEK 
DEPT OF ENERGY 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG ECON ENV PREL BR
SUBJECT: BRAZIL'S ELECTRICITY SUPPLY IN PRECARIOUS EQUILIBRIUM 
 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFED--PLEASE PROTECT ACCORDINGLY 
 
REF: A: Brasilia 0593; B: Brasilia 672; C: Sao Paulo 0031; D: La Paz 
0462; E: 06 Sao Paulo 1059 
 
¶1.  (U) SUMMARY:  Brazil's 2008 electricity supply will just cover 
demand, leaving the county in a state of precarious equilibrium. 
President Lula is lucky that it has been raining sufficiently over 
the last six years to feed Brazil's hydroelectric reservoirs (which 
account for approximately 80 percent of Brazil's electricity 
production), but he may not be as lucky next year.  In addition, the 
GOB's improvements to the electrical system since 2001 have not 
overcome the fundamental problems of lagging investment in 
electricity production and an energy matrix that is heavily skewed 
towards this one source of power.  Government investment to expand 
the electricity supply has been insignificant compared to growth in 
electricity demand, and prospects for private sector investment 
appear limited given the regulatory framework.  Political 
uncertainties in neighboring Bolivia and Paraguay also may limit 
Brazil's supply of electricity.  In addition, several large domestic 
hydroelectric generation projects are years from becoming 
operational.  In short, Brazil's static energy balance shows a very 
tight picture between supply and demand through 2012 when new gas 
and oil discoveries could potentially come on-line.  Brazil's 
options for strengthening the electricity balance in the near term 
are biomass generation, securing reliable sources of natural gas, 
conservation, and better energy efficiency.  In the meantime, Brazil 
should expect higher electricity tariffs until it can develop a 
consistent supply of natural gas and get several large generation 
projects off the ground.  END SUMMARY. 
 
Current Dynamics 
---------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) The Brazilian government appears to have averted an 
electricity crisis due in large part to pure luck.  Because 
approximately 80 percent of Brazil's electricity supply is from 
hydroelectric power, rainfall is the most important determinant in 
avoiding an electricity shortage.  (Note: See Ref A for more 
detailed look at breakdown of Brazil's generation capacity.  End 
Note.)  In December 2007, industry insiders were preparing for 
shortages because rainfall was 50 percent below normal; however, 
heavy rains in early 2008 have saved the GOB from the potential 
crisis in the short-term.  The medium-term threat of an electricity 
crisis, however, is far from over. 
 
¶3.  (U) According to statistics from Brazil's National Agency for 
Electric Energy (Aneel) from March, Brazil had an installed capacity 
for electric power generation of 100,700 megawatts (MW), an increase 
of 3,400 MW over 2007.  Although generating capacity vastly exceeds 
the demand of 64,000 MW (Ref B), it is theoretical because many 
gas-fired generators do not have adequate supplies of natural gas, 
and hydroelectric capacity is dependent on rainfall to fill 
reservoirs.  Shortages in Brazil's natural gas supply (Ref C) 
limited gas-fired plants to producing only 35 percent of their 
11,600 MW capacity in 2007.  On the demand side, electricity demand 
growth tracks well with economic growth.  According to the Energy 
Research Company (EPE), electricity consumption was up 5.7 percent 
in 2007 (GDP growth was 5.4 percent), the largest increase since the 
electricity rationing of 2001.  Consumption was up across the 
various consumers: commercial consumption was up 6.6 percent, 
residential consumption up six percent, and industrial consumption 
up five percent. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Government investment to expand the electricity supply has 
been lagging growth in electricity demand and prospects for private 
sector investment appear limited.  The largest state-owned 
electricity company Electrobras' investment was down by seven 
percent last year in real terms from 2006 despite the GOB's promises 
for increased investment in the sector.  Total public investment in 
the sector reached R$ 3.11 billion in 2007 (approximately USD 1.83 
billion).  David Waltenberg, an expert in legal and regulatory 
energy issues, told Econoff that distortions within the distribution 
system discourage investment and skew the electricity pricing 
structure.  The President of AES Brasil, Britaldo Soares, told 
 
SAO PAULO 00000260  002 OF 004 
 
 
Econoffs that new firms are unwilling to invest without more stable 
investment rules, availability of financing instruments, clearer 
environmental licensing procedures, and better pricing terms.  AES 
Electropaulo's CFO Alexandre Innecco underscored this point by 
noting that from his point of view, only existing foreign companies 
who have established themselves in Brazil are liable to increase 
investments in electricity generation in the short-term.  (Note: 
While acknowledging the significant problems in the sector, private 
industry group representatives Luiz Fernando Leone Vianna of the 
Independent Energy Producers Association (APINE), and Paulo Pederosa 
of the Brazilian Association of Commercial Agents of Electrical 
Energy, both feel the positives outweigh the negatives, and believe 
there are some good opportunities for investment in this sector in 
Brazil.  End Note.) 
 
Better System than 2001 but Not Enough 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The GOB's improvements to the electricity system since 
2001, primarily increasing installed electricity generation capacity 
and interconnecting regional electricity transmission lines, have 
not solved Brazil's fundamental electricity problems and have not 
been enough to assuage the fears of renewed crises.  For example on 
interconnectivity, AES's Innecco pointed out to Econoff that 
reservoirs have different generation capacities that limit the 
effectiveness of the interconnectivity of the grid.  He noted that 
in some cases reservoirs in one region cannot substitute for a lack 
of water in another.  Despite this imperfect substitution, Dilton da 
Conti Oliveira, President of the San Francisco River Hydroelectric 
Company (CHESF), told the Principal Officer in Recife that he was 
not worried about electricity shortages in the Northeast despite the 
lack of rain because CHESF was already "importing" electricity from 
other parts of the country thanks to the interconnected grid. 
(Comment:  This comment by the head of CHESF illustrates the lack of 
understanding of imperfect substitution.  Interconnectivity alone 
will not resolve electrical shortages.  End Comment.) 
 
Supply Uncertainties Abound 
--------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (U) According to GOB figures, the static energy balance 
(assuming five percent growth in demand and a guaranteed natural gas 
supply) shows a very tight picture between supply and demand through 
¶2012.  On the supply side, the uncertainties are enormous.  To 
increase the installed generation capacity by 4.5 percent per year, 
Brazil needs to make investments of R$ 18 billion per year 
(approximately USD 10.6 billion), according to the Federation of 
Industries of Sao Paulo (FIESP).  New electricity generation 
projects such as the auction of the Rio Madeira mega-project Santo 
Antonio in December 2007 are an important step for the GOB, but are 
a far cry from solving the country's energy problems, and would not 
alleviate the intrinsic uncertainty of hydroelectric generation to 
meet future demand.  Brazil would need to build one mega-complex per 
year from 2012 to 2016 to sustain five percent GDP growth. 
Furthermore, project delays are certain to occur due to 
environmental licensing concerns and financing.  Currently, the 
Brazilian law requires multiple environmental impact assessments and 
the Brazilian Environmental Agency (IBAMA) employees are held 
personally liable for mistakes.  The GOB initiated studies six years 
ago on the Rio Madeira projects and it will take a minimum of seven 
years to reach full operating capacity.  Even privatizing existing 
generation facilities has been difficult in recent months.  The Sao 
Paulo state government canceled its third attempt to auction 
Brazil's third largest generation companies Companhia Electrica de 
Sao Paulo (CESP) on March 26 because potential bidders balked when 
the GOB was unwilling to consider an extension of its generation 
contracts, which would have been the largest electricity 
privatization ever in Brazil. 
 
¶7.  (U) International pressures also could contribute to possible 
electricity shortages.  The ongoing discussions between Bolivia, 
Argentina, and Brazil (Ref D) to divide up Bolivian natural gas 
production will probably limit Brazil's supply of Bolivian natural 
gas to power its gas-fired plants.  Another of Brazil's power 
suppliers, its neighbor Paraguay, is also threatening Brazil's 
 
SAO PAULO 00000260  003 OF 004 
 
 
electricity supply in the coming months.  President-elect Fernando 
Lugo wants to raise the tariff on electricity Paraguay sells to 
Brazil from the Itaipu Dam by 700 percent.  Itaipu is the world's 
largest hydropower plant (14,000 MW), from which Brazil gets 20 
percent of its energy supply. 
 
Biomass, Conservation, and Efficiency to the Rescue 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶8.  (SBU) The timeframe for large projects and for further 
development of Brazil's natural gas resources provide opportunities 
for biomass generation to fill some of the gap.  Most experts point 
to biomass electricity generation via bagasse, the biomass remaining 
after sugarcane stalks are crushed to extract their juice for 
ethanol and sugar production.  The Director of the National 
Operating System (ONS) Hermes Chipp told Econoff that biomass 
projects and small hydro plants are fundamental for guaranteeing 
Brazil's energy needs through 2012.  Separately, ABRACEEL's Pederosa 
also cited these as the two areas with the most growth potential for 
the Brazilian energy matrix in the near term. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) According to the Brazilian Sugar Cane Industry Association 
(UNICA), Brazil's sugar/ethanol facilities have an installed 
capacity of 1,800 MW, of which 780 MW was sold to the grid during 
sugar cane harvest last year.  With increased use of biomass from 
sugarcane and the implementation of high pressure boilers, UNICA 
estimates biomass could produce up to 15 percent (11,500 MW) of 
Brazil's energy needs by 2015.  Cogeneration can be as inexpensive 
as the incremental cost of installing a more efficient boiler up to 
an investment-intensive technology overhaul to maximize electricity 
generation.  General Electric (GE) Regional Manager Guillermo Brooks 
told Econoff that GE and others are interested in developing better 
technology to improve efficiency, but that sugar/ethanol facilities 
would need economies of scale in order for the investments to be 
economically viable.  Cogeneration is a complimentary power source 
to hydroelectric generation (wet vs. dry seasons), the construction 
time for a cogeneration plant is about two years (five years for 
hydro), and provides a natural hedge for sugar/ethanol production. 
(Note: In order for bagasse plants to supply electricity to the 
grid, either the state or federal government will need to ensure 
access from these plants to the grid either through building the 
transmission lines or providing economic incentives for the 
companies to do so.  End Note.) 
 
¶10.  (U) Another short-term option is energy conservation and 
efficiency.  Because conservation was so successful in 2001, 
however, Innecco told Econoff that rationing would be less effective 
because many consumers have maintained their conservation efforts. 
Brazil would unlikely see a comparable drop if residential rationing 
measures were instituted again; instead, he said that the savings 
would have to come from industry, which would result in a larger 
economic impact.  Despite Innecco's skepticism, the National Program 
of Electricity Conservation (Procel) estimated that if consumers 
reduced consumption by five percent, Brazil would conserve about 
2,500 MW.  Brazil has an estimated USD 2.5 billion in untapped 
energy efficiency improvements every year despite having had an 
energy efficiency program since 1985.  A recent World Bank study 
showed that Brazil is a difficult place to promote energy efficiency 
because of the lack of available financing for energy efficiency 
projects and high interest rates.  The main source of funding 
instead comes from a federally mandated fee charged to utility 
companies for efficiency measures.  Although the fee encourages some 
efficiency projects, Brazil needs to create other incentives to fund 
energy-saving projects. 
 
¶11.  (SBU) Illegal connections to the electricity grid cost 
distributors approximately R$ 5 billion (USD three billion) per year 
and Brazil's average commercial losses exceed five percent of 
generated electricity, compared with the worldwide average of one 
percent.   AES started a program in June 2005 to formalize illicit 
electricity connections in Sao Paulo.  In 2007, AES Electropaulo 
estimated more than 300,000 illegal connections in its operating 
area.  These consumers abuse the system and have no incentives to 
reduce their consumption.  AES' pilot program working with USAID to 
formalize illegal connections showed a 30 percent consumption 
 
SAO PAULO 00000260  004 OF 004 
 
 
reduction (Ref E) by bringing participants into the formal system 
and educating them how to conserve and to be accountable for their 
electricity consumption. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶12.  (SBU) The tight supply and demand picture for electricity 
undoubtedly means higher electricity tariffs for residential and 
industrial consumers until bigger projects come online in 2012. 
Financial interlocutors point to higher energy costs as one of the 
major inflationary concerns in the Brazilian economy in 2008. 
Although generators will initially bear the brunt of some of the 
up-front costs of higher generation costs, eventually they will pass 
them on to consumers.  Brazil's electricity generation capacity in 
2008 depends on a number of external factors largely out of the 
control of the government such as weather, the results of Paraguay's 
attempts to renegotiate the Itaipu contract, and supplies of natural 
gas from Bolivia and Argentina.  Brazil needs to start advancing 
innovative ideas to bridge the gap and increase electricity supply. 
The GOB is beginning to recognize biomass as a viable alternative 
and the private sector is beginning to finance these ventures.  As 
the 10th largest energy consumer in the world, the World Bank 
expects Brazil to double its energy usage by 2030, but without the 
right government incentives for production, conservation, and/or 
efficiency, Brazil will have a hard time doing this.  Barring much 
larger investments in the energy sector, the Brazilian economy could 
face a significant constraint on its growth.  The next cable in this 
series will focus on regional influences on Brazil's energy sector. 
END COMMENT. 
 
¶13.  (U) This cable was coordinated and cleared by Embassy 
Brasilia. 
 
WHITE