06KHARTOUM413
A/S FRAZER MEETING WITH LIBYAN FM SHALGAM
Thu Feb 16 00:00:00 +0100 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO9820
PP RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #0413/01 0471544
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 161544Z FEB 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1497
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 000413 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/16/2016 
TAGS: PGOV PREL US AU LY SU
SUBJECT: A/S FRAZER MEETING WITH LIBYAN FM SHALGAM 
 
Classified By: P/E Chief E. Whitaker, Reason: Section 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary:  Libyan Foreign Minister Shalgam met with A/S 
Frazer in Khartoum on January 24; he cited regional 
instability as a key Libyan concern, and urged Libyan )U.S. 
coordination in addressing issues of mutual interest.  He 
mentioned President Qadafi's suggestion to send 3,000 AMIS 
troops to monitor the Chad-Sudan border; A/S Frazer pointed 
out the negative impact this would have on an already thinly 
stretched AMIS peacekeeping operation.  Shalgam said Libya 
did not plan to invite foreign observers to the Beja-GNU 
negotiations coming up in Libya.  Shalgam characterized Chad 
as complex politically, and as prone to a coup due to 
over-reliance on President Deby.  He referred to the Darfur 
conflict as social in nature; resolution requires a role for 
Darfurians in central government.  He added that Eritrea is 
involved in both Sudan's east and Darfur, yet remained 
inflexible.  End summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
Libya Seeks to Address Regional Instability with the U.S. 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
¶2. (C) On January 24, Libyan Foreign Minister Abd al-Rahman 
Shalgam and Head of Security Services Moussa Koussa met with 
A/S Jendayi Frazer and Charge Cameron Hume on the margins of 
the AU Summit in Khartoum.  Shalgam stated that Libya is 
concerned about tensions between Chad and Sudan, stating, 
"instability in the region will affect the whole of Sahara 
and the Sahel."  This will encourage terrorism, spur refugee 
flows, and exacerbate tribal conflicts.   Although the 
African Union (AU) has organs designed to address regional 
conflict, Libya wants to work with the U.S. "openly, 
transparently, and frankly."  Libya, he said, has "no 
conflicts with the U.S. in Africa, and it is important for us 
to "get African states to work together for unity."  A/S 
Frazer thanked him for Libya's interest in coordination, and 
expressed appreciation for shared visions of strengthening 
the AU.  She noted that areas of most immediate U.S. concern 
were Darfur, Sudan's east, and relations between Chad and 
Sudan; furthermore, President Bush, the Secretary, and the 
Deputy Secretary all were interested in these matters. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
FM:  Libya Wishes to Send AU Troops to Chad-Sudan Border 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
¶3. (C) FM Shalgam said that Libya is to host a Chad-Sudan 
reconciliation meeting in early February, focusing on 
intellectuals, to discuss restoration of the "social fabric" 
of Chad and Sudan in the "Arabic way."  For true 
reconciliation, however, movement toward a political solution 
is needed.  He added that the Leader (Qadafi) proposes to 
send 3,000 troops to the Chad-Sudan border, and that libya 
would need logistical help to do so. 
 
¶4. (C) A/S Frazer asked FM Shalgam where these troops would 
come from; FM Shalgam suggested that 3,000 of the 7,000 AMIS 
troops in Darfur could be transferred to the border.  They 
could address the needs for border security, which is 
important as the "Zaghawa problem exists in both countries." 
Their conflict may draw "fundamentalists," he asserted.  A/S 
Frazer responded that pulling 3,000 troops from AMIS would 
spread the remaining forces thinly and undermine their 
important mission.  As it stands, AMIS is already hampered by 
limits in air transport and communications. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
High Imported Fuel Costs Hit AU:  Possible Libyan Solution? 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
¶5. (C) Charge Hume said that the AU imports fuel for vehicles 
and aircraft from Dubai at great expense.  Could Libya 
provide it more economically, he asked.  FM Shalgam said yes, 
but noted the problem of fuel smuggling.  This could be 
discussed further, he said, with technical experts working on 
details.  Shalgam also mentioned an upcoming meeting with 
Sudanese National Intelligence and Security Service Director 
Ghosh and his interest in meeting with the CIA on "a wide 
range of topics."  This would include the Ethiopian-Eritrean 
border issue.  The Sahelian countries have problems, yet want 
stability; we can exchange information and assist in making 
their efforts at stability more successful. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
FM Shalgam Emphasizes Libyan-U.S. Cooperation 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (C) FM Shalgam made a point of underscoring Libyan-U.S. 
cooperation, noted that Libya had "brought 30 or 35 suspects" 
involved in counter-terrorism to the attention of the U.S. 
Furthermore, U.S. oil companies are returning to Libya, 
Libyan students are attending U.S. schools again, and there 
 
KHARTOUM 00000413  002 OF 002 
 
 
is even talk of military cooperation. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
Libya Does not Plan to Invite Observers to Beja-GNU Talks 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
¶7. (C) Charge Hume asked about a role for international 
observers for upcoming talks between the Beja Congress and 
the GNU.  FM Shalgam responded that the talks would be 
primarily "social" in nature, and that a readout of the 
sessions would be provided later. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
FM: Chad Political Situation Complex, May be Another Sudan 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
¶8. (C) A/S Frazer asked for Libya's views on Chadian 
President Deby.  FM Shalgam said that the possibility of a 
coup attempt remained, particularly as next year's election 
had raised the third term issue and the matter of a possible 
constitutional amendment.  Chad has more than 60 political 
parties, he said, largely organized along tribal lines.  This 
may result in a civil war, with Chad becoming "another 
Sudan."  This is made more challenging by the absence of 
strong institutions in Chad, which he characterized as "one 
man, one government; one man, one state."  No other candidate 
is emerging, he added, to "prepare to prevent chaos."  If the 
interested parties coordinated, they could be effective. 
 
¶9. (C) FM Shalgam said that Qadafi wished for Libya and the 
U.S. to expand coordination, as it would benefit both the 
bilateral relationship and Africa.  Stability, progress, and 
modernization, including advancement of women, are important 
objectives, he said. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
FM:  Darfur Conflict Social in Origin, Role in Gov't Needed 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
¶10. (C) A/S Frazer asked how Libya sees the recent Sudan 
Liberation Army (SLA) and Justice and Equality Movement (JEM) 
merger.  FM Shalgam said that the origins of the Darfur 
conflict are social.  "They are our friends; we know them 
all," he added, "and we are the only country having contact 
with all of them."  The Libya-Chad border is long, he said, 
and some of the rebels are in Libya now.  Darfurians need to 
participate in the central government, yet need to be patient 
in the political negotiating process. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
FM:  Eritrea Right, but Inflexible and Antagonistic 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶11. (C) In response to A/S Frazer's inquiry about Eritrea, FM 
Shalgam said that Eritrea was "legally right" regarding the 
border situation with Ethiopia, and that the latter should 
accept the verdict.  In discussions, he had found Ethiopian 
Prime Minster Meles to be more flexible on the matter than 
Eritrean President Isaias.  After all, he added, "blood is 
more important than oil."  He referred to the disputed 
territory along the border as "a few hundred meters of 
rocks," which was nothing compared to the two million square 
kilometers involved with Libya had its dispute with Chad over 
the Aozou "tribal area" years ago.  Eritrea has shown little 
flexibility, he noted, and was "against everybody," not just 
Ethiopia, but previously Yemen and Sudan. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
FM:  Eritrea has Role in Sudan's East and in Darfur 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶12. (C) A/S Frazer asked about Eritrea's role in Sudan's 
east.  FM Shalgam responded that Eritrea was important to the 
Beja, but also to rebel groups in Darfur, such as Abdel 
Wahid's SLA faction.  Libya will discuss Eritrea's role in 
discussions with NISS Director Ghosh in the near future, 
"brainstorming on a range of topics." 
 
¶13. (U) A/S Frazer approved this message. 
STEINFELD