07ROME2438
SECRETARY BODMAN, ITALIAN MINISTER SIGN AGREEMENTS
Fri Dec 07 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Rome
VZCZCXYZ0002
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHRO #2438/01 3411151
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 071151Z DEC 07
FM AMEMBASSY ROME
TO RHEBAAA/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9505
INFO RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS PRIORITY 1734UNCLAS ROME 002438 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT PASS TO DOE 
DEPARTMENT FOR L/T 
BRUSSELS FOR USEU - THOMAS SMITHAM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG PREL IT

SUBJECT: SECRETARY BODMAN, ITALIAN MINISTER SIGN AGREEMENTS 
ON ENERGY R&D AND GNEP 
 
REF: ROME 2317 
 
¶1.  (U) Summary.  In a November 13 meeting,  Secretary of 
Energy Bodman and Italian Minister of Economic Development 
Bersani discussed the future of nuclear energy in Italy, the 
Global Nuclear Energy Partnership (GNEP), and bilateral 
cooperation in energy research and development.  Bersani 
signed the GNEP Statement of Principles at the end of the 
meeting.  Bodman and Bersani also signed a bilateral 
agreement on cooperation in energy research and development 
(text in paragraph 5).  End summary. 
 


¶2.  (U) Minister Bersani opened the meeting by welcoming 
Secretary Bodman and declaring his readiness to sign the 
 
SIPDIS 
bilateral agreement on energy research and development 
cooperation and the GNEP Statement of Principles.  Bersani 
noted the agreement covers ""the most significant energy 
technologies,"" and will yield concrete results.  He said 
there is a need to find new solutions to the energy 
challenges facing the EU and United States, and that clean 
coal and nuclear power will likely play an important role in 
meeting future energy needs.  Referring to the 1987 
referendum that had the de facto effect of banning nuclear 
power generation in Italy, Bersani said that ""Italy is not 
out of nuclear power generation, it has only been suspended."" 
 GNEP can play an important role in changing Italian 
attitudes towards nuclear power, according to Bersani. 
 


¶3.  (U) Secretary Bodman noted the need to follow-up on the 
signing of the bilateral agreement with concrete actions.  He 
proposed the GOI send scientists to visit the National 
Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) and National Energy 
Technology Laboratory to see the research U.S. scientists are 
doing in the areas covered by the bilateral agreement. 
Bodman agreed that GNEP can play an important role in 
overcoming Italian skepticism regarding nuclear power.  The 
global demand for electricity will increase 50 percent over 
the next 20 years, and nuclear power will play an important 
role in meeting this growing demand.  Bodman underscored that 
one of GNEP's goals is to allow nuclear power generation 
while limiting the opportunities for proliferation of nuclear 
weapons.  Following Bodman's remarks, Bersani and Bodman 
signed the bilateral agreement and GNEP Statement of 
Principles in front of the press. 
 


¶4.  (U) In separate meetings with Italy's lead for the Major 
Economies Meeting on Energy Security and Climate Change (MEM) 
process, Dr. Valeria Termini, and with officials of the 
Italian electricity parastatal ENEL, DOE PDAS for Energy 
Efficiency and Renewable Energy John Mizroch welcomed visits 
by Italian researchers (from the GOI and/or a pool of firms) 
to DOE facilities in his program area, including NREL.  The 
Italian side, which included staff from the Prime Minister's 
office in both meetings, responded positively to Mizroch's 
suggestion. 
 
¶5.  (U) Begin text of bilateral agreement on cooperation in 
energy research and development. 
 
AGREEMENT BETWEEN 
 
THE DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY 
OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
 
AND 
 
THE MINISTRY OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 
OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLIC 
 
IN THE FIELD OF ENERGY RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 
 
Whereas the Government of the United States of America and 
the Government of the Italian Republic are parties to the 
Agreement for Scientific and Technological Cooperation of 
April 1, 1988, as amended and extended (the ""S&T Agreement""); 
 
Whereas the United States Department of Energy and the 
Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Handicraft of the Italian 
Republic concluded a Memorandum of Understanding in the field 
of Energy Research and Development on December 5, 1985, 
including the May 2, 1990, Implementing Agreements on energy 
policy consultations and enhanced joint collaboration and 
exchange of information (hereinafter ""the 1985 Agreement""), 
which expired on December 5, 1991; 
 
Whereas the United States Department of Energy and the 
Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Handicraft of the Italian 
 
Republic concluded a Memorandum of Understanding in the field 
of Energy Research and Development on May 26, 1995, on energy 
policy consultations and enhanced joint collaboration and 
exchange of information (hereinafter ""the 1995 Agreement""), 
which expired on May 26, 2005; 
 
Whereas the United States Department of Energy (hereinafter 
""DOE"") and the Ministry of Economic Development of the 
Italian Republic (hereinafter ""MSE"") (collectively 
hereinafter ""the Parties"") believe that the cooperative 
activities in the field of research and development, 
information exchange and consultation on energy policy 
undertaken pursuant to the 1985 Agreement, the 1990 
Implementing Agreements, and the 1995 Agreement were mutually 
beneficial; 
 
Whereas the Parties have a common interest in continuing 
activities undertaken pursuant to the 1985 Agreement, the 
1990 Implementing Agreements, and the 1995 Agreement, and in 
undertaking new cooperative activities in the field of energy 
research and development; 
 
Now therefore the Parties agree as follows: 
 
ARTICLE I 
 
¶1.  The objective of cooperation under this Agreement is to: 
 
- continue, for the mutual benefit of the Parties, the 
balanced exchange of energy technology information related to 
various energy fields, such as clean coal energy, hydrogen, 
nuclear energy, bio-energy, and other basic energy sciences; 
 
- conduct related joint research and development and joint 
planning activities which will be further defined in project 
annexes to this Agreement; and 
 
- continue periodic bilateral energy policy consultations 
through annual meetings of subcommittees in any of the 
planned activities as defined in the annexes to this 
Agreement. 
 
¶2.  This Agreement is subject to and governed by the S&T 
Agreement. 
 
 
ARTICLE II 
 
Cooperation under this Agreement may include, but is not 
limited to the following: 
 
¶1.  Exchange of scientific and technical information, and 
results and methods of research and development on a periodic 
basis in a manner agreed to by the Coordinators designated by 
Article III; 
 
¶2.  Organization of seminars and other meetings on agreed 
energy topics in the areas enumerated in Article I in a 
manner agreed to by the Coordinators; 
 
¶3.  Survey visits by specialists of a Party to the energy 
research facilities or projects of the other Party at the 
invitation of the host institution; 
 
¶4.  Exchange of materials, instruments, components, and 
equipment for testing; 
 
¶5.  Exchange of personnel for participation in agreed 
research, development, demonstration, analysis, design, 
experimental, and training activities; 
 
¶6.  Joint projects in the form of experiments, tests, design 
analysis, or other technical collaborative activity; 
 
¶7.  Joint funding of specific research and development 
projects which may be undertaken in connection with other 
qualified organizations or persons in a manner agreed to by 
the Coordinators; 
 
¶8.  Joint funding of specific demonstration activities and 
dissemination of the results of such projects; and 
 
¶9.  Other such forms of cooperation as may be proposed and 
jointly agreed in writing by the Parties. 
 
 
ARTICLE III 
 
 
¶1.  A Coordinator shall be designated by each Party to 
supervise the implementation of this Agreement. As mutually 
agreed, the Coordinators shall meet to evaluate all aspects 
of the cooperation under this Agreement. These meetings shall 
be held alternately in the United States and Italy. 
 
¶2.  Under the direction of the Parties, the Coordinators 
shall approve and monitor all cooperative activities to be 
carried out under this Agreement. 
 
¶3.  The Coordinators shall review and evaluate any newly 
proposed activities and the status of cooperation under this 
Agreement. They also shall give appropriate guidance and 
directions to working groups, as defined in Article III, 
paragraph 4, and to the project managers of activities 
developed under this Agreement. If so requested, the 
Coordinators may give advice to the Parties regarding the 
progress and future of the cooperative activities established 
under this Agreement. 
 
¶4.  The Coordinators shall, as necessary and appropriate, 
establish informal working groups in any of the areas of 
cooperation under this Agreement to facilitate implementation 
of projects which may be undertaken in those areas. 
 
¶5.  At least annually, the Coordinators shall advise the 
Coordinator for the S&T Agreement of the status of 
cooperative activities undertaken under this Agreement. 
 
 
ARTICLE IV 
 
¶1.  Proposals for cooperation under this Agreement may be 
presented by either Party or its designated representatives 
to the Coordinators for approval. 
 
¶2.  Each cooperative activity identified in Article II, 
paragraphs 4-8 which is approved by the Coordinators shall be 
described in writing in a Project Annex to this Agreement. 
Such Annexes shall contain detailed procedures for the 
implementation of the cooperative activity, including but not 
limited to the contributions by each Party (costs and 
cost-sharing), schedules, and responsibilities of each Party. 
 
¶3.  Each Project Annex concluded by the Parties shall be 
subject to and refer to this Agreement. 
 
 
ARTICLE V 
 
The following provisions shall apply concerning exchanges of 
equipment pursuant to this Agreement: 
 
¶1.  By mutual agreement, a Party may provide equipment to be 
utilized in a joint activity. In such case, the sending Party 
shall supply to the host Party, as soon as possible, a 
detailed list of the equipment to be provided, together with 
the relevant specifications and appropriate technical 
documentation related to the use, maintenance, and repair of 
the equipment. 
 
¶2.  Title to the equipment and necessary spare parts supplied 
by the sending Party to the host Party for use in joint 
activities shall remain in the sending Party, and the 
property shall be returned to the sending Party upon 
completion of the joint activity, unless otherwise agreed. 
 
¶3.  Equipment provided pursuant to this Agreement shall be 
brought into operation at the host establishment only by 
agreement of the Parties. 
 
¶4.  The host establishment shall provide the necessary 
premises for the equipment, shall provide for utilities such 
as electric power, water, and gas, and normally shall provide 
materials to be tested, in accordance with the agreed 
technical requirements. 
 
¶5.  The responsibility and expenses for the transport of 
equipment and materials from the United States of America by 
plane or ship to an authorized port of entry in Italy 
convenient to the ultimate destination, and also 
responsibility for its safekeeping, and insurance en route, 
shall rest with DOE. 
 
¶6.  The responsibility and expenses for the transport of 
equipment and materials from Italy by plane or ship to an 
 
authorized port of entry in the United States of America 
convenient to the ultimate destination, and also 
responsibility for its safekeeping and insurance en route, 
shall rest with Italian organizations designated by MSE for 
each Annex. 
 
¶7.  Equipment provided pursuant to this Agreement for use in 
joint activities shall be considered to be scientific, not 
having a commercial character. 
 
 
ARTICLE VI 
 
The following provisions shall apply concerning assignments 
or exchanges of personnel under this Agreement: 
 
¶1.  Whenever an assignment or exchange of personnel is 
contemplated, each Party shall ensure the selection of 
qualified personnel with skills and competence necessary to 
conduct the activities planned under this Agreement. Each 
such assignment or exchange of personnel shall be mutually 
agreed in advance by an exchange of letters between the 
Parties, referencing this Agreement and its pertinent 
intellectual property provisions. 
 
¶2.  The sending Party shall be responsible for the salaries, 
insurance, and allowances to be paid to its staff or its 
contractors. 
 
¶3.  The sending Party shall pay for the travel and living 
expenses of its staff or its contractors when staying at the 
establishment of the host Party, unless otherwise agreed. 
 
¶4.  The host Party shall help locate adequate accommodations 
for the sending Party's staff or its contractors (and their 
families) on a mutually agreeable, reciprocal basis. 
 
¶5.  The host Party shall provide all necessary assistance to 
the staff of the sending Party or its contractors as regards 
administrative formalities, such as making travel 
arrangements. 
 
¶6.  The sending Party shall inform its staff and contractors 
of the need to conform to the general rules of work and 
safety regulations in force at the host establishment. 
 
 
ARTICLE VII 
 
¶1.  Unless otherwise agreed, all costs resulting from 
cooperation pursuant to this Agreement shall be the 
responsibility of the Party that incurs them. 
 
¶2.  Each Party shall conduct the activities provided for in 
this Agreement, and its Annexes, subject to its applicable 
laws and regulations; activities under and pursuant to this 
Agreement and Annexes shall be subject to the availability of 
appropriated funds. 
 
 
ARTICLE VIII 
 
All information, material or equipment transferred under this 
Agreement and any related Annex shall be appropriate and 
accurate to the best knowledge and belief of the transmitting 
Party, but the transmitting Party does not warrant the 
suitability of the information, material or equipment 
transmitted for any particular use or application by the 
receiving Party or any third party.  Information, material or 
equipment developed jointly by the Parties shall be 
appropriate and accurate to the best knowledge and belief of 
the developing Parties.  No Party warrants the accuracy of 
the jointly developed information or the suitability of the 
material or equipment for any particular use or application 
by either Party or by any third party. 
 
 
ARTICLE IX 
 
¶1.  This Agreement shall enter into force upon signature and 
shall remain in force for five (5) years. The Agreement shall 
be renewed automatically for one additional 5-year period 
unless either Party informs the other in writing at least six 
(6) months prior to the date of expiration. 
 
¶2.  This Agreement may be amended or extended by written 
agreement of the Parties. 
 
 
¶3.  This Agreement may be terminated upon one (1) year's 
advance notification in writing by either Party. 
 
¶4.  All joint efforts and experiments not completed at the 
expiration or termination of this Agreement may be continued 
until their completion under the terms of this Agreement. 
 
 
DONE at Rome, this thirteenth day of November, 2007, in 
duplicate in the English language, which shall be the 
authentic text.  A translation of the Agreement into the 
Italian language shall be prepared by MSE, which shall be 
considered equally authentic upon an exchange of letters 
between the Parties confirming its conformity with the 
English language text. 
 
FOR THE DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY   FOR THE MINISTRY OF ECONOMIC 
OF THE UNITED STATES OF        DEVELOPMENT OF THE ITALIAN 
AMERICA:                       REPUBLIC: 
 
End text of agreement. 
SPOGLI"