06HELSINKI1032
CUBA TRANSITION COORDINATOR MCCARRY'S DISCUSSIONS
Wed Oct 11 00:00:00 +0200 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Helsinki
VZCZCXRO5752
RR RUEHAG
DE RUEHHE #1032 2841343
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 111343Z OCT 06
FM AMEMBASSY HELSINKI
TO RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVE
RUEHUB/USINT HAVANA 0004C O N F I D E N T I A L HELSINKI 001032 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/11/2016 
TAGS: PREL PGOV ETRD CU FI EUN
SUBJECT: CUBA TRANSITION COORDINATOR MCCARRY'S DISCUSSIONS 
WITH FINNISH EU PRESIDENCY OFFICIALS 
 
 
Classified By: POLCHIEF GREGORY THOME FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: Cuba Transition Coordinator Caleb 
McCarry delivered well-received messages in Helsinki 
Sept. 29, emphasizing that change is imminent and that 
Europe and the United States have a historic opportunity 
to help foster a transition to democracy on the island. 
Finnish EU Presidency officials agreed that the world's 
democracies must send a message of hope to the Cuban 
people and that the impetus for change must come largely 
from the island.  The GOF, for its part, supports a 
joint US-EU statement -- or at least parallel US and EU 
statements -- urging transition in Cuba, but cautions 
that finding consensus among member states will take 
time.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) WHA Cuba Transition Coordinator Caleb McCarry 
visited Helsinki Sept. 29 to discuss the work of the 
Commission for Assistance to a Free Cuba (CAFC) and the 
Department's strategy for fostering democratic 
transition on the island with senior Finnish EU 
Presidency officials.  He also held a very useful round 
of PD events, including on-the-record interviews with 
journalists and discussions at Helsinki University. 
 
¶3. (SBU) In meetings with Finnish MFA Director-General 
for the Americas and Asia Elina Kalkku, Office Director 
for Human Rights Johanna Suurpaa and Office Director for 
Latin America Anne Lammila, McCarry emphasized that 
change has already begun in Cuba, and that now, for the 
first time in 47 years, the Cuban people have an 
opportunity to choose a path toward democracy and 
economic liberalization.  The CAFC's approach is careful 
and well-planned, he said; the US wants to respectfully 
offer what encouragement it can now, while also 
preparing for the significant humanitarian and 
reconstruction needs that will emerge once a transition 
truly begins.  McCarry urged the EU to recognize that it 
is incumbent on Europe, the US and all the world's 
democracies to send messages of hope and encouragement 
to those living on the island -- including even figures 
within the regime who may seek change.  He also briefed 
the Finns on the encouraging talks the US has had with 
Spain, which to a greater extent has been leading EU 
efforts on Cuba, and asked for Finnish support in 
crafting either a joint US-EU statement on Cuba, or 
parallel statements. 
 
¶4. (C) Finnish interlocutors welcomed the US approach on 
Cuba, agreeing with our message that the only hope for 
an improved human right situation on the island -- as 
well as economic development -- is through greater 
democracy.  Kalkku described the current situation in 
Cuba, with Castro's illness, as "an opening."  The EU 
must send a message of encouragement and hope to Cuban 
civil society, to individuals within the regime who seek 
change, and to the Cuban people, she said.  All 25 EU 
member states agree on this approach, Kalkku continued; 
however, there is currently less agreement regarding the 
best way to proceed as well as the utility at this time 
of a joint US-EU statement.  Several MS (and our GOF 
interlocutors included Finland among this group) agree 
that now is the time for a bold, joint effort to press 
for democratic change.  Others, however, believe that 
economic change may be easier to implement first and do 
not favor a public EU position.  (In particular, Latin 
America Director Lammila encouraged the US to keep 
pressing for a US-EU statement -- and not a US-Spain 
statement.)  Although forging consensus among all 25 MS 
will now be a speedy process and did not offer 
timelines, the Finns emphasized their national position 
of support and promised to do what they could to promote 
agreement "at least" on issuing parallel US-EU 
statements. 
 
¶5. (C) Comment: McCarry's messages on promoting 
transition in Cuba were well received by the Finns.  As 
a small-country EU Presidency with limited Latin America 
resources (there is no Finnish Embassy in Havana), their 
task in helping the EU to step up with a more focused 
Cuba will be a tough one.  Still, we can count on 
Finland to do what it can, and we will continue to 
support the Finnish Presidency's efforts.  End Comment. 
HYATT