02ADANA398
SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY, NOVEMBER 21, 2002
Thu Nov 21 00:00:00 +0100 2002
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ADANA 0398 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU IZ ADANA
SUBJECT:  SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY, NOVEMBER 21, 2002 
 
 
¶1.  This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary for 
November 21, 2002.  Please note that Turkish press 
reports often contain errors or exaggerations; 
AmConsulate Adana does not vouch for the accuracy of 
the reports summarized here. 
 
 
POLITICS, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
-------------------------------- 
 
 
¶2.  DIYARBAKIR FAMILY CHARGES POLICE WITH TORTURE 
(Evrensel)  The family of a twelve-year-old Diyarbakir 
child claimed police had tortured their son while in 
custody.  The child had been arrested during a police 
raid on his home in lieu of his 17-year-old brother. 
The family applied to the Human Rights Association 
(HRA) (for assistance), alleging police had 
blasphemed, kicked and slapped their son, and ordered 
him to wait on one foot during his half hour 
detention.  Father said he would file suit against 
(responsible) police officers. 
 
 
¶3.  PRO-KURDISH EDUCATION DEMONSTRATORS CONVICTED 
(Evrensel)  Diyarbakir State Security Court convicted 
seven Nusaybin (Mardin) people arrested for assisting 
and abetting the PKK (KADEK) by "demanding Kurdish- 
language education by marching with torches" in mid- 
February in Nusaybin.  The convicts, who were among 
ten people arrested during the march, were sentenced 
to three years and nine months' imprisonment.  Defense 
attorney Muharrem Erbey requested his clients' 
acquittal, saying (other) Kurdish education 
petitioners had been acquitted under the recent EU 
Harmonization Laws.  Erbey said he would appeal to the 
Supreme Court, which he believes will overturn the 
verdict. 
 
 
¶4.  POLICE OFFICER CONVICTED FOR REVEALING STATE 
SECRET 
 
SIPDIS 
(Evrensel)  Diyarbakir State Security Court convicted 
Cizre (Sirnak) Security Directorate Anti-terror Squad 
officer M. Sevket Akyildiz for revealing a state 
secret by sending the names of DHKP-C and PKK members 
 
SIPDIS 
being sought to Milliyet and Star newspapers. 
Akyildiz was sentenced to six months' imprisonment 
under Article 229 of the Turkish Criminal Code.  Two 
other defendants who were being tried while at liberty 
were acquitted. 
 
 
¶5.  HRA REPORTS CONTINUED VIOLATIONS 
(Evrensel)  A report issued by the Ankara chapter of 
the Human Rights Association (HRA) said there has not 
been a decrease in rights violations in prisons, 
including those in the Southeastern provinces of 
Adana, Malatya, Iskenderun (Hatay), Batman and Bingol. 
The report claimed that, during prison visits, 
attorneys had undergone humiliating searches, with 
their files seized.  According to the report, inmates' 
health deteriorated due to arbitrary practices and 
they had been denied medical services and treatment. 
A relative of an inmate complained that prison guards 
/ security forces had kept relatives waiting for 
hours, not allowing underwear, socks and sheets into 
prisons where these products were sold for relatively 
much higher prices. 
 
 
¶6.  NINETEEN DEFENDANTS RELEASED IN MERSIN NEWROZ CASE 
(Bolge)  The trial of 25 Mersin people arrested for 
"illegal demonstration, pro-PKK slogans and assault on 
security forces with sticks and stones" during the 
unauthorized March 21 Newroz celebrations in Mersin 
continued at the Adana State Security Court.  The 
defendants were among 148 suspects arrested during the 
celebrations who are being tried in groups of 25 
people at a time.  Only 19 of the defendants being 
tried in custody appeared for the hearing during which 
they denied ties to the PKK and requested their 
release.  Their attorneys also requested the 
defendants' release.  After a break, the court 
released the 19 defendants who were in custody and 
adjourned the trail until a later date due to missing 
documents in the file.  Prison terms of one to three 
years are demanded for the defendants. 
HOLTZ