09ADANA74
SE TURKEY SECURITY INCIDENTS: NOVEMBER 16-22, 2009
Tue Nov 24 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
VZCZCXRO6957
RR RUEHDA
DE RUEHDA #0074/01 3281133
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 241133Z NOV 09
FM AMCONSUL ADANA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4807
INFO RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 1349
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 1114
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 1416UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ADANA 000074 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR DS/IP/EUR, DS/IP/ITA, INR AND EUR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PTER PINR CASC TU
SUBJECT: SE TURKEY SECURITY INCIDENTS: NOVEMBER 16-22, 2009 
 
¶1. The following security incidents for the period of November 
16-22 were compiled by the security assistant at Consulate Adana 
from RSO sources, to include Turkish security contacts, 
government officials and media. The RSO uses the information to 
determine the security situation and trends of violence and 
crime throughout Turkey. The RSO shares the information with the 
country team and visas viper coordinator. 
 
¶2. Military operations against the Kurdistan Workers' Party 
(PKK) as reported by the Turkish General Staff: 
 
¶A. Weapons, ammunition, and equipment seized: 
 
Sirnak - 11.17.09: 2 zodiac boats, various logistical equipment, 
and food. 
 
¶B. PKK members captured or surrendered: 
 
11.16.09 though 11.22.09:  Security forces captured five PKK 
members. 
 
Hatay - 11.20.09: Security forces caught 1 PKK member. 
 
Sanliurfa - 11.17.09: Security forces caught 1 PKK member. 
 
Adana - 11.17.09: Security forces caught 1 PKK member. 
 
¶C. PKK attacks: 
 
Elazig - 11.19.09: Security forces found and destroyed an IED 
made of 100 grams of C-4 and mortar ammunition. 
 
Diyarbakir - 11.16.09: IED killed 4 animals. 
 
¶3. Media reports related to PKK and pro-Kurdish organizations: 
 
¶A. Anti-PKK operations: 
 
11.16.09 through 11.22.09: Turkish Armed Forces (TAF) anti-PKK 
operations in SE Turkey continue.  Many armored vehicles, 
military personnel and ammunition were deployed to Sirnak, 
Hakkari, Van, Sanliurfa, Hatay, Mus and Siirt. 
 
¶B. Arrests: 
 
Diyarbakir - 11.22.09: 1 person arrested on the charge of 
"making propaganda for the PKK." 
 
Sanliurfa - 11.22.09: Security forces detained 1 person on the 
suspicion of terrorism. 
 
Bingol - 11.21.09: 1 person arrested on the charge of "making 
propaganda for the PKK." 
 
Siirt - 11.21.09: Security forces detained 3 people on the 
charge of "making propaganda for the PKK." 
 
Sirnak - 11.21.09: Security forces detained 1 person on the 
suspicion of terrorism. 
 
Hakkari - 11.21.09: A former member of the DTP's youth branch 
was arrested on the charge of "making propaganda for the PKK." 
 
Sanliurfa - 11.21.09:  DTP district chairman sentenced to 3 
years in prison on the charge of "making propaganda for the PKK." 
 
Sirnak - 11.20.09: 1 person under investigation on the suspicion 
of terrorism. 
 
Siirt - 11.19.09: A DTP Administrator was sentenced to 13 years 
in prison on the charges of "violating restrictions on marches 
and demonstrations," and "carrying out illegal action on behalf 
of the PKK." 
 
Diyarbakir - 11.19.09: 1 minor (17) released after almost 7 
months detention on the charge of "making propaganda for the 
PKK." 
 
Sanliurfa - 11.19.09: 66 DTP members, who were fined for "making 
propaganda for the PKK," are preparing to take their case to the 
European Human Rights Court (AIHM). 
 
Sirnak - 11.17.09: Security forces detained 3 people on the 
suspicion of terrorism. 
 
Adana - 11.17.09: 2 members of the pro-Kurdish YDG-M (Patriotic 
Democratic Youth Movement) were arrested on the charge of 
"carrying out illegal action on behalf of the PKK." 
 
Hakkari - 11.17.09: DTP district chairman and his deputy were 
 
ADANA 00000074  002 OF 003 
 
 
fined 600 Turkish lira on the charge of "making propaganda for 
the PKK." 
 
Tunceli - 11.16.09: Security forces detained 1 DTP official on 
the suspicion of terrorism. 
 
¶C. Other media stories about PKK: 
 
11.22.09: Transportation Minister rejected DTP MP Siirt's 
proposal for flight announcements in Kurdish. 
 
Sirnak - 11.22.09: Thousands of people joined in a meeting held 
by the pro-Kurdish Peace and Democracy organization. The 
participants chanted pro-PKK slogans. 
 
11.21.09: Turkish Interior Minister Atalay announced the 
government plans to intensify its efforts to repatriate more 
than half of those in the Makhmour refugee camp, located in 
northern Iraq and home to a large number of PKK members, as part 
of the government's democratic initiative aimed at resolving the 
Kurdish issue.  Atalay said almost 11,000 people are expected to 
surrender and return to Turkey. 
 
Sirrnak - 11.21.09: Members of pro-Kurdish groups, including 
SAR-DER, MEYA-DER, KURDI-DER and DTP, protested the construction 
of a hydroelectric plant. 
 
Tunceli - 11.21.09: TAF declared military security zones in 
several districts due to impending anti-PKK military operations; 
the public is banned from entering or exiting the area between 
the dates of November 24, 2009 and February 24, 2010. 
 
Sanliurfa - 11.21.09: PKK supporters commemorated the 
organization's founding on November 27, 1978. Police intervened 
with tear gas and pressurized water while the demonstrators 
responded with Molotov cocktails. No casualties reported. 
 
Antakya - 11.21.09: Members of pro-Kurdish Democracy Platform in 
Antakya issued a press statement condemning the CHP and chanted 
anti-CHP slogans. 
 
11.19.09: PKK's Chief Murat Karayilan threatened, "Unless TGNA 
solves the Kurdish issue, a war will break out." 
 
11.19.09: According to pro-PKK website ANF, Sirnak's 23rd 
Division launched an investigation against 18 officers who 
objected taking part in continuing anti-PKK military operations. 
 
11.18.09 through 11.21.09: In Van, Mersin, Adana and Izmir 
provinces, security forces detained several people and destroyed 
18,000 books written about imprisoned PKK leader Abdullah 
Ocalan.. 
 
Imrali Island - 11.17.09: Ocalan is no longer the sole inmate of 
the island prison as five convicts were transferred to the 
prison complex. 
 
11.16.09: 7 PKK members, who recently surrendered to security 
forces, were freed. 
 
11.21.09: Speaking on the Heron plane issue, Turkish Minister 
Gonul said Turkey has given Israel a 50-day deadline to fulfill 
a number of terms of the agreement. Turkey uses the Herons for 
surveillance activities against the PKK. 
 
¶4. Media reports on significant crime or security incidents: 
 
Adana - 11.22.09 (1000-1600 local time): Members of the People's 
Liberation Front held an anti-U.S. demonstration near Incirlik 
Air Base, protesting the U.S. presence in the region.  Nearly 
350 people joined in the protest, chanting slogans such as: "USA 
get out of the Middle East," "USA get out of Turkey, this is our 
country," "Damn American Imperialism," "Shut down Incirlik Air 
Base," "Long live our struggle; damn the USA," "We don't want 
142,000 US soldiers in our country," "We will not be the killer 
of Afghanistan's people," and, "We will not be the soldiers of 
NATO, U.S. and AK Party."   Approximately 350 security forces 
took exceptional security precautions both at the U.S. Consulate 
and Incirlik Air Base, including helicopter a patrol.  No 
arrests reported.  The protest received extensive coverage from 
local and national news outlets. 
 
Adiyaman - 11.22.09: Unidentified assailants attacked a civilian 
vehicle with long-range rifles, killing one and wounding 
another. 
 
Sirnak - 11.22.09: Iranian troops killed a fuel smuggler in a 
border village. 
 
Sirnak - 11.22.09: Unidentified thieves broke into the Mor Yakup 
 
ADANA 00000074  003 OF 003 
 
 
Syriac Church and stole a 200-year-old Bible. 
 
Diyarbakir - 11.22.09: Violent crime is on the rise in the 
Ergani district, where 8 people have been killed in the past 3 
months. 
 
Mersin - 11.22.09: Police found 2 corpses in a well. 
 
Sirmak - 11.20.09: Security forces detained 25 people in 
anti-organized-crime operation; 4 were later arrested. 
 
Adana - 11.22.09: Security forces caught a person who robbed a 
Turkish Postal Service branch. 
 
Adiyaman - 11.20.09: 1 person was shot dead. The motive is 
unknown. 
 
Hakkari - 11.20.09: Unidentified people set an Iranian vehicle 
on fire. 
 
Mardin - 11.21.09: Security forces seized 5 unregistered pistols 
and detained 1 person. 
 
Hakkari - 11.19.09: Unidentified people bombed the vehicle of 
Semdinli's AK Party Chairman; no causalities reported. 
 
Hakkari - 11.19.09: Passersby found a hand grenade on the roof 
of a home in the Semdinli District. The hand grenade was 
destroyed on site. 
 
Adana - 11.17.09: Adana TNP's Security Branch Chief visited the 
DTP Provincial Building and warned against possible attacks. The 
Chief also recommended the installation of surveillance 
equipment. 
 
Osmaniye - 11.17.09: Security forces confiscated 5 unregistered 
pistols and detained 2 people. 
 
Sirnak - 11.17.09: A person was shot dead. The motive is 
unknown. 
 
¶5. Illegal immigrant arrests: 
 
11.11.09 through 11.19.09: Security forces captured and deported 
520 illegal immigrants from: Tokat, Hakkari, Agri, Yalova, 
Hatay, Kirklareli, Diyarbakir, Edirne, Canakkale, Van, Mugla, 
Sirnak, Erzurum, the Aegean Coast and the borders of Greece, 
Syria, Iraq and Iran. 
 
¶6. Counter-narcotic operations: 
 
Mersin - 11.21.09: Security forces seized 5 kilograms of hashish 
and detained 2 people. 
 
Bitlis - 11.20.09: Security forces seized 123 kilograms hashish 
and arrested 1 person. 
 
Gaziantep - 11.19.09: Security forces seized 16 kilograms of 
hashish and almost 10,000 pills; 12 people were detained in the 
operation. 
 
Diyarbakir - 11.17.09: Security forces seized 71 kilograms of 
heroin and 381 kilograms of hashish; 23 people were detained and 
19 of them later were arrested. 
 
Adana - 11.17.09: Security forces seized 6 kilograms of hashish 
and detained 5 people. 
 
Sirnak - 11.16.09: Security forces seized 40 kilograms of 
hashish and detained 2 people. 
DARNELL