09ADANA54
TURKEY: SE TURKEY SECURITY INCIDENTS: SEPTEMBER 11 -
Fri Sep 18 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
VZCZCXRO9145
RR RUEHDA
DE RUEHDA #0054/01 2611405
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 181405Z SEP 09
FM AMCONSUL ADANA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4762
INFO RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 1302
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 1076
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 1369UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ADANA 000054 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PTER PINR CASC
SUBJECT: TURKEY: SE TURKEY SECURITY INCIDENTS: SEPTEMBER 11 - 
SEPTEMBER 18, 2009 
 
¶1. The following security incidents for the period September 
11-18, 2009, were compiled by the security assistant at 
Consulate Adana from RSO sources, to include Turkish security 
contacts, government officials and media reports.  Similar 
reports have previously been shared informally by e-mail.  Post 
is now sending this information in cable format to ensure wider 
and more regular distribution.  The RSO uses the information to 
determine the security situation and trends of violence and 
crime throughout turkey.  The RSO also tracks the information by 
location and shares the information with the Country Team and 
Visas Viper coordinator. 
 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
--------------- 
 
Military Operations against the Kurdistan Workers' Party 
 
(PKK) as reported by the Turkish General Staff website 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
------------ 
 
 
 
¶2. Weapons, Ammunition, and Equipment Seized: 
 
Sirnak - 09.13.09: 1 anti-personnel landmine was found and 
destroyed. 
 
Tunceli - 09.11.09: Security forces found and destroyed a 
hand-made landmine made of 1 kilogram of ammonium nitrate. 
 
 
 
¶3. PKK Members Captured or Surrendered: 
 
Diyarbakir - 09.16.09: 1 PKK member surrendered. 
 
Bingol - 09.13.09: 1 PKK member surrendered. 
 
Sirnak - 09.13.09: 1 PKK member surrendered. 
 
Hakkari - 09.12.09: Security forces captured a PKK member. 
 
Hakkari, 09.09-11.09: 7 PKK members were killed. 
 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
Media Reports on Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) 
 
and pro-Kurdish Organizations 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
 
 
¶4. PKK Attacks: 
 
Hakkari - 09.15.09: 1 heavy construction machine belonging to a 
road work company was set on fire. 
 
 
 
Sirnak - 09.13.09: 1 security personnel was wounded. 
 
 
 
Diyarbakir - 09.11.09: 1 civilian was killed and 1 wounded in a 
landmine blast. 
 
 
 
Tunceli - 09.11.09: 2 trucks and 3 heavy construction machines 
were set on fire. 
 
 
 
¶5. Anti-PKK Operations: 
 
09.17.09: Turkish media reported 2 Turkish F-16 war jets have 
flown in the direction of northern Iraq direction. 
 
 
 
09.05.09-09.11.09: Security forces seized 1.5 kilograms of 
potassium/ammonium nitrate in anti-PKK operations.  PKKers 
carried out 2 explosive material incidents in this period. 
 
ADANA 00000054  002 OF 004 
 
 
 
 
 
09.11.09-09.17.09: Security forces captured a total of 4 PKKers. 
 One PKK member was captured alive and three surrendered. 
 
 
 
09.11.09-09.17.09: Turkish Armed Forces (TAF) anti-PKK 
operations continue in Sirnak, Hakkari, Bingol, Van, Batman, 
Diyarbakir, Agri, and Mus. 
 
 
 
¶6. Arrests: 
 
¶A. PKK: 
 
Adana, 09.11.09: Security forces detained 7 people who were 
extorting money from people. Some organizational documents and 
publications were seized in the operation. 
 
 
 
¶B. Democratic Society Party (DTP): 
 
Sirnak, 09.13.09: Security forces detained a member of the YDG-M 
(Patriotic Democratic Youth-Movement. 
 
 
 
Agri, 09.13.09: Security forces detained 3 members of the YDG-M. 
 
 
 
Siirt, 09.14.09: Security forces detained DTP Kurtalan District 
Administrator. 
 
 
 
Diyarbakir, 09.14.09: 10 of 19 people, who were detained in the 
recent anti-KCK-TM (Kurdish Federations Association-Turkey 
Assembly) operations, were arrested on a charge of "being member 
of the terror organization PKK". 
 
 
 
Sirnak, 09.15.09: A child (age 15) was arrested on a charge of 
"being member of a terror organization". 
 
 
 
Diyarbakir, 09.15.09: 6 children are on trial for "being member 
of the terror organization PKK".  The prosecutor requested a 
combined sentence of 138 years in jail. 
 
 
 
Siirt, 09.16.09: Security forces detained DTP's Deputy Mayor. 
 
 
 
Hakkari, 09.16.09: 2 DTP members were arrested on a charge of 
"being member of the terror organization PKK". 
 
Adiyaman, 09.16.09: Security forces detained 3 people on a 
charge of "making propaganda of the terror organization PKK." 
One of them later was arrested on charges of "assisting and 
harboring the terror organization PKK". 
 
 
 
Batman, 09.16.09: Five people including DTP Center District 
Administrators Kamuran Aytas and Mehmet Tas were arrested on a 
charge of "making propaganda of the terror organization PKK". 
 
 
 
Sirnak, 09.17.09: 14 DTPers were detained in an operation 
conducted against the DTP's youth arm Patriotic Democratic 
Youth-Movement (YDG-M). 
 
 
 
Batman, 09.17.09: 1 person was arrested on a charge of "making 
propaganda of the terror organization PKK". 
 
 
 
Gaziantep, 09.17.09: Security forces detained 19 DTPers who 
joined in a protest march organized by DTP's women's branch. 
 
ADANA 00000054  003 OF 004 
 
 
 
 
 
¶C. Other: 
 
Van, 09.17.09: Security forces seized 2 rifles, 9 magazines, and 
ammunition at a house.  One illegal migrant and a person who was 
assisting and harboring him were arrested. 
 
 
 
Agri, 09.16.09: Security forces intervened with a group of DTP 
members who wanted to put a black wreath on the AK Party's 
building. 
 
 
 
Adana, 09.16.09: Security forces captured 7 people who threw 
Molotov cocktails at a supermarket.  Four of them were formally 
arrested.  The group stated the action was carried out to 
protest ongoing military operations and the Turkish Government's 
lack of support for Ocalan's road map. 
 
 
 
Adana, 09.14.09: The Turkish Telecom (TT) building on Cukurova 
Street of Basak Parish was attacked by a group of PKK 
sympathizers with Molotov cocktails. The group chanted slogans 
in favor of PKK and Ocalan and later escaped by branch roads. 
 
 
 
Diyarbakir, 09.15.09: A police check point in Baglar District 
and a medical clinic were attacked by a group of unidentified 
people with Molotov cocktails.  Police opened fire in the air. 
 
 
 
Cukurca and Yuksekova in Hakkari, 09.14.09: Many PKK 
sympathizers clashed with police to protest the deaths of 8 HPG 
members and the arrest of 10 DTPers.  Security forces intervened 
with tear gas, sticks and pressurized water; demonstrators 
responded with stones and Molotov cocktails.  PKK supporters 
blocked the Yuksekova-Esendere-Semdinli Highway with burning 
trash barrels.  Demonstrators chanted slogans in favor of PKK 
and Ocalan.  AK Party's and MHP's buildings, a University Prep 
School, MOBESE cameras (security surveillance cameras) were 
attacked by the protestors.  The clashes ended around dusk. 
 
 
 
Beytussebap in Hakkari, 09.14.09: The crowd coming back from a 
funeral ceremony of a killed PKK member attacked security forces 
with stones. Security forces responded with tear gas.  At least 
3 police officers were wounded. 
 
 
 
Hakkari, 09.13.09: Almost 20,000 people joined in funeral 
ceremonies of 2 PKK members who were killed in a clash on 
September 8.  Demonstrators chanted slogans in favor of PKK and 
Ocalan. 
 
 
 
Adana, 09.14.09: PKK supporters attacked a supermarket on 
Sakirpasa Street of Onur Parish with stones and Molotov 
cocktails.  It was reported that 11 Molotov cocktails were 
thrown at the BIM Supermarket.  There were no injuries.  The 
latest attack was the fourth against the same market.  (Note: 
BIM supermarkets have been attacked many times by PKK supporters 
across Turkey.  The owner of the BIM chain is one of the 
top-level AK Party members, Cuneyd Zapsu. End note.) 
 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
Illegal Migrants, Counter-Narcotics and Other Smuggling 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
 
 
¶7. Illegal migrants: Security forces captured and deported 726 
illegal migrants from the following regions: Canakkale, Adana, 
Erzurum, Iraqi Border, Agri, Yalova, Greek Border, Iranian 
Border, Van, Kocaeli, Mugla, Sirnak,  Balikesir, Hatay, Edirne, 
Kilis, Aegean Coast, Syrian Border, Elazig, Nevsehir.  Four 
Turks assisting the illegal migrants were also arrested in the 
operations that took place between September 11 and 17. 
 
ADANA 00000054  004 OF 004 
 
 
 
 
 
¶8. Counter-narcotic operations: 
 
 
 
Gaziantep, 09.17.09: Security forces confiscated 17,066 pills 
and arrested 1 person. 
 
 
 
Diyarbakir, 09.16.09: Security forces seized 1,054,000 Indian 
hemp seeds and 154 kilograms of hashish. 
 
 
 
Mersin, 09.16.09: Security forces captured 70 people in 43 
separate operations.  Thirty-two people were arrested and 24 
kilograms of hashish, 222 seeds of Indian hemp and 17 pills were 
seized. 
 
 
 
Hatay, 09.16.09: Security forces confiscated 15 kilograms of 
hashish. 
 
 
 
Diyarbakir, 09.16.09: Security forces confiscated 72 kilograms 
of hashish and arrested two people. 
 
 
 
Van, 09.16.09: Security forces seized 140 kilograms of hashish 
and arrested 3 people. 
 
 
 
Elazig, 09.15.09: Security forces seized 6 kilograms of hashish. 
 
 
 
Diyarbakir, 09.14.09: Security forces seized 52 kilograms of 
heroin. 
 
 
 
Van, 09.14.09: Security forces seized 51 kilograms hashish. 
 
 
 
Adana, 09.12.09: Security forces seized 6 kilograms of hashish. 
 
 
 
¶9. Other: 
 
 
 
Batman, 09.14.09: Security forces seized 1284 liters of smuggled 
diesel and 68,040 boxes of smuggled cigarettes. 
DDARNELL