09ADANA59
SE TURKEY SECURITY INCIDENTS: SEPTEMBER 22 - OCTOBER 4,
Fri Oct 09 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
VZCZCXRO6662
RR RUEHDA
DE RUEHDA #0059/01 2821252
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 091252Z OCT 09
FM AMCONSUL ADANA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4773
INFO RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 1313
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 1085
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 1380UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ADANA 000059 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR DS/IP/NEA, DS/IP/ITA, INR AND NEA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PTER PINR CASC
SUBJECT: SE TURKEY SECURITY INCIDENTS: SEPTEMBER 22 - OCTOBER 4, 
2009 
 
¶1.  The following security incidents for the period of September 
22 - October 4, 2009 were compiled from RSO sources by the 
Security Assistant at Consulate Adana, to include Turkish 
security contacts, government officials and media reports. 
Similar reports have previously been shared informally by 
e-mail.  Post is now sending this information in cable format to 
ensure wider and more regular distribution.  The RSO uses the 
information to determine the security situation and trends of 
violence and crime throughout Turkey.  The RSO also tracks the 
information by location and shares the information with the 
Country Team and Visas Viper coordinator. 
 
¶2. Military operations against the Kurdistan Workers' Party 
(PKK) as reported by the Turkish General Staff: 
 
¶A.  Weapons, ammunition, and equipment seized: 
 
Diyarbakir - 09.23.09: 1 flamethrower was found and destroyed. 
 
Diyarbakir - 09.25.09: 1 pair of night-vision goggles, 40 rounds 
of Kalashnikov infantry rifle ammunition, 2 backpacks, various 
organizational documents, medical equipment and food supplies. 
 
Hakkari - 09.26.09: 2 MG-3 machine guns, 1 MG-3 machine gun 
barrel, 1 rocket launcher, 7 RPG-7s, 1 BKC machine gun magazine, 
1 Kalashnikov infantry rifle, 1 M-16 machine gun, 1 Kanas sniper 
rifle, 4 G-3 infantry rifles, 12 G-3 infantry rifle magazines, 1 
anti-personnel landmine (destroyed), 935 rounds of MG-3 
ammunition, 1 light mine and 1 rifle. 
 
Bitlis - 09.27.09: 1 IED was found and destroyed. 1 M-16 
infantry rifle, 1 Kalashnikov rifle, 34 rounds of M-16 infantry 
rifle ammunition, 77 rounds of Kalashnikov infantry rifle 
ammunition, 2 M-16 magazines, 2 Kalashnikov magazines, 2 hand 
grenades, 1 wireless device, 6 cell phones, 4 cell phone memory 
cards, 1 radio, and 3 backpacks. 
 
Hakkari - 09.28.09: 5 anti-personnel landmines were found and 
destroyed. 
 
Mardin - 09.29.09: 2 hand grenades and binoculars. 
 
¶B.  PKK members captured or surrendered: 
 
SE Turkey - 09.26 - 10.02.09: Security forces captured 8 PKK 
members. 1 was recovered dead, 6 captured alive and 1 
surrendered to security officials. 
 
Diyarbakir - 10.01.09: 1 PKK member was captured and later 
released by court decision. 
 
Hakkari - 09.22.09: 1 civilian was killed in a landmine blast. 
 
Bingol - 09.23.09: 1 PKK member surrendered to security forces. 
 
Mus - 09.25.09: 1 PKK member was captured. 
 
Igdir - 09.25.09: 1 PKK member was captured. 
 
Bitlis - 09.27.09: 1 PKK member was recovered dead and 1 PKK 
member was captured alive. 
Sanliurfa - 09.28.09: 1 PKK member was captured. 
 
Hakkari - 09.28.09: 1 PKK member was captured and released by 
court decision. 
 
Diyarbakir - 09.29.09: 2 PKK members were captured. 
 
Sirnak - 09.30.09: 1 PKK member surrendered to security forces. 
 
¶3.     Media reports on Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) and 
pro-Kurdish organizations 
 
¶A.  PKK attacks: 
 
Van - 09.22.09: PKK members attacked a military patrol team. 
There was no loss of life or property in the incident. 
 
Hakkari - 09.22.09: PKK members attacked a military patrol team. 
There was no loss of life or property in the incident. 
 
Hakkari - 09.23.09: PKK members attacked security forces 
patrolling the Semdinli mountains. 1 security personnel was 
wounded. 
 
Sirnak - 09.27.09: 1 civilian was killed and 1 wounded in a 
landmine blast. 
 
Hakkari - 09.30.09: A landmine explosion near a military convoy 
 
ADANA 00000059  002 OF 004 
 
 
did not result in loss of life or property damage. 
 
Sirnak - 10.01.09: 1 soldier was killed. 
Siirt - 10.04.09: PKK members temporarily blocked the 15th km of 
the Siirt-Sirvan highway when they fired over 150 rounds from 
long-range rifles, wounding 1 driver and setting 1 truck on 
fire. 
¶B.  Anti-PKK operations: 
 
Turkish Armed Forces (TAF) operations are continuing in almost 
all east and SE provinces. 
 
¶C.      Arrests: 
 
Sanliurfa - 09.24.09: 2 DTP members were sentenced to a year in 
prison on charges of "making propaganda for the terror 
organization PKK." 
 
Hakkari - 09.24.09: Security forces detained 2 people who joined 
in illegal street demonstrations. 
 
Adana - 09.24.09: Security forces detained 16 people who were 
preparing to join a pro-Kurdish meeting in Diyarbakir. The 16 
people later were released. 
 
Hakkari - 09.24.09: Security forces detained 2 people on 
suspicion of terrorism. 
Adana - 09.29.09: A 16-year-old minor was detained by 
anti-terror teams. 
 
Van - 09.26.09: Security forces detained 3 people on the 
suspicion of terrorist activities. 
 
Sirnak - 09.28.09: 1 PKK member was arrested. 
 
Van - 09.29.09: Security forces captured five people who were 
taking various logistical, food and medical materials to the PKK 
members in the mountains.  Three were later arrested on charges 
of "assisting and harboring the PKK terror organization 
voluntary and intentionally." 
 
Tunceli - 09.29.09: Security forces detained a person who was 
delivering pro-PKK/Ocalan leaflets. Clashes erupted when police 
and SWAT Teams wanted to search a room at DTP's Municipality 
Guest House where the detained person was staying.  Almost 300 
people clashed with police.  According to information taken by 
the Consulate Security Assistant from a police chief in Tunceli, 
people misunderstood the operation. The Tunceli Security 
Director said, "Tension rose when anti-terror and SWAT teams 
took the guest house under siege.  It was a normal procedure, 
but when DTPers saw many policemen around the building they 
thought that the operation was directed against them." 
 
Adana - 09.30.09: 5 minors (ages 14, 15, 16) were sentenced to a 
total of 20 years in prison on the charge of "carrying out 
illegal action on behalf of the terror organization PKK." 
 
Batman - 09.30.09: 1 person was arrested on the charge of 
"making propaganda for the terror organization PKK." 
 
Sanliurfa - 09.30.09: Security forces detained a person who 
attacked a police patrol vehicle with a Molotov cocktail. 
Police seized 18 unexploded Molotov cocktails in the operation. 
The person later was arrested. 
 
Sanliurfa - 09.30.09: Security forces detained 6 people on the 
suspicion of terrorism. 
 
Adana - 09.30.09: 5 minors were arrested on charges of "being 
member of a terror organization" and "making propaganda for the 
terror organization PKK." 
 
Diyarbakir - 09.30.09: 5 people, including DTP Hani District 
Chairman Husnu Bulbul, were sentenced to 9 years in prison on 
charges of "assisting and harboring the PKK terror organization 
voluntary and intentionally." 
 
Diyarbakir - 09.30.09: Security forces detained an employee of 
the pro-Kurdish "Koz Magazine." 
 
Diyarbakir - 10.01.09: Security forces detained 15 members of 
the Devrimci Karargah (Revolutionary Headquarters) in operations 
held in Diyarbakir, Istanbul, Aydin Denizli and Ankara. It was 
reported that the suspects were in preparations to carryout 
actions including plane hijackings, assassinations, and arson 
attacks. 8 of 15 people were later arrested on the charge of 
"being member of a terror organization." 
 
Diyarbakir - 10.01.09: 2 PKK members, who were captured in Lice 
 
ADANA 00000059  003 OF 004 
 
 
District, were arrested on charges of "being member of a terror 
organization." 
 
Mersin - 10.01.09: Security forces detained 3 people on the 
suspicion of terrorism. 
 
Sirnak - 10.01.09: Security forces detained 2 people on the 
suspicion of terrorism. 
 
¶D.  Other: 
 
Security Alert:  October 9 is the anniversary of Abdullah 
Ocalan's deportation from Syria. There is the possibility of 
increased activities by the PKK or pro-PKK groups and 
individuals. 
 
09.24.09: The PKK declared it will evaluate whether to extend or 
end the ceasefire, saying it depends on the TAF's operations. 
 
09.24.09: National Intelligence Agency (MIT) warned all security 
units in the east and southeast about a possible increase in 
provocative acts by the PKK. 
 
09.29.09 - DTP Mus Parliamentarian Sirri Sakik says there are 
almost 5000-6000 armed PKK members in the mountain areas. 
 
09.28.09 - Al-Qaeda has threatened Turkey, which is poised to 
take over the commandership duty in Kabul, Afghanistan. 
 
10.01.09: Elazig TNP's Deputy Director believes the PKK is 
losing power, especially in the mountainous terrain of east and 
southeast Turkey. However, he expects an increase in minor 
disruptive actions throughout the country, such as slashing 
tires, illegal street demonstrations, or Molotov cocktail and 
stone attacks. 
 
10.02.09 - Tunceli's TNP director expects an increase in PKK 
actions. Tunceli TNP's Deputy Director told the Consulate's 
Security Assistant, "PKK's actions may increase if the 
government's Kurdish opening stalls and the developments do not 
satisfy the DTP or other groups." 
 
10.02.09: According to information taken from security chiefs in 
southeast Turkey, almost all gendarme and police check points 
have been removed due to a new focus on intelligence. One of the 
chiefs said, "Instead of stopping hundreds of vehicles for 
hours, the police are going to focus on intelligence reports and 
stop only specific vehicles" 
 
Hakkari - 09.23.09: A bomb exploded in a shopping mall, wounding 
4 civilians. According to police sources, the target of the bomb 
was a police shuttle bus, whose route passes near the explosion 
point. The bus was 10 minutes late that day, so no police were 
wounded in this explosion. 
 
Hakkari - 09.23-24.09: Security forces clashed with PKK 
supporters demanding the release of the bodies of PKK members 
killed in security operations. Police intervened in with tear 
gas and water cannons and demonstrators responded with stones. 
 
Van - 09.25.09: Security forces seized and destroyed 15 Molotov 
cocktails near a high school. 
 
Diyarbakir - 09.25.09: AK Party's Provincial Building was 
attacked by PKK supporters with stones. Security forces 
intervened with tear gas and sticks. Demonstrators threw Molotov 
cocktails. 
Sanliurfa - 09.27.09: Police opened fire in the air as they 
intervened in a PKK demonstration. Protesters burned tires, 
chanted illegal slogans in favor of PKK and Ocalan, and threw 
stones and Molotov cocktails. 
 
Diyarbakir - 09.27.09: 3 bank branches were attacked by Molotov 
cocktails. 
 
Sanliurfa - 09.27.09: Police intervened in a demonstration in 
favor of PKK and Ocalan with sticks, pressurized water and tear 
gas. Demonstrators responded with Molotov cocktails and stones. 
 
Adana - 09.27.09: A house was attacked with a Molotov cocktail. 
 
09.28.09: The investigation into the murder of 3 Christian 
missionaries in Malatya on April, 18, 2007 uncovered the 
gendarme was still paying informants about alleged missionary 
activities after the massacre. 
 
Adana - 09.28.09: 2 parked vehicles in Sehit Duran Parish were 
set on fire by unidentified people. 
 
 
ADANA 00000059  004 OF 004 
 
 
Van - 09.29.09: DTP led protests against police pressure and 
anti-DTP operations in Van, Hakkari, Igdir, Mus, Sirnak, 
Tunceli, Diyarbakir and Batman. 
 
Van - 09.29.09: A security guard at Van's Yuzunci Yil University 
was shot dead by unidentified people. 
 
Mus - 09.29.09: Security forces confiscated 20 village guards' 
weapons on the charge of "hiding a PKK member and not informing 
security forces." 
 
Hakkari - 10.01.09: DTP's Mayor is on trial on the charge of 
making propaganda for a terror organization. 
 
Hatay - 10.02.09: DTP's Iskenderun District building was 
attacked with stones. 
 
Tunceli - 10.03.09: A shepherd escaped unhurt from a mortar 
attack. 9 animals were killed in the blast. 
 
¶4.      Illegal migrant arrests: 
 
09.22-10.01.09: Security forces captured and deported 945 
illegal migrants from the following regions: Aegean Coast, Greek 
Border, Iraqi Border, Iranian Border, Igdir, Van, Edirne, Hatay, 
Hakkari, Adana, Syrian Border, Trabzon, Sirnak, Canakkale, 
Erzurum, Izmir, Agri, Yalova, Balikesir, Diyarbakir, Istanbul, 
Tekirdag. 19 Turks, who were assisting them, were also detained 
in the operations. 
 
¶5.      Anti-crime operations: 
 
Kars - 09.23.09: Security forces seized 4 smuggled pistols and 
arrested 4 people. 
 
Mardin - 09.23.09: Security forces seized 29 long-range rifles 
and 110 rounds of ammunition in a truck and detained 3 people. 
 
Van - 09.29.09: Security forces seized 29,000 boxes of smuggled 
cigarettes and detained 1 person. 
 
¶6.      Counter-narcotic operations: 
 
Van - 09.28.09: Security forces seized 65 kilograms of heroin 
and detained 1 person. 
 
Batman - 09.29.09: Security forces seized 40 kilograms of 
hashish and arrested 6 people. 
 
Van - 10.01.09: Iranian troops opened fire on 2 gas smugglers, 
wounding both of them. 
 
Bingol - 10.01.09: Security forces seized 50 kilograms of 
hashish and 135 units of Indian hemp seeds. 1 person was 
arrested. 
 
Hatay - 10.01.09: Security forces seized 6 kilograms of hashish 
and arrested 2 people. 
 
Sanliurfa - 10.05.09: Security forces seized 20 kilograms of 
hashish and detained 2 people. 
 
Diyarbakir: Security forces seized 11 kilograms of hashish and 
detained 3 people. 
DARNELL