10ADANA3
SE TURKEY SECURITY INCIDENTS: JANUARY 04, 2010 - JANUARY 10,
Tue Jan 12 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
VZCZCXRO5691
RR RUEHDA
DE RUEHDA #0003/01 0121326
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 121326Z JAN 10
FM AMCONSUL ADANA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4833
INFO RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 1376
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 1139
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 1443UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ADANA 000003 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR DS/IP/EUR, DS/IP/ITA, INR AND EUR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PTER PINR CASC TU
SUBJECT: SE TURKEY SECURITY INCIDENTS: JANUARY 04, 2010 - JANUARY 10, 
2010 
 
¶1.  (U) The following security incidents for the period of 
January 04, 2010 - January 10, 2010 were compiled by the 
security assistant at Consulate Adana from RSO sources, to 
include Turkish security contacts, government officials and 
media.  The RSO uses the information to determine the security 
situation and trends of violence and crime throughout Turkey. 
The RSO shares the information with the country team and Visas 
Viper coordinator. 
 
¶2.  (U) Military operations against the Kurdistan Workers' Party 
(PKK) as reported by the Turkish General Staff: 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
-------- 
¶A.  Weapons, ammunition, and equipment seized: 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
-------- 
 
01.01.10 through 01.08.10: Security forces confiscated 14 
kilograms of TNT, 25 kilograms of plastic explosive material, 
and 6 kilograms of ammonium nitrate. 
 
Tunceli - 01.06.10: Security forces found and destroyed 2 IEDs 
made of 6 kilograms of ammonium nitrate. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
¶B.  PKK members captured or surrendered: 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
01.04.10 through 01.10.10: Security forces captured 5 people: 4 
alive and 1 surrendered. 
 
Sirnak - 01.06.10: Security forces captured 1 PKK member. 1 PKK 
member surrendered. 
 
Sirnak - 01.04.10: Security forces captured 1 PKK member. 
 
 
¶3.  (U) Media reports related to PKK and pro-Kurdish 
organizations: 
--------------------------------- 
¶A.  Anti-PKK operations: 
--------------------------------- 
 
Turkish Armed Forces (TAF) anti-PKK operations in SE Turkey 
continued in Sirnak, Tunceli and Van. 
 
¶N. Iraq - 01.08.10: TAF artillery teams bombed the Zap region; 
no injuries reported. 
 
---------------- 
¶B.  Arrests: 
---------------- 
 
Diyarbakir - 01.10.10: Security forces detained an activist of 
the pro-Kurdish Kandil Peace Group on the suspicion of 
terrorism. 
 
Batman - 01.09.10: Security forces arrested 3 members of the 
Turkish Hezbollah on the charge of "membership in Turkish 
Hezbollah." 
 
Sanliurfa - 01.09.10: Security forces arrested 2 people on the 
charges of "membership in the PKK," and "making propaganda for 
the PKK." Security forces also arrested 1 person on the charge 
of "membership in Turkish Hezbollah." 
 
Mersin - 01.09.10: Security forces detained 8 people, including 
6 children, on the suspicion of terrorism. 
 
Hakkari - 01.09.10: Security forces detained 8 people on the 
suspicion of terrorism. Three were later arrested. 
 
Gaziantep, Hatay, Mersin, and Adiyaman - 01.08.10: Security 
forces arrested 21 people who had been detained in the recent 
anti-KCK operations conducted in the region. 
 
Hakkari - 01.06.10 and 01.07.10: Security forces detained 12 
people on the suspicion of terrorism. 
 
Adana - 01.06.10: Security forces detained 5 people on the 
suspicion of terrorism. 
 
Diyarbakir - 01.06.10: A member of the pro-Kurdish 
MKM-DER-Mesopotamian Culture Center was arrested on the charge 
of "membership in the PKK." 
 
Sanliurfa - 01.05.10: Security forces arrested 1 person on the 
charge of "membership in an armed terror organization." 
 
 
ADANA 00000003  002 OF 004 
 
 
Adana - 01.05.10: A former mayoral candidate from DTP is under 
investigation for "making propaganda for the PKK in the Kurdish 
language." 
 
Sanliurfa - 01.04.10: 1 person was detained on the suspicion of 
terrorism. 
 
Sirnak - 01.04.10: Security forces arrested 8 people on the 
charge of "membership in the PKK" in an operation against the 
PKK's youth arm, YDG-M. 
 
Van - 01.04.10: Security forces detained 5 people on the 
suspicion of terrorism. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
¶C.  Other media stories about the PKK: 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
01.10.10 - The General Staff had recorded encrypted messages 
coming from the PKK four days prior to an attack in Tokat on 
December 7 that left seven soldiers dead, but was unable to 
decode the messages and prevent the assault. 
 
01.10.10 - Iran hanged a member of the PKK this week, and 
several other members of the group are to be executed in the 
coming days in an attempt to deter attacks in Iranian territory. 
The PKK's Iranian offshoot, a group called the Party for a Free 
Life in Kurdistan (PJAK), has carried out several attacks on 
Iranian security forces. 
 
Diyarbakir - 01.10.10: Almost 91 NGOs, including pro-Kurdish 
organizations, held a press statement to protest recent anti-KCK 
operations and to call upon GOT to find a democratic solution 
for the Kurdish issue. 
 
Adiyaman - 01.10.10: Pro-Kurdish NGOs held a press statement to 
protest anti-KCK operations. Demonstrators chanted slogans in 
favor of PKK and Ocalan. 
 
Sanliurfa - 01.10.10: PKK supporters attacked a Turkish Telecom 
Building with Molotov cocktails. Pro-PKK "Ayrin Erdem Youth 
Initiative" has claimed the responsibility. 
 
Adana - 01.09.10: PKK supporters set fire to 4 vehicles in 
Mahfesigmaz, Guzelyali and Turgut Ozal 
areas.  A Pro-PKK group called themselves as "Ocalan's Youths" 
has claimed responsibility. NOTE: Three of Consulate Adana's 
four officers live in this area. END NOTE. 
 
Mersin - 01.09.10: The pro-Kurdish Democracy Platform protested 
alleged lynch attempts against Kurdish and other ethnic groups. 
Demonstrators chanted slogans in favor of PKK and Ocalan. 
 
Diyarbakir and Hakkari - 01.08.10: Pro- Kurdish NGOs and BDP 
(Peace and Democracy Party) officials and members held press 
statements to protest the recent anti-KCK operation. 
Demonstrators chanted slogans in favor of PKK and Ocalan. No 
clash or arrest occurred. 
 
Mersin - 01.07.10: Police stormed a house and detained 4 people 
who were making Molotov cocktails 
 
01.07.10: Approximately 300 intellectuals have started a 
campaign in reaction to the denial of a rental house to Ahmet 
Turk, former leader of the DTP. The "My house is Yours" campaign 
is supported by artists, academics, professionals and writers. 
 
Hakkari - 01.06.10 through 01.10.10: PKK supporters blocked 
streets, burnt trash barrels and chanted slogans in favor of PKK 
and Ocalan to protest recent anti-KCK operations across Turkey. 
Police intervened with tear gas, pressurized water and batons; 
protesters responded with Molotov cocktails and stones. Two 
protesters were wounded on January 6 by rubber bullets. 
 
01.06.10: The Security General Directorate received information 
from a PKK informant regarding a plan to target the families of 
police officers who work in eastern Turkey. Security precautions 
around police officers' homes and their children's schools have 
been heightened. 
 
Diyarbakir, Van, Bingol, Batman, & Sanliurfa - 01.06.10: Many 
people, including former DTP members, BDP officials, Human 
Rights Union members, and members and officials of pro-Kurdish 
unions gathered to protest recent anti-KCK operations. 
Demonstrators chanted slogans in favor of PKK and Ocalan. No 
clash or arrest occurred. 
 
Mersin - 01.06.10: A fight between two high school students - 
one Turkish and one Kurdish - turned into an ethnic dispute 
 
ADANA 00000003  003 OF 004 
 
 
involving over 200 residents. The fight ended after police teams 
arrived on the scene and fired shots into the air. Six injuries 
and 15 arrests were reported. 
 
Gaziantep - 01.06.10: Demonstrators, including BDP officials and 
members, gathered to protest recent anti-KCK operations. 
Meanwhile, investigations continue regarding the 24 people who 
were detained in the last anti-KCK operations. 
 
Turkey-wide - 01.04.10: The Democratic Society Congress, which 
gathered in Diyarbakir a few months ago upon orders from 
Abdullah Ocalan, added certain press agencies to its list of 
targets. Security forces have heightened security measures at 
offices believed to be at risk. 
 
Diyarbakir, Van & Mus - 01.04.10: Demonstrators, including 
current and former BDP and DTP members and officials, gathered 
to protest anti-KCK operation. 
 
¶4.  (U) Media reports on significant crime or security incidents: 
 
01.10.10: A suspect in the trial of suspected members of an 
illegal gendarmerie unit called JITEM has confessed to taking 
part in extrajudicial killings and even making prayer beads out 
of the ears of those whom he had killed. 
 
Bingol - 01.10.10: A child was wounded by an IED. 
 
Hatay - 01.10.10: Security forces detained 47 people in an 
anti-gang operation.  Twenty-two of them later were arrested on 
the charge of "membership in an organized-crime group." 
 
Kilis - 01.10.10: Security forces found 10 hand grenades and 9 
fuses at a residence. 
 
Bingol - 01.09.10: Unidentified people slashed the tires of 13 
civilian vehicles. Elsewhere in the province, villagers found 
some fragments of human bones. A criminal investigation is 
underway. 
 
Diyarbakir, Hatay Osmaniye and Gaziantep - 01.07.10: Security 
forces detained 77 people and confiscated 162 historical 
artifacts in an anti-organized-crime and smuggling operation. 
 
Mersin - 01.07.10: An attacker opened fire at a police check 
point, wounding 3 police officers. The attacker was later 
apprehended. 
 
Batman - 01.06.10: Security forces confiscated 1 rifle, 6 
pistols, 7 magazines, 78 rounds of ammunition and 28 bullets. 5 
people were detained. 
 
Elazig - 01.06.10: Security forces detained 4 people in an 
anti-organized-crime operation. 
 
Elazig - 01.05.10: Security forces seized 1 Kalashnikov rifle, 4 
rifles, 3 pistols, and 172 rounds of ammunition. 
 
Diyarbakir - 01.05.10: Demonstrators protested recent anti-KCK 
operations, blocking traffic and throwing stones and Molotov 
cocktails. Security forces intervened with tear gas, batons and 
pressurized water. 
 
Van - 01.05.10: Demonstrators, including Human Rights Union and 
pro-Kurdish organization officials, gathered to protest anti-KCK 
operations. Demonstrators chanted anti-GOT slogans. 
 
Van - 01.04.10: A person who was working as a cleaner at a bank 
attempted to rob his employer, killing 1 person and wounding 3 
others. 
 
¶5. (U) Illegal immigrant arrests: 
 
12.27.09 through 01.09.10: Security forces captured and deported 
963 illegal immigrants from: Kirklareli, Kilis, Balikesir, 
Erzurum, Nigde, Tekirdag, Van, Aydin, Hatay, Aksaray, Hakkari, 
Sirnak, Bitlis, Edirne, Mugla, the Aegean Coast and the borders 
of Iran, Iraq, Syria and Greece. Nine Turks assisting them were 
also detained in the operations. 
 
¶6. (U) Counter-narcotic operations: 
 
Turkey-wide - 01.01.09 through 12.31.09: Gendarme forces 
confiscated 44 kilograms poppy gum, 2,400 kilograms of heroin, 
2,035,527,831 units of cannabis, 998 seeds of cannabis, 20,000 
kilograms of raw hashish, 5,500 kilograms of powder hashish, 1.7 
kilograms of cocaine, 17 kilograms of morphine, 173,000 
synthetic pills, and 3470 liters of acid anhydrite. 
 
 
ADANA 00000003  004 OF 004 
 
 
Adana - 01.09.10: Security forces seized 500 pills (Ice) and 
detained 7 people in an anti-narcotic operation conducted 
against 8 separate addresses.  Two Ecstasy pills, 720 grams of 
cannabis, and 10 kilograms of white powder were also seized in 
the operation. 
 
Batman - 01.08.10: Security forces seized 8 kilograms of hashish 
and detained 5 people. 
 
Osmaniye - 01.08.10: Security forces detained 4 people in an 
anti-smuggling operation. 
 
Sanliurfa - 01.06.10: Security forces seized 6 kilograms of 
hashish and detained 2 people. 
 
Hakkari - 01.04.10: Security forces seized 36 kilograms of 
hashish and arrested 2 people. 
 
Elazig - 01.04.10: Security forces seized 20 kilograms of 
hashish and detained 3 people. 
 
Van - 01.04.10: Security forces seized 120 kilograms of heroin 
and 170 kilograms of hashish. 6 people were detained in the 
operation. 
 
Van - 01.05.10: Security forces confiscated 95 kilograms of 
hashish and detained 2 people. 
DARNELL