10ADANA15
SE TURKEY SECURITY INCIDENTS: FEBRUARY 16 - 23, 2010
Thu Feb 25 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
VZCZCXRO3008
RR RUEHDA
DE RUEHDA #0015/01 0561212
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 251212Z FEB 10
FM AMCONSUL ADANA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4867
INFO RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 1410
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 1170
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 1477UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ADANA 000015 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR DS/IP/EUR, DS/IP/ITA, INR AND EUR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PTER PINR CASC TU
SUBJECT: SE TURKEY SECURITY INCIDENTS: FEBRUARY 16 - 23, 2010 
 
¶1.  (U) The following security incidents for the period of 
February 16 - 23, 2010 were compiled by the security assistant 
at Consulate Adana from RSO sources, to include Turkish security 
contacts, government officials and media.  The RSO uses the 
information to determine the security situation and trends of 
violence and crime throughout Turkey. The RSO shares the 
information with the country team and visas viper coordinator. 
 
 
 
¶2.  (U) Military operations against the Kurdistan Workers' Party 
(PKK) as reported by the Turkish General Staff (TGS): 
 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
-------- 
 
¶A.  Weapons, ammunition, and equipment seized: 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
-------- 
 
 
 
1.1.10 through 2.19.10:  Security forces seized or detonated 
safely 15 kilograms of TNT, 17 kilograms of plastic explosive 
materials, 58 kilograms of ammonium/potassium nitrate, six 
landmines and four IEDs. 
 
 
 
Mardin - 2.17.10: Security forces seized one Kalashnikov rifle, 
seven magazines, and 11 rounds of ammunition. 
 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
¶B.  PKK members captured or surrendered: 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
2.16.10 through 2.21.10: Turkish Armed Forces (TAF) captured two 
people. 
 
 
 
Hakkari - 2.18.10: Security forces caught one PKK member. 
 
 
 
¶3. (U) Media reports related to PKK and pro-Kurdish 
organizations: 
 
 
 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶A.  Anti-PKK operations: 
------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
2.23.10: TAF has increased military deployment to SE Turkey in 
advance of the spring thaw.  Military personnel, armored 
vehicles, and ammunition have been deployed to the areas of 
operation in Hakkari, Sirnak, Mardin, Tunceli and Bingol. 
 
 
 
Tunceli - 2.23.10: TAF declared military security zones in 
several districts due to anti-PKK military operations; the 
public is banned from entering or exiting the area between 
February 25 and May 25, 2010. 
 
----------------- 
¶B.  Arrests: 
----------------- 
Van - 2.23.10: Two people were arrested on the charge of "making 
propaganda for the PKK." 
 
Diyarbakir - 2.23.10: Mehmet Ali Aydin, the head of the 
pro-Kurdish Peace and Democracy Party (BDP) in Diyarbakir 
province, was arrested on charges of conducting propaganda for 
PKK. Aydin was arrested on charges of conducting propaganda for 
the PKK, membership in a terrorist organization and committing a 
crime on behalf of said organization. 
 
Sanliurfa - 2.22.10: One person is on trial on the charge of 
"making propaganda for the PKK." 
 
 
ADANA 00000015  002 OF 004 
 
 
Sanliurfa - 2.22.10: Security forces arrested four people on the 
charge of chanting illegal slogans in favor of the PKK." 
 
Diyarbakir - 2.22.10: Security forces arrested one person on the 
charge of "joining in illegal street action on behalf of the 
PKK," and detained another on the suspicion of terrorism. 
 
 
 
2.21.10: Prosecutors in Diyarbakir demanded 480 years 
imprisonment for Vedat Kursun, former editor-in-chief of the 
Kurdish-language Azadiya Welat daily, claiming he had been 
disseminating pro-PKK propaganda by publishing stories on the 
statements and activities of the organization. 
 
 
 
Bitlis - 2.21.10: Security forces arrested a member of the 
pro-Kurdish BDP on the charge of "membership in the KCK." 
 
Hakkari - 2.21.10: Security forces detained 14 people in an 
anti-KCK (Kurdish Democratic Confederation/Turkey Council) 
operation. Note:  KCK is considered by Turkish law enforcement 
to be the urban arm of the PKK. End note. 
 
Mus - 2.21.10: Security forces arrested one person on the charge 
of "making propaganda for the PKK." 
 
Hakkari - 2.20.10: Security forces arrested two people on the 
charges of "making propaganda for the PKK," and "joining in 
illegal actions on behalf of the PKK." 
 
Van - 2.19.10: Security forces detained 25 people in anti-KCK 
operations, later arresting 12 on the charge of "PKK 
membership." 
 
Mersin - 2.19.10: Security forces arrested 26 people on the 
charges of "destroying public property," and "joining in illegal 
street actions on behalf of the PKK." 
 
 
 
Adana-Konya - 2.19.10: Security forces captured the Adana 
region's PKK leader in an operation in Konya. Police said the 
terrorist had been on the most-wanted list for 17 years. 
 
 
 
Sirnak and Batman - 2.18.10: Security forces arrested 16 people 
on charges of "PKK membership,"  "violating restrictions on 
marches and demonstrations," and "joining in illegal street 
actions on behalf of the PKK." 
 
 
 
Siirt - 2.17.10: Security forces arrested seven members of the 
pro-Kurdish MKM-DER (Mesopotamia Culture Center) and BDP on the 
charge of "making propaganda for the PKK." 
 
 
 
Bingol - 2.17.10: Security forces detained several members of 
the pro-Kurdish YDG-M (PKK's youth wing) on the charge of "PKK 
membership." 
 
 
 
Gaziantep - 2.17.10: Security forces arrested eight people who 
detained in an anti-YDG-M operation, on the charge of "PKK 
membership." 
 
 
 
Van - 2.17.10: Security forces arrested eight people detained in 
an anti-KCK operation, on the charge of "PKK membership." 
 
 
 
Mus - 2.17.10: Security forces detained former Malazgirt 
chairman of the banned Democratic Society Party on the suspicion 
of terrorism. 
 
 
 
Suruc in Sanliurfa - 2.17.10: Security forces arrested two 
people on the charge of "making propaganda for the PKK." 
 
 
 
Sanliurfa - 2.17.10: Security forces detained a person on the 
 
ADANA 00000015  003 OF 004 
 
 
suspicion of terrorism. 
 
 
 
Cukurca in Hakkari - 2.17.10: Security forces arrested six 
people on the charge of "making propaganda for the PKK." 
 
 
 
Siirt - 2.17.10: Security forces arrested seven MKM-DER members 
on the charge of "making propaganda for the PKK." 
 
 
 
Adana - 2.17.10: Security forces arrested nine YDG-M members on 
the charge of "PKK membership." 
 
 
 
Mersin - 2.16.10: Security forces detained ten people in Tarsus 
on the suspicion of terrorism.  Police arrested two people who 
on the wanted list. 
 
 
 
Mardin - 2.16.10: Security forces arrested 16 people, including 
local BDP politicians and municipality council members, on the 
charge of "membership in the KCK." 
 
 
 
Batman - 2.16.10: Security forces detained 58 people on the 
suspicion of terrorism. 
 
 
 
Hakkari - 2.16.10: Security forces arrested six people on the 
charges of "joining in illegal actions on behalf of the PKK," 
and "making propaganda for the PKK." 
 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶C.  Other media stories about the PKK: 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
2.23.10: PKK's feminist wing, KJB, is calling all Kurdish women 
to join in March 8 celebrations on International Women's Day. 
 
 
 
Sanliurfa - 2.21.10:  Demonstrators chanted pro-PKK slogans, 
blocked roads, threw stones and set an ATM on fire with Molotov 
cocktails.  Police intervened with pressurized water, batons and 
tear gas. 
 
 
 
Hakkari - 2.19- and 2.20.10: Security forces clashed with PKK 
supporters. Demonstrators chanted slogans in favor of PKK and 
Ocalan. 
 
 
 
Malatya - 2.18.10: The burial of a person who self-immolated to 
protest 11th anniversary of Abdullah 
 
Ocalan's capture was attended by many supporters. 
 
 
 
Hakkari - 2.17.10: PKK supporters clashed with security forces 
while protesting the anniversary of Ocalan's capture.  Police 
intervened with batons, pressurized water and tear gas; 
demonstrators responded with Molotov cocktails, fireworks, and 
rock throwing. 
 
 
 
Hakkari - 2.16.10: An IED placed near a jewelry shop on 
Cumhuriyet Street in Semdinli detonated at around 2300, causing 
minor damage. 
 
 
 
Sanliurfa - 2.16.10: PKK sympathizers continued to carry out 
illegal protests related to the anniversary of Abdullah Ocalan's 
capture.  In 
 
Viransehir, security forces intervened with pressurized water, 
 
ADANA 00000015  004 OF 004 
 
 
batons and tear gas and PKK supporters responded with Molotov 
cocktails and stones. 
 
 
 
Sanliurfa - 2.16.10: PKK supporters attacked a police patrol 
vehicle with fireworks and Molotov cocktails. No injuries 
reported. 
 
 
 
¶4.   (U) Media reports on significant crime or security 
incidents: 
 
2.23.10: Ayman al-Zawahiri, al-Qaeda's second-in-command, 
strongly criticized the Turkish government for committing crimes 
against Islam by allowing Turkish soldiers to serve in 
Afghanistan. 
 
2.17.10: Twenty-six people, including a high-level police 
officer, were arrested in trafficking-in-persons operations in 
Istanbul, Ankara and Malatya. 
 
¶5. (U) Illegal immigrant arrests: 
 
 
2.14.10 through 2.22.10: Security forces captured and deported 
321 illegal immigrants from: Canakkale, Edirne, Van, Aydin, 
Sirnak, Antalya, Hatay and the borders of Greece, Syria, 
Bulgaria and Iran. 
 
 
 
2.23.10: Zaman Newspaper: Research conducted on migration 
patterns by a group of journalists has revealed that more than 
34,000 illegal migrants drowned in the Aegean and Mediterranean 
seas between 1988 and 2009. In addition to the more than 34,000 
illegal migrants who drowned in the Mediterranean and Aegean 
seas, 15,000 migrants were found dead inside Europe's borders. 
While 4,500 people perished in trying to reach Spain, 
approximately 140 people drowned while heading from Algeria to 
Sardinia. 
 
 
 
¶6.  (U) Counternarcotic operations: 
 
Diyarbakir - 2.23.10: Security forces seized 193 kilograms of 
hashish and one pistol, and detained four people. 
 
2.23.10: Security forces detained 16 people in simultaneous 
counternarcotics operations in Adana, Hatay, Diyarbakir and 
Antalya. 
 
Adana - 2.23.10: Security forces seized five kilograms of 
hashish and detained one person. 
 
Siirt - 2.23.10: Security forces seized ten kilograms of 
hashish. 
 
Batman - 2.21.10: Security forces seized eight kilograms of 
hashish and detained four people. 
 
Sanliurfa - 2.20.10: Security forces seized 55 kilograms of 
hashish. 
 
Adiyaman - 2.19.10: Security forces seized four kilograms of 
hashish, two pistols, 50 grams of heroin and detained 20 people 
in an operation targeting street sellers. 
 
Sirnak - 2.19.10: Security forces seized 2,256 units of pills 
and detained one person. 
 
 
 
Diyarbakir - 2.19.10: Security forces seized 38 kilograms of 
hashish and arrested one person. 
 
 
 
Adana - 2.17.10: Security forces seized 10 kilograms of hashish 
and detained 5 people. 
 
 
 
Adiyaman - 2.17.10: Security forces detained 20 people. 
DARNELL