10ADANA7
SE TURKEY SECURITY INCIDENTS: JANUARY 18-25, 2010
Sat Jan 30 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
VZCZCXRO2198
RR RUEHDA
DE RUEHDA #0007/01 0300821
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 300821Z JAN 10
FM AMCONSUL ADANA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4845
INFO RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 1151
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 1388
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 1455UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ADANA 000007 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR DS/IP/EUR, DS/IP/ITA, INR AND EUR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PTER PINR CASC TU
SUBJECT: SE TURKEY SECURITY INCIDENTS: JANUARY 18-25, 2010 
 
¶1.  (U) The following security incidents for the period of 
January 18-25, 2010 were compiled by the security assistant at 
Consulate Adana from RSO sources, to include Turkish security 
contacts, government officials and media.  The RSO uses the 
information to determine the security situation and trends of 
violence and crime throughout Turkey. The RSO shares the 
information with the country team and Visas Viper coordinator. 
 
¶2.  (U) Military operations against the Kurdistan Workers' Party 
(PKK) as reported by the Turkish General Staff: 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
-------- 
¶A.  Weapons, ammunition, and equipment seized: 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
-------- 
 
Sirnak - 01.23.10: 25 kilograms of ammonium nitrate, 5 
magazines, logistical equipment. 
 
Mardin - 01.22.10: Pressure-sensitive IED made of 150 grams of 
plastic explosives and 750 grams of ammonium nitrate. 
 
Diyarbakir - 01.22.10: Two pressure-sensitive IEDs made of 6 
kilograms of ammonium nitrate. 
 
Bingol - 01.21.10: Two IEDs. 
 
Batman-Agri-Igdir - 01.21.10: 2 Kalashnikov rifles, 1 rifle, 9 
pistols, 5 rifles for hunting, 335 rounds of ammunition, 1 hand 
grenade, 2 pairs of binoculars, many organizational documents, 
logistical equipment, and food. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
¶B.  PKK members captured or surrendered: 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
01.19.10 through 01.25.10: Security forces captured 6 PKK 
members. 
 
Mardin - 01.24.10: 1 PKK member caught. 
 
Sirnak - 01.20.10: 4 PKK members surrendered. 
 
Eleven PKK members have been captured since January 1, 2010. 
The courts arrested seven of the eleven and released four.  One 
soldier was killed in the same period, and four soldiers were 
wounded. 
 
--------------------- 
¶C. PKK attacks: 
--------------------- 
 
Hakkari - 01.18.10: 1 civilian wounded in IED blast. 
 
¶3. (U) Media reports related to PKK and pro-Kurdish 
organizations. 
 
--------------------------------- 
¶A.  Anti-PKK operations: 
--------------------------------- 
 
Based on information that PKK members were in preparations to 
carry out actions to protest prison conditions of Abdullah 
Ocalan, TAF increased anti-PKK operations in SE Turkey, 
particularly in Tunceli and Bingol. 
 
Turkish Armed Forces (TAF) anti-PKK operations in SE Turkey 
continued in Tunceli, Sirnak, Batman, Mardin, Hatay, Siirt, 
Hakkari and Bingol.  Many armored vehicles, military personnel 
and ammunition were sent to the operation areas. 
 
¶N. Iraq - 01.21.10: TAF artillery teams bombed Kurejare 
District, no injuries reported. 
 
----------------- 
¶B.  Arrests: 
----------------- 
 
Mus - 01.25.10: DTP's former chairman and two other officials, 
were sentenced for a cumulative 30 months in prison on the 
charge of "making propaganda for the terror organization PKK." 
 
Adiyaman - 01.25.10: BDP (Peace and Democracy Party) Provincial 
Chairman Mehmet Varol was sentenced for 6 months in prison on 
the charge of "making propaganda for the PKK." 
 
Bingol - 01.24.10: Security forces detained 1 person on the 
suspicion of terrorism. 
 
 
ADANA 00000007  002 OF 004 
 
 
Siirt - 01.24.10: Security forces arrested 7 people on the 
charge of "joining in illegal actions on behalf of the PKK." 
 
Sanliurfa - 01.24.10: Security forces arrested an employee of 
the Pro-Kurdish Azadiya Welat Newspaper (the Free World) on the 
charge of "making propaganda for the PKK." 
 
Sanliurfa - 01.23.10: Security forces arrested 3 people on the 
charge of "membership in Al-Qaeda." 
 
Sirnak - 01.23.10: Security forces detained 2 people on the 
charge of "making propaganda for the PKK." 
 
Bingol - 01.23.10: Security forces detained 3 people in anti-KCK 
(Kurdish Democratic Confederation/Turkey Assembly) operation on 
the charges of "chanting illegal slogans in favor of the PKK," 
and "making propaganda for the PKK." 
 
Adana - 01.23.10: Security forces arrested 3 people on the 
charge of "joining in illegal actions on behalf of the PKK." 
 
Batman-Diyarbakir-Van-Istanbul - 01.21.10: Security forces 
arrested 42 people on the charges of "membership in the PKK", 
"assisting and harboring the PKK," and "carrying out actions in 
rural areas on behalf of the PKK." Two Kalashnikovs, 1 pistol, 
magazines, ammunition, 4 rifles, 1 hand grenade, organizational 
documents, and logistical material were seized in the 
operations. 
 
Diyarbakir - 01.21.10: Security forces detained 4 people on the 
suspicion of terrorism. 
 
Bitlis - 01.21.10: Security forces arrested 3 people on the 
charge of "making propaganda for the PKK." 
 
Adana - 01.21.10: Security forces arrested 16 people on the 
charge of "membership in Al-Qaeda." The arrestees chanted 
anti-U.S. and Israeli slogans upon their arrival at the police 
station in Adana. 
 
Adana - 01.21.10: 15 people, including DTP former chairman of 
Ceyhan Seyfettin Aydemir and Party member Abdullah Aydemir were 
sentenced to a cumulative 24 years in prison on the charge of 
"violating restrictions on marchers and demonstrations." 
 
Hakkari - 01.21.10; DTP former provincial chairman Hivzullah 
Kansu was sentenced for 2 years and 2 months in prison on the 
charge of "making propaganda for the PKK." 
 
Adana - 01.21.10: 2 people who were arrested on the charge of 
"joining in illegal actions on behalf of the PKK" were released. 
 
 
Mus - 01.21.10: Security forces detained 3 people on the 
suspicion of terrorism. 
 
Diyarbakir - 01.21.10: Security forces detained an employee of 
the pro-Kurdish Azadiya Welat Newspaper on the suspicion of 
terrorism. 
 
Diyarbakir - 01.21.10: Security forces detained 14 people on the 
suspicion of terrorism. 
 
Batman - 01.20.10: Security forces detained 2 people on the 
suspicion of terrorism. 
 
Hakkari - 01.20.10: Security forces arrested 1 minor (age 15) on 
the charge of "making propaganda for the PKK." 
 
Van - 01.20.10: DTP's former mayoral candidate Abdurrahman Cagan 
was sentenced for 5 months in prison on the charge of "making 
propaganda for the PKK." 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
¶C.  Other media stories about the PKK: 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
01.25.10: The PKK has set up a new unit, called the Kurdistan 
Freedom Falcons (TAK), to coordinate large-scale terrorist acts 
in urban areas alongside the Kurdish Communities Union (KCK). 
The group plans to launch this double-front action on Feb. 15, 
the anniversary of the capture of the PKK's jailed leader 
Abdullah Ocalan, and continue until March 21, Nevruz, a spring 
festival which is of special significance to Kurds.  NOTE: Many 
deadly actions in the past which targeted civilians were claimed 
by TAK past to shift attention from the PKK, which generally 
does not claim responsibility for actions targeting civilians. 
END NOTE 
 
Diyarbakir - 01.25.10: According to the Human Rights Union of 
 
ADANA 00000007  003 OF 004 
 
 
Diyarbakir, 67 security officials and 68 PKK members were killed 
in 2009, despite PKK's declared ceasefire. The report also said 
that 91 civilians were killed in the same period. Security 
forces detained 4,475 people in 2009, and arrested 1,444 of 
them. The report also said that there is a sharp increase in 
torture cases and added that 1,016 people were subjected to some 
type of torture. 
 
Hakkari - 01.23.10: Many people gathered in Yuksekova to protest 
prison conditions of Abdullah Ocalan. Security forces intervened 
with tear gas, pressurized water and batons and demonstrators 
responded with Molotov cocktails and stones; no injuries 
reported. 
 
Adana - 01.23.10: Pro-Kurdish NGOs gathered to protest prison 
conditions and called upon the government to release seriously 
ill prisoners. 
 
Siirt - 01.21.10: Security forces confiscated 3 Kalashnikovs, 1 
rifle, 417 rounds of ammunition, 22 rounds of pistol ammunition, 
and 13 magazines in an anti-terror operation.  Two people who 
were in preparations to send the material and ammunition to 
PKK's mountain units were arrested on the charge of "assisting 
and harboring the PKK." 
 
Malatya - 01.21.10: Three students were kicked out of their 
university dormitory on the suspicion of pro-PKK activities. 
 
Hakkari - 01.20.10: A court announced its rationale on an 
earlier ruling regarding 8 Turkish soldiers taken hostage by the 
PKK following an ambush at a military outpost in that left 12 
others dead, saying the 8 should have remained at their posts 
and fought the militants to the end.  The soldiers were captured 
during a PKK attack on October 21, 2007, near the Turkish-Iraqi 
border.  The eight Turkish soldiers were held for two weeks 
before they were released in northern Iraq. 
¶4.  (U) Media reports on significant crime or security incidents: 
 
Sanliurfa - 01.24.10: 1 person was killed and 4 others wounded 
in a firefight between two families. 
 
Diyarbakir - 01.24.10: Unidentified people attacked AK (Justice 
and Development) Party's district building with Molotov 
cocktails, no injuries reported. 
 
Mersin - 01.24.10: Unidentified people set a vehicle on fire. 
 
Sanliurfa-Adiyaman-Mersin-Mardin-Sirnak-Diyar bakir-Gaziantep: 
01.20.10 through 01.24.10: Security forces detained 50 people in 
an anti-organized crime and smuggling operation. 
 
Osmaniye - 01.23.10: Security forces detained two and seized 
smuggled cigarettes and 100 sexual stimulant pills. 
 
Sirnak - 01.21.10: Security forces detained 11 people in an 
anti-organized crime and smuggling operation. 
 
Adana - 01.21.10: Security forces detained 9 people in an 
anti-organized crime and smuggling operation. 
 
Hatay - 01.21.10: Security forces seized 3 trucks of smuggled 
cigarettes and detained 3 people in an anti-smuggling operation. 
 
 
Diyarbakir - 01.20.10: Security forces detained 12 people in an 
anti-crime operation. 
 
¶5. (U) Illegal immigrant arrests: 
 
01.18.10 through 01.24.10: Security forces captured and deported 
209 illegal immigrants from: Adana, Hatay, Hakkari, Igdir, 
Mugla, Antalya, Izmir, Edirne, Agri, Aydin and the borders of 
Iran, Georgia and Greece. 
 
¶6. (U) Counter-narcotic operations: 
 
Osmaniye - 01.25.10: Security forces confiscated 25 kilograms of 
hashish and detained 2 people. 
 
Hatay - 01.21.10: Security forces confiscated 4 kilograms of 
hashish and detained 2 people. 
 
Van - 01.20.10: Security forces confiscated 134 kilograms of 
hashish and detained 1 person. 
 
¶7. (U) Anti-Al-Qaeda Operation in across Turkey, including SE 
and Adana. 
 
01.22.10: Security forces detained at least 120 people in 
simultaneous anti-Al-Qaeda operations held by the 
 
ADANA 00000007  004 OF 004 
 
 
counterterrorism teams in 16 provinces across Turkey, including 
Ankara (5), Kocaeli (20), Elazig (8),  Istanbul, Bursa, 
Sanliurfa (6), Gaziantep (7), Mersin (15), Van (4), Mus (6), 
Malatya (6), Samsun (4), Izmir (4), Erzurum (1) and Diyarbakir, 
Kahramanmaras, Konya and Adana (1). 
 
¶8. (U) Anti-American activity 
 
Adana - 01.22.10: An anti-American rock concert attracted an 
audience of more than 1,000 people.  Concert-goers participated 
in a moment of silence to commemorate lives lost in the fight 
against "imperialism, America, and Israel," and chanted slogans 
such as "America get out, this is our country," and "Shut down 
Incirlik Air Base."  The same group held a similar concert two 
days later in Antakya. 
DARNELL