06HILLAH29
PROTESTS, SPORADIC VIOLENCE CONTINUE ACROSS SOUTH CENTRAL;
Fri Feb 24 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
REO Hillah
VZCZCXRO8330
PP RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHKUK RUEHMOS
DE RUEHIHL #0029/01 0551820
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 241820Z FEB 06
FM REO HILLAH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0555
INFO RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD PRIORITY 0540
RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE
RUEHIHL/REO HILLAH 0602UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HILLAH 000029 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KISL PINR IZ
SUBJECT: PROTESTS, SPORADIC VIOLENCE CONTINUE ACROSS SOUTH CENTRAL; 
SADRISTS PREACH CALM, PROTECT BABIL SUNNI SHRINE 
 
REF: A)  HILLAH 0028  B) HILLAH 0026 
 
HILLAH 00000029  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED - NOT FOR INTERNET DISTRIBUTION 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: Protests continued across Wasit and Babil 
Provinces in South Central Iraq for a second and third day after 
the bombing of Al-Askariyah mosque in Samarra. In Wasit, Shi'a 
Islamists of all affiliations joined a massive demonstration 
February 23. The next day, Sadrist mosque preachers called for 
calm. Diwaniyah Sadrists called for their followers to mobilize 
to protect Samarra. In Babil, a tightly-enforced curfew did not 
prevent additional protests on February 23 and 24, and police 
reported apparently sectarian killings. Babil mosques generally 
preached restraint, and Sadrists reportedly offered to protect a 
Sunni mosque in Al-Hillah. End summary. 
 
TWO BABIL SUNNIS REPORTED DEAD; SADRISTS PRAY WITH SUNNIS 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
¶2. (SBU) Protests Thursday, February 23 again coursed through 
Al-Hillah, breaking up in the late afternoon just before the 
imposition of a curfew that was to begin at 6 p.m. Babil 
officials described the protest as peaceful, and estimated the 
crowd to be about 3,000. Three mortars were reportedly fired at 
the demonstrators, missing the protest and instead striking a 
nearby house, injuring a woman and two children. Local contacts 
reported that two Sunnis were killed late on February 23, 
increasing the total known dead in Babil to three so far in the 
wake of the Al-Askariyah bombing. 
 
¶3. (SBU) A curfew prohibiting car traffic on Al-Hillah's streets 
remained in effect through Friday, February 24, although traffic 
reportedly moved freely outside the city. Local staff reported 
seeing a very large number of Sadrists dressed in black 
preparing to board as many as thirty buses bound for Kufa, Najaf 
Province, the site of one of Moqtada Al-Sadr's main offices and 
an affiliated mosque. Local staff also reported convoys from 
Mahaweel, in Northern Babil Province, traveling through Babil on 
the main road to Najaf. Local staff said that the convoys could 
have been heading towards Najaf, or to the Imam Zaid Bin Ali 
Shrine near Kifl, Babil Province. (Note: February 24 marks a day 
of pilgrimage to the Zaid bin Ali Shrine for Shi'a Muslims. End 
note.) The convoys bore banners and pictures of Moqtada Al-Sadr. 
Passengers were chanting, "Down, down, America, down, down, 
Israel" as the convoy passed by the Regional Embassy Office. 
Later on February 24, protesters estimated at more than 5,000 
marched through Al-Hillah chanting for the dismissal of U.S. 
Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Local contacts reported Sadrist imams preaching 
self-control and restraint during Friday prayers, urging 
worshippers not to be driven into sectarian strife because that 
is the goal of the terrorists. Sadrists were also reported to 
have joined Sunnis in prayer. According to a local official, 
Babil Governor Salem Saleh Mehdi Al-Muslimawi had sent word to a 
Sunni mosque in Al-Hillah asking them to cancel their Friday 
prayers for their own safety. Hearing of this, the Sadrists 
reportedly sent a delegation to the Sunni shrine, convinced the 
Sunnis to hold their services under Sadrist protection, and even 
joined in the Sunni rites. 
 
THURSDAY ANGER YIELDS TO FRIDAY CALLS FOR PEACE IN WASIT 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) A large crowd, representing the full range of Shi'a 
Islamists and estimated in the thousands, converged on the main 
Sadrist mosque in Al-Kut Thursday, February 23. The 
demonstrators marched peacefully to the main courtyard of the 
Wasit Governorate Center building, where they were received by 
Provincial Council members, some of whom are Sadrists, Wasit 
Supreme Council for the Islamic Revolution in Iraq (SCIRI) 
Chairman Ahmed Al-Hakim and a representative of the Sistani 
office in Al-Kut. Sistani's instructions calling for 
demonstrations were read to the crowd. After a speech by former 
Provincial Council Chairman Majed Ali Askar calling for the 
withdrawal of Coalition Forces, the crowd chanted "No! No! 
America! No! No! Israel!" Many in the crowd also called for 
violence and retribution against Sunnis and their leaders, 
including Saleh Mutlaq and Adnan Al-Dulaimi. The demonstration 
was patrolled by Iraqi Army and Iraqi Police forces. A banner in 
front of the Sadrist office in Al-Kut read, "The explosion that 
damaged the holy shrine in Samarra is the result of a coalition 
between the United States and terrorist Sunni political 
leaders." 
 
¶6. (SBU) Thursday's violent rhetoric apparently gave way to 
restraint by Friday, February 24. At the main Sadrist mosque in 
Al-Kut, Wasit Sadrist Head Modhafer Al-Musawi appealed for calm. 
Reading a statement reportedly from Moqtada Al-Sadr, Al-Musawi 
described the mosque bombings in Samarra as an act designed to 
split the brotherhood of Islam and Muslims in Iraq. Musawi, 
further relating the statement of Al-Sadr, demanded that a 
 
HILLAH 00000029  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
committee of Sunni and Shi'a be formed to investigate the 
incident, and that religious leaders sign an "honor pact" to 
leave important Sunni and Shi'a sites unharmed. At a Sunni 
Mosque in Al-Kut, a small crowd of approximately 50 worshippers 
gathered for Friday morning prayers. The imam appealed for unity 
and brotherhood between all Muslims of Iraq. 
 
SADRIST, SISTANI MOSQUES OFFER DIVERGENT INSTRUCTIONS 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) In Diwaniyah, stores and government offices were closed 
February 23, and no protests or demonstrations were reported. 
The next day, Shi'a mosques offered divergent guidance. A local 
journalist reported that in mosques affiliated with Grand 
Ayatollah Ali Al-Sistani, preachers called for calm. In 
contrast, Sadrist mosques offered "incendiary" sermons, and 
urged worshippers to travel to Samarra to protect the religious 
sites there. 
FONTENEAU