02ADANA386
SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY
Wed Nov 20 00:00:00 +0100 2002
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ADANA 0386 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU IZ ADANA
SUBJECT:  SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY 
NOVEMBER 6, 2002 
 
 
¶1.  This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary for 
November 6, 2002.  Please note that Turkish press reports 
often contain errors or exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana 
does not vouch for the accuracy of the reports summarized 
here. 
 
 
POLITICS, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
-------------------------------- 
 
 
¶2.  COORDINATING GOVERNOR TO REPLACE OHAL GOVERNOR 
(Sabah)  Following the 15-year state of emergency (OHAL) in 
the East and Southeast, which is to end on November 30 in 
Diyarbakir and Sirnak, the only provinces where OHAL 
remains in effect, the OHAL Governor's Office will be 
replaced by the Coordinator Governor's Office.  During the 
Turkish National Security Council (MGK) meeting last month, 
Interior Ministry Muzaffer Ecemis briefed MGK members on 
his Ministry's "classified" report, along with a series of 
measures to be taken after OHAL ends in the region.  The 
Coordinator Governor will reportedly have the same 
privilege of using special allocations from the Prime 
Ministry budget as the OHAL Governor. 
 
 
¶3.  NGO REPORT CALLS DIYARBAKIR RETURNEE KILLINGS "TERROR" 
(Evrensel)  A report prepared by an Association for the 
Oppressed (MAZLUM-DER) about the killing of three returnees 
to Bismil's (Diyarbakir) Ugrak village by village guards 
called the incident not a blood feud, but "terror" by 
village guards which threatened the social peace.  The 
delegation called for removal of obstacles in the way of 
village returns and abolition of the village guard system. 
 
 
¶4.  THREE PUBLIC EMPLOYEES INVESTIGATED FOR PARTICIPATION 
IN DEHAP RALLY 
(Evrensel)  An investigation has been launched against 
three Diyarbakir public employees for participating in the 
Democratic People's Party (DEHAP) rally and the 
inauguration of a DEHAP election office in Lice 
(Diyarbakir).  The public employees have been suspended 
until the investigation is concluded. 
 
 
¶5.  DEHAP PETITIONS TO CANCEL VOTES IN TWO TOWNSHIPS 
(Evrensel)  Claiming voters were forced to cast their votes 
openly in Sirnak's Beytussebap and Uludere townships, as 
well as many villages, the Democratic People's Party 
(DEHAP) petitioned the Provincial Election Board to cancel 
the elections (in those townships and villages).  In 
addition, Youth Party (GP) Sirnak candidate Tahir Adiyaman 
claimed Ayvalik and Basaran villagers were forced to cast 
their votes openly and complained the Election Board 
refused to process objections to that end. 
 
 
¶6.  103 ELECTION VIOLATION APPLICATIONS 
(Evrensel)  One hundred and three people applied to the 
Crisis Desk formed by the Diyarbakir Chapter of the Human 
Rights Association (HRA), reporting rights violations 
during the November 3 elections. According to the Desk, 
observers serving at 17 different ballot boxes were 
prevented, while 37 people were arrested on election day 
for arguing with security forces.  Alleged violations 
included forcing voters to vote openly, pressuring them to 
vote for another party (rather than the Democratic People's 
Party - DEHAP), preventing them from casting their votes, 
as well as threats and wrong electorate information cards. 
 
 
¶7.  MERSIN POLICE BRIEFED ON EU HARMONIZATION LAWS 
(Milliyet/Hurriyet/Turkiye)  Chief Public Prosecutor Halil 
Acioglu briefed 500 police chiefs and police officers at 
the Mersin Security Directorate on EU Harmonization Laws. 
Police were informed about recent amendments to the 
Criminal Court Procedures Law (CMUK), the Police Duty and 
Authorization Law, the Meetings, Demonstrations and Marches 
Law, the State Security Court and Trial Procedures Laws, 
the Associations Law, as well as Regulations on Arrest, 
Detention and Testimony Taking. 
 
 
¶8.  NEW ADANA MP'S LOBBY TO POSTPONE ADANA AIRPORT'S CLOSURE 
(Milliyet/Hurriyet)  Following a meeting with 
representatives of the Adana and Mersin industrial 
organizations, newly elected Justice and Development Party 
(AKP) and Republican People's Party (CHP) parliamentarians 
and provincial chairmen faxed a joint message to their 
headquarters to postpone the closure of the Adana Airport 
to flights until April 1, 2003.  In addition to 
postponement of the Airport's closure, the message called 
for putting in service a secondary runway, and use of the 
Incirlik Air Base during the two-month renovation project. 
(Note:  Several papers had already reported the closure of 
the Adana Airport to flights as of November 4 due to repair 
and maintenance.) 
HOLTZ