04ADANA135
SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY, OCTOBER 5, 2004
Tue Oct 05 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ADANA 000135 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM IZ TU ADANA
SUBJECT: SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY, OCTOBER 5, 2004 
 
¶1.  This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary for October 
05, 2004.  Please note that Turkish press reports often contain 
errors or exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch for 
the accuracy of the reports summarized here. 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
¶2.  SABAH/HURRIYET: In Gaziantep, former banker Betul Kurt (27) 
disappeared with $10 million she had received by promising high 
interest rates to those who made deposits in a currency 
exchange. The currency exchange office belonged to her 
relatives.  While working as a banker, Kurt had been charged 
with using clients' money in her name, and she is facing 8.5 
years of imprisonment. 
 
¶3.  CUMHURIYET/EVRENSEL: In Siirt province, 33 Istanbul and 
Siirt "Human Shield Initiative" members who had attempted to 
travel to the Cirav Mountain in order to stop military 
operations underway against PKK/Kongra Gel, were arrested by the 
Eruh Criminal Court of Peace for opposing Assembly and Marches 
Law No. 2911, damaging others' property, disobeying officials' 
orders, openly instigating hatred and animosity among people, 
and resisting enforcement officers. 
 
CUMHURIYET: American diplomats from the Political Section of the 
US Embassy in Ankara, Philip Kaplan and James Sopp, arrived in 
Van. During their visit with the Van Mayor, Mr. Kaplan said they 
were undertaking a trip with the goal of understanding Turkey 
better, and had been visiting Van as a part of that trip. 
Kaplan said that they called on governors, mayors, NGO 
representatives, and public prosecutors in the towns they 
visited. 
 
MILLIYET/BOLGE/ULKEDE OZGUR GUNDEM: The trial related to Siyar 
Perincek, an alleged PKK/Kongra Gel militant who died in clashes 
with police, started in Adana.  Three policemen charged with 
manslaughter face sentences varying from 5 to 15 years of 
imprisonment.  One of the defendants, police supervisor D.O., 
claimed Perincek fired at him two rounds before he shot at him. 
The hearing was adjourned to November 11. 
 
VAKIT: Approximately 10,000 Turkish trucks have been "stranded" 
for two weeks in Zakho, Northern Iraq, because of unjust 
practices by the Kurdish peshmergas.  Truckers have been 
claiming that they are forced to buy fuel from the Halil Ibrahim 
Customs Station and pay a fee of $125, an increase of $25 over 
the past. Truckers have been petitioning Turkish authorities to 
find a remedy. 
 
TURKIYE: Jandarma teams seized 16.785 kilograms of heroin in 
operations in the Aktoprak and Tekpinar villages of Adiyaman. 
Three persons were arrested in connection with drugs. 
 
 
 
 
ALLISON