04ADANA150
BFIF 2004 END OF YEAR REPORT
Wed Dec 01 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ADANA 000150 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EB/CBA - DENNIS A. WINSTEAD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BEXP ABUD AMGT BTIO ECON EINV ETRD ADANA
SUBJECT: BFIF 2004 END OF YEAR REPORT 
 
REF: STATE 238763, STATE 248715 
 
¶1.  Adana greatly appreciates the support from EB for two 
projects during 2004.  Thanks to BFIF funding post was also able 
to send the American Corner/Gaziantep Director to Ankara for 
consulations with FCS staff from May 26-29, 2004.  (Note:  The 
American Corner is housed in the Gaziantep Chamber of Industry 
and is a partner in promoting understanding and cooperation 
between the U.S. and Turkey.  End note.)  The trip resulted in 
an improvement in the commercial information provided to the 
business community in the area covered by Consulate Adana.   The 
American Corner director met with several FCS staff members 
regarding all FCS activities; in addition she was trained on 
internet sector and firm research, briefed on "doing business in 
Iraq" themes, provided with numerous books and website resources 
for the Gaziantep center, and provided information about FAS/ag 
finance.  In the months after her training she fielded numerous 
inquiries including, to name just a few, requests for commercial 
and trade links to U.S. companies searching for lists of carpet 
and fabric producers, paint and chemical companies and 
industrial kitchen equipment providers. 
 
¶2.   BFIF funding also allowed teh Deputy Principal Officer to 
accompany a group of Turkish businessmen on a business mission 
to Washington in April 2004 in conjunction with the American 
Turkish Council's  (ATC) 23rd annual meeting, which is regularly 
attended by all of the major U.S. companies doing business in 
Turkey, the small and medium U.S. firms doing business or 
looking to expand here, and their Turkish counterparts.  BFIF 
support to this non-FSC post allowed us to continue to showcase 
SE Turkey as a potential new market for American goods and 
services and to reach out in ways that would not be possible 
without this funding.  Financial accounting for the projects is 
being provided septel. 
 
REID