04ANKARA5377
ACTION REQUEST: U.S. MILITARY MEDIVAC OF INJURED
Tue Sep 21 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

211444Z Sep 04UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 005377 
 
SIPDIS 
 
BAGHDAD PLEASE ALSO PASS MOSUL AND MNF-I 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL MOPS TU IZ
SUBJECT: ACTION REQUEST: U.S. MILITARY MEDIVAC OF INJURED 
TURKISH AID WORKER FROM MOSUL 
 
 
¶1. This is an urgent action request.  Please see para. six. 
 
¶2. Summary: On Sept. 20, Turkish Red Crescent worker Mustafa 
Pekcan was seriously wounded in a terrorist attack and taken 
to a Mosul hospital, where he underwent emergency surgery. 
GOT is seeking U.S. assistance to medivac Pekcan to Turkey. 
TFO has been to the hospital and TFO surgeon evaluated his 
condition afternoon of Sept. 21.  Surgeon believes Pekcan is 
improving but that the hospital is adequate and that it is 
not safe to move him immediately, though it may be safe on 
Sept. 22.  Embassy requests USG approval for MNF-I to medivac 
Pekcan to Diyarbakir, Turkey as soon as it is safe for him to 
travel.  End summary. 
 
¶3. On Sept. 20, a vehicle carrying Turkish Red Crescent 
workers from Talafar--where they had been doing relief work 
following recent coalition operations there--came under 
insurgent fire on the road to Mosul.  Three to four workers 
were lightly injured but one, Mustafa Pekcan, was seriously 
wounded, with injuries to his kidney, colon, and pelvis.  The 
workers were taken to El Salam hospital in Mosul, where 
doctors performed emergency surgery on Pekcan.  We understand 
Pekcan was suffering serious internal bleeding following 
surgery but is now doing somewhat better; the internal 
bleeding seems to have slowed.  TFO surgeon evaluated 
Pekcan's condition afternoon of Sept. 21 and believes that 
his standard of care is good and it would not be in Pekcan's 
interests to move him now, though he may be in better shape 
to move on Sept. 22. 
 
¶4. Turkish Red Crescent, Turkish MFA, and TGS have all been 
in contact with us concerning this case.  MFA forwarded us a 
diplomatic note (para. seven) requesting USG assistance to 
medivac Pekcan to Diyarbakir, Turkey.  Red Crescent is 
anxious to move Pekcan now, but, acknowledging TFO surgeon's 
evaluation, Turkish Special Forces Commander in Silopi told 
our LNO there that Sept. 22 would be adequate for medivac. 
 
¶5. The Turkish press is aware of this case and has already 
been making inquiries to the Embassy press officer. 
 
¶6. Action request: Request the Department coordinate with 
relevant players--DoD, CENTCOM, Embassy Baghdad--to authorize 
MNF-I to stand ready to medivac Pekcan to Diyarbakir o/a 
Sept. 22, depending on Pekcan's condition.  End action 
request. 
 
¶7. BEGIN TEXT OF DIPLOMATIC NOTE 
 
2004/UKGY/395977 
 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Turkey 
 
Top Urgent 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Turkey 
presents its compliments to the Embassy of the United States 
of America in Ankara and concerning the recent armed attack 
to a Turkish Red Crescent vehicle in Mosul has the honour to 
inform of the following: 
 
The Ministry has received a petition from Mrs. Didem Pekcan, 
spouse of Mr. Mustafa Pekcan, a Turkish Red Crescent 
personnel who had severely injured in the above mentioned 
attack and currently under medical treatment in Al Selam 
Hospital in Mosul requesting her husband's urgent transfer to 
Turkey via ambulance helicopter or plane and undertaking all 
the responsibilities and risks arising from this transfer.  A 
copy of the said petition is enclosed herewith. 
 
In this framework, the assistance of the Esteemed Embassy in 
informing the relevant American authorities on the issue with 
the aim of realizing the transfer of Mr. Mustafa Pekcan from 
Mosul, Iraq to Diyarbakir, Turkey at its earliest convenience 
will be highly appreciated. 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Turkey 
avails itself of this opportunity to renew to the Embassy of 
the United States of America the assurances of its highest 
consideration. 
 
Ankara, 21 September 2004 
 
Encl.: (As Stated) 
 
Embassy of the United States of America 
Ankara 
 
END TEXT 
 
¶8. Baghdad minimize considered. 
EDELMAN