04ANKARA5024
EXBS: TURKEY ADVISOR MONTHLY REPORTING CABLE
Wed Sep 08 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 005024 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NP/ECC- PVANSON, ACHURCH, TGROEN 
DEPT FOR EUR/ACE- DMARTIN, DMCCORMICK 
CBP/INA FOR PWARKER, RGALBRAITH 
USDOE/NNSA FOR TPERRY 
DOC FOR PETERSEN-BEARD 
USCG FOR RCIESLINSKI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC KNNP KSTC MNUC PARM PREL
SUBJECT: EXBS: TURKEY ADVISOR MONTHLY REPORTING CABLE 
 
REF: STATE 146478 
 
¶1.   Summary: August was a productive month despite the high 
number of Turkish contacts that were still enjoying their 
traditional summer vacation.  The DOE Second Line of Defense 
visit was able to lay the initial groundwork required to 
begin the planning process in upgrading the portal monitors 
at many of the Turkish border crossing. EXBS Advisor met with 
Turkish officials to coordinate the upcoming initial visits 
for the DOC Internal Compliance Program and the DOE Commodity 
Identification Program. He also began planning with the 
Undersecretariat for Customs for a review of each border 
crossing to establish a base line of operations and 
prioritization list for areas of improvement in training, 
equipment and possibly facilities.  Finally, EXBS Advisor 
continued to establish himself as the Embassy's main point of 
contact in the field of nonproliferation for the GOT. End 
Summary. 
 
¶2.    Completed Actions for the Reporting Period 
 
      ¶A.  Site Assessment and Meetings During Recent 
Reporting Period 
 
            1) August 2-3- Department of Energy second Line 
of Defense Team conducted introductory discussion with 
Turkish Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Customs and Atomic 
Energy Authority.  This program received favorable comments 
from the GOT and they would like to begin the program as soon 
as possible. 
 
            2) August 6- EXBS advisor met with Mr. Okay 
Cakiroglu, President of the Turkish Atomic Energy Authority 
(TAEK).  The meeting focused on TAEK,s involvement in the 
GOT nonproliferation program.  Mr. Cakiroglu outlined how 
TAEK supports the work being accomplished by Turkish Customs. 
 It is also involved in the region, focusing on standardizing 
Atomic Energy and other nuclear activities in Turkic speaking 
countries, such as Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and 
Uzbekistan.  Turkey is organizing and sponsoring the Eurasian 
Conference for Nuclear Science and Its Application in 
Uzbekistan this October. 
 
            3) August 12- EXBS advisor met with MFA DDG for 
Disarmament Haluk Ilicak.  During the meeting discussion were 
held on current projects including the EXBS MOU, Turkey's 
participation in the PSI experts working group, and future 
participation in the SEDM conference and future PSI 
activities.  EXBS advisor presented information on upcoming 
EXBS activities including the Internal Compliance Program 
initiation meetings, Black Sea and Caspian Sea Maritime 
Workshop.  Finally, EXBS advisory outline plan to work with 
Undersecretariat of Customs Enforcement to begin a 
coordinated review of the GOT Customs procedures to develop a 
list of potential areas with the EXBS program could focus to 
assist GOT. 
 
            4)  August 19- EXBS advisor met with DDG for 
Customs Enforcement Riza Mehmet Korkmaz_ and Department Head 
Mehmet Guzel to begin work in the development of a 
coordinated review of the GOT Customs Enforcement activities, 
with the aim of developing a list of areas which the EXBS 
program could assist the GOT in customs enforcement.  It was 
decided that Department Head Guzel will develop a 
presentation of the overall GOT Customs activities and 
believed shortfalls.  A future meeting will be scheduled to 
review this information and develop a schedule of visits to 
customs areas. 
 
            5) August 27- EXBS advisor delivered a pair of 
Diplomatic Notes to Turkish MFA. The first proposing a set of 
coordination meetings to begin the process of developing and 
customizing the DOC Internal Control Program for Turkey and 
another inviting GOT participation in the upcoming 
Black/Caspian Sea Maritime Conference which will take place 
in Kiev, Ukraine. 
 
      ¶B.    Training Conducted During Reporting Period: None. 
 
      ¶C.    Equipment Delivered During Reporting Period: None 
      ¶D.    Imminent Training or Equipment Status Update: 
None 
 
      ¶E.    Significant Developments in Export Controls, 
Nonproliferation, or Related Border Security 
 
            1) Turkey participated in the multi-national PSI 
Exports Working Group in Copenhagen and Oslo. This was the 
first major working group exercise in which Turkey 
participated with a full team of experts.  The team actively 
participated and agreed to send a team to the next PSI 
Working Group exercise as well as offering assets to the 
Maritime Exercise in Spain and to host an exercise in 2006. 
(Comment: Discussions in September placed a questions mark 
over Turkey's future participation in PSI activities; see 
septel (notal)) 
 
            2) Turkish replied to the U.S. comments on the 
umbrella EXBS agreement.  The comments where forwarded to the 
Department via cable for consideration.  Post also provided 
the Department with possible language to modify the last area 
of disagreement between the U.S. and GOT.  Once this or 
similar language is accepted the agreement can move forward 
in the Turkish government for full approval. 
 
            3) Turkey submitted a delegation list for 
participation in the Southeast European Defense Ministers 
conference, which will take place in Bled, Slovenia in early 
September.  EXBS Advisor served as the main link between the 
GOT delegation and OSD for this conference. 
 
            4) Turkey submitted a delegation list for the 
upcoming PSI maritime exercise that is to take place in 
Newport, Rhode Island in September.  The team of experts 
appears to be fully qualified and prepared to actively 
participate in this workshop.  EXBS Advisor is the Post lead 
on the PSI initiative. 
 
¶3.    Future Activities 
 
      ¶A. September 8-11- Turkey will send a team of Border 
Security Experts to the South Eastern Europe Defense 
Ministers Conference in Bled Slovenia. 
 
      ¶B. September 20-24  - Preliminary meetings will be held 
with Department of Commerce team to discuss the Internal 
Control Program. Country clearance request received, awaiting 
confirmation of dates from MFA before proceeding with 
detailed coordination. 
 
      ¶C. September 27-30- Turkey will send a team of Senior 
Maritime Leaders to participate in the Black Sea and Caspian 
Sea Maritime Leaders Conference in Kiev, Ukraine. 
 
      ¶D. Sept/Oct- EXBS Advisor will begin review of Custom 
Border posts, including actual site visits.  A schedule of 
visits is being developed with the Undersecretariat for 
Customs Enforcement and will include visits to major 
seaports, airports and land border crossings. 
 
      ¶E. Oct 4-17 - EXBS adviser will travel to Washington DC 
for program consultations and leave. 
 
      ¶F. Oct 18-20- EXBS Advisor will attend EUCOM Black Sea 
Initiative Conference in Garmish, Germany. 
 
¶4.    Red Flag Issues 
 
      ¶A. Finally approval of the U.S. Turkey EXBS agreement 
is needed in order for the EXBS program to begin to have an 
impact in Turkey.  Post submitted to State Department 
proposed wording change to the agreement that we believe 
would be acceptable to the GOT (Ankara 04779).  Awaiting 
reply to cable before presenting this wording to GOT MFA. 
 
      ¶B. The DOE SLD and INECP along with the DOC ICP 
Programs are ready to start as soon as the overarching EXBS 
agreement is signed and in effect, with background and 
preparatory meetings already scheduled. 
 
¶5.    Contact Information for EXBS Adviser: Kevin Lyon, phone 
(90)(312) 455-5555 ext 2525, fax (90)(312) 468-4775, email 
LyonK@state.gov. 
 
EDELMAN