04CARACAS2596
RICE LETTER ON SUMATE GETS ATTENTION
Thu Aug 12 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Caracas
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS  CARACAS 002596 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
NSC FOR CBARTON 
SOUTHCOM ALSO FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM KDEM OPRC KIRC VE
SUBJECT:  RICE LETTER ON SUMATE GETS ATTENTION 
 
 
--------------- 
Summary 
--------------- 
 
¶1.   On July 31, one of Caracas' most important 
opposition dailies, "El Nacional" carried an article 
entitled "Condoleezza Rice Criticizes the Political 
Persecution of Sumate Directors."  That same week the 
Venezuela press has included coverage of a letter from 
members of the House Committee on International 
Relations, remarks by State Department spokesman during 
the regular press briefing, and the "Washington Post" 
editorial that also expressed concern for Sumate's 
officers. On August 12, the "Daily Journal" printed an 
article whose first paragraph reads, "The U.S. government 
has once again come to bat for Sumate." and cites both 
Dr. Rice and the House letter.  On The opposition press 
underscored these messages' support for democracy and 
human rights.  The GoV reacted to these letters and 
remarks by saying that they were further proof that the 
U.S. was the leader of the opposition.  End summary 
 
----------------------------------- 
Dr. Rice's Letter 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  National security advisor Condoleezza Rice wrote a 
letter July 22, 2004, responding to a missive about 
Sumate from the president of the Venezuelan chapter of 
the Stanford alumni. The daily newspaper "El Nacional" 
extensively quoted rice's letter in an article entitled 
"Condoleezza Rice Criticizes the Political Persecution of 
Sumate Directors."  The first quote was taken from the 
letter's last paragraph, "we call on the Venezuelan 
government to cease its harassment of these individuals 
and others and to dedicate itself to guaranteeing the 
free exercise of democratic rights." 
 
----------------------------------- 
Remarks by Other Officials and U.S. Sources 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶3. "El Nacional" (July 31, 2004) carried a second article 
on the same page entitled, "U.S. Condemns Intimidation of 
Civil Society."  This second article referred to July 31, 
2004 remarks by the department of state spokesman 
expressing concern "about harassment and intimidation of 
civil society, whether it be in Venezuela or whether it 
be anywhere else."  This same article also referred to 
the "Washington Post" editorial on the same subject.  GoV 
media also reported Vice-President Rangel's 
acknowledgement that the then U.S. Charge had discussed 
the Sumate and Capriles cases with him on July 29. 
 
----------------------------------- 
House Committee Letter Gets Media Attention 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  A July 12 letter, to president Chavez from the House 
Committee on International Relations defending Sumate, 
also received significant play in the Venezuelan press. 
It was read in its entirety at least twice on 24-hour 
news channel Globovision and heard on Union Radio 
(opposition).  All the major Caracas dailies carried the 
letter, with "El Nacional" running the entire text. 
Beneath the letter was the response of the Venezuelan 
ambassador in Washington, who remarked, " I must admit 
that it's unusual for U.S. legislators to give a legal 
opinion on a specific case in the judicial system of 
another country." 
 
----------------------------------- 
Pro-Chavez Reaction 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶5. President Chavez, Fifth Republic Movement (MVR) Deputy 
Nicolas Maduro, and other GoV officials and media have 
used the letter to criticize the USG, saying the USG 
 
letters are nothing more than an attempt to defend its 
lackeys.  Samuel Moncada, of the Chavista Comando 
Maisanta, held a press conference in which he noted that 
the letters sent by the National Security Advisor 
Condoleezza Rice and comments by other officials "put 
into question the mandate of the Venezuelan people, which 
will be tested in the referendum election of August 15." 
These accusations follow months of direct criticism and 
accusations by President Chavez during his Sunday Alo 
Presidente program.  He has used the program as a 
platform to accuse the USG of giving intellectual and 
financial support to the opposition.  Using 
"declassified" NED documents requested through the FOIA, 
he is convinced that he has "presented proof." 
 
----------------------------------- 
Sumate Case 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  Sumate, an NGO founded in 2002, was founded to 
support individual freedom and the exercise of 
constitutional, specifically electoral, rights.  While 
not a party, its immediate goal is to recall Chavez.   On 
June 10, 2004 the GoV formally accused Maria Corina 
Machado, vice-president of Sumate of conspiracy and 
treason.  In July the prosecutor's office accused three 
more officers. A fifth official has been summoned for 
questioning, but has not been formally accused.  While 
currently free, they fear they could be taken into 
custody at any time. 
 
----------------------------------- 
The International Visitor Connection 
---------------  ------------------- 
 
¶7. Machado and another Sumate officer (Aldejandro Plaz) 
were nominated to participate in a FY 2004 multi-regional 
project on NGO management, but due to their activities, 
neither could travel.  One Sumate representative did 
participate in a voluntary visitor program to observe the 
2004 Florida presidential primary election.  On the other 
side, Luisa Ortega, the public prosecutor in charge of 
these cases, was nominated to participate in a FY-2004 RP 
on anti-corruption but she cancelled her participation at 
the very last minute. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Comment 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶8. President Chavez, party members, and official media 
have used the letter to renew criticisms of the USG.  Dr. 
Rice's letter complemented expressions of concern by U.S. 
congressmen and U.S. media. 
 
Shapiro 
 
 
NNNN 
      2004CARACA02596 - UNCLASSIFIED