04HARARE1497
CIVIL SOCIETY A NO-SHOW AT NCA DEMONSTRATION
Thu Sep 02 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Harare
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

021132Z Sep 04UNCLAS HARARE 001497 
 
SIPDIS 
 
AF/S FOR BNEULING 
NSC FOR SENIOR AFRICA DIRECTOR C. COURVELLE, D. TEITELBAUM 
PARIS FOR C. NEARY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM ZI
SUBJECT: CIVIL SOCIETY A NO-SHOW AT NCA DEMONSTRATION 
 
REF: A. HARARE 778 
 
     ¶B. HARARE 220 
 
¶1. (SBU) The National Constitutional Assembly (NCA) had 
planned two demonstrations for September 1, according to NCA 
Chairman Lovemore Madhuku. The first, intended to be a 
demonstration by a small group in front of the South African 
Embassy, failed to materialize. An NCA member delivered a 
letter to the South African Ambassador before the 
demonstration, and by the time he emerged the police had 
arrived. The second, planned to include about 500 NCA members 
and individuals from other organizations, occurred in 
downtown Harare.  According to Madhuku, about 200 NCA members 
participated in the demonstration while a larger group of 
about 300 was blocked by police from participating. Madhuku 
said about 30 were arrested and several demonstrators were 
injured. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Madhuku said most other opposition organizations 
stayed away from the demonstrations, although they were 
informed about both in advance. He said another demonstration 
would be planned for the near future, for which he hoped to 
get better turnout. 
 
¶3. (SBU) COMMENT: NCA continues to be the only part of the 
opposition willing to organize and participate in street 
demonstrations (see reftels). As evidenced by the lack of 
turnout, members of other organizations and ordinary citizens 
are not willing to risk physical and economic consequences. 
Without the involvement of other opposition groups, the 
effectiveness of the demonstrations is questionable.  END 
COMMENT 
Dell