04MANAMA694
GLOBE BAHRAIN.DIALOGUE AT A CRITICAL TIME
Wed May 12 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Manama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MANAMA 000694 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NEA/PPD JDAVIES AND APENDLETON; NEA/ARP CKANESHIRO; 
ECA/PE/C/PY BPERSIKO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV TSPL KGLB OEXC KPAO BA
SUBJECT: GLOBE BAHRAIN.DIALOGUE AT A CRITICAL TIME 
 
 
¶1.  Bahrain GLOBE high school students continue to 
enthusiastically work together with Americans to save the 
Earth.  To observe Earth Day 2004, PAS coordinated with 
the Ministry of Education and GLOBE Bahrain students to 
support activities to increase awareness of environmental 
issues in Bahrain. On April 21, APAO and PAS FSN joined 
250 GLOBE Students from 26 schools, both public and 
private, to survey the garbage and pollutants in various 
seashore locations in Bahrain. 
 
¶2.  On April 22, GLOBE students participated in a 
"Contrail Count-a-Thon" experiment conducted by NASA and 
GLOBE. Students observed and measured clouds formed from 
water vapor in aircraft exhaust.  Their measurements were 
reported to NASA scientists as part of a worldwide 
experiment. GLOBE students then participated in a web 
discussion group with American GLOBE scientists to 
exchange ideas about how GLOBE measurements can help 
protect the Earth and the impact of these measurements on 
the greater scientific community.  GLOBE students from 
Lebanon, Jordan and Qatar also participated. DCM spoke to 
300 students and teachers at a Ministry of Education 
organized GLOBE Environmental Awareness Conference on 
April 27.  PAS distributed Earth Day 2004 posters to the 
26 schools in Bahrain that participate in the GLOBE 
Program. 
 
¶3.  COMMENT:  The GLOBE Program works.  At a time when 
American credibility faces stark challenges, GLOBE 
students demonstrate the positive impact of educational 
exchange programming.  The science projects and 
international experiments that GLOBE students participate 
offer a common ground for Bahrainis and Americans to 
stand on.  Electronic discussion groups of Bahraini 
students and Americans are just one example of how a 
productive dialogue, albeit not political, continues in 
spite of current tensions. Students are excited about 
having their research recognized in the U.S.  One female 
Globe student told the APAO, "Knowing that our data is 
important internationally, in places like NASA, makes us 
work harder as a GLOBE Bahrain team."  END COMMENT. 
 
 
FORD