04MANAMA839
INTERNEWS JOURNALISM TRAINING SHOULD CONTINUE
Sat Jun 05 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Manama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MANAMA 000839 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NEA/PI-DMULENEX; NEA/PPD-PAGNEW; NEA/ARP CKANESHIRO; 
DRL/PHD JLEVINSON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMPI KPAO KDEM BA
SUBJECT:  INTERNEWS JOURNALISM TRAINING SHOULD CONTINUE 
 
REFERENCE:  MANAMA 444 
 
¶1.  In reftel, para 13 (our response to NEA/PI's request 
for feedback on MEPI's FY 2004 funding recommendations), 
post concurred with NEA/PI's decision to evaluate the 
results of the Internews media training program prior to 
investing further in this project in FY04.  Internews has 
visited Bahrain twice since reftel; they have met the 
right people, coordinated with the Journalists 
Association, and provided extremely useful consultations 
at the University's new Communications Department.  They 
have also just conducted a very successful training 
workshop (see para 2) and have contacted appropriate 
Bahraini attorneys to attend a media and the law workshop 
this summer.  Post's MEPI working group evaluation of 
Internews in Bahrain:  definitely worth continuing. 
 
¶2. The first phase of the MEPI-funded Internews Network 
journalism training was a real success, providing needed 
skills to young Bahraini journalists.  The May 22-26 
workshop was attended by fifteen journalists, focusing on 
the role of journalists in a more open society, the 
ethics of the profession, and basic skills.  The course 
was spot on - both from our own observations and from the 
trainees themselves.  Internews Middle East Director 
Karim Alrawi, Training Coordinator Sally Sami, and 
Trainer Daniel Boylan also called on the Minister of 
Information who expressed his full support for journalism 
training and requested that Internews offer more training 
in Bahrain, including the broadcast media.  Post strongly 
concurs.  We would like Internews to conduct a workshop 
on the difference between accurate investigative 
reporting and writing opinion pieces/editorializing, a 
real problem in the Arab media.  Post looks forward to 
the second phase of the Internews training in November 
2004, which will improve internet skills and e- 
journalism. 
 
NEUMANN