04MANAMA1204
NDI SUCCEEDS IN GIVING BAHRAIN'S YOUTH THE
Sun Aug 01 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Manama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MANAMA 001204 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA/ARP 
LONDON FOR ETHAN GOLDRICH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM PHUM KMPI BA
SUBJECT: NDI SUCCEEDS IN GIVING BAHRAIN'S YOUTH THE 
OPPORTUNITY TO PARTICIPATE IN THE DEMOCRATIC PROCESS 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY: The MEPI-funded National Democratic Institute 
(NDI) succeeded in promoting political participation by 
organizing Bahrain's first-ever Youth Forum.  Approximately 
50 percent of Bahrain's population is under 30 years of age, 
and as such, Bahrain's democratic reform depends on the 
inclusion and participation of its youth in the political 
process.  This forum gave Bahrain's youth the opportunity to 
directly engage Bahrain's leadership on issues relevant to 
its generation.  Topping the list of issues was the failure 
of meaningful dialogue between opposition societies and the 
GOB.  Other salient issues included unemployment, 
discrimination, transparency, low wages and housing. 
Interest was signified by the level of participation.  NDI 
invited 100 members of political and social societies and 
over 300 showed up.  Enthusiasm has generated a desire to 
pursue similar events in the future.  NDI is 'on message' by 
organizing events such as these and helping young adults 
develop into agents of change.  Post recommends that MEPI 
support future events such as this forum. END SUMMARY. 
 
------------ 
FORUM FORMAT 
------------ 
 
¶2.  (U) The July 18 "Cafe Dialogue" was held at Bahrain's SAS 
Radisson Hotel.  The young adult participants (ages 18-30) 
were divided into 'cafes' and given 90 minutes to determine 
issues relevant to Bahrain's youth.  Cafe leaders summarized 
the discussions and presented them to the "elders"--members 
of Parliament, religious societies, NGOs, media and GOB 
officials. 
 
---------------- 
YOUTHS' CONCERNS 
---------------- 
 
¶3. (U) In his opening speech, President of the Bahrain Youth 
Forum Society Hussain Al Eskafi said that Bahrain is full of 
young people but no one is willing to listen to them.  The 
young participants considered the national dialogue between 
the opposition and the GOB on constitutional issues a 
failure, citing little impact on the GOB's decision making. 
They pointed to sectarian disunity, control by the elite, and 
the absence of true popular support for the dialogue as 
contributing to this failure.  In addition to the 
constitutional issue, cafe leaders ranked the following 
issues in order of importance: naturalization, unemployment, 
discrimination, low wages, corruption (administrative and 
financial) and housing.  President of Al Shabiba Youth 
Society Hussain Al Hulaibi added that political societies 
need to make more of an effort to engage youth and grant them 
a political role.  The Bahrain Youth Forum Society plans to 
host quarterly forums in the future to continue political 
discussions and coalesce ideas for the purpose of political 
participation. 
 
-------------------------- 
STATEMENTS VERSUS DIALOGUE 
-------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (U) To represent the leadership, NDI attracted prominent 
Bahrainis representing the full political spectrum. These 
included Second Deputy Chairman of the Council of 
Representatives Shaikh Adel Al Moawda, Vice President of Al 
Wefaq National Islamic Society Shaikh Hassan Mushaima, 
President of the National Democratic Action Society (NDAS) 
Abdul Rahman Al Noaimi, Shura Council member Ibraheem 
Bashmia, and columnist Sameera Rajab.  With the exception of 
MP Shaikh Adel Moawda, who stated that "any dialogue is 
better than no dialogue at all," statements made by the 
"elders" did not directly address concerns presented by the 
younger participants.  They preferred to restate their 
standard platforms. 
 
¶5.  (U) COMMENT:  Even though the forum did not result in a 
full exchange between young and old, this event proved a 
significant start in the right direction.  A primary goal of 
MEPI is advocating the expansion of political participation. 
The outstanding reputation of NDI's programs and NDI's 
engagement with opposition society members, NGOs, the 
Municipal Council, the Shura Council and the elected Council 
of Representatives, helped draw over 300 participants.  Post 
encourages NEA/PI to continue to fund NDI to support the 
development of political participation and similar forums in 
Bahrain.  END COMMENT. 
ZIADEH