04MADRID3073
COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR CODEL MILLER
Wed Aug 11 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Madrid
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MADRID 003073 
 
SIPDIS 
 
CODEL 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR H/CALLARD/DIGGS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OREP AMGT ASEC AFIN JO PK AF IZ BA DJ EG SP
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR CODEL MILLER 
 
REF: STATE 172566 
 
¶1.  Embassy Madrid warmly welcomes and grants country 
clearance to Rep. Jeff Miller, House Armed Services Committee 
(HASC), and delegation, to visit Spain from August 24-25, 
2004 for an overnight stop at Rota Naval Base. 
 
¶2.  Embassy Control Officer for this visit is Econ Officer 
Richard C. Merrin, tel: (34) 91-587-2399 (office), (34) 
659-057-024 (cell), e-mail: MerrinRC@state.gov. 
Administrative Point of Contact at Rota is Lieutenant Colin 
Corridan, tel: (34) 95-682-2795 (office), (34) 659-901-288 
cell, e-mail: corridanc@navsta.rota.navy.mil. 
 
¶3.  Embassy understands accommodations and ground 
transportation for the delegation are being arranged by Rota. 
 
 
¶4. THREAT ASSESSMENT: 
 
In general, Spain is safe.  However, Madrid and other large 
cities in Spain -- including resort/convention areas such as 
Benidorm -- attract a large number of criminals and 
pick-pockets and frequent incidents of crimes of opportunity 
against the unwary do occur.  Carry only essential items, 
including a photocopy of your passport's photo page. 
Visitors can protect themselves from crime by being 
street-smart, alert, and aware of their surroundings.  In the 
event you are victimized by crime, or experience any other 
security-related incident, please contact the Embassy's 
Regional Security Office at 91-587-2550, or after hours at 
91-587-2355.  Official visitors to the Embassy in Madrid or 
the Consulate General in Barcelona are encouraged to receive 
a security briefing from the RSO office at their earliest 
convenience.  Additional information regarding safety and 
security in Spain is available on the U.S. Department of 
State's website (http://www.state.gov), and the U.S. 
Embassy's website (www.embusa.es). 
 
Travelers are encouraged to review the most recent Worldwide 
Caution issued by the Department of State.  As the Department 
of State continues to develop information on any potential 
security threats to Americans overseas, it shares credible 
threat information through its Consular Information Program 
documents, available on the Internet at 
http://travel/state.gov.  In addition to information on the 
Internet, U.S. travelers can hear recorded information by 
calling the Department of State in Washington, D.C. at 
202-647-5225 from their touch-tone telephone, or receive 
information by automated telefax by dialing 202-647-3000 from 
their fax machine. 
MANZANARES