04TELAVIV6149
WB/G SITREP: DECEMBER 6, 2004 (1230 HRS LOCAL):
Mon Dec 06 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEL AVIV 006149 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NEA FOR BURNS/SATTERFIELD/DIBBLE; 
NEA/SA/EX FOR RICHE; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; 
DEPT FOR DS/IP/ITA; DRL FOR A/S CRANER; 
NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN; 
USAID FOR DCHA, DCHA/FPP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG PTER ASEC PHUM CASC KPAL
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: DECEMBER 6, 2004 (1230 HRS LOCAL): 
IDF ARRESTS 23 PALESTINIANS IN WEST BANK 
 
 
THIS IS A JOINT MESSAGE FROM CONGEN JERUSALEM AND EMBASSY TEL 
AVIV 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY: In the Gaza Strip, Palestinian militants 
fired a total of 11 mortar shells at IDF soldiers and Israeli 
settlers over the December 4-6 weekend.  IDF fire injured six 
Palestinians in Khan Yunis, and seven Palestinians in Rafah 
refugee camp.  Israeli border police found sacks containing 
ten Kalashnikov rifles and magazines at Har Horesha.  In the 
West Bank, an IDF soldier was injured by Palestinian 
stone-throwing near Takua.  IDF forces and Palestinian gunmen 
exchanged fire near Sa Nur and Tulkarm.  The IDF arrested a 
total of 23 Palestinians in locations throughout the West 
Bank December 4-5.  The IDF demolished one house and two 
stores in Jabal Mukabr.  End Summary. 
 
---------- 
Gaza Strip 
---------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injuries/Mortars: The IDF reported Palestinian claims that 
a Palestinian-fired mortar shell south of Katif settlement 
injured one Palestinian December 5.  Israeli media reported 
that Palestinian militants fired one additional mortar shell 
during the same incident. 
 
-- Injuries/Shootings: Palestinian media reported that IDF 
fire injured six Palestinians in Khan Yunis December 5. 
 
-- Injuries/Shootings: UNRWA reported that IDF fire injured 
seven Palestinians in the Rafah refugee camp December 4-5. 
Among those injured were a 53-year-old woman, a 60-year-old 
woman, a 45-year-old woman, and a 15-year-old boy. 
 
-- Mortars: The Martyr Izz-al-Din al-Qassam Brigades reported 
that they fired six mortar shells December 4 in the southern 
Gaza Strip.  According to the IDF, Palestinian militants 
fired three additional mortar shells December 5.  One of 
these was fired at Netzer Hazani settlement and two were 
fired at Neve Dekalim settlement. 
 
-- Rockets: According to Palestinian media, Martyr Izz-al-Din 
al-Qassam Brigades fired a rocket at the Nahal Oz settlement 
December 4.  According to the IDF, Palestinian militants 
fired one rocket at Ganei Tal settlement December 5. 
 
-- Shootings: According to the IDF, Palestinian militants 
engaged in four instances of shooting at IDF soldiers and 
Israeli settlers at locations throughout the Gaza Strip 
December 5-6. 
 
-- Explosives/Confiscation: Israeli media reported that 
Israeli border policemen found sacks containing 10 
Kalashnikov rifles and magazines near Har Horesha on the 
Israel-Egypt border December 5. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS/CHECKPOINTS 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was open December 4-5 at both Netzarim and Abu Khouli 
checkpoints. 
 
-- The Erez Crossing was closed to Palestinians, but open to 
diplomats and some internationals, December 4-6. 
 
-- UNRWA personnel reported that while Erez Industrial Zone 
was open December 4-6, they saw very few Palestinian factory 
owners entering. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian workers, but open 
for the import of aggregates used in construction, December 
4-6. 
 
-- UNRWA reported that Karni terminal was open with 
substantial delays December 4-6. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open December 4-6.  Palestinian males 
between the ages of 16 and 35 were prohibited from crossing. 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan checkpoint was closed, but Toufa checkpoint 
was open, December 4-6. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS 
 
-- Senior Palestinian Islamic Jihad militant Muhammed 
al-Hindi announced in Gaza City December 5 that PIJ would 
reject the long-term truce with Israel that Hamas leadership 
reportedly cited as a possibility and then rescinded. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injury: An IDF soldier December 3 suffered light injuries 
when Palestinians threw stones at a patrol vehicle near the 
West Bank settlement of Takua, according to Palestinian 
newspapers. 
 
-- Injuries: IDF soldiers December 3 fired tear gas at 
Palestinians during an arrest operation in Tubas village 
south of Jenin, resulting in several dozen injuries from tear 
gas inhalation. 
 
-- Clashes: IDF soldiers December 4 clashed with Palestinians 
in Tuqu near Bethlehem after IDF patrols entered the village. 
 
 
-- Explosives: Palestinians detonated an explosive device 
December 4 near IDF soldiers in the old city of Nablus. 
There were no injuries reported from this incident. 
 
-- Shootings: Palestinian gunmen December 4 opened fire on an 
IDF jeep near the settlement of Sa Nur in the northern West 
Bank.  There were no injuries reported from this incident. 
 
-- Shootings: Palestinian gunmen and IDF soldiers December 5 
exchanged gunfire near Tulkarem.  There were no injuries 
reported from this incident. 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) ARRESTS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Arrests: Israeli forces arrested at least 13 Palestinian 
activists in Tulkarem December 4, including the local head of 
Hamas, Rami Teikh. 
 
-- Arrests: The IDF arrested three wanted activists December 
5, including a PFLP member, near Nablus.  IDF sources said 
the PFLP activist was preparing to carry out a suicide 
attack. 
 
-- Arrests: The IDF arrested ten Palestinians December 5-6, 
including a PFLP activist, during arrest operations in 
Nablus, Ramallah, Bethlehem, and the Hebron area. 
 
-- Several dozen Palestinians in the village of Bayt Ula west 
of Hebron suffered tear-gas inhalation December 5 during a 
demonstration protesting the construction of the separation 
barrier. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) DEMOLITIONS: 
 
-- The IDF conducted demolition operations in the village of 
Jabal Mukabr in East Jerusalem December 6.  The IDF 
demolished at least one house and two commercial stores for 
lacking building permits. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- The Palestinian leadership--PLO Chairman Abu Mazen, 
Palestinian Authority (PA) Prime Minister Abu Ala,a, and 
interim PA President Rawhi Fattuh--is scheduled December 6 to 
meet with Syrian officials in Damascus followed by a visit to 
Lebanon.  The PA leadership will also meet with Khaled Mishal 
of Hamas and other representatives of other Palestinian 
factions based in Syria and Lebanon. 
 
-- A senior Hamas official in Lebanon, Usama Hamdan, denied 
statements made December 3 from a Hamas West Bank 
representative that the organization would accept a long-term 
truce with Israel.  Hamdan stated December 4 that there had 
been no change in Hamas,s policy.  Hamas leader Mahmud 
al-Zahar December 5 said that Hamas placed conditions on a 
true with Israel and ruled out a unilateral cease-fire. 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
CRETZ