04TELAVIV1644
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Wed Mar 17 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 TEL AVIV 001644 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
Mideast 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
All media bannered Israel's current and expected 
response to Hamas-led terrorism.  The media reported 
that PM Sharon has ordered the assassination of Hamas 
and Islamic Jihad leaders.  Yediot quoted senior 
security sources as saying that they are "in the 
crosshairs."  Leading media reported that last night 
the IDF started operations throughout the Gaza Strip. 
Israel Radio quoted Palestinian sources as saying that 
two Palestinians were killed, including a member of the 
Popular Resistance Committees, and that seven others 
were wounded, one of them critically.  Leading media 
reported that two Palestinians were killed Tuesday in 
an IAF helicopter attack in Gaza City, and that IDF 
operations in the Strip are continuing today.  Ha'aretz 
reported that top Fatah activists are leaving the 
movement to join Hamas. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that security officials are 
considering preempting any legal entanglements by 
speeding up the construction of the separation fence. 
Israel Radio reported that today the High Court of 
Justice will debate four separate petitions related to 
the erection of the fence. 
 
Ha'aretz assesses that Syria is likely to be hit hard 
by a restriction in U.S. investments.  Jerusalem Post 
quoted sources in Washington as saying Tuesday that the 
Bush administration is expected to prohibit American 
energy companies from future investments in Syria, but 
allow some already existing projects to continue, as 
part of fresh U.S. sanctions to be unveiled in the 
coming days.  Ha'aretz reported on an individual 
initiative: following his visit to Israel in November 
2002, New York City Comptroller William Thompson, 
received the consent of the shareholders in the pension 
fund of the NYC policemen and firemen to approach large 
American companies in which the pension fund invests, 
to stop their activities in Syria and Iran.  Ha'aretz 
also featured the Syrian media's efforts "to deny the 
reality of a nearby country" (Israel). 
 
Israel Radio cited Al Jazeera-TV that today Osama El- 
Baz, senior adviser to Egyptian President Hosni 
Mubarak, is due to meet with PA Chairman Yasser Arafat 
and that El-Baz is carrying a special message from 
Mubarak. 
 
Ha'aretz and Jerusalem Post quoted Jordanian officials 
as saying that Jordan is considering suing Israel over 
the money seized from Ramallah banks in February. 
Jordan claims that the funds belong to Jordanians. 
Yediot reported that the Foreign Ministry is embarking 
on an international campaign against the deadly abuse 
of Palestinian children by the Palestinian terrorist 
groups.  Maariv and Hatzofe reported that Abdullah 
Quran, the 10 to 12-year old boy (depending on the 
media) arrested Monday with explosives at a checkpoint 
near Nablus, received five shekels (about 1 USD) for 
the errand he was sent on.  Maariv quoted Minister in 
the Prime Minister's Office Gideon Ezra (Likud) as 
saying that Israeli Arabs should be recruited in 
protection efforts against suicide bombers, whom they 
will recognize more efficiently than the average 
Israeli Jew. 
 
Yediot reported that Tuesday A/G Menachem Mazuz 
confirmed to Meretz Knesset Member Zahava Gal-On a 
Ha'aretz story that the Shin Bet maintains a 
"blacklist" of left-wing activists because of the 
concern that they could become, albeit unwillingly, 
accessories to the activities of terror organizations. 
Leading media also quoted Mazuz as saying that the 
disengagement plan could cause a rift among Israelis. 
 
Most media reported that last night, with a 54 to 46- 
percent margin, Yossi Beilin won the contest for the 
leadership of Yahad, the successor party to Meretz, 
over Knesset Member Ran Cohen, who is more identified 
with social issues. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that Iran and Egypt will operate 
separate reconnaissance satellites in one to two years. 
 
Ha'aretz reported on events held across the U.S. to 
mark the first anniversary of the death of American 
peace activist Rachel Corrie, who was crushed to death 
by an Israeli military bulldozer as she attempted to 
prevent the destruction of a Palestinian house in 
Rafah.  Rachel's father Craig Corrie was quoted as 
saying in an interview with Ha'aretz: "I believe that 
the Israeli government has had every chance over the 
past year to do what Prime Minister Sharon promised 
President Bush in their conversation on March 17, 
2003."  Ha'aretz notes that according to the State 
Department, the gist of that conversation was that the 
GOI would carry out a comprehensive, full, and 
transparent investigation and report back to the U.S. 
on its findings. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that local residents are planning a 
dual language, Jewish-Arab school in the Wadi Ara area 
(between Hadera and Afula). 
 
Jerusalem Post cited an AP story that the U.S. Justice 
Department has hardened its position on a Holocaust 
lawsuit claiming the U.S. Army plundered riches seized 
by Nazis from 800,000 Hungarian Jews and covered it up 
for decades. 
 
-------- 
Mideast: 
-------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Chief Economic Editor and senior columnist Sever 
Plotker wrote in the lead editorial of mass- 
circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot: "We cannot-- 
either morally or politically -- drown Gaza either in 
the sea or in blood.  But Arafat can be expelled." 
 
Senior columnist and chief defense commentator Zeev 
Schiff wrote in independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: 
"The new installations are part of a comprehensive 
British-Palestinian security plan.... The American go- 
ahead for British involvement was granted reluctantly 
and on a limited basis, and only after Blair's personal 
appeal to President Bush." 
 
Conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized: 
"This is not 'just' child abuse, but child sacrifice. 
It is as if Palestinian terrorists are trying to reach 
new depths of war crimes." 
 
Former director-general of the Prime Minister's Office 
and the Foreign Ministry Avraham Tamir wrote in 
popular, pluralist Maariv: "History will chronicle the 
unilateral disengagement ... as a necessary transition 
period in the peace process, in accordance with 
President Bush's road map principles." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
Â¶I.  "Going to Gaza" 
 
Chief Economic Editor and senior columnist Sever 
Plotker wrote in the lead editorial of mass- 
circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot (March 17): "The 
most recent wave of terror attacks by Hamas was 
launched to prove that Israel is withdrawing from Gaza 
because of Ashdod, that Al Qaida's 'Madrid method' 
(terror prompts withdrawal) has met with success here 
as well.  Israel, in response, has decided to purge 
Gaza of Hamas and to deal Hamas a deathblow.... 
There can be no disputing the need to pay Hamas back 
what it duly deserves. However, the root of all evil 
does not lie with this terror organization.  Hamas is 
capable of launching such a large scope of terror 
attacks against Israel only because it is backed by 
Palestinian militias that are loyal to Arafat.  Arafat 
perceives Hamas to be his long-range strategic arm.  He 
wants to be cast as the liberator of Gaza.  As such, as 
long as Arafat is around, it is doubtful that the 
Israeli withdrawal will take place.  And it is also 
doubtful whether the blow being dealt to Hamas -- 
lethal as it may be -- will achieve its desired goals. 
We cannot-- either morally or politically -- drown Gaza 
either in the sea or in blood.  But Arafat can be 
expelled." 
 
II.  "The British Are Here, With Arafat's Approval" 
 
Senior columnist and chief defense commentator Zeev 
Schiff wrote in independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz 
(March 17): "With grudging consent from the Americans, 
the British are now setting up two new operation 
control rooms, one in Ramallah and one in Gaza, for 
Palestinian security organizations.... What is the 
reason for the British involvement?  Aside from a 
desire to wield influence in the Israeli-Palestinian 
conflict, the British are afraid that implementation of 
the disengagement plan could lead to Palestinian loss 
of control in the territories to be evacuated, and to 
ensuing chaos.  Essentially, the new installations are 
part of a comprehensive British-Palestinian security 
plan.... The American go-ahead for British involvement 
was granted reluctantly and on a limited basis, and 
only after Blair's personal appeal to President 
Bush.... The reasons for the Americans' and the 
Israelis' unwillingness to cooperate with the 
Palestinians on this issue are basically identical: 
Arafat's direct involvement in implementing the plan, 
and his condition that nothing happen without his say- 
so.... If and when the disengagement begins, we will 
begin to see increasingly more involvement of foreign 
countries in the area.... Because the withdrawal is 
unilateral and not in the framework of an agreement, it 
is doubtful that Israel could prevent the Palestinians 
from steps such as inviting international 
representatives, unless the step could be considered as 
an act of war." 
 
III.  "Child Sacrifice" 
 
Conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized 
(March 17): "Israel was shaken Monday.  It wasn't 
because of a terrorist atrocity actually perpetrated, 
but because of one thankfully preempted.  Front pages 
were dominated by the story of 11-year-old Abdullah 
Quran, who carried a powerful bomb in his schoolbag.... 
This is not 'just' child abuse, but child sacrifice. 
It is as if Palestinian terrorists are trying to reach 
new depths of war crimes, matched only by previous uses 
of ambulances and pregnant women to carry out terrorist 
attacks.... Incredibly, Abdullah's misadventure went 
largely unreported by the world's media, further 
underscoring the double standard against Israel.... The 
Palestinian manipulation of children is as pervasive 
and transparent as Hitler's 'Children's Army' at the 
end of World War II.  It's a flagrant violation of 
Article 38 of the 1989 UN Convention on the Rights of 
the Child, which censures 'the recruitment and 
involvement of children under 15 in hostilities and 
armed conflicts.'  Yet it's an entrenched Arab practice 
in this country.... Palestinian youngsters are 
incessantly subjected to brainwashing in the media and 
classroom.  Hate is inculcated in them.  Even 
preschoolers are taught to aspire to martyr status. 
They grow in a culture that, rather than consecrating 
life, glorifies violent 'sacrificial' death." 
 
IV.  "Disengagement as Strategic Need" 
 
Former director-general of the Prime Minister's Office 
and the Foreign Ministry Avraham Tamir wrote in 
popular, pluralist Maariv (March 17): "History will 
chronicle the unilateral disengagement, in accordance 
with the principles of Prime Minister Ariel Sharon, as 
a necessary transition period in the peace process, in 
accordance with President Bush's road map 
principles.... Sharon's disengagement plan will earn 
broad national support in Israel; the duration of a 
national unity government, even if extremist factions 
leave it because of the connection with the goals of 
the road map; U.S. support and assistance for 
relocating a civilian and military infrastructure; the 
support of Egypt and Jordan to the only way of 
preparing the ground for the implementation of the road 
map; and the support of the European Union, the Russian 
Federation, the Secretary-General of the UN and key 
Arab and Muslim countries.  The scope of that support 
will have repercussions on change in the Palestinian 
government toward a determination to dismantle the 
terrorist infrastructure, to stop hostile operations 
and to sever connections with international terrorist 
organizations such as Hizbullah and Al Qaida.... 
Sharon's disengagement plan ... would have implications 
for the advancement of a comprehensive Israeli-Arab 
peace, in which a diplomatic and security solution 
would be found to all the components of a conflict that 
has lasted since time immemorial." 
 
KURTZER