04THEHAGUE2124
NETHERLANDS/AFGHAN ELECTIONS: DUTCH PREPARED TO
Wed Aug 25 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy The Hague
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS THE HAGUE 002124 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PK AF IR NL
SUBJECT: NETHERLANDS/AFGHAN ELECTIONS: DUTCH PREPARED TO 
APPROACH IRAN ON IOM VISAS, BUT MORE FUNDING FOR ELECTIONS 
DOUBTFUL 
 
REF: A. (A) STATE 179808 
     ¶B. (B) STATE 180351 
 
¶1. Poloff delivered ref A and B messages August 23 to Wilfred 
Mohr, Head of the Dutch MFA's South Asia Division.  With 
regard to ref A request that the Dutch approach Iran on out 
of country registration and voting, Mohr acknowledged that 
the Government of Iran "needs to do more."  He revealed that 
in its EU Presidency capacity, the Dutch government had 
sought EU approval to approach Tehran on behalf of the EU to 
press for "stepped up IOM and visa efforts."  Mohr said he 
believed that the approach would take place on Thursday or 
Sunday in Tehran.  In an August 25 follow-up conversation, 
Mohr confirmed that instructions to deliver a demarche on 
this subject had been sent to the Dutch mission in Tehran. 
The IOM, however, had in the meantime reported an improved 
situation (Iranian MFA had prepared 16 visas and 16 were 
still pending) and now reportedly believed that "a demarche 
would not be necessary at this time."  Mohr indicated that 
the Dutch would "standby" until the status of the remaining 
visa requests became clear.  Separately, Joep Damoiseaux, the 
Head of Asylum and Migration Affairs at the MFA, told poloff 
on August 25 that IOM officers "are encouraged and feel an 
intervention at MFA is not necessary at present." 
 
¶2. Regarding ref B message on UNAMA's funding gap, Mohr said 
August 23 that the Dutch had pledged nearly 8 million euros - 
5 for registration and nearly 3 for the actual elections - 
all of which had already been transferred.  Mohr noted that 
EUR 850,000 had originally been paid to UNDP for the Loya 
Jirga Conference (which, in the Dutch view, had been 
"overfunded").  The GoNL later agreed that these funds should 
be transferred into the elections account (Note: This 
probably accounts for the USD 930,000 ref B cites as 
"committed but not yet disbursed.") and that such 
disbursement should be a UNDP rather than GoNL action.  Mohr 
said the GoNL had not foreseen a UNAMA budget shortfall and 
is not presently in a position to contribute further.  Mohr 
confirmed August 25 that no further funding is available at 
this time. 
RUSSEL