05ADANA132
SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY FOR JUNE 29, 2005
Mon Jul 11 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ADANA 000132 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU ADANA
SUBJECT: SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY FOR JUNE 29, 2005 
 
This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary for June 29, 2005. 
 Please note that Turkish press reports often contain errors or 
exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch for the accuracy 
of the reports summarized here. 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
EKSPRES:        Bulent Ozulku, a businessman and a former CHP 
candidate of CHP in 2004 local elections for the Greater City of 
Adana, addressed the party grassroots in a local TV program and 
said; "CHP in Adana is unfortunately pursuing policies that 
severed its ties with the public.  We have embarked upon efforts 
to form a party administration that would consolidate its ties 
with the public back again. We invite people, who feel 
dedication to CHP, to take part in this action." 
 
BOLGE:  Bolge reports that CHP Provincial Chairperson Serdar 
Seyhan's remarks stating, "Our national leader does not allow 
such a press conference", allegedly aims to prevent the press 
announcement that the opposition group will be making tomorrow 
in Adana.  The Provincial leader of CHP reportedly drew serious 
criticism from the members of the opposition group. 
 
EKSPRES:        The Mardin Governor's Office announced that 6,000 
people, who left their houses and land due to terror-related 
activities since 1986 to date, have applied to the Office to 
benefit from the Law on Compensation for Sufferers of 
Anti-Terror Activities.  Reportedly, 266 cases have been 
examined, and 15 of them have earned the right to compensation 
in Mardin.  A total of 100,000 NTL (approximately 74,000 USD) 
has been paid to 15 people. 
 
EKSPRES/BOLGE:  Efforts to tear into pieces the hardened crust 
formed by M/V Ulla's 2,200 tons of waste is under way.  The 
tools required to break apart the hardened crust have recently 
arrived. Following this operation, the waste will be loaded on 
to a Liberian-registered vessel waiting anchored 100 meters away 
from M/V Ulla. 
 
HURRIYET/BOLGE: AKP Adana Provincial Chairperson Abdullah 
Dogru, criticizing Prof. Ali Goren, assembly member of Seyhan 
Municipality and the Deputy Mayor of Adana for subjecting 
people, including the PM Erdogan, AKP ministers and the AKP 
organization to harsh criticisms, further stated that AKP 
demanded the dismissal of Goren from the party.  (Note: Prof. 
Ali Goren was attacked and beaten by an unknown group of people 
as he was exiting a hall in Seyhan Municipality in Adana on June 
Â¶6. End Note.) 
 
HURRIYET (CUKUROVA):    In a symposium marking the summit of 
religions in Antakya, members of different faiths expressed 
messages of tolerance.  Mustafa Kemal University Rector Prof. 
Metin Gurkanlar said that people of different religions are able 
to live harmoniously in Antakya and that tolerance of people 
belonging to different faiths in Antakya sets an example to the 
whole world. 
 
HURRIYET (CUKUROVA):    Peter Vogel, journalist and Europe 
Representative of the EU Platform for Turkey, came to Adana and 
paid visits to the Turkey representatives of the Platform. 
Vogel said that he had discussed the progress in the path of 
democratization with the NGOs in Istanbul and Adana. 
 
SABAH (GUNEY):  Fake agricultural pesticides entering the 
country illegally from Iran are being used in the agricultural 
fields of the Cukurova plain.  These pesticides are reportedly 
seriously hazardous to human health. 
 
HURRIYET (CUKUROVA):    A children's mafia comprised of 10 
teenagers between the ages of 16 and 18 in Sukru Tulay Child 
Caring Center in Adana are reportedly beating the smaller 
children and appropriating their money.  Teenagers are 
reportedly forcing the smaller children to wash their socks and 
clean their rooms.  Director of the Center reportedly said they 
have been unable to prevent beating in the center. 
 
OZGUR GUNDEM:   The Van Security Directorate's Foreigners' 
Branch did not allow hunger strikers to stage a strike in front 
of the UNHCR (United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees) 
building in Van.  The strikers stated that they would continue 
their protest in their houses (see press summary 06/23 and 
06/27). 
 
OZGUR GUNDEM:   Tensions that broke out because of the death 
of a protestor at the funeral of a terrorist in Bostanici area 
of Van still continue and people are reportedly complaining 
about the current situation, which resembles a state of 
emergency.  Soldiers are reported as marching along the streets, 
singing military songs and conducting raids to the houses. 
Armored vehicles are reportedly patrolling the streets day and 
night, and security officers are searching the people they 
suspect. 
 
OZGUR GUNDEM:   Bismil Deputy Mayor Sebap Baran asked for 
support for the intelligentsia's call to lay down arms saying 
that only one party's call for peace would not suffice to bring 
peace in the southeastern region. 
 
HURRIYET/CUMHURIYET/OZGUR GUNDEM:       Nearly a hundred people 
commemorated the 80th anniversary of the execution of Seyh Said 
and his 47 friends in Diyarbakir.  The event was primarily 
organized by the Kurd-Der (Kurdish Association).  The newly 
founded Turkish Republic in 1920s had to deal with the Kurdish 
uprising in the southeastern Turkey in 1925 and the leaders of 
this uprising, Seyh Said and his friends were executed then to 
end the unrest. 
 
CUMHURIYET:     CHP National Headquarters set up a commission to 
investigate the killing of a former Kilis Mayor and his son on 
June 3 in Kilis.  CHP Gaziantep Provincial Chairperson noted 
that the perpetrator of the killing has still not been found. 
 
CUMHURIYET:     Murat Karayilan, Executive Council Chairperson of 
the KKK (Union of Kurdish People), the new political formation 
of the PKK/Kongra-Gel, reportedly dismissed allegations in the 
Turkish media which said the PKK rejected the call of the 
intelligentsia to lay down its arms.  Karayilan reportedly told 
Mesopotamian News Agency, "We respect the calls for laying down 
the arms.  These calls show good will despite the fact that the 
calls came late and are insufficient in character.  Everything 
that aims to bring peace is good and positive. We are trying 
hard not to waste the efforts of the intelligentsia and are 
aiming to discuss the situation in an upcoming evaluation 
process." 
 
HURRIYET:       Selim Sadak, former DEP (Party of Democracy) deputy 
and member of the Coordination Board of DTH (Democratic Society 
Movement), called the PKK to end its activities and stop laying 
mines. 
 
 
 
 
 
REID