05ADANA121
SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY FOR JUNE 06, 2005
Fri Jun 10 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ADANA 000121 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU ADANA
SUBJECT: SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY FOR JUNE 06, 2005 
 
Consulate Adana is providing this press scan for June 6.  Please 
note that Turkish press reports often contain errors or 
exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch for the accuracy 
of the reports summarized here. 
 
 
-Egitim-Sen members who are also affiliated with KESK 
(Confederation of Public Employee Unions ) staged a protest 
meeting over the weekend in Istanbul and Diyarbakir against 
shutting down decision of the union. People chanted reported 
pro-Ocalan slogans  in Diyarbakir. Fourteen people who 
reportedly refused to abide by the orders of the security 
officails were taken into custody. On Saturday, a protest was 
reporteldy staged in Adana as well. A big banner read "Shut down 
Incirlik Airbase, not Egitim-Sen." 
 
-Four soldiers died in the rural of Cicekli village in Tunceli 
when they engaged in a conflict with the PKK terrorists. 
 
-A delegation comprised of DEHAP, HRA and Mazlum-Der members 
conducted studies in Ceylanpinar of Sanliurfa about the 
incidence of an alleged killing of a villager by the guards of 
the TIGEM (Agricultural Exploitations General Directorate) and 
private security officials. 
 
-A 4.6-magnitude earthquake shook the city center at 6 am in the 
morning in Hakkari. 
 
-Diyarbakir Culture and Arts Festival ended. 
 
-Greenpeace called on government officials to take action to 
rehabilitate the Sofulu landfill in Yuregir district of Adana. 
 
-Chairperson of ATSO (Antakya Chamber of Commece and Industry) 
ensured that the government as well as the opposition party 
members are taking a unified action about the issue of 
constructing an airport in Hatay. 
 
-The award ceremony of 12th Adana Film Festival was held in the 
theater hall of Adana Municipality and the festival ended. 
 
-Cumhuriyet notes that the EU may demand from Turkey during the 
EU negotiation process to issue a general amnesty for Abdullah 
Ocalan, to enable the international management of the Tigris and 
Euphrate rivers and related infrastructure projects, to decrease 
the wide influence of Turkish Armed Forces in Turkey and alleged 
presence in northern Iraq. 
 
-Adana Street Children Association launched a project called 
"From streets to the Future" to enable the return of the street 
children to healthy social life. The project aims to provide 
vocational education to 172 children. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REID