05ADANA229
SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY FOR DECEMBER 08, 2005
Fri Dec 09 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ADANA 000229 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU ADANA
SUBJECT: SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY FOR DECEMBER 08, 2005 
 
 
This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary for December 08, 
Â¶2005.  Please note that Turkish press reports often contain 
errors or exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch for 
the accuracy of the reports summarized here. 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
RADIKAL / HURRIYET:     The investigation into PKK/Kongra-Gel 
leader Zubeyir Aydar's allegations to Milliyet and Tercuman 
newspapers on August 21 and 22 that Abdullah Ocalan was leading 
the PKK/Kongra-Gel from his prison cell, was dropped when 
Istanbul Prosecutor's Office decided that no physical evidence 
proving a crime was found concerning the charges. 
 
ZAMAN:  Concerning the investigation into Zubeyir Aydar's 
remarks, Zaman daily reported that the jailed terrorist leader 
Abdullah Ocalan gave a half-page statement to the Istanbul 
Prosecutor as a witness during the investigation process.   The 
daily further reported that Abdullah Ocalan did not clearly 
mention any formulation resembling the concept of overarching 
identity of citizenship of Turkey and sub-identities of 
different cultures within Turkey (see press summary 12/07). 
 
CNNTURK ONLINE 
(http://www.cnnturk.com/TURKIYE/haber_detay.a sp?PID=319&HID 
=1&haberID=144489):     According to a report of pro-PKK website of 
Firat News Agency, the U.S. was looking for ways to enable the 
return to Turkey of refugees in Mahmur camp, which was 
established 11 years ago in Iraq.  A delegation formed by U.S. 
soldiers and civilians is reportedly paying visits to the camp 
to assess the situation there and to learn about the views of 
the camp residents about Abdullah Ocalan. 
 
ZAMAN:  Reportedly, the police found 250 grams of plastic 
explosives at the house of the Silopi municipality assembly 
member (from DEHAP), who was detained along with eight people 
during unannounced home raids conducted at three houses (see 
press summaries 12/06 and 07).  Two of the people detained were 
alleged PKK members and the rest of the detainees reportedly 
aided and harbored the terrorist organization PKK. 
 
ZAMAN:  National Security Directorate increased the security 
threat level in the nation's 81 security director headquarters 
against any possible suicide bomb, bomb or gun attacks targeting 
the directorates. 
 
ZAMAN:  Reportedly, Supreme Court Chief Prosecutor issued a 
warning against the DTP (Democratic Society Party), which 
elected two persons for party chairmanship.  According to the 
Political Parties Act of Turkey, a political party can have only 
one national chairperson.  The Prosecutor also warned DTP that 
former DEP (Democracy Party) deputies Leyla Zana, Hatip Dicle, 
Orhan Dogan and Selim Sadak cannot be a member to political 
party because of the previously given verdict banning these 
people from political life. 
 
ZAMAN / HURRIYET:       Opposition parties criticized PM Erdogan's 
recently uttered remarks saying, "Democracy and religion are 
helpful in attaining a peaceful environment...Religion is the 
glue that held the ethnic components (within a society) 
together."  According to CHP (Republican People's Party) 
National Leader, PM Erdogan "lost his bearings" and started a 
perilous, controversial and an endless religious debate. 
According to Baykal, PM Erdogan, upon seeing that his 
formulations stressing the ethnic identities rather than a 
single national identity proved weak and were not very welcomed, 
now resorted to the concept of religion, which would reportedly 
disorient him more.  Separately, Zaman reported that CHP leader 
would visit Hakkari's Semdinli and Yuksekova districts this 
morning to examine the situation there. Baykal will go to Van 
and Malatya provinces later. 
 
OZGUR GUNDEM:   A local court brought a civil action and fined 
Sukran Aydin, the Bismil Mayor of Diyarbakir, because Aydin 
greeted the public with a Kurdish word during her address to a 
crowd in 2002 at Diyarbakir's Kulp district.  Aydin will have to 
pay approximately 1100 USD.  Reportedly, DEHAP Deputy National 
Chairperson Ali Urkut made a speech in Zaza language on the same 
day; however, no action was brought against him, said the 
newspaper. 
 
RADIKAL:        Third Court of First Instance in Ankara approved the 
regulation that banned the use of Kurdish during political 
activities of the political parties.  The regulation stipulates 
that no other language than Turkish will be used during the 
political activities of the parties. 
 
RADIKAL:        Mikail Ilcin, leader of Hani clan and former Hakkari 
deputy from CHP (Republican People's Party), said during a press 
announcement yesterday that a Kurdish state must be founded in 
northern Iraq.  Ilcin reportedly praised Massoud Barzani, leader 
of the KDP (Kurdistan Democratic Party), during his 
announcement. 
 
OZGUR GUNDEM:   A large-participation press announcement will 
be held on December 10 World Human Rights Day in Hakkari's 
Semdinli district.  DTP delegates, SHP (Social Democratic 
Populist Party) municipality assembly members, KESK 
(Confederation of Public Employees' Unions), Umut Bookstore, 
Human Rights Association representatives and Chamber of 
Tradesmen and Artisans will form a platform in Semdinli to make 
a press announcement and to draw attention to their commitment 
to follow the developments on the case. 
 
OZGUR GUNDEM:   A Culture and Arts Association in Istanbul 
used a logo published on Ozgur Gundem newspaper, and designed a 
key holder which carried the logo with a statement on it saying, 
"Semdinli Bomb, Do not forget it, Watch out!"  The association 
members said that, this key chain, while expressing their 
protests and reaction against the Semdinli case, will help keep 
the memory of the incidents fresh on the minds of the people. 
 
OZGUR GUNDEM:   "Delegation of Citizens", which went to 
Semdinli to conduct studies there, returned to Istanbul to talk 
about their Semdinli observations.  Professor Gencay Gursoy, 
Chairperson of the Istanbul Chamber of Doctors, said that 
Kurdish people demanded peace, justice, identity rights and 
freedom. During the meetings held with citizens in Hakkari, 
Semdinli, Yuksekova and Van, the first and foremost demand of 
the people was to make their voices heard, not silenced, said 
Gursoy. 
REID