05ADANA81
SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY FOR APRIL 18-19, 2005
Wed Apr 20 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ADANA 000081 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU ADANA
SUBJECT: SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY FOR APRIL 18-19, 2005 
 
This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary for April 18-19, 
Â¶2005.  Please note that Turkish press reports often contain 
errors or exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch for 
the accuracy of the reports summarized here. 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
BOLGE / EKSPRES:        Adana Mayor Aytac Durak reportedly was furious 
when a muhtar (headman) allegedly made a request to be immune 
from a Municipality decision to demolish unauthorized house 
construction. Durak reportedly denied the request and ordered 
the demolition of the headman's house immediately. 
 
CUMHURIYET / SABAH (GUNEY) / RADIKAL:   A "substantial" 
quantity of oil reportedly leaked from the BOTAS (Petroleum 
Pipeline Corporation) pipeline - located three kilometers away 
from Ataturk Dam in Sanliurfa - and made its way to the Dam, 
covering the surface of the water with petroleum and allegedly 
catching on fire.  Thanks to the hard work of the firefighters, 
a catastrophe was avoided.  The incident reportedly caused 
environmental damage, especially to endangered species of 
turtles, and local people are concerned about the quality of 
their potable water. 
 
RADIKAL / HURRIYET:     In two separate military operations, two 
members of the MKLP in Ovacik district of Tunceli and a member 
of the PKK in Omerli district of Mardin were killed.  One 
Turkish soldier was reportedly wounded slightly.  Separately, 
the Mayor of Diyarbakir allegedly used the term "armed Kurdish 
opposition" (note: referring to the PKK) in a broadcast of 
pro-PKK Roj TV.  He also reportedly said that it would be 
discriminating among citizens should the Municipality 
investigate whom is requesting when they receive requests for 
municipal ambulances to transport bodies to funerals.  (Note: 
this comment is in response to criticism for his having approved 
the use of municipal ambulances on occasion to transport bodies 
of alleged terrorists.  End note.) 
 
RADIKAL:        Hekim Turgut, Hakkari's Provincial Education 
Director, alleged that threats against his life have been made 
by phone since he started filing complaints against contractors 
who built the schools that were seriously damaged during the 
January 25 earthquake. 
 
RADIKAL / OZGUR GUNDEM: One child died and two were wounded when 
they handled an explosive they found as they were grazing their 
sheep in an open field close to a military station in Patnos 
district of Van. 
 
HURRIYET / OZGUR GUNDEM:        A seven-year-old girl was 
reportedly found raped, tortured and wounded in a Diyarbakir 
street. The victim was hospitalized in Dicle University's 
Research Hospital and the police are trying to find the criminal 
with the help of fingerprints found on the girl's body. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REID