05ANKARA1035
THIRD-COUNTRY TRANSFER: TURKEY'S REQUEST TO SELL
Fri Feb 25 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

251343Z Feb 05UNCLAS ANKARA 001035 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR PM/RSAT, EUR/SE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MASS MARR TU
SUBJECT: THIRD-COUNTRY TRANSFER: TURKEY'S REQUEST TO SELL 
H-300C HELOS 
 
REF: A. 04 STATE 14450 
 
     ¶B. 03 ANKARA 8011 
     ¶C. 03 STATE 235681 
     ¶D. 03 ANKARA 4098 
     ¶E. 02 ANKARA 8942 
 
¶1. On July 6, 2004, the Turkish MFA forwarded by diplomatic 
note a request to sell U.S.-origin H-300C helicopters to 
"Anadolu Havacilik Elektronik Sanayi ve Ticaret Limited 
Sirketi" (Anatolian Aviation and Avionics, Ltd.), a Turkish 
firm which represents a U.S. firm, Globe Aero, Ltd.  The 
request contained no/no information about the helos, 
including how they were obtained from the United States.  In 
an Oct. 21, 2004 meeting on the status of a number of Turkish 
third-party transfer cases, emboffs requested that the GOT 
provide further information on this request, such as how and 
when the GOT obtained the helos, how many it planned to sell, 
the original acquisition value, and their estimated current 
value. 
 
¶2. On Feb. 15, 2005, Embassy received another diplomatic note 
with further information attached.  We then noticed that the 
helos listed were the same as those for which Turkey had 
successfully applied for USG clearance to sell to another 
firm, Air Consult (see refs).  On Feb. 23, PolMilOff 
contacted Ali Gunay of MFA's Americas Desk, who reported that 
the helos in question were put up for tender by the Ministry 
of Defense.  Apparently as interested companies (so far only 
two) submit bids, the GOT is then seeing if the USG will 
allow the transfer.  PolMilOff pointed out that this seems 
like an extraordinarily long tender (opened in 2002) and 
asked when it would close.  Gunay responded that MOD had not 
established a final closing date, but he expected that bids 
would close by the end of this year.  Post is faxing notes 
and enclosures for both these cases to PM/RSAT (attention 
Todd Hughes). 
 
¶3. BEGIN TEXT OF MFA NOTE NUMBER 2004/ALGY/284768: 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Turkey 
presents its compliments to the Embassy of the United States 
of America and with reference to the Ministry's Note No" 
2003/ALGY/510770, dated December 16, 2003 has the honor to 
request assistance in obtaining the U.S. Government's 
approval for the sale of U.S. origin H-300 helicopters to 
"Anadolu Havacilik Elektronik Sanayi ve Ticaret Limited 
Sirketi" which represents a U.S. company named "Glove Aero 
Limited." 
 
The Ministry also has the honor to inform the Embassy that 
Anadolu Havacilik Elektronik Sanayi ve Ticaret Limited 
Sirketi plans to purchase the aforementioned helicopters for 
commercial and educational purposes. 
 
Representation Certification of Anadolu Havacilik Elektronik 
Sanayi ve Ticaret Limited Sirketi and Power of Attorney form 
prepared by Globe Aero Limited are enclosed herewith.  The 
aforesaid documents also include point of contact information 
for both firms. 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Turkey 
avails itself of this opportunity to renew to the Embassy of 
the United States of America the Assurances of its highest 
consideration. 
 
Ankara, July 5, 2004 
 
END TEXT 
 
¶4. BEGIN TEXT OF MFA NOTE NUMBER 2005/ALGY/54324 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Turkey 
presents its compliments to the Embassy of the United States 
of America and with reference to the meeting held in the 
Ministry on 21 October 2004 regarding the outstanding 
third-party transfer cases, has the honor to present herewith 
the necessary information about the sale of US - origin 
H-300C helicopters to Anadolu Havacilik ve Ticaret Limited 
Sirketi. 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs avails itself of this 
opportunity to renew to the Embassy of the United States of 
America the assurances of its highest consideration. 
 
Ankara, 15 February, 2005 
 
END TEXT 
EDELMAN