05ANKARA5507
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Sep 23 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 ANKARA 005507 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 22, 2005 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Rice: PKK a Matter of Timing, Not Principle - Sabah 
Fried: US, Turkey Agree to Increase Pressure on PKK - 
Milliyet 
Gul at UN: Northern Iraq a Terrorist Training Base - 
Milliyet 
US Asks for Time on the PKK - Aksam 
PKK Extends `Suspension of Operations' to October 3 - Sabah 
Talabani: We Need US Troops in Iraq - Vatan 
CSIS Report: Iraq a Base for Islamic Militants - Sabah 
Karamanlis to Visit Turkey in Late November - Hurriyet 
3 PKK Terrorists Killed in Van - Sabah 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
US Waiting for the `Right Time' for PKK - Cumhuriyet 
Gul: UN Cannot be By-Passed on Cyprus - Radikal 
Zabari Gives Assurances on PKK - Yeni Safak 
MFA: No Recognition Without Cyprus Settlement - Cumhuriyet 
Saudi FM: US Deepening Sectarian Divide in Iraq - Cumhuriyet 
Saudi FM: US Surrendering Iraq to Iran - Yeni Safak 
CSIS Report: 30,000 Insurgents in Iraq - Cumhuriyet 
Hamas Open to Compromise with Israel - Radikal 
Israel, Iran Spar at UNGA - Zaman 
Russia Supports Iran at UN - Yeni Safak 
Kaddafi to Pay Surprise Visit to Israel Soon - Yeni Safak 
UN: Vatican Protects War Criminals - Yeni Safak 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
Rice, Gul Meet in New York:  At a meeting Foreign Minister 
Gul in New York yesterday, Secretary Rice signaled that US 
action against the PKK presence in Iraq is `a matter of 
timing, not a matter of principle.'  Unidentified Turkish 
officials told journalists that the US side `expressed a 
greater willingness to talk about things that could be done' 
than in the past.  A Turkish diplomat said that `both sides 
were pleased' by the Gul-Rice meeting.  The sides also 
exchanged views about developments in Iraq, including 
`sensitive' issues such as Kirkuk and Tal Afar. 
 
Fried: US, Turkey Agree to Increase Pressure on PKK:  The 
following is a summary of an interview with Daniel Fried, 
Assistant Secretary of State for European and Eurasian 
Affairs, that was carried today in "Milliyet:" 
 
`We know how concerned the Turkish government and people are 
about the PKK issue.  The Foreign Minister expressed these 
concerns very openly and honestly with Secretary Rice.  We 
have agreed with the Turks that we need to step up the 
pressure on the PKK and its affiliates in Europe.  This 
doesn't solve the problem, but it is an important step 
forward.  Our goal is to eliminate the PKK wherever it has a 
presence.' 
 
`There are many security threats in Iraq that we are working 
to eliminate.  We cannot counter all threats at the same 
time.  This does not mean we don't care -- we do.  We think 
this is very important.  Foreign Minister Gul made the 
Turkish position very clear to us.  He left no room for 
misinterpretation.  Secretary Rice understood what he meant. 
There are things that we may be able to do, and we are 
working on them.' 
 
`We are not in a position to meet the most dramatic 
expectations of the Turkish people.  We are not in a 
position to launch a military operation.  You must remember 
that Iraq is a sovereign country.  The real communication 
channels should be between the governments of Turkey and 
Iraq.  This is a matter of concern not only the US, but for 
Iraq as well.  But we are determined to step up the pressure 
and do whatever we can.' 
 
`Our policy is the elimination of terrorists from Iraq. 
What the Turkish people should understand from this is that 
we want the PKK removed completely from Turkey and Iraq. 
They must be eliminated wherever they are seen.' 
 
`Tripartite cooperation among Turkey, the US, and Iraq has 
improved, both rhetorically and in terms of joint action. 
Turkey and the US share common strategic goals in Iraq.  We 
want a peaceful, secure and democratic Iraq that remains as 
a single state.  We want the constitutional arrangements to 
strengthen Iraq, not to divide it.  The US and Turkey 
totally agree on the kind of Iraq we want to see.  Of 
course, this new Iraq should be an Iraq without the PKK.' 
 
`We understand and sympathize with Turkey's concerns 
regarding the Turkmen in Kirkuk and Tal Afar.  This recent 
operation in Tal Afar has avoided some of the issues that 
were raised during operations year.  We also know well 
Turkeys' concerns regarding Kirkuk, and we understand them.' 
 
`We have never believed in a division of Iraqi territory. 
We want the status of Kirkuk to be determined in a way that 
will serve the interests of all Iraqis.' 
 
Gul Addresses UNGA:  On Wednesday, Foreign Minister Abdullah 
Gul delivered a speech at the 60th session of the UN General 
Assembly in New York.  Gul offered the condolences of the 
Turkish people to the American people for the tragic loss of 
life and large-scale destruction caused by Hurricane 
Katrina.  Gul said that a democratic Iraq at peace with its 
neighbors can only be created by the inclusion of all Iraqi 
groups in a coalition.  He stressed that the existence of 
different ethnic and religious groups must not be a force 
for division in Iraq: `On the contrary, a multicultural 
society would make Iraq stronger.  If a multi-cultural Iraq 
does not live up to its expectations, this will generate 
conflict and instability instead of hope and inspiration for 
the region.'  Gul claimed that Turkey, in cooperation with 
the UN, had been at the forefront of efforts for political 
and economic rehabilitation in Iraq.  `The Neighbors of Iraq 
Forum, pioneered by Turkey, has been an effective platform 
to support the unity and territorial integrity of Iraq. 
Iraq has unfortunately become a training ground for 
terrorists.  We are concerned that terrorism emanating from 
Iraq may affect other countries, including Turkey.  It is 
our joint duty to prevent such an outcome,' he added.  Gul 
also discussed the Middle East, noting that recent 
developments in the peace process and in Lebanon had raised 
hopes.  He welcomed the Israeli withdrawal from the Gaza 
Strip, and called for a similar process for the West Bank. 
`Israeli settlement activities in occupied territories must 
come to an end.  The sanctity of the holy sites in Jerusalem 
must be respected.  The roadmap should be revived and fully 
implemented,' Gul said, stressing that terrorism should not 
be allowed to derail the peace process this time.  `The 
reforms in the Palestinian National Authority must move 
forward, particularly in the area of security.  Efforts to 
improve living conditions of the Palestinians should be 
intensified,' the Turkish FM said.  With regard to Cyprus, 
Gul denounced attempts to `move the issue away from the UN.' 
`We regard efforts to undermine the role of the UN as a most 
disturbing paradox,' Gul said.  He noted that `although the 
Annan Plan did not fully meet expectations, the Turkish 
Cypriots, for the sake of compromise, approved it with an 
overwhelming majority.  The rejection of the Annan Plan at 
the referenda held last year was a blow to the international 
community.'  Gul added that it is difficult to believe that 
the Turkish Cypriots continue to live under restrictions, 
cut off from the outside world.  The FM called for the 
lifting of all restrictions on northern Cyprus, and 
suggested the need to enable the free movement of people, 
goods, and services.  On the fight against terrorism, Gul 
condemned the `chain of attacks' across the world. 
`Combating terrorism should be a global, collective 
struggle, and the UN should continue to play a prominent 
role,' he said.  Gul emphasized the right to peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy, and underlined the requirement for 
countries to maintain full and transparent cooperation with 
the International Atomic Energy Agency.  `The establishment 
of WMD-free zones, particularly in the Middle East, would be 
an important contribution to international peace and 
security,' Gul said. 
 
Gul Meets with Zebari:  Foreign Minister and Deputy Prime 
Minister Abdullah Gul met with Iraqi Foreign Minister 
Hoshyar Zebari in New York yesterday.  According to 
diplomatic sources, the draft Iraqi constitution, recent 
developments in Tal Afar, and the PKK presence in northern 
Iraq were discussed.  Zebari said that Iraq had been doing 
everything in its power, and pledged to `do something' more 
on the PKK issue. 
 
Gul on the PKK, EU Counter-Declaration, Cyprus:  On 
Thursday, Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul told journalists 
from NTV that Turkey said that nobody should doubt that 
Turkey has the power to use `every means necessary' to fight 
the PKK in northern Iraq.  Gul claimed that the failure of 
the US to take steps against the PKK has caused a `loss of 
prestige' for the US in Turkey.  `Turkey hopes to see 
visible signs that the US is taking steps together with Iraq 
on this issue,' he emphasized.  Regarding the EU counter- 
declaration issued yesterday in the face of Ankara's refusal 
to recognize Nicosia, Gul noted that the EU accession 
document had yet to be approved by the European Parliament. 
`The issue is being assessed, and we will then make a 
statement,' he said.  Gul also criticized the Greek Cypriot 
administration for trying to `lure' the EU into efforts to 
resolve the Cyprus problem.  Gul said that Turkey opposes 
efforts to move the issue away from the UN. 
 
EU Counter-Declaration on Turkey:  Dailies quote Turkish 
diplomatic sources as saying that the EU counter-declaration 
for Turkey `went too far,' whereas EU Enlargement Commission 
Olli Rehn described the document as `reasonable and 
balanced.'  `The agreement paves the way for the adoption of 
the negotiating framework, and thus the opening of entry 
talks with Turkey on October 3,' Rehn said.  `This proposal 
takes due account of all concerns and provides a solid basis 
for rigorous and fair negotiations with Turkey.  I look 
forward to its rapid adoption by EU member states,' Rehn 
noted.  Papers claim that the Greek Cypriots had managed to 
get concessions from the EU by threatening to delay the 
approval of the counter-declaration.  Most commentaries 
suggest that the EU did not press for the immediate 
recognition of the Greek Cypriot state, but signaled that 
Turkey will not be allowed to delay recognition until the 
final stage of the accession talks.  The EU also wants 
Turkey to remove `all obstacles' to the free movement of 
goods, including a ban on Greek Cypriot ships and planes 
calling at Turkish ports and airports.  The EU said the bloc 
will review progress on the opening of Turkey's ports and 
airports in 2006. 
 
Iskenderun Port Halts Shipments to Iraq:  "Cumhuriyet" 
reports that Turkey's Customs Undersecretariat has decided 
to halt the transfer to Iraq of 120 vehicles and 71 crates 
offloaded from the Egyptian flagged "Egyptian Pride" at 
Turkey's Mediterranean port of Iskenderun.  Iskenderun 
Maritime Trade Chamber chairman Bulent Kavsak said that the 
military vehicles brought to the port in Iskenderun could 
not be classified as `combat vehicles,' but are intended for 
logistical and humanitarian support. 
 
McEldowney Announces US Grant for Education of Needy Turkish 
Students: Turkey's leading national daily, "Hurriyet," 
carried an op-ed by US Charge d'Affaires, Nancy McEldowney, 
in which the Charge expressed US support for the education 
of Turkish children.  `In Turkey, many families in rural 
areas are unable to send their children to school, and 
instead have them stay at home or work in the fields,' 
McEldowney wrote, noting that the US government has 
contributed 9 million USD to a Turkish project under which 
cash payments are made to poor families so that they can 
keep their children in school.  `The project has been 
particularly successful in helping Turkish girls get to 
school - and stay there,' McEldowney said.  The Charge wrote 
that this effort will be advanced further with another US 
grant of 6 million USD.  `This program, called `From the 
Field to the School,' will help children throughout the 
country engaged in seasonal agricultural labor leave the 
fields and enroll in school,' she wrote.  McEldowney 
concluded that `by working together on these collaborative 
programs, Turkey and America stand very tall and very proud. 
Together we will build a better future for all our 
children.' 
 
Baydemir Suggests Democratic Debate Will Help Solve Kurdish 
Problem:  Papers report that Diyarbakyr Mayor Osman Baydemir 
told the European Parliament that violence will return in 
Turkey if democratic channels for solving the Kurdish issue 
are blocked.  Baydemir was in brussles to address a 
conference sponsored by the EU-Turkey Civil Commission to 
discuss the Kurdish issue.  He said that the main reason for 
Turkey's failure to solve the Kurdish issue thus far is the 
absence of democratic debate.  Responding to questions from 
the press, Baydemir said that Turkey must create a suitable 
milieu in which democratic discussions can be held. 
`Otherwise, the violence will continue,' Baydemir said, in 
remarks seen by some commentators as a `threat' for the 
reemergence of PKK violence.  Some papers chareg that 
Baydemir has been acting as a mouthpiece for the imprisoned 
PKK leader Abdullah Ocalan. 
 
Ankara Forum Holds Fourth Meeting in Istanbul:  The third 
gathering of the `Ankara Forum' was held in Istanbul 
yesterday with the participation of the Palestinian Chambers 
of Commerce, Industry, and Agriculture, the Israeli Economic 
Foundation, and the Turkish Union of Chambers (TOBB).  The 
sides said in a joint press statement that the Ankara Forum 
is focused on the Palestinian Free Industrial Zone, the 
development of small and medium-scale enterprises, 
construction, and financing.  The Forum's fourth meeting 
will take place in Tel Aviv in November.  TOBB Chairman 
Rifat Hisarciklioglu said that a budget of 3 billion USD has 
been allocated to help the development of Palestinian 
economy, and he called on Turkish entrepreneurs to 
participate in rebuilding a new Palestine.  "Sabah" says 
that the Palestinian Free Industry Zone, which will be 
established between Turkey and Palestine through the efforts 
of TOBB, will help Turkish businessmen to surmount US quota 
restrictions.  The US, Russia, the EU, and the UN have 
agreed to extend 3 billion USD in financial support to 
Palestine over the next three years.  They also agreed to 
set up a special industrial zone in Palestinian territory. 
Goods produced in that special zone and exported to the US 
will be exempt from quota restrictions.  The zone will be 
run by TOBB.  "Sabah" expects businessmen from the region 
and from Turkey to rush to Palestine to benefit from these 
exports incentives. 
Three PKK Terrorists Killed in Van:  Security forces killed 
three PKK militants in Turkey's eastern city of Van late 
last night, papers report.  Two militants were wounded in 
the clash, and two others escaped. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  German Election/Future of EU/Turkey 
 
"The Final Junction" 
Soli Ozel wrote in the mass appeal "Sabah" (9/22): "The 
result of the German election provides some clues for 
understanding the current situation within the EU.  The fact 
is that the European Union will very likely be in a state of 
political deadlock, if not political crisis, over the next 
four years.  Due to the choice made by the German people, 
the German economy will continue to slow down in the period 
ahead.  . The possibility of a solid and strong EU is 
further clouded when the crisis in Germany is combined with 
the identity crisis that exists in France.  All of this 
points toward a looser EU along the lines preferred by the 
United Kingdom.  In any case, the EU's need to work toward a 
joint foreign policy, to improve its competitiveness, and to 
address its security concerns has not diminished." 
 
"It is not Binding, But." 
Sami Kohen opined in the mainstream daily "Milliyet" (9/21): 
"At first glance, the counter-declaration issued by the EU 
could be considered as a one-sided statement that does not 
contain binding obligations for Turkey.  Although it is true 
that, just like Turkey's July 29 declaration, the counter- 
declaration has no legal value, it does reflect the joint 
determination of EU countries on the controversial issues of 
Turkey's recognition of Cyprus and the opening of its ports 
to the Greek Cypriots.  This EU approach is in direct 
conflict with the view that Turkey is defending.  There is 
no doubt that this declaration also has political 
importance.  The declaration laid out the expectations the 
EU has of Turkey during the upcoming EU.  Even though the 
language in the declaration was rather soft, it is not hard 
to guess that some EU countries, especially the Greek 
Cypriots, will remind Turkey of these expectations at every 
opportunity.  But it wouldn't be right for Turkey to use 
this declaration as an excuse to walk away from the table on 
October 3.  Now the most important issue is the finalization 
of the framework document for negotiations , which is 
binding and thus even more important." 
 
MCELDOWNEY