05ANKARA5133
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Sep 02 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 005133 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 01, 2005 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
EU Foreign Ministers to Issue Counter-Declaration - Hurriyet 
Bridge of Death on the Tigris - Hurriyet 
Reuters' Cameraman in Abu-Ghraib - Hurriyet 
No EU Condition for Turkey to Recognize Cyprus - Sabah 
Marc Grossman is New Advisor for Ihlas Holding - Sabah 
Ankara Warns on Kirkuk Portion of Iraqi Constitution - Sabah 
Yerevan's Railway Nightmare - Milliyet 
Ambassador Edelman: Erdogan's Approach on Iraq is Right - 
Milliyet 
Diplomatic Initiative on Roj-TV - Milliyet 
Abizaid and Jones to Visit Turkey for PKK Talks - Milliyet 
Suicide Bomb Panic in Iraq, 852 Dead - Aksam 
US Generals to Visit Turkey to Discuss PKK - Aksam 
Turkey Will Not be asked to Recognize Cyprus - Aksam 
DEHAP Members Arrested in Nusaybin - Aksam 
MFA Spokesman: We Don't Recognize A Region Called Kurdistan 
- Star 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Disaster in Baghdad - Cumhuriyet 
DEHAP Reacts to General Buyukanit's Remarks - Cumhuriyet 
DEHAP Members Arrested at Militant's Funeral  - Cumhuriyet 
IOC: `Modernization is Only Way Out for Islamic World' - 
Zaman 
One Rumor, and 1,000 Dead - Yeni Safak 
Ankara: We Don't Recognize a Region Called Kurdistan - Yeni 
Safak 
Turkmen Leaders Unhappy About Kirkuk Provision - Yeni Safak 
Occupation in Iraq Costs US More than Vietnam - Yeni Safak 
FM Gul to London to Lobby for October 3 - Yeni Safak 
 
BRIEFING 
 
EU Accession:  All papers report that at a meeting in 
Brussels yesterday, EU Ambassadors agreed to release a 
counter-declaration in response to Ankara's declaration 
stating that Turkey's signing of the EU accession protocol 
does not imply recognition of Cyprus.  The foreign ministers 
of the EU countries will decide today on the final wordking 
of the counter-declaration today at a meeting in Wales. 
"Milliyet" reports that Turkey will not be asked by the EU 
to recognize Cyprus, but "Cumhuriyet" notes that the 
declaration will call on Turkey to fully implement its 
customs union agreement with EU countries by opening its 
ports and airports to Greek Cypriot vessels and planes. 
"Hurriyet" notes that the Greek Cypriots are not satisfied 
by the current draft of the counter-declaration and have 
threatened to veto the start of accession talks with Turkey. 
Foreign Minister Gul will fly to the UK today to attend the 
EU Foreign Ministers' meeting as a special guest, and to 
lobby EU foreign ministers on the October 3 accession talks. 
"Hurriyet" says that EU countries will make certain demands 
of Turkey during this meeting.  France and Cyprus will 
reportedly urge Turkey to announce a timetable for opening 
its ports to Greek Cypriot vessels.  Greece will demand that 
Aegean territorial violations be mentioned in the EU 
framework document.  France and Austria will call on the EU 
to mention a `privileged partnership' for Turkey as an 
alternative to full membership. 
 
Orhan Pamuk Could Face 3-Year Jail Term:  Charges have been 
filed against Turkish novelist Orhan Pamuk for comments he 
made to a Swiss newspaper, in which he said that `30,000 
Kurds and a million Armenians were killed in Anatolia, but 
no can talk about that.'  Pamuk is being charged with 
`humiliating the Turkish identity.'  If convicted, the 
writer could face up to 3 years in prison.  The first 
hearing in Pamuk's case will take place December 16 in 
Istanbul. 
Ankara Comments on Iraqi Constitution:  MFA spokesman Namik 
Tan commented on the Iraqi Constitution as part of his 
weekly press conference.  Tan warned yesterday that `the 
struggle to dominate Kirkuk could turn into a clash or 
conflict that could spread throughout all of Iraq.  If the 
UN were to take an active role in the process, that would be 
a guarantee for the resolution of competing claims in Kirkuk 
and for the prevention of a manipulation of the process.' 
Tan noted that the draft constitution could be implemented 
successfully only if it were accepted by all segments of the 
Iraqi population.  Responding to a question regarding Iraq's 
federal structure, Tan said `we do not recognize a region 
called Kurdistan.  Everyone knows that there is no such 
region.'  Tan aded that, in general, the consitution 
satisfactorily protects the rights of the Turkmen minority 
in Iraq. 
 
US Generals to Visit Turkey:  All papers report that CENTCOM 
Commander General John Abizaid and EUCOM Commander General 
James Jones visit Ankara September 8-9 to discuss PKK 
terrorism with their counterparts in the Turkish military. 
Turkish Military officials have said they don't expect a 
concrete resolution to the problem to emerge from the 
meeting.  The military sources said their expectation is to 
learn from the US commanders what non-military steps the US 
is prepared take to address the PKK threat in Iraq.  The 
sources stressed that such steps should be tied to a 
specific timetable. 
 
Danish PM Spokesman Says He is `Unaware' of PKK-Affiliated 
Media:  Several papers report that a spokesman for Danish 
Prime Minister Anders Fogg Rasmussen, when asked to comment 
on claims that Denmark is allowing ROJ-TV, a PKK-affiliated 
station, to broadcast from its territory, claimed that he 
was `unaware' that the PKK had requested permission to 
broadcast in Denmark.  `If that is the case, and if the PKK 
were to broadcast fom Danish territory, then that would fall 
under Denmark's anti-terrorism laws.  It would then be a 
matter for the police and the Ministry of Justice,' the 
spokesman added. 
 
Turkish General Staff Denies General Ozkok Remarks on 
Government:  The Turkish General Staff (TGS) issued a 
written statement yesterday denying press reports that TGS 
Chief General Hilmi Ozkok had said he was `very pleased with 
the Turkish government's handling of the terrorism issue." 
According to the TGS statement, the reports `do not reflect 
reality, as the Chief of General Staff scrupulously refrains 
from commenting on political issues.' 
 
Air Force Commander Affirms Ties Betwee Turkish State, 
Hizbullah:  In a front-page story, "Milliyet" reports that 
General Faruk Comert, Commander of the Turkish Air Force, 
has said that he warned the Governor of Diarbakir back in 
the 1990s of the danger of `using another organization, such 
as Turkish Hizbullah,' in the struggle against the PKK in 
southeast Turkey.  The paper claims this is the first time 
that the long-rumored ties betwee the Turkish state and the 
terrorist Hizbullah have been acknowledged by a senior 
Turkish official. 
 
Seven DEHAP Officials Arrested for Attending Funeral of PKK 
Terrorist:  "Zaman" and "Cumhuriyet" report that seven 
officials of pro-Kurdish DEHAP were detained for 
participating in the funeral of a Syrian terrorist killed in 
clashes with security forces in the Black Sea cities of 
Trabzon and Macka on August 21.  The suspects were accused 
of spreading PKK propaganda and praising PKK terrorist 
actions. 
Ambassador Edelman Comments:  "Milliyet" reports that former 
US Ambassador Eric Edelman, who is now the third man at the 
Pentagon, attended the Victory Day reception at the Turkish 
Embassy in Washington.  Edelman praised PM Erdogan's article 
that appeared in the Wall Street Journal, saying that the 
Prime Minister's approach on the Iraq issue is `the right 
one.'  Responding to journalists' comments on the apparent 
improvement in Turkish-American relations, Edelman joked 
that `now that I have left Turkey, things are going better.' 
 
Reuters Cameraman Held At Abu-Ghraib:  "Hurriyet" reports 
that Reuters cameraman Ali Omer Ibrahim Meshadani, who was 
arrested by US forces in Ramadi on August 8, will be kept in 
Abu-Ghraib prison for 6 months while he awaits trial.  The 
US-Iraqi Joint Investigation Office ruled that Meshadani 
presents a threat for the Iraqi people, and therefore denied 
his release.  The cameraman will not be allowed to see his 
lawyers or family members during his first 60 days in 
prison. 
 
Former US Ambassador Grossman to Work For IHLAS:  "Sabah" 
reports that former US Ambassador Marc Grossman has signed a 
contract for $100,000 to serve as a consultant for the IHLAS 
Holding Group.  Grossman ended his 29-year diplomatic 
carrier when he retired from the State Department earlier 
this year. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  The Iraq Constitution 
 
"A New Source of Terror" 
Sami Kohen commented in the mass appeal "Milliyet" (9/1): 
"It is unclear whether the Baghdad bridge disaster occurred 
as the result of a pre-planned suicide attack or simply 
panic based on rumors.  The ongoing tension in Iraq and the 
never-ending attacks make the general atmosphere very 
suitable for provocations.  Regardless of the cause, this 
tragedy is likely to deepen the existing gap between the 
Sunnis and the Shiites. . The incident also shows that, 
given the current feeling of insecurity and the atmosphere 
of tension, implementation of the constitution will not be 
easy, even if the draft is approved at referendum.  The 
political system for Iraq as laid out in the constitution 
requires a good level of mutual understanding and harmony 
between the various religious and ethnic groups.  The 
current tension between Iraq's Sunnis and Shiites makes it 
hard to envision a situation in which the federal structure 
can be put into effect.  The leaders of the ethnic and 
religious groups in Iraq must act with common sense and in a 
cold-blooded manner, because they have the responsibility to 
lead their followers to the right path." 
 
"Country of Disasters" 
Yilmaz Oztuna observed in the conservative "Turkiye" (9/1): 
"Iraq has turned into a country of disasters.  The tragedy 
on the Tigris river bridge has become the latest in this 
chain of disasters.  . Historically, Iraq has never been a 
land of peace and stability.  Currently, the Iraqis are 
engaged in a struggle over the constitution.  But nothing 
can possibly heal the wounds of this country.  As a matter 
of fact, nobody is happy with the new Iraqi constitution, 
with the possible exception of President Bush.  There is no 
way to argue that this constitution represents a step toward 
serious democracy.  Although the US intention is far from 
clear, it might be planning a civil war in Iraq.  The Iraqi 
Kurds have gained the power to form a state, and Turkey's 
decision to deny support for US troops on March 1 paved the 
way for this development.  The US will probably leave Iraq 
after working to ensure that the oil flow from the region is 
secured.  Arabs will most likely remain aloof to the new 
Kurdistan.  The same goes for Iran. . The Middle East is on 
the verge of new bad surprises.  The events in Iraq will 
likely spread through the entire region, and have a negative 
effect on all concerned." 
MCELDOWNEY