05ANKARA5355
TFUS01: TURKS REMEMBER GENEROUS EARTHQUAKE
Wed Sep 14 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

141449Z Sep 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 005355 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR HURRICANE KATRINA TASK FORCE 
DEPT PLEASE PASS DHS FOR FEMA/OIA 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AEMR EAID PREL KPAO TU
SUBJECT: TFUS01: TURKS REMEMBER GENEROUS EARTHQUAKE 
ASSISTANCE FROM US AND RESPOND IN KIND 
 
Ref: (A) STATE 163366 (B) ANKARA 5193 (C) STATE 162270 
 
(D) STATE 163278 (E) STATE 163729 (F) ANKARA 5210 
 
¶1. This is an action cable.  See paragraph 6. 
 
¶2. Summary: The GOT has formally offered an assistance 
package totaling USD 2.5 million for Hurricane Katrina, 
including a USD 1.5 million cash donation to the 
American Red Cross (already sent), and USD 1 million of 
in-kind assistance.  GOT Emergency Management Agency 
President Hasan Ipek has requested guidance from post to 
prioritize the in-kind assistance and to determine how 
and to whom to arrange delivery.  In addition to the 
GOT's generous offer, the embassy continues to receive 
numerous letters of condolence and private offers of 
assistance (including ten full scholarships at the Izmir 
University of Economics for undergraduate  and graduate 
students in the affected area) from Turkish citizens as 
they remember America's response to the major earthquake 
near Istanbul in 1999.  End summary. 
 
-------------------------------- 
OFFICIAL GOT OFFER OF ASSISTANCE 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶3. On September 13, econoff received notification from 
Turkish Emergency Management Agency (TEMA) President 
Hasan Ipek that the GOT has offered monetary and in-kind 
assistance totaling USD 2.5 million for Hurricane 
Katrina.  According to Ipek, PM Tayip Erdogan felt 
strongly that Turkey should assist the USG and held 
several meetings to determine the best type of 
assistance.  Ipek added that the GOT has already 
transferred USD 1.5 million to the American Red Cross 
(ARC).  He stated that GOT officials will meet on 
September 15 to determine what in-kind assistance will 
comprise the remaining USD 1 million.  They plan to use 
the ref A list of items as a guide. 
 
¶4. Ipek requested assistance in prioritizing the in-kind 
donation and with determining the logistics for 
delivery.  He stated that the GOT is willing to donate 
the items either directly to FEMA, to the ARC or to any 
organization that the USG specifies.  According to Ipek, 
the GOT has contacted NATO EADRCC (Euro-Atlantic 
Disaster Response Coordination Center) regarding 
transportation and delivery but will await USG 
instructions prior to shipping the donation.  He added 
that they will ship the items in any way the USG 
requests.  Finally, he mentioned that the GOT could also 
send medical personnel to the affected area.  MFA Volkan 
Oskiper confirmed to Econoff that this official offer 
came from the Prime Ministry and supersedes the previous 
offer of a search and rescue team (Ref F). 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
TURKS TO AMERICANS: WE REMEMBER YOUR KINDNESS 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. In addition to the private offer of 1.2 million 
bottles of water (ref B), the embassy continues to 
receive numerous letters of condolence from Turkish 
citizens.  One of particular note came from a Turkish 
citizen who currently lives in the World Bank- 
constructed housing in Izmit, an area badly affected by 
the massive earthquake that occurred near Istanbul in 
¶1999.  In remembrance for the generosity shown by 
America in response to this disaster in 1999, the writer 
included a USD 5 donation.  A second letter of special 
interest is from the leadership of Izmir  University of 
Economics (IEU), where the mission's fourth and newest 
American Corner is housed.  As thanks for the generosity 
shown to Turkey by American students during the 1999 
earthquake, the university has offered full scholarships 
to five graduate and five undergraduate students who are 
currently enrolled at universities or community colleges 
in the affected areas.  The university's medium of 
instruction is  English. 
 
-------------- 
ACTION REQUEST 
-------------- 
 
¶6. Action request:  Post requests Department's guidance 
in responding to the GOT's official offer of assistance. 
In particular, the embassy would appreciate instructions 
on whether or not the GOT should make all donations 
through the ARC. 
 
¶7. Post POC is Economic Officer Rebecca Patrick (x.2255 
or patrickrk@state.gov). 
 
MCELDOWNEY