05ANKARA6262
EXBS: TURKEY ADVISORS MONTHLY REPORT- (SEPTEMBER
Fri Oct 14 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 006262 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NP/ECC- PVANSON, ACHURCH, VLE, JHARTSHORN 
DEPT FOR EUR/ACE- DSILLIMAN, SYOUNTCHI 
CBP/INA- PWALKER 
DOC FOR PETERSON-BEARD 
USCG FOR BGOLDEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC KNNP KSTC MNUC PARM TU
SUBJECT: EXBS: TURKEY ADVISORS MONTHLY REPORT- (SEPTEMBER 
2005) 
 
REF: ANKARA 6248 
 
¶1.      Summary:  EXBS Advisor served as control officer for 
the visit of State Under Secretary for Arms Control and 
International Security Robert Joseph.  Also, in September 
EXBS Advisor coordinated a Commodity Identification Training 
(CIT) refresher course and related meetings for Turkish 
Customs and Atomic Energy personnel and participated in the 
final selection meeting for the Turkish contractor to 
customize the Internal Control Program (ICP) for use by 
Turkish businesses.  Finally, EXBS Advisor coordinated the 
participation of Turkish delegations in the recent PSI Air 
Cargo workshop, International Export Control Conference, and 
other events.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.      Completed Actions for the Reporting Period 
 
¶A.        Site Assessment and Meetings During Recent 
Reporting Period 
 
1)          Sept. 9 -  EXBS Advisor met with MFA Head of 
Department for Arms Control and Disarmament Osman Yavuzalp to 
discuss current projects in Turkey, including Internal 
Control Program (ICP), Commodity Identification Training 
(CIT), Product Identification Tool (PIT) and Second Line of 
Defense (SLD).  EXBS Advisor also inquired about the status 
of the NP Cooperation Agreement, which is awaiting Turkish 
Parliamentary ratification in the next months and reviewed 
the CIT project status.  EXBS Advisor completed coordination 
of Turkish participation in upcoming conferences including 
PSI workshop and Export Control conference. 
 
2)          Sept. 19 - EXBS Advisor participated in a meeting 
with TAEK, Turkish Customs and DOE INECP personnel to discuss 
current status of the Turkish CIT program and  recent 
accomplishments, and to prepare for the upcoming 2 day CIT 
Refresher course. 
 
3)           Sept. 22 - EXBS Advisor took part in wrap-up 
meeting following the CIT Refresher course with DOE INECP and 
the Turkish CIT Core Technical Group members (representatives 
from Turkish Customs and TAEK), during which milestones for 
the upcoming 6 months were established including future CIT 
Train-the-Trainer courses and completion of the Turkish CIT 
Training Plan.  The development of instructors, acquisition 
training aids and other issues associated with the course 
were also discussed. 
 
4)          Sept. 23 - EXBS Advisor met with MFA Arms Control 
and Disarmament Head of Department Osman Yavuzalp to discuss 
upcoming visit of U/S Joseph to Ankara. 
 
5)          Sept. 26 - EXBS Advisor took part in a meeting at 
Undersecretariat of Foreign Trade (UFT) to review the ICP 
project with Siemens Business Service Representatives. 
Siemens has been selected by the GOT to complete the Turkish 
customization of the ICP program.  Items discussed at the 
meeting included the development of a work plan and a budget, 
establishment of points of contact within Siemens, UFT and 
other Turkish governmental organization and the U.S. for this 
project.  Siemens appears ready to move forward with the 
project which has been stalled for almost a year awaiting 
selection of a contractor to complete this part of the 
project. 
 
6)          Sept. 29-30 - EXBS Advisor served as control 
officer for the visit of U/S Joseph to Ankara.  Details of 
visit and meetings held and attended by EXBS Advisor are 
contained in ref. A. 
 
¶B.        Training Conducted During Reporting Period: 
 
1)         Sept. 20-21- CIT Refresher Training Course for 13 
member of the CIT Core Technical Group; 6 TAEK 
representatives and 15 Customs inspectors. 
 
¶C.        Equipment Delivered During Reporting Period: None 
 
¶D.        Imminent Training, Equipment or Activity Status 
Update: 
 
1)        Oct. 10-14- Three members of the Turkish CIT Core 
Technical Group attended CIT Instructor Training in Richland, 
Washington. 
 
2)        Oct. 11-13- Three members of the Turkish Coast 
Guard attended Black Sea/Caspian Sea Conference in Baku, 
Azerbaijan. 
 
3)        Oct. 23-28 - Two Turkish representatives to attend 
TRACKER workshop in Oxford England. 
 
¶E.        Significant Developments in Export Controls, 
Nonproliferation, or Related Border Security: 
 
1)         GOT MFA informed EXBS Advisor that the signed NP 
Agreement has been forwarded by the Prime Minister's office 
and is now before Parliament awaiting final ratification. 
Ratification is expected in October. 
 
¶3.      Future Activities 
 
¶A.         October 24- 29 - University of Georgia Center for 
International Trade and Security to visit Turkey to conduct 
overview study of export control system. 
 
¶B.         November 14 - 18 - EXBS Advisor on annual leave. 
 
¶C.    December (tent.) - DOE INECP to present End Use/End 
User workshop to GOT officials 
 
¶D.         January (tent)- DOE INECP to conduct CIT Train the 
Trainer course in Ankara. 
 
¶4.      Red Flag Issues: None 
 
¶5.      Contact Information for EXBS Adviser ) Kevin Lyon, 
phone (90)(312) 455-5555 ext 2525, fax (90)(312) 468-4775, 
email LyonK@state.gov. 
 
 
MCELDOWNEY