05ANKARA753
NPT 2005 REVIEW CONCERENCE (REVCON): REQUEST TO
Wed Feb 09 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

091009Z Feb 05UNCLAS ANKARA 000753 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KNNP PARM TU
SUBJECT: NPT 2005 REVIEW CONCERENCE (REVCON): REQUEST TO 
ASSIST IN PREPARATIONS 
 
REF: STATE 08228 
 
¶1. EXBS Adviser delivered reftel issue paper and talking 
points to MFA Head of Department for Arms Control and 
Disarmament Sabri Ergen on February 4, 2005.  Ergen thanked 
us for the information and assured EXBS Adviser that the 
information would be provided to the Turkish delegation 
attending the upcoming meetings. 
 
¶2.  The following information is in response to reftel's 
request for public diplomacy activities on the NPT that could 
be effective in Turkey: 
 
-- Which NPT issues are most prominent in Turkey?  The only 
proliferation-related issue that is discussed frequently in 
the Turkish press is Iran's alleged pursuit of nuclear 
weapons. 
 
-- Which public diplomacy tools would be most persuasive in 
communicating the U.S. message on non-proliferation, 
disarmament and peaceful use issues?  High level visits and 
carefully selected and placed op-ed articles in local press 
are effective ways to communicate the U.S. message. 
 
-- Would DVC be influential on NPT issues in Turkey?  DVC's 
are generally not a very effective means to pass information 
in Turkey.  A DVC on NPT issues would most likely generate 
only a small if any amount of interest. 
 
-- Are there local journals or other key national or regional 
media in which it would make sense to place articles by USG 
officials on NPT issues?  Embassy Ankara has placed op-ed 
pieces on a variety of issues in many Turkish daily 
newspapers.  An article on NPT issues could be translated and 
placed in the local media without too much difficulty. 
 
-- Would public outreach activities by a visiting USG 
official prove useful in influencing Turkey's views on NPT 
issues?  Public outreach by high-level USG officials on NPT 
would be of interest here.  The most effective activities 
would be press round tables or interviews with key 
journalists to ensure fair representation of U.S. views. 
 
EDELMAN