05ANKARA2524
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue May 03 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 002524 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
TUESDAY, MAY 3, 2005 
 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Turkey, Israel to Launch 17 Joint Military Projects - 
Hurriyet 
Erdogan: Turkey Can Mediate for Israel-Palestine Peace - 
Vatan 
Shalom Opposes Turkey's Mediation Efforts - Milliyet 
Abbas: If Israel Agrees, We Won't Oppose Turkey as Mediator 
- Milliyet 
Turkey to Buy Harpy-2 `Bombing Birds' from Israel - Milliyet 
Sharansky Resigns to Protest Gaza Withdrawal - Aksam 
Annan Issues Call For Nuclear Non-Proliferation - Sabah 
Laura Bush Crushes President's `Tough Guy' Image - Aksam 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Israel Rejects, Again, Turkey's Mediation Offer - Zaman 
Attacks on Rise in Baghdad: 100 Killed in 4 Days - 
Cumhuriyet 
ECHR to Announce Decision on Ocalan May 12 - Cumhuriyet 
Rice Threatens North Korea: US Can Defend Itself - 
Cumhuriyet 
Muslim Votes Key in British elections - Yeni Safak 
British Muslims Angry at Blair - Zaman 
20,000 Russian Intellectuals Convert to Islam - Yeni Safak 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
Erdogan Visits Israel, Palestine:  Prime Minister Tayyip 
Erdogan met with Palestinian `head of state' Mahmoud Abbas 
in Ramallah on Monday after wrapping up his official 
contacts in Israel earlier the same day.  The PM had been 
scheduled to meet with Palestinian `Prime Minister' Ahmed 
Qurei, but the Palestinians canceled the meeting when 
Erdogan was more than two hours late arriving in Ramallah. 
After the meeting with Abbas, Erdogan voiced Turkey's 
readiness to help advance the Middle East peace process. 
Abbas welcomed Erdogan's offer, saying that Palestine wants 
to see both a political and economic role for Turkey.  Abbas 
suggested launching talks with Israel under Turkish 
auspices.  Erdogan said he had asked Israeli officials to 
support Abbas, giving him a chance to apply measures which 
will be to Israel's interests.  `Abbas must have real power 
in order to establish authority and block the activities of 
armed groups,' Erdogan said.  Turkish papers report that 
Erdogan urged PM Sharon on Sunday to end the fighting with 
Palestinians.  `For years, Syria sheltered a terrorist 
organization fighting with Turkey,' Erdogan noted, adding 
that `we lost 40,000 lives in terrorist attacks.'  `But 
today, we have turned a new page with Syria,' Erdogan said, 
and he advised Sharon to do the same with Palestinians. 
Turkish papers report that Israeli Foreign Minister Silvan 
Shalom opposes arbitration efforts by third countries, 
including Turkey.  Shalom reportedly suggested that Turkey 
could instead provide economic and humanitarian assistance 
for Palestinians.  Erdogan also told the joint press 
conference with Abbas and Qurei that Turkey's Union of 
Chambers (TOBB) brought together Israeli and Palestinian 
business representatives in Ankara late last month in an 
effort to support the peace process through the development 
of economic and commercial ties.  The second leg of meetings 
will be held in Israel, Erdogan said, pledging that Turkey 
would do all it can to assist the two sides.  `We want to 
help the Palestinians,' Erdogan said, noting that Turkey 
will continue its political, military, and commercial ties 
with Israel.  Erdogan later joined a meeting of the 
Palestinian Business Council in Ramallah and inaugurated the 
office of the Turkish International Cooperation Agency 
(TICA), through which aid to the Palestinians will be 
coordinated. 
 
Erdogan Meets Senator Frist in Jerusalem:  Before moving on 
to Palestine from Jerusalem on Monday, visiting Turkish 
Prime Minister Erdogan met with two leading figures of the 
American Jewish lobby as well as Senate majority leader Bill 
Frist, "Milliyet" reported.  Fritz said he was pleased to 
see Erdogan in Israel, and that Turkey could make a 
contribution to the peace process.  Senator Frist reportedly 
offered to host PM Erdogan in the US Senate during his 
upcoming travel to the United States.  "Milliyet" speculates 
that Frist, a figure close to President Bush, may be 
effective in delivering messages from Erdogan to the 
administration in Washington. 
 
Turkey to Buy Military Drones From Israel:  Ankara has 
decided to buy 48 `Harpy-2' armed military drones from 
Israel, "Milliyet" reports.  Manufactured by Israel Aircraft 
Industries (IAI), the Harpy-2 attack drones will reportedly 
cost Turkey 80 million USD.  Shortly before Erdogan's 
landmark visit to the region, Ankara had agreed to buy 10 
surveillance drones from Israel.  Turkish Defense Minister 
Vecdi Gonul, who joined PM Erdogan on his state visit to 
Israel, said that Turkey-Israeli joint defense projects now 
amounted to over 1 billion USD following recent arms 
agreements signed by the two countries.  The Turkish Defense 
Minister will reportedly stay on in Israel for two extra 
days to visit Israeli defense industrial sites. 
 
DAS Kennedy in Turkey:  Deputy Assistant Secretary of State 
Laura Kennedy arrived in Ankara on the first stop of her 
regional tour aimed primarily at relaunching Cyprus peace 
talks.  Kennedy will meet with Turkish Foreign Ministry 
(MFA) Undersecretary Ali Tuygan today before departing for 
Athens on Wednesday morning, "Zaman" reports.  The paper 
expects Kennedy to urge Papadopoulos to send to the UN any 
proposed changes to the Annan Plan as soon as possible. 
 
Turkey, US Agree on Incirlik Air Base:  Turkish papers 
continue to report on `details' of the agreement between 
Turkey and the US regarding the use of Incirlik Air Base as 
a logistical support hub for operations in Iraq and 
Afghanistan.  A maximum of six US C-17 cargo planes will be 
deployed at Incirlik when the hub begins to operate in June. 
The C-17s will take non-lethal cargo brought to Incirlik in 
civilian cargo planes to Iraq and Afghanistan, according to 
the reports.  The Turkish side did not grant `blanket 
permission' for cargo flights as requested by the US side. 
As the result of `hard bargaining' between the two sides, 
the Americans will be required to inform Turkey beforehand 
about flight routes and cargo details.  Turkey will 
terminate the use of the base if national interests requires 
it to do so.  The agreement will take effect on June 23 and 
will be valid for one year. 
 
Zebari Asks for Time to Handle PKK:  Iraqi Foreign Minister 
Hosyar Zebari told a private Turkish broadcaster that the 
new Iraqi government will not support domestic groups 
fighting against Iraq's neighbors.  Zebari asked Turkey for 
time in handling the issue of PKK militants in northern 
Iraq.  `A tripartite security commission (Turkey, Iraq and 
the US) has been established, but we have not yet agreed on 
the kind of coordination necessary to take action against 
the PKK threat,' he said.  Zebari noted that PKK leaders in 
Iraq are hiding along borders with Iran and Turkey, areas 
not fully controlled by Baghdad. 
 
Schroeder Due in Turkey:  German Chancellor Gerhard 
Schroeder will kick off an official two-day visit to Ankara 
Tuesday evening.  Schroeder will meet Prime Minister Erdogan 
tomorrow before moving on to Istanbul, where he will meet 
Patriarch Bartolomew and participate in the Turkey-Germany 
Economic Forum.  Papers expect Schroeder to pressure Erdogan 
on the reopening of the Greek Orthodox Halki Seminary in 
Istanbul, and to urge Turkey to open its border with 
Armenia. 
 
Erdogan-Kocharian to Meet in Warsaw:  Ankara is trying to 
arrange a meeting between Prime Minister Erdogan and 
Armenian President Kocharian at the Council of Europe 
leaders' summit in Warsaw that will take place May 15-17, 
papers report.  Azerbaijani President Aliyev is also 
expected to meet Kocharian in Warsaw to discuss the 
resolution of the Nagorno-Karabakh problem. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: Turkey-Israel Relations; Iraq; An Advisor 
for Humor 
 
"An Adjustment in Middle East Policy" 
Sami Kohen opined in the mainstream opposition "Milliyet" 
(5/3):  "PM Erdogan's visit to Israel and Palestine was the 
result of Ankara's decision to make an adjustment to its 
Middle East Policy.  The purpose of the was to improve the 
damaged Turkey-Israeli relationship.  The outcome of the 
visit shows that this goal was largely achieved.  The timing 
of the visit was perfect.  There are huge changes underway 
in the Middle East.  While the region is being reshaped, it 
wouldn't be right for Turkey to remain a spectator to these 
events.  Erdogan's timely visit proves that Turkey is 
adjusting its Middle East Policy by approaching developments 
in the region in a more moderate and more credible way.  It 
is obvious that this policy will accelerate Turkey's 
relations with the Arab countries as well as with Israel and 
the Palestinians.  However, Turkish diplomacy should not 
expect to play a serious mediating role, at least in the 
short run.  There are many countries seeking such 
responsibility, but Israel has shown no desire so far for 
third-party mediation.  Nevertheless, there is still a lot 
that Turkey can do to contribute to peace in the Middle 
East.  Supporting reconstruction in the Gaza Strip is only 
one example.  For the time being, chances for success in the 
Middle East seem rather promising." 
 
"The Real Situation" 
Hadi Uluengin commented in the mass appeal "Hurriyet" (5/3): 
"Do you ever ask yourself what is going in Afghanistan these 
days?  Even though everything is not perfect there, the new 
government led by President Kharzai has succeeded in taking 
major steps toward normalization.  In general, the situation 
in Afghanistan is not bad at all. All of the `conventional 
wisdom' about endless bloodshed and resistance in post- 
election Afghanistan has been shown to be spurious.  What 
about the situation in Iraq?  The situation is improving 
there as well, albeit more gradually.  Although the 
insurgents have not ended their attacks and the list of the 
dead grows longer with each passing day, the `main axis' 
does not and will not change.  In other words, just like in 
Afghanistan, terrorism will not be able to change the 
direction of Iraq.  Whether Shiite, Sunni, Arab, or Kurd, 
the majority of all Iraqi people seek more than anything a 
prosperous, peaceful, and sovereign Iraq.  The establishment 
of the new Iraqi government, the holding of free elections, 
and the expectation of a US military withdrawal from Iraq by 
July 2006 have narrowed the path of the insurgents.  So the 
general situation in Iraq is also moving in the right 
direction.  By the `general situation,' I mean democracy. 
Despite all the chaos in the world, we believe that the main 
force of change in the 21st century will be the cause of 
democracy." 
 
"Erdogan's Most Urgent Need is an Advisor on Humor" 
Meral Tamer wrote in the mainstream opposition daily 
"Milliyet" (5/3):  "Think of this scene:  Prime Minister 
Erdogan is telling a joke at the podium during a dinner 
given in his honor by the Parliament correspondents.  As the 
joke continues, his wife Emine rushes on to the stage amidst 
bewildered looks, seizes the microphone from her husband and 
says `not that same stale joke again!'  Because the event 
would be carried live on all major television channels, the 
sight of Emine Erdogan taking the microphone and cracking 
joke after joke would leave people laughing so hard their 
sides would split. Substitute George Bush for Prime Minister 
Erdogan, and Laura Bush for Emine, and this event actually 
happened.  As I was flipping through the TV channels on 
Saturday night, I came across this scene on CNN- 
International.  Mrs. Bush was being broadcast live at a 
dinner at the White House - and she was cracking people up. 
Most of the people in the room - starting with President 
Bush and Secretary of State Rice - were laughing so hard at 
what Mrs. Bush was saying that tears had come to their eyes. 
I can't tell you how enjoyable it was to see such a scene on 
my screen.  Some of the things Mrs. Bush said were reported 
yesterday in the Turkish media.  The headline in our papers 
was her comment that because George goes to bed every night 
at 9 o'clock, she and Mrs. Cheney are forced to sit up by 
themselves and watch "Desperate Housewives."  But what 
surprised me most was the First Lady's remarks about her 
mother-in-law: `everyone thinks that Barbara is such a sweet 
grandmother figure.  But if you ask me, she's a lot more 
like Don Corleone!'  With former President Bush sitting 
practically next to her and  laughing, the First Lady was 
comparing his wife with a mafia boss.  It was unbelievable. 
My humble recommendation is that Prime Minister Erdogan, no 
matter what else happens, go out and find himself a humor 
advisor.  If there were anyone from his current group of ace 
advisors who could fill that role, instead of opening court 
cases against cartoonists who draw him in the papers, the 
Prime Minister would have responded to those cartoons with a 
shot of good humor.  It would have been much more effective 
than the lawsuit, and he would have gained a lot of public 
sympathy by responding to humor with humor.  But for 
something like this to happen, there would need to be not 
only an atmosphere of tolerance, but also a high degree of 
self-confidence on the part of those who lead this country." 
 
EDELMAN