05ANKARA2397
AGREEMENT FOR COOPERATION CONCERNING PEACEFUL USES
Thu Apr 28 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 002397 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG KNNP TRGY TU
SUBJECT: AGREEMENT FOR COOPERATION CONCERNING PEACEFUL USES 
OF NUCLEAR ENERGY AND THE RETURN OF FUEL RODS 
 
REF: A. STATE 270743 
     ¶B. ANKARA 775 
 
¶1. This is an Action Cable.  See para 6. 
 
¶2.  Summary: The Government of Turkey completed the 
ratification process by the Turkish Grand National Assembly 
for the Agreement for Cooperation between the Republic of 
Turkey and the United State of America concerning Peaceful 
Uses of Nuclear Energy.  Post received a request to find out 
the status of the United States ratification of the 
Agreement.  A lack of ratification by the United States could 
have a negative effect on exchange of nuclear information and 
potential cooperation on development of Turkey's Nuclear 
Power plants but -most importantly- it could impede desired 
return of Highly Enriched Uranium Fuel (HEU) assemblies to 
the U.S. from Turkey. End Summary. 
 
¶3.  Post received a Diplomatic Note announcing Turkish Grand 
National Assembly ratification of the Agreement for 
Cooperation between the Republic of Turkey and the United 
State of America concerning Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy 
on January 14, 2005.  This Agreement has also been published 
in the Turkish Official Gazette as required by Turkish law. 
 
¶4.  In a April 22 meeting with EXBS Advisor, the President of 
the Turkish Atomic Energy Authority (TAEK), Okay Cakiroglu, 
stated that Turkey was willing to carry out the planned 
exchange of the Highly Enriched Uranium fuel assemblies at 
the Cekmece Nuclear Reactor for new Low Enriched Uranium fuel 
assemblies, as requested by the United States earlier this 
year (reftels).  However, Cakiroglu pointed out that an 
important part of this exchange was that Turkey would receive 
the replacement fuel assemblies.  In his view this would not 
be possible absent United States ratification of the 
Agreement concerning Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy, which 
would allow the transfer of these fuel assemblies to Turkey. 
Without the replacement fuel assemblies, Turkey is unwilling 
to transfer the HEU fuel assemblies, since it would not be 
able to operate their research reactor. 
 
¶5.  Cakiroglu also informed EXBS Advisor that Turkey still 
plans to construct several nuclear power plants.  GOT has 
conducted preliminary discussions with several companies in 
various countries.  Cakiroglu believes that the ideas and 
technology presented by Westinghouse would best fit the needs 
of Turkey.  Again, however, in the absence of a ratified 
agreement, Cakiroglu believes that the GOT would not be able 
to consider Westinghouse or any other U.S. company for their 
nuclear power plants. 
 
¶6.  Action: Post requests the status of the ratification 
process for the Agreement for Cooperation between the 
Republic of Turkey and the United State of America concerning 
Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy.  Post also requests 
information on expected timing for ratification. 
 
¶7.  Comment: Turkey, although very reluctant at first, has 
done everything required for an early return of the HEU fuel 
rods as requested by the United States earlier this year. 
Ironically, United States inaction to date on this Agreement 
may now delay this sought after exchange. Further delay in 
ratification of this Agreement could affect not only the 
future return of this fuel source, but also U.S. commercial 
involvement in Turkey's potential nuclear program. While 
recognizing that Turkey's prospective program may face 
financial difficulties, we would like to be responsive to 
Turkey's desire for exploring U.S. technology. 
 
EDELMAN