05ANKARA2049
EXBS: TURKEY ADVISOR MONTHLY REPORTING CABLE
Fri Apr 08 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 002049 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NP/ECC- PVANSON, ACHURCH, TGROEN 
DEPT FOR EUR/ACE- DMARTING, DMCCORMICK 
CBP/INA- PWALKER 
DOC FOR PETERSON-BEARD 
USCG FOR BGOLDEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC KNNP KSTC MNUC PARM TU
SUBJECT: EXBS: TURKEY ADVISOR MONTHLY REPORTING CABLE 
(MARCH 2005) 
 
REF: 2004 STATE 146478 
 
 ¶1.      Summary:  EXBS Advisor conducted the second of three 
annual program consultations in Washington DC, meeting with 
stateside program coordinators of the projects being 
conducted in Turkey, including the Internal Control Program, 
Commodity Identification Training, Product Identification 
Tool and other Non-proliferation programs.  EXBS Advisor also 
reviewed Turkey's participation in PSI activities and 
discussed ways to maintain Turkey's engagement in this 
initiative.  Finally, EXBS Advisor continued negotiation of 
the NP Cooperation Agreement, bringing this agreement to the 
brink of completion. 
 
¶2.      Completed Actions for the Reporting Period 
 
¶A.        Site Assessment and Meetings During Recent 
Reporting Period 
 
1)          March 4-  EXBS Advisor met with MFA Arms Control 
and Disarmament Head of Department Sabri Ergen to conduct 
monthly update meeting on all current projects in progress in 
Turkey, including Internal Control Program (ICP), Commodity 
Identification Training (CIT), Product Identification Tool 
and Second Line of Defense (SLD).  EXBS Advisor also 
discussed the status of the NP Cooperation Agreement, which 
was being cleared by the various Ministries in the Turkish 
Government.  Ergen stated that all comments were due by this 
date, but he was still missing one or two ministries. 
Finally, EXBS Advisor discussed Turkey's involvement in PSI 
and the Omaha PSI experts working group, to which Turkey sent 
a significant delegation. 
 
2)          March 10- EXBS Advisor met with Undersecretariat 
of Foreign Trade  (UFT) Agreement Department Head Fail Kural 
to review the progress of the ICP project and provide UFT 
with the latest version of the ICP software.  Kural informed 
EXBS Advisor that UFT has selected a contractor, Havelsan 
Company, to perform the needed customization of the software. 
 The contractor's name and contact information has been 
forwarded to DOC contractor to begin coordination of specific 
job elements.  A follow on meeting between UFT, Havelsan and 
EXBS Advisor was scheduled for early April to establish 
milestones for the project. 
 
3)          March 16-  EXBS Advisor met with Department Heads 
for Customs Enforcement Mehmet Guzel and Ender Gurleyik to 
review EXBS program work with the Turkish Customs, including 
CIT, PIT, and Risk Management Workshop.  Gurleyik informed 
EXBS Advisor about recent Customs exchanges with Germany and 
the British Customs Authority, these exchanges include the 
sharing of information, training and best practices 
concerning operations within Customs areas.  EXBS Advisor 
utilized the Export Control System questionnaire as a guide 
to a question and answer discussion to develop a standard 
understanding of the current system and challenges that exist 
within Turkish Customs Areas of responsibility concerning NP 
issues.  Additionally, Guzel and Gurleyik reviewed recent 
cases and the status of plans to upgrade the Habur Gate 
Border crossing with Iraq. 
 
4)          March 18- EXBS Advisor met with MFA Arms Control 
and Disarmament Head of Department Sabri Ergen in advance of 
Washington consultations.  EXBS Advisor confirmed upcoming 
CIT refresher training and reviewed status of the ICP 
project.  Ergen informed EXBS Advisor that the NP Cooperation 
Agreement has been approved by the various Ministries in the 
Turkish Government, now MFA was conducting a preview of 
Parliament to ensure that there would not be any difficulties 
in getting the agreement passed after signature.  MFA is also 
preparing a Turkish version of the Agreement which should be 
ready in early April.  Finally, EXBS Advisor discussed 
Turkey's involvement in PSI and the next PSI experts working 
group. Ergen informed EXBS Advisor that Turkey is prepared to 
offer a PSI exercise in the Mediterranean in spring 2006. 
(Note: At the Omaha meeting, Turkey offered to host a 
ground/sea/air exercise in May 2006). 
 
5)          March 23-25- EXBS Advisor conducted program 
consultations in Washington DC with representatives from 
NP/ECC, NP/PPC, NP/PTR, DOE/INECP, DOHS/CBP, DOC/OIP, 
Commonwealth Trading Partners and the Wisconsin Reporting 
Group.  EXBS Advisor provided current updates on all projects 
underway in Turkey, along with planning for future 
activities. NP/ECC also outline upcoming changes in the EXBS 
program and the potential effects that could be a result of 
these changes.  The Turkey program appears to be on track and 
moving in the correct direction. 
 
¶B.        Training Conducted During Reporting Period: None. 
 
¶C.        Equipment Delivered During Reporting Period: None 
 
¶D.        Imminent Training or Equipment Status Update: 
 
1)          Apr 18-22-  DOE NNSA will conduct a CIT Refresher 
course for members of the Turkish CIT Core Group, members of 
the Turkish Customs service and Turkish Atomic Energy 
Authority that are developing the training plan for Turkey. 
 
¶E.        Significant Developments in Export Controls, 
Nonproliferation, or Related Border Security: 
 
1)         GOT continued interagency coordination of the NP 
Cooperation Agreement.  No objections have been raised to the 
latest US draft that was delivered the end of February, 
although the GOT wants to add one word to the list of items 
the US may provide, which we do not anticipate being a 
problem.  A signing ceremony for the NP Agreement could occur 
as early as this spring with ratification by the Turkish 
Parliament by the end of the summer. 
 
¶3.      Future Activities 
 
¶A.         Apr 18- 22- DOE NNSA to conduct CIT Refresher 
Course and project review. 
 
¶B.         May 23- 27 (tent)- DOE NNSA to conduct CIT 
Instructor Training 
 
¶4.      Red Flag Issues: None 
 
¶5.      Contact Information for EXBS Adviser ) Kevin Lyon, 
phone (90)(312) 455-5555 ext 2525, fax (90)(312) 468-4775, 
email LyonK@state.gov. 
 
 
EDELMAN