05BAGHDAD3540
DAILY IRAQI WEBSITE MONITORING - AUGUST 29, 2005
Tue Aug 30 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 003540 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: DAILY IRAQI WEBSITE MONITORING - AUGUST 29, 2005 
 
SUMMARY: Discussion on the Constitution was the major 
editorial theme of Iraqi, Arabic language websites on August 
29, 2005. END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------ 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
------------------------------ 
 
¶A. "Iraq's Constitution - Theatre of the Absurd" (Iraq4all, 
8/29) 
¶B. "Islamists Remove Their Masks--Beware of the 
Constitution" (Modern Discussion Website, 8/29) 
¶C. "The Constitution between Compromise and Veto" (Dar al- 
Iraqiya, 8/29) 
¶D. "Ba'athism and the Legitimacy of the Constitution" 
(Wattan 4 All, 8/29) 
 
---------------------------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "Iraq's Constitution-Theatre of the Absurd" 
Editorial by Salah Omar Al-Ali, Iraq 4 All News Website 
(http://iraq4all.org) 
 
"For six months now, the Iraqi National Assembly's theatre 
has been showing a comedy entitled, `Drafting the Iraqi 
Constitution.' And we reveal no secret when we say that all 
acts were completely prepared in the White House kitchen. As 
for the actors, they only have the role of translating these 
scenes and expressing them through tragic gestures to limits 
that make you sad and want to cry and through comic gestures 
that do the same. 
 
Whereas some players support and others reject (they agree 
and disagree) they all follow one director occupying Iraq's 
thrown these days--the Occupiers (Ambassador Khalilzad and 
Negroponte before him). 
 
Many nations took a long time to draft their constitutions, 
including the United States that needed eight years to 
complete and approve its constitution, while Germany took 
seven years after toppling the Nazi regime. So how can 
Iraq's constitution be drafted in seven months while it's 
still under the occupation of the U.S. military, and should 
we distract people with this issue to divert their attention 
from the main cause of resisting occupation? 
 
The current constitution completely neglects the country's 
sovereignty, advocates for sectarian confrontations under 
the guise of federalism, and threatens unity under the 
moniker of preserving rights. 
 
Imposing a constitution drafted according to the TAL and 
devised by the best known Zionist extremist personalities 
represents the utmost degree of disrespect for Iraqis and 
Iraq's future generations. 
 
We join our voices with those demanding the rejection of 
this draft which, if approved, will expose Iraq to great 
catastrophes. We call for demonstrations, a collection of 
signatures to be sent to the U.N., and convening meetings in 
all Iraqi cities to clarify the dangers resident in this 
draft proposed by an illegitimate National Assembly." 
 
¶B. "Islamists Remove Their Masks--Beware of the 
Constitution" 
Editorial by Nejah Yousif, Modern Discussion Website 
(http://www.rezgar.com) 
 
"I wasn't surprised by the vicious campaign launched by 
supporters of the United Iraqi Alliance against the 
Communist Party and the Kurdish coalition, after finding 
itself in an undesirable position due to its failure in 
providing security, deteriorating services, and 
administrative corruption, in addition to many 
assassinations and attacks executed by its militias 
currently controlling police and military forces which can 
be clearly seen though sectarian slogans mimicked by these 
forces on Iraqi satellite channels. 
 
Drafting a constitution is a national responsibility that 
should not overlook any of the population's components nor 
hinder half of the society through Islamic laws. 
 
The current `revised' draft constitution reflects the 
ambitions and desires of religious clerics to take over and 
reach the state of clerical ruling currently found in Iran. 
This draft is worse than the first constitution in Iraq's 
history. The stinking stench of sectarianism is obvious and 
its consequences will be inflicted on the suffering masses. 
 
What makes things worse is that the election boycotters, or 
those who are truly former regime elements, have rejected 
the draft for proposing Islam as a main source of 
legislation and not the main source of legislation. In 
addition to opposing federalism and the eradication of the 
Ba'ath Party they want to return to square one and 
rehabilitate their fascist party members so they may re- 
enter the political process and take over power again. 
 
On the other hand, the U.S. seems to be confused about its 
policy in Iraq, allowing Islamists to impose their Islamic 
constitution over a multi religious and intellectually 
diverse Iraqi society. The U.S. promoted this constitution 
describing it as a democratic example that would encourage 
the region's people, but what seems to me and others is that 
it neither encourages Iraqis nor the region's people, and if 
allowed to continue it will yield an ineffectual and 
decrepit constitution. 
 
And to complete the picture, the attack against secular and 
democratic powers should start now. Where today's fascists 
have learned from those of yesterday, and have followed the 
concept of divide and conquer by assuring Kurds of 
federalism (until they were able to gain endless rights for 
the Shiite clergy and their take over of the police and army 
forces) and circulating rumors about communists and their 
struggles to distort their image and prevent any secular and 
democratic visions. 
 
Iraqis have shown patience and endured crises and bloody 
wars to be able to live in a society of justice and 
equality, without sectarian divisions where women remain 
threatened by the authority and dominance of men. The only 
thing I can do in the face of the enemies of democracy is to 
vote `No' over the constitution." 
 
¶C.  "The Constitution between Compromise and Veto" 
Editorial by Adil Al-Rubai'ee, Dar al-Iraqiya (The Iraqi 
House) Website (http://www.normal.iraq- 
ina.com/showarticles.php?id=1270) 
 
"All civilized countries throughout the world have had their 
democratic and constitutional experiments which developed 
over decades or even hundreds of years before evolving into 
their current forms guaranteeing stability and prosperity 
for their citizens and promoting the peaceful transfer of 
authority through democratic principles based on competition 
among political parties and power through ballot boxes. 
 
Although a lot of these experiments are similar in their 
outlines, concerning the general principles of political 
life, we can't ignore that each experiment is unique due to 
political and constitutional changes. 
 
And whoever reads the political and constitutional history 
of these countries will find that constitutions were 
developed and integrated over time in ways that match 
peoples' hopes and open new horizons. 
 
Our draft constitution and all of the hot debates around it 
is a base for the new Iraq and not a future frozen in a 
destiny that can't be changed or modified--especially if we 
know that people have the final word. The important thing is 
that sticking issues should be settled according to national 
interests and not to use compromises to impose minority 
vetoes on the majority because that won't serve the 
political process or the national interest." 
 
¶D. "Ba'athism and the Legitimacy of the Constitution" 
Editorial by Abdul Baqi Faraj 
Wattan 4 All (A Country for All) News Website 
(http://wattan4all.com/viewarticle.php?id=329 5&pg=articles) 
 
`This constitution lacks legitimacy - this is what a man who 
landed on a podium coming from another time announced! A man 
without a mustache and long beard who put a white turban on 
his head, who wore a flowing white garment with a black 
short cloak on his shoulders. I thought for awhile that he 
is one of Sahaba (Prophet's friends) or one who was carrying 
his sword though he didn't have one. 
 
You could give this individual, from another heaven, several 
names! He resembles Osama Bin Laden, Saddam Hussein, 
Zarqawi, Qatar's Foreign Minister, the Supreme Leader of the 
Islamic Republic of Iran, Bashar Al'Assad,  Qdaf al-Dam and 
numerable others of death and darkness. But he is comrade 
Sheikh Abdul Nasir Al-Janabi who came forward this morning 
to announce Iraq's constitution which Iraqi people will give 
their vote to on October 15th.  `This constitution lacks 
legitimacy' because it wasn't written on a basis of 
compromise! 
 
With whom and how could compromise be achieved?  Abdul 
Nasir's comrades announced.The constitution should be 
written in a compromise with them! What they intend to do is 
to re-legitimize respect for the Nazi Ba'ath Party. 
 
Apart from being, you either agree or disagree with the 
draft Iraqi constitution because its articles were written 
by people with clerical minds. This is the political reality 
and this is the power balance. You should listen to the 
peoples' opinion even if you disagree with those who wrote 
the constitution and with majority opinion which is not 
always right ! 
You should then listen on October 15th for two letters or 
more when people say `Yes' or `No.' "