05BAGHDAD4841
MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, DECEMBER 15th
Sun Dec 04 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 BAGHDAD 004841 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, DECEMBER 15th 
ELECTION, TRANSPARENCY, U.S. MILITARY PLANTING STORIES IN 
THE IRAQI MEDIA; BAGHDAD 
 
SUMMARY: Today's major editorial theme was split between 
widespread coverage of the American military's placement of 
stories in the Iraqi press and continuing coverage of 
electoral issues. 
 
Analysis: Independent Az-Zaman published a page-three 
column, "Az-Zaman Cannot Be Seduced Or Threatened" which was 
highly critical of the U.S. military's involvement in the 
"scandal" of publishing unattributed, pro-American stories 
in the Iraqi press. The newspaper described the act as "a 
stigma on the forehead of the occupation." 
 
Independent Ad-Dustoor's front-page editorial by Editor-in 
Chief Bassim Al-Sheikh was entitled, "Advertising and the 
Media" and took a defensive tone coupled with a slightly 
broader attack, accusing much of the Western media of 
defaming the Iraqi press and even complicity in the scandal 
merely by virtue of how it's treated the Iraqi media. 
 
On a different topic, independent Al-Mada's back-page column 
entitled, "The Mercy of Reduction" dealt with the upcoming 
election and how the Iraqi people are still suffering daily 
from crises and problems committed during the current and 
former governments. 
 
Independent As-Sabah Al-Jadeed's front-page editorial 
highlighted the results of the Cairo Conference and how the 
Iraqi people are waiting for reconstruction, progress and 
rapprochement following the election. 
 
Al-Adala continues publishing editorials on pages 4, 6, 7 
about the political and electoral process in general and 
also about the UIA's list. Baghdad also continues to 
dedicate a back-page column to speaking about the Iraqiya 
National List No. 731 
 
KDP affiliated At-Taakhi published a front-page editorial 
entitled, "Kurdistan's Society is Rich Due to Its Unity" 
where the writer criticized those who are trying to gain the 
votes of Shiite Kurds by employing sectarian slogans. The 
writer argued that the Shiite (Faili) Kurds will defend 
their rights because first and foremost they are Kurds. 
 
Al-Ittihad published a page-three column entitled "Kurdistan 
Coalition List (730) is a List For All Iraqis" that dealt 
with preparations for the upcoming election and the 
importance of all Iraqis voting for list 730 because "it 
will satisfy all wishes and interests of Iraqis." 
 
Independent Al-Mashriq distributed "The Eyes of the Voter," 
an eight-page electoral supplement with the newspaper which 
contains editorials about the upcoming election. Other 
newspapers (i.e. Ad-Dustoor, As-Sabah, and As-Sabah Al- 
Jadeed) are also publishing electoral supplements which have 
been less news-driven and more public service oriented. END 
SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "Even You?" (Asharq Al-Awsat, 12/4) 
¶B. "Advertising and the Media" (Ad-Dustoor, 12/4) 
¶C. "Allawi Outside of the Electoral Game" (Al-Bayyan, 12/4) 
¶D. "Az-Zaman Cannot Be Seduced or Threatened" (Az-Zaman, 
12/4) 
¶E. "Honesty Is Rare In Our Country" (As-Sabah Al-Jadeed, 
12/4) 
¶F. "About the Los Angeles Times Article" (Al-Mada, 12/4) 
¶G. "The Lame Duck and the Strategy of Withdrawal" (Al- 
Ittihad, 12/4) 
 
---------------------------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "Even You?" 
(Asharq Al-Awsat - independent, London-based, Saudi owned, 
Pan-Arab, no bias, published this page-eight editorial by 
Tarik Al-Hameed) 
 
"The Los Angeles Times' report on the U.S. military paying 
Iraqi papers to write pro-American articles indicates what I 
call polluted democracy. What is the difference between the 
U.S. forces and the dictator Saddam's regime? Saddam 
oppressed and tyrannized inside Iraq and domestic media 
outlets praised him. At the same time, he paid those who 
were outside of Iraq to polish his image. 
 
"We heard General Rick Lynch, the U.S. forces spokesperson 
in Iraq, say that Al-Qaeda considers media half the battle, 
but did Al-Qaeda push the Americans to adopt the same style 
as Saddam? If we understand that the media is half the 
battle, can we justify lying? I think we have a lot of liars 
in the world--we also have writers who write as a business. 
We have authors who write because they believe that media is 
a sacred jihad. 
 
"In fact, media outlets that sympathize with Al-Qaeda are 
not the press. Therefore, buying a news report from the 
Americans in an attempt to improve their image is similar to 
burying nuclear waste in our region. We have a lot of 
problems and we do not need the Americans to increase these 
problems. If we want to improve America's image among 
Iraqis, we should avoid making haphazard mistakes in Iraq. 
 
"We say to the Americans that they should not spoil the 
democracy they established in Iraq. Improving the image of 
America does not come from buying media outlets. In fact, it 
comes through adopting transparency, supporting a free press 
and providing freedom for conveying facts without any 
interference. But, if the Americans want to establish 
another bombastic press in the region, we would say to them 
`even you?'" 
 
¶B. "Advertising and the Media" 
(Ad-Dustoor - independent, no bias, published this front- 
page editorial by Bassim Al-Sheikh) 
 
"The feverish western media outlets have defamed and accused 
the Iraqi press of publishing reports and this reflects the 
shining face of the `occupation' or the `multi-national 
forces' as those who oppose or support its presence label 
them. If we want to be neutral, we should call these forces 
foreign troops. It seems western media have forgotten that 
any paper has the right to publish ads. Usually, Iraqi 
newspapers publish ads and they indicate that these items 
are ads and do not necessarily represent the newspaper's 
viewpoint. 
 
"All Iraqi newspapers publish ads that call for Iraqis to 
promote peace, love and safety. These published articles 
clearly represent ads and they have nothing to do with 
affiliations or loyalties. On the other hand, when 
newspapers publish ads, they are not responsible for the 
influence [created by] publishing those ads. 
 
"We know for sure that the leak of information about this 
issue is a result of American political and economic 
disagreements. However, we will not let the sensationalist 
American press defame our national media outlets. Our media 
outlets rely on professionalism, rules, and are committed to 
journalism's code of honor. We do not care about the 
American factions or if they did not benefit from deals, 
which are held under the guise of the media. I think this is 
an American affair that Iraqis have nothing to do with. 
Iraqi journalists know better how to discriminate between 
advertising and media." 
 
¶C. "Allawi Outside of the Electoral Game" 
(Al-Bayyan - affiliated with Ad-Dawa (led by Al-Ja'fari), no 
bias, published this page-three editorial by Zainab Al- 
Khafaji) 
 
"Iraqi National List leader Iyad Allawi recently paid a 
visit to a military camp and attended a military parade. 
This act has nothing to with the electoral campaign and in 
fact, this behavior violates the government's 
responsibility. The electoral competition must be ruled by 
ethics and values. 
 
"Allawi's recent statements in front of the Iraqi Army's 
parade have caused confusion in the electoral competition 
and are distant from the rules of the electoral game. These 
statements accused Al-Ja'fari's government of disregarding 
human rights. At this point, Allawi must present strong 
proof to support his accusations. I think that Dr. Iyad 
Allawi should have analyzed his statements well before he 
announced them. He should have condemned armed terrorist 
groups and regional countries that support them instead of 
standing against Al-Ja'fari's government. 
 
"Iyad Allawi should not have criticized the government's 
military triumphs against terrorism. In fact, Allawi's 
accusation may confuse the Iraqi community because Iraqi 
voters must not be concerned about details of military 
issues that have nothing to do with the electoral process. I 
think that Allawi has made a political mistake by making 
such a statement. It is not right to randomly accuse others 
in an attempt to make electoral gains because this is not 
democracy. Allawi and other competitors should focus on one 
important issue in their electoral campaign and that is the 
interest of the country." 
 
"[Congressman] Murtha and Kerry weep for the sake of the 
American Democratic party and they want to hinder the `lame 
duck' by calling for early withdrawal from Iraq. However, 
Bush laughs for the sake of America and for the sake of 
staying in the White House just as Reagan did in order to 
achieve `complete victory' in Iraq." 
 
¶D. "Az-Zaman Cannot Be Seduced or Threatened" 
(Az-Zaman - independent, published this page-three 
editorial) 
 
"We consider the scandal of the U.S. military's involvement 
in publishing articles as publicity for it in the Iraqi 
newspapers, a stigma on the occupation's forehead. It seems 
that the U.S. army wants to humiliate the independent 
national Iraqi press through buying the dignity of 
unprofessional journalists. The occupation has brought 
unprincipled journalists and established false press 
platforms for them to convey amateurish reports. In 
addition, these reports lacked patriotism. The occupation 
tried to use these reports to affect the Iraqi national 
press. At the same time, the occupation tried to fight the 
Iraqi national press by providing and allocating funds and 
places for those unprofessional media outlets. 
 
"The newspaper Az-Zaman has always watched these attempts, 
which represent a significant insult to the independent 
Iraqi press. We refused to publish any suspected article or 
report. Additionally, we refused many ads for famous 
companies because we discovered that these companies 
propagandize for the same reason. For all those reasons, our 
newspaper has become an example for credibility and 
professionalism. Our newspaper is honored for not being 
involved in this crisis. Thus, Az-Zaman has set an example 
for the national press that refuses submission to any group. 
Our newspaper cannot be seduced and there is nothing it 
fears but God and the people. 
 
"Az-Zaman represents an example for independence and it 
succeeded in distancing itself from the occupation's traps 
and its tricks to gain influence in the new Iraqi press. We 
believe that the U.S. army and any other group involved in 
this scandal threatens the Iraqi media's independence and 
the honor of journalism. At the same time, we condemn and 
totally reject these practices. Az-Zaman calls on Iraqi 
journalists to be wary of tricks and traps that they may 
fall into. In addition, it warns advertising companies not 
to fall into the traps of the occupation. Az-Zaman is proud 
to resist all these methods because it is free from 
pressures, threats and seduction." 
 
¶E. "Honesty Is Rare In Our Country" 
(As-Sabah Al-Jadeed - independent, no bias, published this 
front-page editorial by Ismail Zayyer) 
 
"I saw a phrase on one of the electoral list posters that 
says, `seven months of achievements and more are coming.' 
Neither I nor any Iraqi has the right to object to the way 
candidates portray their electoral campaigns, because 
democracy allows any way of doing so, but without insulting 
other candidates or hurting the public. But the question is; 
what are the achievements during the past seven months that 
some candidates are promising to provide us with more? 
"If the water and electricity shortages, deterioration of 
security, and the shortages of food items in the ration 
share, destruction of Iraqi cities, assassination of 
scientists and teachers are considered achievements then 
congratulations to the Iraqis, because more of these 
achievements will come in the next stage. 
"For me, I will vote for whoever will clean the streets 
simply because whoever propagates such a slogan is 
considered the only one who is honest, because he knows his 
abilities in advance. He would be certain that he is unable 
to provide security, or to elevate the rule-of-law above all 
else, unable to provide job opportunities or to feed the 
hungry people under these complicated and difficult 
circumstances. 
 
"Vote for whomever will deal with the sewage, bring order to 
the traffic, cancel the fuel lines through provisions, 
because that person is the only honest one among others who 
make promises bigger and grander than this." 
 
¶F. "About the Los Angeles Times Article" 
(Al-Mada - independent, no bias, published this front-page 
editorial by the paper's editorial board) 
 
"A Los Angeles Times reporter interviewed the managing 
editor and employees of our newspaper but, the Los Angeles 
Times reporting was distorted-it asserted there are some 
Iraqi newspapers that publish articles about military 
operations. Al-Mada thinks that this story represents one 
point of view and that most of the sources for these reports 
are not mentioned. For this reason we do not deal with such 
stories, because our newspaper respects its professional 
policy and our readers should get accurate information 
 
"The Los Angeles Times report was distorted because it did 
not publish the whole interview. Al-Mada newspaper stated 
that it refuses to accept money for publishing ads or 
articles. At the same time Al-Mada has editorialized more 
than once on its font page about the disclosure and the 
condemnation of many advertisements that lack clear motives 
and sources. 
 
"Here we confirm that the Los Angeles Times report included 
distorted information, which is distinct from our policies 
and goals. We as a newspaper depend on professionalism and 
we reiterate that we are committed to our fixed policies. We 
also reject all types of `support and grants' from any 
foreign entities whatever their motives might be. 
 
"Finally we ask the Los Angeles Times to publish this 
comment in its next edition in order to explain the facts 
and to be committed to the principles of journalism." 
 
¶G. "The Lame Duck and the Strategy of Withdrawal" 
(Al-Ittihad - affiliated with the PUK, led by Jalal 
Talabani, pro-coalition, published this page-five editorial 
by Faryad Rawanduzi) 
 
"With the beginning of the second year of the second 
presidential term for the American President George Bush in 
the White House, the president now enters the `lame duck' 
stage. In this stage, leaders do not hesitate to implement 
their dream even if this dream will cost them their 
political life. 
 
"President Bush put an end to the likelihood of an early 
withdrawal from Iraq in spite of the Democrats and the 
pressures of some Republican doves. But, if Bush is now in 
`lame duck' mode, this will not belittle pressures to 
establish an American strategy to withdraw U.S. forces from 
Iraq. Therefore, Bush's plan to withdraw may not meet with 
other politicians' plans. Such plans were adopted by the 
Democratic Senator Joseph Biden and the hawkish Democrat 
Murtha's plans to withdraw from Iraq even if this withdrawal 
would be at the expense of `victory.' 
 
"Henry Kissinger believes that any thinking about withdrawal 
from Iraq represents a `disaster.' President Bush knows this 
fact. As long as President Bush is a `lame duck,' he will 
have nothing to lose. If he withdrew from Iraq according to 
his opponents' strategies, he would lose everything. Hence, 
the `lame duck' stage indicates that President Bush will not 
withdraw according to Democratic wishes. In fact, the 
withdrawal will be accomplished according to his plans." 
 
KHALILZAD