05BAGHDAD3709
IRAQI DPM CHALABI SENDS CONDOLENCE LETTERS
Sat Sep 10 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS BAGHDAD 003709 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/I-POL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPDC PREL IZ
SUBJECT: IRAQI DPM CHALABI SENDS CONDOLENCE LETTERS 
TO PRESIDENT BUSH AND VP CHENEY 
 
¶1. On September 4 Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister Ahmad 
Chalabi addressed two letters, one each to President 
Bush and Vice President Cheney, expressing 
condolences to the American people for the enormity 
of Hurricane Katrina.  The text of the two letters 
is identical. 
 
¶2. The letters' text follows, in its original 
English: 
 
We wish to express our deepest sympathies to the 
people of the United States of America for the 
tragic loss of life and destruction caused by 
Hurricane Katrina.  We Iraqis owe a debt of 
gratitude to the American people, and especially the 
men and women of the US armed forces, who have 
sacrificed so much for the cause of freedom, 
democracy and justice in Iraq. 
 
Please accept our condolences at this time and be 
assured that we stand ready to assist the United 
States mn any way possible during these sad times. 
Our thoughts and prayers are with all those who have 
been affected by this tragedy. 
 
Sincerely, 
[signature] 
Ahmad Chalabi 
 
END LETTER TEXT. 
 
Satterfield