05CAIRO7088
ARAB LEAGUE RESOLUTIONS:  IRAQ, PALESTINE,
Mon Sep 12 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 CAIRO 007088 
 
SIPDIS 
 
GENEVA FOR JCASSIDY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV KPAL EAID PTER EG IZ IS ICRC
SUBJECT: ARAB LEAGUE RESOLUTIONS:  IRAQ, PALESTINE, 
TERRORISM, MAGEN DAVID ADOM ISSUE 
 
REF: CAIRO 7047 
 
¶1.  The following are unofficial embassy translations of Arab 
League resolutions on Terrorism, Palestine, Iraq, and the 
Third Protocol/Magen David Adom issue, approved by Arab 
Foreign Ministers during their meeting in Cairo on September 
¶8.  The documents were obtained in draft format but have 
reportedly been agreed to by Foreign Ministers with minimal 
edits.  A more detailed readout of the meetings is provided 
in reftel. 
 
¶2.  Text of 4 Arab League Resolutions (Unofficial Embassy 
translations): 
Terrorism, Iraq, Palestine, Third Protocol/MDA Issue: 
 
Arab League Resolution on Terrorism 
----------------------------------- 
 
After reviewing the memorandum of the General Secretariat, 
the preliminary report of the Secretary General and the 
General Secretariat,s activity between the two rounds, and 
the recommendation of the Political Affairs Committee, the 
Arab League Council at its ministerial level has decided the 
following: 
 
1-  Condemn the terrorist bombings in Sharm El-Sheikh as 
criminal acts that rendered many innocent people victim in 
violation of all religious, ethical, and human values. 
Condemn the terrorist acts in London and Arab countries and 
other regions of the world. 
 
2-  Condemn all forms of terrorism regardless of their 
motives and excuses.  Reject any link between terrorism and 
any religion, culture or civilization.  Confront effectively 
what the Arabs and Muslims are being exposed to, be it racial 
attack or discrimination.  Stress the Islamic religion,s 
message aimed at elevating the values of tolerance and 
rejecting terrorism and extremism. 
 
3-  Work to tackle the roots of terrorism and remove the 
factors that feed it through eradicating the foci of 
tensions, (halting) double standards in implementing 
international law, and putting an end to injustice and 
aggressions against human rights. 
 
4-  Continue Arab coordination at the United Nations with 
regional countries and groups for the sake of holding an 
international anti-terrorism conference under the auspices of 
the United Nations.  Expedite the drafting of a comprehensive 
UN agreement on terrorism that would include a clear 
definition of terrorism that is agreed upon internationally, 
taking into account that the killing of innocent civilians is 
not approved by heavenly religions or international charters, 
and taking into account the difference between terrorism and 
the people,s legitimate right to resist occupation and 
aggression. 
 
5-  Stress the importance of Arab coordination at the 
bilateral and multilateral levels in order to reactivate the 
provisions of the Arab anti-terrorism agreement through 
enhancing cooperation in the judicial and security fields and 
through inviting the Arab countries that have not signed the 
Arab agreement to do so while (at the same time) underline 
the importance of having all Arab countries join the 
international anti-terrorism agreements. 
 
6-  Mobilize media, educational, and religious institutions 
and the civil society to increase awareness of the danger of 
terrorism and extremist ideology and to confront this 
destructive epidemic that threatens the stability of human 
societies and undermines the process of their development. 
 
7-  Enhance measures aimed at combating the financing of 
terrorism in accordance with current international agreements 
and criteria in order to confront money-laundering and 
terrorism-financing operations, and to request the Arab 
ministers of Justice and Interior to draft an Arab agreement 
on this. 
 
8-  Welcome again the Riyadh Declaration issued by the 
International Anti-Terrorism Conference held in Riyadh in 
February 2005 and call for issuing a UNGA resolution to form 
a work team (task force) to study the (best) means of 
carrying out the recommendations included in the Declaration, 
as well as King Abdallah,s proposal on establishing an 
international anti-terrorism center, which would strengthen 
international cooperation in this connection. 
 
9-  Assign a team of Arab anti-terrorism experts to follow up 
on what has been reached by the international anti-terrorism 
conference held in Riyadh and the Arab Regional Seminar on 
Combating Terrorism held at the Arab League on February 
16-17, 2005 and to submit a report and recommendations to the 
next round of the Arab League Council. 
 
10- Promote existing cooperation between the Arab League and 
international and regional organizations in the field of 
anti-terrorism and enhance the Arab League General 
Secretariat,s point-of-contact with the Anti-Terrorism 
 
SIPDIS 
Commission formed by virtue of SC Resolution No. 1371 of 2001. 
 
Arab League Resolution on Iraq 
------------------------------ 
 
After reviewing the memorandum submitted by the Republic of 
Iraq and based on Resolution 264 by the Tunisia summit dated 
May 23, 2004 and Resolution 299 by the Algeria summit dated 
March 23, 2005, 
and as it stresses the Arab League ministerial resolutions 
No. 6324 and 6325 of September 9, 2003 and 6377, 6437, and 
6494, 
 
and as it welcomes the recommendations issued by the 
international conference on Iraq held in Sharm El-Sheikh on 
November 22-23, 2004, 
 
and as it welcomes the recommendations issued by the Brussels 
conference held on June 22, 2005, 
 
and as it refers to SC Resolution No. 1618 of 2005 that 
condemns terrorist activities in Iraq, 
 
and after hearing the review by the Iraqi FM, 
 
and after conducting deliberations, the Arab League Council 
at the ministerial level held on September 8, 2005 has 
decided the following: 
 
1-  Stress the necessity of having all Arab countries adhere 
to the complete implementation of provisions 7, 8, 11, and 12 
of Algeria summit Resolution No. 299 of 2005 regarding 
developments in Iraq and Arab diplomatic presence in Iraq so 
as to express Arab brotherly solidarity for Iraq as a member 
state and a founder of the Arab League.  Urge Arab 
governments and non-government financial institutions and 
funds to actively contribute to the reconstruction of Iraq 
and cancel its debts in order to enable the Iraqi economy to 
stand on its feet. 
 
2-  Welcome the Secretary General,s announcement to open an 
Arab League General Secretariat Mission in Baghdad and his 
call for accomplishing this mission as soon as possible in 
order to activate the League,s role in Iraq. 
 
3-  Underline the necessity of assisting in accomplishing the 
current political process in Iraq in a way that guarantees 
the unity of the people and land of Iraq and enhances the 
Iraqi people,s full exercise of their sovereignty.  Call on 
all sects of the Iraqi people to join in the political 
process, especially the drafting of the Constitution and the 
referendum on it, as well as in the legislative elections 
scheduled for December 2005. 
 
4-  Strongly condemn the terrorist attacks in Iraq, 
incursions, and destruction, and extend condolences to the 
victims of the (recent) bridge tragedy and other areas of 
Iraq, which are all a threat to peace and security as stated 
in SC Resolution No. 1618 of 2005.  Denounce all that is 
related to terrorism, be it instigation or financing, which 
is targeting the Iraqi people.  Call on all Arab countries to 
cooperate for the sake of securing the stability and 
reconstruction of Iraq. 
 
5-  Denounce the serious human rights violations that took 
place during the occupation of Kuwait and the obliteration of 
facts about POWs and missing Kuwaitis and other countries, 
nationals, the remains of whom were found in mass graves. 
Express deep condolences to the families of the victims and 
call for exerting all possible efforts in order to find out 
the fate of all those who are missing. 
 
6-  Express deep sorrow and regret at the martyrdom of 
Egyptian Ambassador Ihab El-Sherif and the Algerian diplomats 
Ezz Iddin Belqadi and Ali Belaroussi and extend condolences 
to the families of the three martyrs and to the governments 
of Egypt and Algeria. 
 
7-  Support the Iraqi Government,s efforts and all concerned 
parties to enhance security precautions in Iraq, especially 
for Arab and non-Arab diplomatic missions and secure 
effectively the protection of all diplomats and 
representatives of regional and international institutions 
and media officials so as to maintain, encourage, and expand 
Arab and non-Arab diplomatic presence in Iraq. 
 
8-  Form a ministerial committee consisting of Jordan, 
Bahrain, Algeria, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Iraq, Kuwait, Egypt, 
and the Secretary General to draw up a strategic plan to 
assist Iraq and follow up on the resolutions of the Arab 
summit and the ministerial meetings. 
 
9-  Submit a request to the Secretary General to follow up on 
this issue and present a report to the next round of the Arab 
League. 
 
Arab League Resolution on Palestinian Issue 
------------------------------------------- 
 
After reviewing the memorandum of the General Secretariat, 
the preliminary report of the Secretary General and the 
General Secretariat,s activity between the two rounds, the 
recommendation of the Political Affairs Committee, and the 
Plan of Action to implement the Initiative prepared by the 
Arab Initiative Committee at the level of Permanent 
Delegates, 
 
and as the Arab League Council reiterates the resolution of 
(previous) Arab summits, particularly the Beirut 2002, the 
Sharm El-Sheikh 2003, the Tunisia 2004, and the Algeria 2005 
summits, 
 
and as the Council refers to the international resolutions on 
the Palestine issue and the Arab-Israeli conflict, 
particularly the relevant SC resolutions on establishing an 
independent Palestinian State with Jerusalem as its capital 
and achieving a lasting and comprehensive peace, 
 
and as the Council stresses its resolution No. 6486 of March 
3, 2005, 
 
and as the Council warns of the danger of Israel,s continued 
indifference to international and Arab peace endeavors and 
continued defiance of international resolutions, 
 
and as it stresses the importance of Palestinian national 
unity at this stage, the Arab League Council at its 
ministerial level has decided the following: 
 
1-  Emphasize that the peace process is an inseparable entity 
and that the just, comprehensive, and lasting peace that the 
peoples of the region are aspiring to will not be achieved 
except by the return of all and complete Arab rights to their 
rightful owners.  Stress that the Gaza pullout plan is a 
first step on the road towards a complete and comprehensive 
withdrawal from all the occupied Palestinian territories, 
including Jerusalem, and is an inseparable part of the peace 
process according to the (relevant) international resolutions. 
 
2-  Praise the awareness of the spirit of responsibility of 
the Palestinian national dialogue and stress complete support 
for the PNA in its ongoing efforts to maintain security and 
order and enhance the power of the law in the Palestinian 
territories, a matter which would guarantee the preservation 
of the Palestinian people,s national unity and create an 
atmosphere conducive to the resumption of the peace process. 
Praise the efforts exerted by the Arab Republic of Egypt in 
cooperation with the PNA with this regard. 
 
3-  Warn of Israel,s premeditated intentions of taking 
advantage of the Gaza withdrawal to strengthen the 
occupation,s grip on the West Bank and Jerusalem.  Denounce 
the Israeli position expressed recently by the Israeli PM 
that the Israeli efforts after the Gaza pullout would be 
devoted to securing Israeli presence in major areas in 
Galilee, Negev, and Greater Jerusalem that would include East 
Jerusalem, settlements, and security areas in the West Bank. 
 
4-  Welcome all international initiatives that would place 
MEPP on top of the political priorities.  Ask the U.S. 
Administration in this connection to work to translate into 
reality President Bush,s vision of establishing an 
independent Palestinian State next to Israel in accordance to 
the principles of the peace process as expressed in the 
relevant UN resolutions, the principle of Land for Peace, the 
principle of Non-Acquisition of Territories by Force, and the 
Arab peace initiative.  Regard all that has to do with the 
final status as subject to negotiation between the two 
parties on the basis of the aforementioned principles without 
any prior conditions or promises. 
 
5-  Call on the Member States and the General Secretariat to 
continue to follow up on the results of voting on the 
resolutions related to the Palestinian issue and the 
Arab-Israeli conflict at the UNGA and all international 
organizations, and to contact the countries that adopt 
negative positions on this for the sake of explaining the 
Arab viewpoint in an attempt to push them into changing their 
positions. 
 
6-  Assert that the Arab peace initiative is the way to 
achieve a just, permanent, and comprehensive peace in the 
region.  Adhere to the Arab peace initiative and work to 
reenergize it through actions on various local, regional, and 
international levels. 
 
7-  Call on the Quartet to resume to work seriously to 
achieve a just and comprehensive peace in the ME on the basis 
of the Arab peace initiative, the Roadmap, and SC Resolution 
No. 1515 of 2004. 
8-  Enhance Arab action at the international arena and seek 
the issuance of a UNGA resolution adopting the Arab peace 
initiative as a document relating to the roadmap.  Arrange 
for a seminar on Palestinian-American relations aimed at 
achieving a better understanding between the two sides at 
this stage which requires a greater level of understating and 
dialogue with (various) international dynamic forces, 
especially in the United States. 
 
9-  Reactivate the Plan of Action towards the Israeli society 
and political forces inside Israel in accordance with the 
relevant provision of the Arab peace initiative, whether 
through engaging and intercommunicating with the Palestinians 
of 1948 or conducting a dialogue with Jewish forces in the 
U.S. or elsewhere while adhering to the framework and 
provisions of the Arab peace initiative. 
 
Arab League Resolution on Maged David Adom 
------------------------------------------ 
 
... (preambular language not included) 
 
¶1.  Affirming the Arab countries adherence to the provisions 
of International Law, International Humanitarian Law, and the 
Geneva Conventions, stressing that the Council is keen to 
preserve the unity, cohesion, and universality of the 
International Movement of the Red Cross and Red Crescent, 
 
¶2.  Affirming the stance of the member states that the time 
is not right to hold the Diplomatic Conference for the State 
Parties of Geneva Conventions (1949) to add a third protocol 
and adopt an additional emblem to that adopted by the 
Conventions until tangible progress is made in the peace 
process, continuing violations of the Geneva Convention in 
the occupied Palestinian territories including East Jerusalem 
are stopped, and a consensus is reached with respect to the 
substantive conditions necessary to convene such a 
conference, particularly that the draft additional protocol 
has not been approved yet, 
 
¶3.  Affirming the adherence of the Member States to the 
provision of the previous paragraph of this Resolution within 
the framework of the consultations conducted by the Swiss 
Government, and emphasizing this stance during the 
Consultative meetings to be held September 12-13 with each 
Arab country, in its capacity as a Contractual Party will 
inform the Swiss Government with such stance, 
 
¶4.  Requesting the Secretary General to inform the Government 
of the Swiss Confederation, in its capacity as the Depositary 
State, and the regional organizations and groups with the 
present resolution in a bid to coordinate the stances 
therewith in this respect, 
 
¶5.  Continuing the coordination and the consultation between 
the governments and the Arab Red Cross and Red Crescent 
Societies, appreciating their efforts and movements with 
respect to the issue of the third protocol additional to the 
Geneva Conventions, and 
 
¶6.  Assigning the Council of Arab Ambassadors in Geneva with 
following up the implementation of this Resolution and 
conducting of necessary communications with the geographical 
and political groups concerned. 
 
 
Visit Embassy Cairo's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/cairo 
 
You can also access this site through the 
State Department's Classified SIPRNET website. 
 
RICCIARDONE