05CAIRO5472
EGYPTIAN MEDIA COVERAGE OF ASSISTANT SECRETARY
Mon Jul 18 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS CAIRO 005472 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PA FOR J. ADAM ERELI; NEA/PD FOR FRANK FINVER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KPAO KMDR OPRC UK IZ IS EG OVIP
SUBJECT:  EGYPTIAN MEDIA COVERAGE OF ASSISTANT SECRETARY 
DAVID WELCH'S VISIT 
 
REF:  CAIRO 5429 
 
¶1.  Assistant Secretary David Welch's statements following 
a meeting with Egyptian Foreign Minister Aboul Gheit 
received straightforward, lengthy inside-page coverage in 
almost all Egyptian dailies on July 17, 2005.  The coverage 
stressed Egyptian-U.S. cooperation on the Israeli 
withdrawal from Gaza, as well as Welch's statements on the 
dispatch of ambassadors to Iraq and U.S. consideration of 
Hamas as a terrorist organization.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  Leading pro-government Al Ahram's (circulation: 
750,000) coverage was headlined, "Welch says after meeting 
with the FM:  Egypt and the U.S. work strongly on the 
implementation of the Israeli withdrawal from Gaza.  Aboul 
Gheit calls for no escalation in the Palestinian 
territories and commitment to the Sharm understandings." 
The story quoted the entire press conference where Welch 
emphasized, "there are fifty countries represented in Iraq 
and terrorism is attacking everyone."  He was also quoted 
as denying any U.S. intention to have contacts with Hamas 
"because it is a terrorist organization." 
 
¶3.  Pro-government Al Akhbar's (circulation: 750,000) 
headline read, "Aboul Gheit discusses regional developments 
with U.S. Assistant Secretary.  There is need for a clear 
vision on the post-withdrawal from Gaza." 
 
¶4.  Small circulation pro-government Al Gomhouriya's 
(circulation: 200,000) report was entitled, "Welch says 
after meeting with Aboul Gheit:  Egyptian-U.S. relations 
are strategic and they work to achieve stability in the 
region.  FM (Abul Gheit) conveyed to the American envoy 
Cairo's concern over the Israeli-Palestinian clashes." 
 
¶5.  Leading opposition Al Wafd's front-page coverage 
stressed, "Welch refuses to explain the reasons for having 
an office for the National Democratic Institute in Egypt." 
 
¶6.  Independent daily Nahdet Masr (circulation: 20,000) 
brief, front-page coverage carried the headline, "Welch 
says no contacts with Hamas.  He reiterated his accusations 
of terrorism against it." 
 
Corbin