05CAIRO5296
EGYPT SUPPORTS COMPREHENSIVE UN REFORM BUT
Tue Jul 12 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS CAIRO 005296 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL EG UNSC
SUBJECT: EGYPT SUPPORTS COMPREHENSIVE UN REFORM BUT 
CONCERNED ABOUT AFRICAN DYNAMICS 
 
REF: STATE 126870 
 
¶1.  (U)  Charge met with the Foreign Ministry's Chief of 
Cabinet Ambassador Sameh Shukry on July 11 to deliver reftel 
demarche regarding the G-4 framework resolution on UN reform. 
 The Charge stressed that the USG is open to UNSC enlargement 
but believes the G-4 resolution, if adopted, would be 
divisive.  The Charge urged the GOE to support the USG's 
comprehensive approach to UN reform by agreeing to address 
UNSC expansion along with the other UN reform issues on the 
agenda. 
 
¶2.  (C)  Ambassador Shukry responded that the GOE supports 
the U.S. position that UNSC expansion should be part of a 
package of overall reforms, but noted its commitment to 
abiding by the AU position, adopted in Sirte, authorizing a 
draft declaration regarding the Security Council.  Shukry 
suggested that with the active AU position on this issue, 
there would reasonably be debate on the merits of the G-4 
proposal. He stressed that the GOE is inclined to deal with 
this matter delicately to avoid division within Africa. He 
further noted his concern that certain nations are inclined 
to move forward on reform quickly.  Nigeria and Ghana, he 
clarified, "may be seeking to engage for ulterior motives" 
and thus, the U.S. would be wise to make its demarche on UN 
reform to "those who want to move too quickly." (Note: 
Shukry was likely referring to Nigeria's quest for a UNSC 
seat.  End note). The Charge signaled his appreciation for 
the Ambassador's comments on dynamics among African nations 
and stressed again that the USG needs GOE support on this 
matter. 
 
 
 
Visit Embassy Cairo's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/cairo 
 
You can also access this site through the 
State Department's Classified SIPRNET website. 
 
CORBIN