05DOHA1443
QATAR WELCOMES ISRAEL'S WITHDRAWAL FROM GAZA
Wed Aug 17 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Doha
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS DOHA 001443 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR NEA/ARPI THORNE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL GZ IS QA
SUBJECT: QATAR WELCOMES ISRAEL'S WITHDRAWAL FROM GAZA 
 
 
¶1. The government of Qatar announced its satisfaction with the 
Israeli withdrawal from the Gaza Strip in a diplomatic circular 
received August 16. The circular included an "unofficial 
translation" in English (para. 2). In its statement, the GOQ 
calls for withdrawal from all Palestinian territories and 
establishment of a Palestinian state with Jerusalem as its 
capital. Qatari papers reported the government's official 
position on front pages August 17. 
 
¶2. English text of Diplomatic Circular No. 1192-22. 
 
Unofficial Translation 
 
The State of Qatar has welcomed and expressed its satisfaction 
about the Israeli withdrawal from the Gaza Strip. 
 
This has been disclosed by a responsible source at the Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs to Qatar News Agency. 
 
The source has described the withdrawal as an important step 
towards the establishment of the independent Palestinian state, 
affirming that it is imperative that the Israelis complete their 
withdrawal from all Palestinian territories in line with the 
resolutions of the international legitimacy and the tenets of the 
Road Map plan. 
 
On this occasion, the source has expressed his felicitations to 
the Palestinian people. 
 
At the end of his announcement, the source reiterated Qatar's 
firm stance that the only way to achieve just and lasting peace 
is through the implementation of the resolutions of the 
international legitimacy and by enabling the Palestinian people 
to practice all its legitimate rights, foremost to establish its 
independent state on its territory with Jerusalem as its capital. 
 
End text. 
UNTERMEYER