05FRANKFURT2127
Saarland Takes New Steps to Fight TIP
Tue Mar 15 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Frankfurt
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS FRANKFURT 002127 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PTER SOCI GM
SUBJECT: Saarland Takes New Steps to Fight TIP 
 
REF: A) 04 FRANKFURT 6697 B) BERLIN 0692 
 
Sensitive but unclassified; not for Internet distribution 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY: The state of Saarland has announced 
several new measures targeting trafficking in persons (TIP). 
These include consolidating agencies responsible for TIP 
within the Interior Ministry.  State Interior Minister 
Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer will also highlight TIP at the 
upcoming conference of State Ministers for Women in June and 
press for better coordination among states in implementing 
national anti-TIP laws and regulations.  Saarland's 
initiatives reflect a growing commitment in Southwest 
Germany to combating trafficking in persons.  END SUMMARY. 
 
---------------------------------- 
More TIP Prosecutions in Saarland 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Prosecution of traffickers in Saarland is rising, 
with 18 cases against traffickers in 2004; 11 in 2003; 10 in 
2002; and four in 2001.  State Interior Ministry officials 
ascribe the development to increasing awareness of TIP and 
the Saar government's heightened focus on combating 
trafficking. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
Interior Minister Brings TIP Agencies Under One Roof 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) In January, Saarland Interior Minister Annegret 
Kramp-Karrenbauer centralized responsibility for TIP within 
the Interior Ministry in order to fight TIP more 
effectively.  Senior Interior Ministry officials told 
Consulate representatives that the change combines units of 
the Social, Justice, and Interior Ministries under a common 
administration. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Saarland supports an assistance center for 
trafficked women in Saarbruecken (the state capital) and 
works with a number of church-based NGO's to help 
trafficking victims.  State officials emphasize that there 
will be no cuts in funding for anti-TIP programs despite 
overall belt-tightening in Saarland's public sector. 
Interior Minister Kramp-Karrenbauer also promised to raise 
TIP at the June 2005 Conference of State Ministers for 
Women.  Saarland officials support increased assistance to 
victims willing to testify against traffickers. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Saarland's heightened dedication to combating TIP 
reflects a growing awareness of the problem throughout 
southwest Germany (ref A).  Impetus for the state's 
initiative comes largely from conservative Interior Minister 
(and recent IV grantee) Kramp-Karrenbauer and State 
Secretary Gaby Schaefer.  The decision to place all TIP 
 
SIPDIS 
agencies under the authority of the Interior Ministry shows 
Kramp-Karrenbauer's personal interest in the issue.  With 
these recent steps, the Saarland government has demonstrated 
its willingness to work with the German federal government, 
NGOs, and the USG to fight trafficking.  END COMMENT. 
 
BODDE