05KIRKUK292
AMBASSADOR LAYS CORNERSTONE FOR AMERICAN UNIVERSITY IN
Sat Dec 17 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
REO Kirkuk
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS KIRKUK 000292 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/I 
BAGHDAD FOR POL, USAID, NCT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SCUL EAID PGOV SOCI IZ
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR LAYS CORNERSTONE FOR AMERICAN UNIVERSITY IN 
IRAQ-SULAYMANIYAH 
 
¶1. SUMMARY:  Ambassador Khalilzad joined President Talabani and 
Planning Minister Dr. Barham Salih on December 11 in laying the 
cornerstone of the future American University in Iraq - 
Sulaymaniyah (AUI-S).  The Kurdistan Regional Government is 
contributing $10 million to the project.  In private meetings 
with Talabani and Salih, the Ambassador also committed $10 
million, pending the completion of a feasibility plan and fund 
raising strategy.  Other funds will be forthcoming from private 
donors.  The occasion was marked with speeches stressing that 
this historic occasion would not have been possible without the 
U.S.-led liberation of Iraq.  Some Middle Eastern media 
misreported the Ambassador's speech as calling for the 
reelection of President Talabani.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. The American University project is the brainchild of the 
Minister of Planning, Dr. Barham Salih (a senior figure in the 
Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, PUK, the party of Iraqi President 
Jalal Talabani; Sulaymaniyah is its geographical base).  AUI-S 
aspires to emulate the longstanding American Universities in 
Beirut and Cairo and the new ones in Kuwait and Sharjah.  Like 
them, AUI-S will be a fee-paying institution, but it is not 
affiliated with any university.  Dr. Barham has leveraged the 
proposed U.S. contribution and the credibility it provides, to 
secure pledges totaling millions of dollars from the KRG and the 
private sector in Sulaymaniyah; he says KRG-Erbil Prime Minister 
Nechirvan Barzani has pledged to contribute as well (amount 
TBD). 
 
¶3.  According to the contractor charged with drawing up the 
initial plans for the University (Federal Development and 
Contracting based in Sulaimani), phase one construction is to 
begin in July 2006 and be complete by September 2007; the first 
semester is slated to begin in December 2006 with one thousand 
students in an English preparatory program.  The departments 
planned for Phase One are:  Business Administration, Economics, 
Finance, Marketing, Computer Engineering, and Electrical and 
Electronic Engineering.  Eventually, AUI-S is to have five 
thousand students drawn from the Kurdistan region as well as 
other parts of Iraq and the Mideast. 
 
¶4.  The Board of Trustees comprises Dr. Barham, Prof. John 
Agresto, Prof. Kanaan Makiya, Prof. Khalid Salih, Dr. Rajaa Al 
Khuzai, Mr. Farook Mustafa Rasool, and Mr. Basil Rahim. 
 
¶5.  The December 11 ceremony at the site of the future campus, 
was held in front of several hundred, including many students. 
KRG-Sulaymaniyah Prime Minister Omar Fattah, Dr. Barham, 
Ambassador Khalilzad, and President Talabani all gave speeches, 
then the Ambassador joined the President and Dr. Barham in 
laying the cornerstone.  We note that some Arabic-language 
newspapers (notably Al-Sharq Al-Awsat and Al-Zaman) misreported 
the Ambassador as saying that the Iraqi legislature that will 
emerge from this month's elections should re-elect President 
Talabani.  In fact, as correctly reported in the 
Kurdish-language Kurdestani Nwe, the Ambassador merely noted 
that the new legislature would elect a President "and I can 
imagine the result."  The crowd loved it. 
BELL