05LIMA3588
FOREIGN MINISTRY EXPRESSES CONCERN OVER PERUVIAN
Thu Aug 18 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Lima
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS LIMA 003588 
 
SIPDIS 
 
WHA FOR MONSERRATE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PREL PE
SUBJECT: FOREIGN MINISTRY EXPRESSES CONCERN OVER PERUVIAN 
LEFT COMATOSE AFTER ALTERCATION WITH ALLEN, TEXAS POLICE 
 
REF: LIMA 3492 
 
Action Request in Paragraph 4. 
 
¶1.  Embassy has received the following dip note from the 
Peruvian Foreign Affairs Ministry regarding the case of Edgar 
Vera Monte, a Peruvian who is on life support following an 
altercation with police in Allen, Texas on 8/4. 
 
"The Ministry of Foreign Relations, Office of the Secretary 
of Peruvian Communities Abroad, is writing to the Consular 
Section of the U.S. Embassy to express its profound concern 
and surprise over the actions taken by the Police of Allen, 
Texas against Peruvian Citizen Edgar Vera Morante last August 
¶4. 
 
According to information received by the Peruvian Consulate 
in Houston, (the Allen, Texas Police) used excessive force 
(in detaining Vera Morante), an excess of force that violated 
judicial norms for arrest procedures in the United States as 
well as those stipulated in existing treaties regarding the 
observation of human rights. 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Relations, Office of the Secretary of 
Peruvian Communities Abroad, is requesting, through the 
United States Government, that an immediate and exhaustive 
investigation of this incident be carried out and that 
punitive sanctions be applied as appropriate." 
 
¶2.  About 20 family members and supporters of Vera protested 
outside Embassy from 1100-1300 hours on August 12 (Reftel). 
Later that day, at about 2000, the same group returned and 
held a one-hour candlelight vigil for Vera in front of 
Embassy.  Both protests were peaceful. 
 
¶3.  The Vera Case continues to make the news in Peru, with 
local papers claiming that excessive force was used in Vera's 
arrest.  Congress President Marcial Ayaipoma told the 
Ambassador on 8/15 that he expects this matter will soon be 
raised in the legislature, and requested an update on the 
investigation into the incident. 
 
¶4.  Embassy requests guidance in responding to the Foreign 
Ministry's Dip Note and future press inquiries.  We suggest a 
response along the lines of: 
 
-The United States Government and the State of Texas are 
concerned over all allegations regarding the use of excessive 
force. 
 
-In the case of Edgar Vera Monte, an indepdnent investigation 
of the actions of the Allen, Texas Police Department is being 
carried out by the Texas Rangers and monitored by the FBI. 
 
-The U.S. Embassy will provide the results of this 
investigation to the Foreign Ministry as soon as they are 
available. 
STRUBLE