05MANAMA1874
BAHRAIN: AVIAN AND PANDEMIC INFLUENZA INFORMATION
Tue Dec 20 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Manama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

201339Z Dec 05UNCLAS  MANAMA 001874 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
STATE FOR OES/DSINGER AND RDALEY, NEA/ARPI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TBIO SENV ECON EAGR EAID PREL BA ECTRD ROW
SUBJECT: BAHRAIN: AVIAN AND PANDEMIC INFLUENZA INFORMATION 
 
REF: A. SIMPSON-DALEY E-MAIL OF NOVEMBER 30 
 
     ¶B. STATE 209622 
     ¶C. MANAMA 1605 
 
This cable responds to Ref B questions regarding local avian 
influenza and pandemic influenza preparedness. 
 
------------------------------ 
PREPAREDNESS AND COMMUNICATION 
------------------------------ 
 
Q: DOES THE GOVERNMENT HAVE A PREPAREDNESS PLAN/STRATEGY FOR 
PREVENTING AVIAN FLU FROM BECOMING A PANDEMIC AND 
CONTAINING A PANDEMIC ONCE IT OCCURS? 
 
A: Bahrain lies in the autumnal migratory path for birds from 
infected Asian regions and expects to confront cases of avian 
influenza bird infection.  The GOB is deploying elements of a 
robust precautionary program (Ref. B), including restrictions 
on bird importation and inoculations of farm bird 
populations.  In addition, the GOB has crafted a 
comprehensive national strategy to be approved and 
implemented by a committee headed by Undersecretary of 
Agriculture Affairs Kadhem Hashim Al Hashimi and composed of 
officials from the Ministries of Agriculture, Health, 
Interior, and Industry and Commerce.  The government has thus 
far allocated BD 448 thousand (approximately $1.2 million) to 
combat Bird Flu and other animal diseases. 
 
Q: IF THE COUNTRY HAS A STRATEGY, HOW CAPABLE IS IT OF 
IMPLEMENTING IT? 
 
A: Bahrain is well situated to implement many precautionary 
aspects of its program at a pre-pandemic stage.  Although the 
draft strategy has yet to be approved, several key elements 
have already been implemented.  The Ministry of Agriculture 
has dispatched teams to inoculate farm poultry.  It says it 
has already administered some 800,000 doses of H9N2 vaccine 
of the planned four million doses set to be administered to 
the nation's poultry stock, farms are being disinfected, and 
the importation of birds has been restricted. 
 
Q: PLEASE PROVIDE A COPY OF THE PLAN OR THE INTERNET ADDRESS 
FOR THE PLAN. 
 
A: Post provided an advance draft of the plan on November 30 
(Ref A).  The GoB has not yet established an avian influenza 
website, though officials plan to do so in the near future. 
 
Q: HOW TRUTHFUL WILL THE GOVERNMENT BE IN REPORTING THE SCOPE 
OF ANY DISEASE OUTBREAK AMONG PEOPLE AND/OR ANIMALS 
 
A: Post believes that Ministry of Health officials have been 
and will continue to be truthful in government-to-government 
contacts.  Post's Avian Influenza Working Group assesses that 
there is some potential for the GOB to minimize public 
reporting of an outbreak if the scope were sufficient to lead 
to an erosion of public confidence.  The greater danger would 
be that cases might not be diagnosed in a timely manner. 
(See Surveillance/ Detection below.) 
 
Q: WHAT INCENTIVES COULD BE OFFERED THAT WOULD LIKELY RESULT 
IN MORE TRANSPARENCY? 
 
A: Post will maintain working-level contact with Ministry of 
Health interlocutors to promote continued information access 
and exchange.  To encourage public openness, the GOB has 
announced that it will establish a fund to compensate poultry 
farmers whose birds are culled as the result of an outbreak. 
This should help mitigate any economic disincentive to 
identify and report symptomatic birds. 
 
Q: WHERE DOES PREPARING FOR AN AVIAN FLU HUMAN PANDEMIC RANK 
AMONG GOVERNMENT PRIORITIES? WHO AND WHAT WOULD MOST 
INFLUENCE THE COUNTRY TO GIVE THE ISSUE A HIGHER PRIORITY? 
 
A: Because the GOB expects to see cases of avian influenza, 
it has taken the need to prepare quite seriously and the 
Prime Minister has explicitly stated that avian flu 
preparation ranks among the highest national priorities.  GOB 
planning and preparations are also being developed in 
coordination with the GCC.  Given its existing resources, 
Post assesses that the current level of priority assigned to 
the avian influenza threat is appropriate. 
 
Q: WHO IS THE KEY "GO-TO" PERSON, OFFICE OR DEPARTMENT (I.E. 
MINISTER FOR HEALTH, PRIME MINISTER, ETC.) FOR USG OFFICIALS 
TO ENGAGE ON THIS ISSUE? 
 
A: Ministry of Health Director of Public Health Dr. Samir 
Khalfan. 
 
Q: HAVE NATIONAL LAWS BEEN REVIEWED TO ENSURE THAT THEY ARE 
 
CONSISTENT WITH INTERNATIONAL HEALTH REGULATIONS AND DO NOT 
POSE BARRIERS TO AVIAN INFLUENZA DETECTION, REPORTING, 
CONTAINMENT, OR RESPONSE? 
 
A: The GOB has modeled its national strategy on WHO 
guidelines and has specifically evaluated its national laws 
with respect to the handling and disposal of infectious 
waste. 
 
Q: IS THE HOST COUNTRY ALREADY WORKING WITH INTERNATIONAL 
ORGANIZATIONS OR OTHER COUNTRIES ON THE AVIAN FLU ISSUE? 
 
A: The GOB is currently coordinating with the GCC and the WHO. 
 
Q: ARE GOVERNMENT LEADERS LIKELY TO ASK FOR ASSISTANCE FROM 
THE US OR OTHER COUNTRIES? 
 
A: They have already done so.  The Ministry of Health has 
requested USG information on currently available H5N1 
vaccines for birds, including the advisability of the use of 
live-attenuated vaccine. 
 
Q: WOULD GOVERNMENT LEADERS BE RECEPTIVE TO MESSAGES FROM US 
LEADERS THROUGH A BILATERAL APPROACH, AT A MULTILATERAL FORUM 
SUCH AS THE UN WHO, FAO, ETC OR APEC, OR THROUGH BILATERAL 
CONTACTS BY A THIRD COUNTRY? 
 
A: GOB leaders are receptive to US messages, in particular on 
the subject of avian influenza.  The Ambassador and Emboffs 
have engaged GOB officials on avian influenza preparedness on 
several recent occasions and have found them highly 
receptive.  Minster of Health Dr. Nada Abbas Haffadh told the 
Ambassador November 27 that she welcomed future collaboration 
with USG officials on this topic.  Multilateral cooperation 
with the WHO and the GCC is also in evidence.  The US-GOB 
relationship is such that it would not be necessary to 
solicit third country intervention.  The GOB consults closely 
with the UK on a range of issues.  The draft Master Plan for 
Confronting Avian Influenza was drawn up with substantial 
assistance from UK experts under WHO auspices. 
 
Q: DOES THE COUNTRY CURRENTLY ADMINISTER ANNUAL FLU SHOTS? 
 
A: Seasonal flu shots are currently available at public and 
private hospitals for patients who seek them.  With the 
exception of poultry workers, the GOB does not have a 
campaign in place to proactively immunize its population 
against seasonal flu. 
 
Q: IF NOT, MIGHT IT CONSIDER DOING SO? 
 
A: The GOB has considered and rejected any change to its 
standard practice on this question, believing its resources 
are better directed to other preventive aspects of its plan. 
 
Q: WHAT IS THE PRODUCTION CAPABILITY FOR ANNUAL TRIVALENT FLU 
VACCINE? 
 
A: Bahrain does not produce annual trivalent flu vaccine.  It 
is currently imported from Malaysia. 
 
Q: DOES THE COUNTRY PRODUCE INFLUENZA VACCINE FOR POULTRY? 
 
A: Bahrain does not produce poultry vaccine.  It is currently 
imported from Holland. 
 
Q: IS THERE A LIABILITY SHIELD FOR FOREIGN MAKERS/DONORS OF 
VACCINES? 
 
A: No. 
 
Q: IF NOT, ANY PROSPECTS OF ONE BEING ENACTED? 
 
A: At present, the GOB has not proposed such legislation. 
Unless it were to appear necessary as a condition for 
obtaining needed vaccine, such a measure is unlikely. 
 
Q: HOW WELL INFORMED IS THE POPULATION ABOUT THE AVIAN FLU 
THREAT AND ABOUT MEASURES THEY SHOULD TAKE TO MITIGATE THE 
THREAT? 
 
A: Much of the information currently available to the public 
from press and official sources focuses on publicizing 
precautionary measures being undertaken by the GOB.  There is 
also an emphasis on advice for detecting symptoms in birds, 
e.g., production of soft-shelled eggs, hemorrhaging under the 
skin, etc.  Preventative measures such as hand-washing are 
still under-emphasized at present. 
 
Q: WHAT MECHANISMS ARE AVAILABLE FOR PROVIDING ADDITIONAL 
INFORMATION TO THE POPULATION, PARTICULARLY IN 
RURAL AREAS, AND HOW EFFECTIVE ARE THESE MEASURES? 
 
A: The GOB initiated a fresh public awareness campaign 
December 5 to better educate its citizens on the nature of 
the threat.  Officials are addressing students at schools and 
colleges and distributing leaflets in public places in 
support of the effort.  The GOB has established a citizen 
hotline to answer questions regarding avian influenza and 
reports that after an initial rush, call volume has declined. 
 
---------------------- 
SURVEILLANCE/DETECTION 
---------------------- 
 
Q: HOW CAPABLE ARE THE MEDICAL AND AGRICULTURE SECTORS IN 
DETECTING A NEW STRAIN OF INFLUENZA AMONG ANIMALS OR PEOPLE 
RESPECTIVELY? 
 
A: The Ministry of Agriculture has begun testing for Bird Flu 
at farms throughout the country on a continuous basis.  The 
Ministry of Health is reportedly ramping up its facilities to 
be able to test humans for Bird Flu. 
 
Q: HOW LONG MIGHT IT TAKE FOR CASES TO BE PROPERLY DIAGNOSED? 
 
A: Ministry of Health officials advise that their current 
laboratory tests would diagnose avian influenza within 36 
hours.  A test for the virus would be administered to any 
patient displaying symptoms consistent with avian influenza 
and who reported having exposure to poultry livestock within 
the past 10 days. 
 
Q: CAN INFLUENZA VIRUSES BE SUBTYPED IN THE COUNTRY? 
 
A: Yes 
 
Q: IF SO BY WHOM? 
 
A: The Ministry of Health has adopted an Integrated Capacity 
Development Program for laboratory specialists with direction 
from the WHO.  The Ministry of Health has recently acquired 
laboratory equipment allowing local subtyping. 
 
Q: DOES THE COUNTRY SEND SAMPLES TO A WHO/EU/US REFERENCE 
LABORATORY? 
 
A: In the event of an avian influenza outbreak in Bahrain, 
samples will be sent to the WHO. 
 
Q: WHAT ARE THE CRITICAL GAPS THAT NEED TO BE FILLED IN ORDER 
TO ENHANCE THE COUNTRY'S DISEASE DETECTION AND OUTBREAK 
RESPONSE CAPABILITIES? 
 
A: MED Emboff, who has worked in Manama for many years as a 
health practitioner, evaluates that the GOB real world 
ability to detect new influenza strains is limited.  Emboff 
cautions that in the past, limitations of personnel, 
expertise and technology have limited the Ministry of 
Health's ability to implement plans as laid out on paper. 
Emboff observes that one important medical facility, the 
Salmaniya Hospital complex, is already straining to meet 
current demand, with insufficient beds or staff to meet daily 
needs.  However, local private hospitals currently have 
excess capacity and could absorb some increased activity. 
 
Q: WHAT IS THE COUNTRY'S GREATEST NEED IN THIS AREA FROM THE 
US OR INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS? 
 
A: Assistance in acquiring more fast-reacting diagnosis kits 
would be useful.  Though some Tamiflu capsules are expected 
to arrive soon, the GOB has expressed apprehension that 
ordered supplies may not materialize.  In that event, 
officials have requested US assistance in identifying 
alternative licensed sources of the oseltamivir phosphate 
antiviral (Tamiflu).  See Response Containment below. 
 
-------------------- 
RESPONSE/CONTAINMENT 
-------------------- 
 
Q: DOES THE COUNTRY HAVE A STOCKPILE OF MEDICATIONS, 
PARTICULARLY OF ANTIVIRALS, AND IF SO HOW MUCH? 
 
A: Bahrain presently has no antiviral stockpiles, but expects 
delivery of one million capsules of adult dosage Tamiflu and 
500 thousand capsules of child dose Tamiflu in coming days. 
 
Q: IF SOME HAS BEEN ORDERED, HOW MUCH AND WHEN IS IT EXPECTED? 
 
A: Additional capsules have been ordered but are not expected 
to be delivered until February 2006. 
 
Q: DOES THE COUNTRY HAVE A STOCKPILE OF PRE-POSITIONED 
PERSONAL PROTECTIVE GEAR? 
 
A: Bahrain does have a stockpile of disposable N-95 
respirator face pieces, face shields, goggles, and disposable 
blood pressure cuffs. 
 
Q: WHAT IS THE RAPID RESPONSE CAPACITY FOR ANIMAL AND HUMAN 
OUTBREAKS? 
 
A: In conjunction with its Integrated Capacity Development 
Program, Bahrain is currently working to enhance the 
expertise of key laboratory personnel to quickly identify 
emerging subtypes, including biosecure facilities. 
 
Q: ARE GUIDELINES IN PLACE FOR THE CULLING AND VACCINATION OF 
BIRDS, DISINFECTION OF FACILITIES, AND LIMITATIONS ON ANIMAL 
MOVEMENT? 
 
A: Upon detection of a single infected bird, all birds within 
a three kilometer radius are to be disposed of.  A nationwide 
bird vaccination program is already under way.  The Ministry 
of Agriculture's animal and avian quarantine center is 
currently under expansion.  The center presently has the 
capacity to house twenty thousand birds.  Only those 
countries certified as free of Bird Flu by the WHO are 
allowed to export poultry meat to Bahrain and the Prime 
Minister has issued a decree banning the importation of live 
birds from any country.  Ministry of Agriculture officials 
are stationed at all major national entry points, including 
the Bahrain International Airport, the King Fahad Causeway 
and all sea ports.  Any live birds intercepted are killed on 
the spot or returned to their country of origin.  However, 
the GOB acknowledges these measures to be ineffective in 
stemming the entry of wild birds into Bahrain, though the 
Ministry of Agriculture has begun testing wild bird 
populations in the Al Areen Wildlife Preserve. 
 
Q: HOW WILLING AND CAPABLE IS THE GOVERNMENT TO IMPOSE 
QUARANTINES AND SOCIAL DISTANCING MEASURES (CLOSING SCHOOLS, 
PUBLIC GATHERINGS, MASS TRANSIT)? 
 
A: The draft national strategy indicates a willingness to 
impose appropriate quarantines and social distancing 
measures, including the curtailment of public gatherings and 
the closure of land, sea and air transport.  It is unclear 
how public prayers and mosque services would be affected. 
The GOB plans to quarantine Avian Influenza patients in 
airborne isolation rooms (AIR) and has a detailed symptom and 
vulnerability assessment plan.  However, only 60 AIR rooms 
have been built. 
 
Q: WOULD ITS MILITARY ENFORCE QUARANTINES? 
 
A: The draft national strategy makes no mention of military 
or law-enforcement quarantine support.  However, GOB working 
level officials advise Emboffs that the Ministry of Interior, 
including law-enforcement personnel, would support quarantine 
efforts.  Posts assesses that if military support became 
necessary, it would be available. 
 
ZIADEH