05MANAMA1671
FORUM FOR THE FUTURE:  ANNOUNCEMENT OF THE
Mon Nov 14 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Manama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MANAMA 001671 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, EUR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL EAID PGOV PHUM KMPI KDEM BA AF CA JA PK TU OVIP RICE CONDOLEEZZA
SUBJECT: FORUM FOR THE FUTURE:  ANNOUNCEMENT OF THE 
FOUNDATION FOR THE FUTURE AND FUND FOR THE FUTURE 
 
 
¶1. SUMMARY.  Initial contributing governments to the 
Foundation for the Future and Fund for the Future gathered 
for a public announcement of the new initiatives on the 
margins of the November 11-12 Forum for the Future conference 
in Manama.  All speakers emphasized the importance of 
democratic and economic reform for a prosperous future for 
the broader Middle East.  Secretary Rice emphasized that the 
mission of the projects is to empower the citizens of the 
region to secure their own freedoms, to build their own 
democracies and to lead their own countries to greater hope 
and dignity.  END SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Empowering Citizens, Fueling Prosperity 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. As part of the President's Freedom Agenda, the U.S. and 
other G-8 and international partners announced the launch of 
the Foundation for the Future and the Fund for the Future 
November 12.  An international non-profit entity, the 
Foundation will fund local non-governmental organizations, 
academic institutions, professional associations, and others 
in the region promoting political reform.  The Fund will 
provide capital to small and medium-sized enterprises to help 
stimulate economic growth. 
 
¶3. Secretary Rice emphasized that the purpose of the 
Foundation is to empower the citizens of the Broader Middle 
East and North Africa (BMENA) to secure their own freedoms, 
to build their own democracies, and to lead their own 
countries to greater hope and dignity.  The Foundation will 
empower citizens working for democratic reform to use grant 
money for the projects they deem most effective.  The 
Secretary thanked Shaikha Mozza, the first lady of Qatar, for 
 
SIPDIS 
a $10 million donation to the Foundation.  Turning to the 
Fund, she said it is designed to help stimulate the private 
sector in the region, particularly small and medium size 
enterprises, to fuel employment and prosperity.  Activities 
will begin in the two regional countries that contributed to 
the Fund - Egypt and Morocco - but will spread to all 
regional states that choose the path of economic liberty and 
reform. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Comments of International Partners 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶4. Bahraini FM Shaikh Khalid al-Khalifa described the Fund 
and Foundation as key underpinnings to the goals of the 
Forum, and the governments of Egypt, Morocco, Denmark, and 
the U.S. signed a Memorandum of Understanding for the Fund. 
 
¶5. Jordanian Planning Minister Al-Ali expressed hope the 
Foundation will become an important tool for increased 
freedom and democracy and empowerment of civil society. 
Governments must listen to civil society's views on priority 
areas for reform.  She expressed pride that Jordan was the 
first Arab country to announce its support for the Foundation 
and invited senior officials to the first preparatory meeting 
in Jordan in December. 
 
¶6. European Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner said some of the one 
billion Euros of EC aid for the broader Middle East would go 
to the Foundation to support the objective of a prosperous 
and stable region. 
 
¶7. Human Rights Training and Information Center official 
Ezzadine Al-Asbahi affirmed civil society's support for the 
Foundation.  The Foundation is the culmination of a series of 
consultations between state and non-state actors, designed to 
help fulfill people's aspirations for development, freedom, 
and dignity.  He urged governments and the private sector to 
lend their support and expertise to the new institution. 
 
¶8. Calling democracy the only path to a prosperous future, 
Qatari FM Al-Thani offered to host the Foundation for the 
Future and to ensure its independence and freedom. 
 
¶9. Egyptian Investment Minister Mohieldin said the Fund 
represents a great opportunity to expand export and 
investment projects in the region. Projects should emphasize 
good governance, transparency, accountability, openness, 
rights of workers, and environmental protection. 
 
¶10. Danish FM Moeller expressed his expectation that more 
countries in the region will join the Fund by the time of the 
next Forum. 
 
¶11. Moroccan FM Benaissa applauded the growth in the 
conference's representation from the civil society sector 
from five at last year's meeting in Rabat to 40 this year in 
Manama.  He hoped the Fund would expand growth, employment, 
wealth, and innovation. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Contributing Countries/Organizations 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶12. The following officials participated in the launch of the 
Fund and Foundation (known contributions in parentheses): 
 - U.S. - Secretary Rice (Foundation: $35.5 million over two 
years; Fund: $50 million) 
 - UK - Foreign Minister Straw (Foundation: $1 million) 
 - Jordan - Planning Minister Al-Ali 
 - European Commission - Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner 
(Foundation: 1 million Euros) 
 - Qatar - Foreign Minister Hamad Al-Thani (Foundation: $10 
million) 
 - Denmark - Foreign Minister Moeller (Foundation: $2 
million; Fund: $1 million) 
 - Greece - Foreign Minister Molyviatus (Foundation: $1.5 
million) 
 - Hungary - Foreign Minister Somogyi (Foundation: in-kind 
support through the Democracy Center) 
 - Italy - Under Secretary Mantica (Foundation: $1 million) 
 - Netherlands - Director van Lynden 
 - Spain - Foreign Minister Moratinos (Foundation: $1 million) 
 - Switzerland - State Secretary Ambuel 
 - Turkey - Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister Gul 
(Foundation: $500,000) 
 - Lebanon - Foreign Minister Salloukh 
 - Egypt - Investment Minister Mohieldin (Fund: $20 million) 
 - Morocco - Foreign Minister Benaissa (Fund: $20 million) 
 
Three non-governmental organizations also took part: 
 - Human Rights Information and Training Center - Ezzadine 
Al-Asbahi 
 - No Peace Without Justice - Emma Bonino 
 - Turkish Economic and Social Studies Foundation - Mensur 
Akgun 
 
MONROE