05MANAMA1297
MAJOR COVERAGE OF AMBASSADOR'S THANKS TO BAHRAINI
Thu Sep 08 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Manama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MANAMA 001297 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO PREL PGOV BA
SUBJECT:  MAJOR COVERAGE OF AMBASSADOR'S THANKS TO BAHRAINI 
PEOPLE FOR HURRICANE ASSISTANCE 
 
REF:  STATE 163279 
 
¶1.  Major Arabic and English dailies carried a statement 
September 7 from the Ambassador expressing "profound 
gratitude" for the $5 million offer of assistance from the 
Government of Bahrain, as well as the many gestures of 
compassion, concern, and generosity shown by the Bahraini 
people.  English dailies Bahrain Tribune and the Gulf Daily 
News carried the statement on the front page.  Arabic 
dailies Al Ayam and Akhbar Al Khalij printed the statement 
in full with a photo of the Ambassador.  Following a meeting 
with the Ambassador, Minister of Labor Al-Alawi thanked the 
Ambassador for his press statement, which he said was very 
much appreciated by the Bahrainis. 
 
¶2.  The Ambassador gave a one-hour interview to government- 
owned Arabic daily Al Ayam and its English sister paper 
Bahrain Tribune on September 6, in which he thanked the 
Bahrainis for their pledge, and commented on the outpouring 
of support from friends around the world during America's 
time of need.  The article is expected in print in the 
coming days. 
 
¶3.  Spotting a potentially positive human interest story, 
APAO placed a stranded New Orleans-based Bahraini Fulbright 
Exchange Scholar, Dr. Mohammed Merzaa, in touch with English 
and Arabic dailies in Bahrain.  In the interviews, Dr. 
Merzaa told his story of evacuating his residence at Tulane 
University as hurricane winds approached.  His harrowing 
tale of escape and heartwarming stories of kindness from 
American families along the way were the subject of stories 
in six Bahraini dailies and was featured on Al Jazeera's 
talk-show, "From Washington" on September 5.  In the Bahrain 
Tribune Dr. Merzaa comments, "The US State Department and 
the US Embassy in Bahrain were very supportive, as was the 
Fulbright Foundation.  They offered help and kept my family 
informed of the situation." 
 
¶4.  Commentary on Hurricane Katrina was almost uniformly 
positive, with one exception.  The disaster was covered as a 
major story in all newspapers and broadcast media.  A 
frequent critic of U.S. policy, writing in Akhbar Al Khalij, 
applauded the humanitarian response and criticized 
extremists who have characterized Katrina as God's wrath on 
the United States.  In an Al Ayam news report of a session 
of parliament, Minister of Parliament Mohamed Al Sheikh 
expressed reservations on the $5 million donation.  He and 
others argued that the government should have consulted 
parliament first, and that the amount could have been spent 
on needy Bahraini families. On the other hand MP Ahmed 
Behzad pointed out that there was no reason for these 
reservations as the aid was a humanitarian gesture. 
 
MONROE