05OTTAWA754
FY 2005 EVALUATION: DVC with Robert Dixon and
Fri Mar 11 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ottawa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

111312Z Mar 05UNCLAS OTTAWA 000754 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE 
 
STATE FOR IIP/G/WHA - CBARONE; IIP/T/ES - GCHRISTISON 
WHA/PDA - JGREENBLATT 
MONTREAL, TORONTO AND VANCOUVER FOR PAOS 
CALGARY FOR PA FIELD REP 
CALGARY PLEASE PASS WINNIPEG 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OIIP CA
SUBJECT: FY 2005 EVALUATION: DVC with Robert Dixon and 
Thomas Kerr on Alternate and Renewable Energy Policies and 
Programs 
 
 
TRACKER NUMBER:  223483 
 
REFERENCE:  OTTAWA 149 
 
¶A.   DATE, FISCAL YEAR AND QUARTER: March 3, 2005; FY 05; 
Second Quarter 
 
¶B.   OBJECTIVE:  Canada and the U.S. share one of the 
closest energy relationships in the world, with Canada the 
leading foreign supplier of energy to the United States. 
Both countries agree on the need for research and policies 
to lessen our dependence on fossil fuels, but many Canadians 
are not fully aware of the extent to which the U.S. 
government is engaged in alternative and renewable energy 
initiatives.  As a signatory to the Kyoto Protocol, Canada 
has sometimes questioned why the United States did not sign 
on, and doubts the U.S. commitment to reducing greenhouse 
gases.  This DVC program was intended to inform audiences in 
government, NGO and industry circles about U.S. leadership 
in the alternative and renewable energy fields. 
 
¶C.   MPP THEME: Economic security and prosperity; 
Environmental protection 
 
¶D.   EVALUATION/IMPACT:  Excellent.  The DVC with Robert 
Dixon and Thomas Kerr offered Canadian officials, 
politicians, environmentalists and reporters a variety of 
information about the renewable energy initiatives underway 
in the US--from wind to hydrogen cell to biomass projects-- 
and the respective roles of federal government agencies, 
state governments, utility companies, and voluntary private 
business and citizen choices in moving the US towards 
greater self-reliance and reduced greenhouse gas emissions. 
Dr. Dixon's emphasis on market competitiveness, government 
investment in research for new technologies, and the 
importance of drawing local populations into the decision- 
making on power generation and distribution options that 
will affect their environment helped distinguish US 
perspectives from those of countries which have opted for 
administrative requirements or subsidies of renewable energy 
sources which are not commercially competitive. 
 
The program advanced the post's objective of making U.S. 
energy and environmental policies better understood by 
Canadians who are directly involved in policy and public 
opinion as Canada weighs its own options in meeting its 
Kyoto obligations.  The powerpoint slides materials speakers 
Dixon and Kerr provided and supplemental references the 
Embassy's Econ Section compiled provided attendees resources 
for further understanding U.S. alternative energy policy. 
Post particularly appreciates Dr. Dixon's answering 
additional questions by e-mail from a Member of Parliament 
on the Environment and Sustainable Development Committee. 
 
¶E.   QUALITY OF U.S. SUPPORT AND IIP OFFICES INVOLVED: 
Excellent.  Post thanks Gretchen Christison for arranging 
and moderating this conference. 
 
CELLUCCI