05OTTAWA243
TFXO01: ROUNDUP ON CANADIAN TSUNAMI ASSISTANCE
Wed Jan 26 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ottawa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 OTTAWA 000243 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR TSUNAMI TASKFORCE 1, EAP AND WHA/CAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID AEMR PGOV CASC CA
SUBJECT: TFXO01: ROUNDUP ON CANADIAN TSUNAMI ASSISTANCE 
 
REF: A. OTTAWA 228 
     ¶B. OTTAWA 12 
     ¶C. OTTAWA 6 (MORATORIUM) 
     ¶D. 04 OTTAWA 3483 
 
¶1.  The increase in GOC tsunami assistance to C$425 million 
(US$340 million), from an initial C$1 million on December 26, 
reflects the overwhelming response of the Canadian public. 
The GOC has allocated C$36 million (about US$30 million) of 
the total to the UN Flash Appeal and C$265 million (over 
US$210 million) to immediate humanitarian relief and 
rehabilitation, covering expenses in FY2004-2005 (ending 
March 31).  The GOC's offer to match private donations to 
approved NGOs made by January 11, 2005 (see para. 4), will 
use approximately C$200 million (over US$160 million) of the 
funds allocated for immediate humanitarian relief, although 
that number may still increase.  Given Canada's population of 
about 32 million people, total GOC and private contributions 
of C$615 million come to about C$20 (over US$15) per person. 
 
¶2.  The remaining C$160 million (US$128 million) is committed 
over four years. However, Finance Minister Ralph Goodale, in 
a statement highlighting Canadians' generosity to tsunami 
victims, emphasized that "Canadians must not lose sight of 
our obligations elsewhere in the world," listing Canadian 
support for the Global Polio Eradication Initiative, his role 
on the Commission for Africa, and recent debt forgiveness for 
African countries as examples of Canada's global efforts. 
 
How can we show how much we care? 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  Prime Minister Martin added stops in tsunami-affected 
countries to his recent swing through Asia (ref A). Canada's 
tsunami response covers a wide range of activities (all 
 
SIPDIS 
funded from the C$425 commitment), including: 
 
-- Deployment of the Disaster Assistance Relief Team to 
Ampara, Sri Lanka.  The DART set up operation on January 10, 
with a focus on primary medical care, provision of fresh 
water, and some engineering ability. 
 
--  Provision of supplies such as pharmaceuticals, 
flashlights, blankets. 
 
--  An offer of debt moratorium for one year for affected 
countries (ref C). 
 
--  Tax deductions in 2004 for tsunami contributions made 
through January 11, 2005. 
 
--  Canadian Space Agency collaboration in providing 
satellite imagery. 
 
--  Deployment of 10 forensic specialists to Thailand. 
 
Other initiatives include: 
 
-- Fast-tracking permanent-resident visas for family members 
from the region. 
 
Proposals to expedite adoptions faded quickly upon 
recognition of trafficking concerns. 
 
 
Matching Funds:  Probably a one-off program 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  Immediately after the disaster, the GOC announced that 
private donations for tsunami relief, made to approved NGOs 
between December 26 and January 11, would be matched by the 
federal government.  Canada's International Development 
Agency (CIDA) expects to match at about C$200 million (US$160 
million) in private contributions. Although 26 NGOs were 
approved for the matching program, over half of the total 
collected was donated through the Red Cross, which reports 
almost C$130 million (about US$100 million) in eligible 
contributions.  On January 24, the Canadian Red Cross 
released preliminary proposals for disbursement of its 
tsunami aid.  In order to receive matching funds from CIDA, 
 
SIPDIS 
the approved NGOs must submit project proposals within about 
the next 10 weeks.  GOC funds will be distributed on a 
project-by-project basis as tsunami relief progresses in 
order to minimize duplication and make sure the focus remains 
in priority areas. 
 
¶5.  Although the matching program worked, in the sense that 
the matching may have boosted contributions, GOC officials 
tell us it is unlikely to be repeated.  Uncertainty about the 
total to be matched complicates budgeting.  The GOC initially 
expected to match C$50 million in donations and the surge in 
private contributions was a factor in rapidly boosting 
Canada's overall tsunami aid.  The matching also adds 
administrative costs.  An interagency committee was formed to 
evaluated NGO claims of eligibility, and additional 
committees will be needed to evaluate aid proposals by the 
NGOs. 
¶6.  Because the matching funds come from Canada's overall 
tsunami commitment, there is a shell-game element:  funds 
 
SIPDIS 
used to match donations to NGOs won't be available for other 
uses.  On the other hand, NGOs qualified for the matching 
program by having existing humanitarian operations on the 
ground in the affected area and a proven record of effective 
humanitarian relief work.  To the extent the matching program 
attracted additional private funds, these NGOs can quickly 
expand their programs.  A few lonely voices have raised the 
question of why the GOC is using any taxpayer funds for 
tsunami relief, rather than just relying on private 
 
SIPDIS 
generosity.  This reflects the tsunami's influence in raising 
foreign aid issues about which the public is usually 
unconcerned.  (Similarly, commentators started to question 
the regulation that requires 90% of Canadian food aid to be 
purchased in Canada.)  There is also the likelihood that 
failure to match private contributions to future disasters 
will be considered discriminatory. 
 
From Provinces to Piggy Banks 
----------------------------- 
 
¶7.  Most provincial governments responded with contributions 
of about C$100,000 (about US$80,000), with most funneling 
contributions through the Red Cross. Alberta led the pack 
with C$5 million, Saskatchewan chipped in C$1 million, and 
tiny Prince Edward Island contributed C$20,000.  As in the 
U.S., private donations have ranged in scope from a C$5 
million donation from the owners of Music World, described as 
the largest personal donation ever to the Canadian Red Cross, 
to the proceeds of bake sales and the contents of 
piggy-banks.  The corporate and arts worlds also raised funds 
for disaster relief. 
 
Debt Moratorium:  Amount still not clear 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  The GOC was quick to announce a debt moratorium for 
affected countries (ref B) and has a "worst-case" estimate of 
the present value of the proposed debt moratorium, assuming 
full take-up over three years.  However, several countries 
have already confirmed that they do not intend to avail of 
international offers of debt moratorium, and the period is 
unlikely to last for three years.  Finance policy makers are 
balancing a desire to be generous with concern about becoming 
out of step with the Paris Club and a recognition that 
Australia's position (give aid; don't forgive debt) makes 
sense. Money not used for debt relief will be reassigned to 
other assistance to the region.  Although individual banks 
are waiving fees for remittances to the disaster area, that 
service has not been widely publicized. 
 
Consular situation 
------------------ 
 
¶9.  The Department of Foreign Affairs tells us that as of 
January 21, the toll of Canadians is five confirmed dead 
(three in Thailand; one in Sri Lanka; one in India).  In 
addition, one person is presumed dead in Thailand.  Nineteen 
others in Thailand are confirmed to have been in the area, 
have not been accounted for, and there is "grave concern for 
their safety." In addition, there are 55 people who may have 
been in the affected area and are still unaccounted for.  The 
consular hotline will close at the end of this week, but 
Canadians can continue to call the usual emergency number 
(613-996-8885) for information. 
 
¶10.  The team of 10 forensic specialists and two case 
officers has been rotated out and three-to-four specialists 
are still assisting at the Disaster Victim Identification 
center.  The forensic team did ID one of the Canadian victims 
confirmed dead last week. 
 
Visit Canada's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/ottawa 
 
CELLUCCI