05OTTAWA3106
Canada Nominees for "U.S. National Security
Tue Oct 18 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ottawa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

181133Z Oct 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 OTTAWA 003106 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE 
 
FOR ECA/A/E/USS - BRIAN N. GIBSON; WHA/PDA - JANE CARPENTER- 
ROCK 
TORONTO FOR PAO; CALGARY FOR PA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OEXC SCUL CA
SUBJECT: Canada Nominees for "U.S. National Security 
Policymaking in a Post-9-11 World" Institute, Jan 8-Feb 20, 
2006 
 
REFERENCE:  State 149595 
 
¶1.   Summary:  Mission Canada is pleased to nominate two 
strong candidates, selected from among the Embassy and seven 
consulates in Canada, for the subject U.S. Studies 
Institute.  Both play significant roles in educating future 
leaders of Canada and stimulating public debate in Canada on 
security and Canada-U.S. security cooperation in the 
capitals of powerhouse provinces Ontario and Alberta and 
beyond.  Neither has significant first-hand U.S. experience. 
Post provides nominating information below for Dr. Goran 
Pesic, the first director of the University of Toronto's new 
Council on Transatlantic Relations, and Dr. Kevin Haggerty, 
Director of the Criminology Program at the University of 
Alberta.  We look forward to selection information. End 
summary. 
 
¶2.   U.S. Consulate General Calgary nominee: 
 
A)   Name:  Kevin Daniel Haggerty 
B)   Date of Birth: June, 10, 1965 
C)   City of Birth: Regina, Saskatchewan 
D)   Country of Birth: Canada 
E)   Country of Residence: Canada 
F)   Country of Citizenship: Canada 
G)   Home address:  11328 73rd Ave 
          Edmonton, Alberta 
          T6G 0C8, Canada 
          780-434-0801 
            kevin.haggerty@ualberta.ca 
H)   Gender: male 
I)   Dietary/health concerns: none 
 
J)   Current Position: 
     Director, Criminology Program 
     Assistant Professor of Sociology 
     Areas of Specialization:  Policing and Security; Risk 
     Theory; Sociology of Science and Technology; 
     Surveillance; Research Ethics 
 
 
K)   Current Institutional Address: 
     Department of Sociology 
     University of Alberta 
     HM Tory Building 
     Edmonton, Alberta, Canada   T6G 2H4 
 
L)   Past Positions: 
1999-2000 - Postdoctoral fellow, Centre of Criminology, 
University of Toronto 
1993-1998 - PhD student, University of British Columbia 
(assorted research assistant jobs during my time there) 
1992-93 - Research Associate, Centre of Criminology, 
University of Toronto 
 
M)   Education: 
1998           Doctor of Philosophy (Sociology), University 
               of British Columbia 
 
1992           Master of Arts (Criminology) University of 
               Toronto, Centre of Criminology 
 
1990 Bachelor of Arts, Honours (Law: Concentration in 
     Criminology and Criminal Justice). Carleton University 
 
N)   Professional Memberships 
     Canadian Law and Society Association 
     Society for the Study of Social Problems 
     Canadian Sociological Association 
 
O)   Publications (selected): 
 
 
Ericson, Richard V., and Kevin D. Haggerty. 1997. Policing 
     the Risk Society. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 
     and Oxford: Oxford University Press (487 pages). 
 
Haggerty, Kevin D. and Richard V. Ericson eds. The New 
     Politics of Surveillance and Visibility (forthcoming 
     2005) 670 manuscript pages 
 
Erin Kruger and Kevin D. Haggerty. (forthcoming 2006) 
     "Intelligence Exchange in Policing and Security" 
     Policing and Society 
 
Haggerty, Kevin D., and Amber Gazso. 2005 "Seeing Beyond the 
     Ruins: Surveillance as a Response to Terrorist 
     Threats." Canadian Journal of Sociology 30(2), 169-187 
 
Haggerty, Kevin D. 2004. "Technology and Crime Policy." 
     Theoretical Criminology 8:221-227. 
 
Haggerty, Kevin D., and Richard V. Ericson. 2000. "The 
     Surveillant Assemblage." British Journal of Sociology 
     51:605-22. 
 
Haggerty, Kevin D. (forthcoming 2005). "Visible War: 
     Information War, Surveillance and Speed." in The New 
     Politics of Surveillance and Visibility, edited by 
     Kevin D. Haggerty and Richard V. Ericson. Toronto: 
     University of Toronto Press. 
 
Ericson, Richard V., and Kevin D. Haggerty. 2002. "The 
     Policing of Risk." in Embracing Risk: The Changing 
     Culture of Insurance and Responsibility, edited by Tom 
     Baker and Jonathan Simon. Chicago: University of 
     Chicago Press. 
 
Haggerty, Kevin D. (forthcoming 2006) `Risk Management' 
     Encyclopaedia of Police Science  3rd ed. Jack Green ed. 
     New York: Routledge 
 
Q)   Fluency:  English is nominee's first language 
 
R)   Justification: 
 
     The University of Alberta is about to launch an 
"Institute for United States Studies" (IUSS)-the first of 
its kind in a province that takes its relationship with the 
United States very seriously. In a country that has, up to 
this point, not taken a systematic approach to the study of 
the United States, the post finds this initiative a positive 
sign that academics and administrators are focusing their 
energies and their funding on a research and teaching 
institute devoted to the United States.  The IUSS in 
Edmonton will be housed in the Faculty of Arts, will be 
multi-disciplinary, and will focus on a variety of public 
policy issues surrounding the very important Canada-U.S. 
relationship. 
 
     Security will be an important focus, and Kevin Haggerty 
is well-placed to direct this section of the IUSS.  He is 
keen to learn more about security efforts in the United 
States following 9-11 (which he correctly says have 
dramatically changed at a pace that make it difficult to 
follow at times), and his participation in the Fulbright 
Winter Institute will give him the background and first-hand 
exposure to current issues in this field that will prepare 
him well to develop the University of Alberta's innovative 
program. 
 
     Canada and the United States arguably share the closest 
security relationship in the world, with Canadian and 
American forces side by side protecting North American air 
space at NORAD, fighting terror and nurturing stability in 
Afghanistan, and sharing intelligence daily to foil terror 
and international crime.  With a 5000-mile border, as the 
U.S. Ambassador has said, we cannot secure our countries 
without each other in the post-9-11 environment.  Yet 
Canadian public opinion towards U.S. foreign and security 
policies has grown conflicted.  Some view what they perceive 
as U.S. unilateralism as reason to distance themselves from 
U.S. international interventions.  Some question the balance 
between counterterrorism measures and personal privacies and 
civil rights in the wake of the Patriot Act.  The U.S. 
deportation of Canadian-Syrian Maher Arar to Syria, where he 
was imprisoned and allegedly tortured for nearly a year, 
then released without charge, led to a public inquiry on the 
Canadian government's role in his deportation, with the 
public accusing the Canadian security and intelligence 
services of improperly sharing information with Americans 
and the U.S. of violating human rights.  In this 
environment, the Mission has worked hard to impress upon 
Canadian opinion leaders the scale of the stakes in the war 
on terror in the post-9-11 period.  Arming Professor 
Haggarty with the facts, perspectives and contacts to 
accurately portray U.S. objectives, policies and approaches 
in the field of security, intelligence and law enforcement 
for emerging Canadian leaders in the University of Alberta's 
pioneering U.S. Studies Center will address that goal. 
 
S)   Nominee's Personal Statement: 
 
     It almost appears as if the focus of this study 
institute was crafted specifically to further my research 
and teaching interests and advance institutional 
developments at my university. 
 
     As the Director of the Criminology program at one of 
Canada's premier research universities my professional 
activities routinely address developments in American 
security policy, both domestic and international. My 
longstanding research program concentrates on issues of 
security, intelligence and information technology. This 
includes publications on the attractions and limitations of 
new surveillance technologies as part of the war on 
terrorism. I have written on recent developments in U.S. 
military practice and also on the complex relationship 
between organizational and technological developments in the 
American military and domestic crime policy - a topic which 
I think is particularly germane after 9/11. Some of my more 
prominent works in this area include the co-authored book 
Policing the Risk Society which was awarded special 
recognition by the Herbert Jacob Book Prize committee of the 
American Law and Society Association. I also have a 
forthcoming co-edited book The New Politics of Surveillance 
and Visibility (University of Toronto Press) which is 
centrally concerned with security developments after 9/11. I 
teach graduate and undergraduate courses where such issues 
figure prominently, and as noted below, am eager to develop 
two new courses that concentrate specifically on American 
security policy. 
 
     I believe that my participation in this study institute 
would allow me to benefit substantially in four specific 
areas: 
 
1) I am committed to continuing and expanding my research in 
the area of U.S. security policy, with a particular emphasis 
on the place of intelligence and information in security 
practice. While I try to remain abreast of developments in 
this area, after 9/11 policy change has been so far-reaching 
and advanced at such speed that it can be difficult to 
remain current. As such, I see the prospect of intensive 
study in this area to be a true blessing and would expect 
that my research would receive a monumental boost from such 
an experience. 
 
2) The University of Alberta is currently discussing a 
faculty-wide initiative to develop an Institute on United 
States Policy Development (IUSPD). My participation in this 
seminar would allow me to solicit concrete advice from other 
participants about how to best develop our proposal and to 
fashion such an Institute. 
 
3) I would also use this opportunity to further develop two 
courses on U.S. security policy. The first is an 
undergraduate course on American security policy (domestic 
and international) that I envision as being a central 
component of the IUSPD. The second would be a graduate 
course concentrating specifically on developments in the 
aftermath of 9/11. 
 
4) Participation in this study institute would also provide 
an excellent opportunity to fashion new research and 
teaching collaborations with scholars with similar 
interests. 
 
     While I would attend such an institute seeking to learn 
as much as possible, I also believe that my research and 
experience in this area would allow me to make informed 
contributions to the discussions. Canadians are not 
disinterested observers of American security policy, but are 
actively involved in assorted trans-national security 
collaborations, with Canada often following the American 
lead on security matters. Hence, both I and my students 
would benefit immensely from a more sophisticated 
understanding of U.S. security policy -  something that can 
only benefit international relations more generally. 
 
T)   Action Officer: 
Betty Rice, Public Affairs Field Representative, U.S. 
Consulate General Calgary;  Tel 403-444-5203; fax 403-266- 
4743; Email  ricebw@state.gov.  Please copy CAO Elizabeth 
Kauffman at kauffmanec@state.gov. 
 
3)  U.S. Consulate General Toronto Nominee: 
 
A:  NOMINEE'S FULL Name: 
     First name: Goran 
     Middle: Samuel 
     Last:  Pesic 
 
¶B.  DATE OF BIRTH:  06-18-1972 
 
¶C.  CITY OF BIRTH: Vlasotince, Serbia and Montenegro 
Nationality:   Canadian (1980) 
 
¶D.  COUNTRY OF BIRTH: SERBIA AND MONTENEGRO 
 
¶E.  COUNTRY OF RESIDENCE: CANADA 
 
¶F.  COUNTRY OF CITIZENSHIP: CANADA (1980) 
 
 
¶G.  HOME ADDRESS, TELEPHONE AND E-MAIL: 
 
85 DUNN, TORONTO, ONTARIO, M6K 28R CANADA 
TEL: (416) 538-0607  CELL: (416) 824-2552 
GORAN.PESIC@SYMPATICO.CA 
 
¶H.  GENDER: MALE 
 
¶I.  MEDICAL, PHYSICAL, DIETARY OR OTHER PERSONAL 
CONSIDERATIONS: NONE 
 
PROFESSIONAL INFORMATION 
 
¶J.  PRESENT POSITION AND TITLE:  EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE 
COUNCIL ON TRANSATLANTIC RELATIONS. 
 
¶K.  CURRENT INSTITUTIONAL AFFILIATION AND COMPLETE ADDRESS: 
 
THE COUNCIL ON TRANSATLANTIC RELATIONS, UNIVERSITY OF 
TORONTO, P.O. BOX 273, STATION F, TORONTO, ONTARIO M4Y 2H7. 
 
¶L.  WORK EXPERIENCE, INCLUDING PREVIOUS POSITIONS AND 
TITLES: 
 
JUNE 2002- MARCH 2005    EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, THE ATLANTIC 
COUNCIL OF CANADA 
 
MAY 1997 - JUNE 2002     ONTARIO MINISTRY OF LABOUR, SENIOR 
GOVERNMENT ANALYST 
 
¶M.  EDUCATION, ACADEMIC AND PROFESSIONAL TRAINING, INCLUDING 
DEGREES EARNED AND FIELDS OF SPECIALIZATION: 
 
2000 UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO 
     BACHELOR OF ARTS (HON. B.A.), 
     POLITICAL SCIENCE AND INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS 
 
 
2001 PUBLIC SERVICE EXECUTIVE TRAINING & DEVELOPMENT 
PROGRAM, OTTAWA, CANADA - CANADA CUSTOMS & REVENUE AGENCY, 
CONTINUOUS PROCESS IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM 
 
2002-PRESENT   THE COVENANT GROUP, TORONTO, CANADA 
NUMEROUS MANAGEMENT, LEADERSHIP, MARKETING AND COMMUNICATION 
COURSES THROUGHOUT CAREER AS WELL AS RECEIVING ON-GOING 
EXECUTIVE COACHING. 
 
¶N.  ACTIVE PROFESSIONAL MEMBERSHIPS: 
 
SINCE 2002-CANADIAN INSTITUTE OF INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS 
SINCE 2002-CANADIAN INSTITUTE FOR STRATEGIC STUDIES 
INSTITUTIONAL 
SINCE 2003-COMPAS GROUP INSTITUTE OF STUDIES ON DEFENCE 
POLICY (DENMARK) 
SINCE 2003-ROYAL CANADIAN MILITARY INSTITUTE 
 
¶O.  SHORT LIST OF RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS [NO MORE THAN FIVE 
TO TEN CITATIONS]: 
 
PESIC, GORAN S., ASSESSING CANADA'S NEW NATIONAL SECURITY 
POLICY. THE TRANSATLANTIC QUARTERLY. THE ATLANTIC COUNCIL OF 
CANADA, SUMMER 2004. 
 
PESIC, GORAN S., THE FIRST YATA SEMINAR IN BRUSSELS.  THE 
TRANSATLANTIC QUARTERLY.  THE ATLANTIC COUNCIL OF CANADA, 
SPRING 2004. 
 
 
BONNN, PREBEN. ET AL., TOWARDS A COMMON EUROPEAN SECURITY 
AND DEFENCE POLICY: THE WAYS AND MEANS OF MAKING IT A 
REALITY.  BERLIN: LIT VERLAG, 2003.  (ISBN 3-8258-6711-0.) 
 
¶P.  PREVIOUS TRAVEL AND STUDY OR RESEARCH EXPERIENCE IN THE 
UNITED STATES, INCLUDING DATES AND AN INDICATION AS TO 
WHETHER SUCH TRAVEL WAS SUPPORTED BY U.S. GOVERNMENT FUNDS: 
OCCASIONAL TOURIST AND CONFERENCE-RELATED TRAVEL, NO U.S.- 
SUPPORTED TRAVEL. 
 
¶Q.  EVIDENCE OF FLUENCY IN WRITTEN AND ORAL ENGLISH (E.G. 
PERSONAL INTERVIEW, TEST SCORE, ETC.):  Native fluency. 
 
¶R. RATIONALE: 
 
Dr. Pesic was recently named Executive Director at the 
Council on Transatlantic Relations, University of Toronto, a 
new foreign policy institution that the Mission expects to 
achieve many of the goals of the complementary Atlantic 
Council of Canada he formerly led:  to promote a broader and 
deeper understanding of international peace and security 
issues relating to NATO by engaging Canadians on Canada's 
 
role in NATO and its commitment to transatlantic 
cooperation. Dynamic and energetic in reaching out to both 
traditional and younger groups, Dr. Pesic stimulates thought 
on Canada's approach to security and cooperation among 
Canada, the U.S., and their allies through exchanges, 
seminars, articles and publications.  He explores NATO 
relationships and developments, cooperation in Europe, and 
NORAD. 
 
As the former executive director of the Atlantic Council of 
Canada, Pesic was responsible for operations and 
programming, conferences and the preparation of the Canadian 
foreign policy publication "The Transatlantic Quarterly," 
which offers an overview and assessment of security 
throughout the Western Hemisphere, the strategic and 
economic dimensions, and North America's relationship and 
role within the NATO Alliance. Further exposure to the U.S. 
positions on security issues and foreign policy would boost 
Dr. Pesic's effectiveness in spurring dialogue that will aid 
the cooperation so essential to both our countries' security 
and well-being. 
 
Canada and the United States arguably share the closest 
security relationship in the world, with Canadian and 
American forces side by side protecting North American air 
space at NORAD, fighting terror and nurturing stability in 
Afghanistan, and cooperating on peacekeeping and security 
missions worldwide.  With a 5000-mile border, as the U.S. 
Ambassador has said, we cannot secure our countries without 
each other in the post-9-11 environment.  Yet Canadian 
public opinion towards U.S. foreign and security policies 
has grown conflicted.  Some view what they perceive as U.S. 
unilateralism as reason to distance themselves from U.S. 
international interventions.  Some question the balance 
between counterterrorism measures and personal privacies and 
civil rights in the wake of the Patriot Act.  And many 
regard upgrades of the Canadian forces as unnecessary 
expenses, opting to fund social services instead.  In this 
environment, the Mission has worked hard to impress upon 
Canadian opinion leaders the scale of the stakes in the war 
on terror.  This nomination seeks to address that goal. 
 
¶S.  Dr. Pesic's personal statement: 
 
I remember vividly my meeting at Parliament Hill on April 
27, 2004 to listen to Canada's first comprehensive national 
security policy - Securing an Open Society: Canada's 
National Security Policy. A week prior to the announcement, 
I received a call from the Privy Council Office inviting me 
to attend a select meeting of security and defence community 
experts to participate in a government's announcement on its 
new national security policy. I was pleased be to part of 
this historic moment in Canadian security policy history. 
 
I began to take considerable interest in Canada's national 
security position as well as its overall response in the 
Post-9/11 era.  This prompted me to write a report for the 
Transatlantic Quarterly magazine entitled: Assessing 
Canada's New National Security Policy.  I did a 
comprehensive survey of the existing literature, which 
revealed that Canada was indeed slow to respond to U.S. 
concerns over issues pertaining to national and 
international security, particularly as it related to the 
War on Terror, immigration and overall border control 
issues.  Although Canada did eventually begin to shift its 
working priorities closer to U.S. national security policy 
concerns, contentions in Canada-U.S. political and trade 
relations continue to negatively influence Canadian public 
opinion of our bilateral relationship with the U.S. 
 
Having since closely observed these issues from my current 
position as Executive Director of the Council on 
Transatlantic Relations (CTR), (a Canadian-based think-tank 
focusing on international policy research and analysis on 
security and defence issues), I am concerned that the 
current U.S. strategic defence message and its national 
security policy concerns are not being adequately received 
by Canadian policy-and-decision makers.  This is similar to 
the misperceptions and lack of understanding of the security 
field within which NATO now operates - something that I have 
been working hard to address. 
 
Several weeks ago, I lead a high-level Canadian Delegation 
to the European Union and NATO Headquarters.  The intent of 
this CTR Canadian Leaders Forum was to provide these 
influential policy-makers and opinion leaders with an 
overview of the new security challenges faced by the EU and 
NATO, and the actions these organizations have taken to 
address these new challenges and threats, as well as to 
discuss Canada's role in the Fight Against Terrorism. 
 
The group included, former Minister of Defence Mr. David 
Pratt, Parliamentary Secretary for Transportation, the 
Honourable Jim Karygiannis, a Managing Editor from the 
National Post, a Director of the Canadian Defence and 
Foreign Affairs Institute, a senior academic from University 
of British Columbia as well as very senior executives from 
firms such as Hill & Knowlton and Stratos Global 
Corporation. They expressed a keen willingness to be message 
multipliers to their domestic audiences and various 
constituency groups. Given the successful outcome of this 
event, I would like to repeat these efforts and direct them 
toward bringing a similar calibre of Canadians to the U.S. 
As such, the CTR is currently planning a Leaders Forum to 
Washington, D.C. and NATO Transformation in Norfolk, VA, 
sometime in late spring 2006. 
 
Moreover, the CTR plans to organize three major events in 
2006 focusing on the Canada-U.S. strategic relationship. 
The first of these high-level events is a Roundtable 
Conference entitled, "Evaluating Canada's National Security 
Strategy Two Years Later-Perspectives from Ottawa and 
Washington D.C." to be held in Ottawa in April/May 2006. The 
second is an International Security Conference focusing on 
Transportation and Security.  This conference will closely 
examine best practices in the Fight Against Terrorism. This 
international event will be held in Toronto in early June 
¶2006.  The third event will focus on broader transatlantic 
security issues and concerns.  This Forum, entitled: "The 
World of e-Borders-The E.U. Experience and the Canada and 
U.S. Smart Border Strategy", will explore a several new 
concepts in international security, including the 
establishment of a transatlantic security perimeter as well 
as emerging themes in "soft defence".  It is scheduled to 
take place in Ottawa in the late fall of 2006. 
 
As a result of my extensive work in the Canadian security 
and defence field, I have gained much knowledge of the 
thematic issues involved in the post-9/11 era.  However, I 
am keen to further my knowledge and comprehension of 
American views on what constitutes U.S. national security 
and defence policy, and evolving methodologies from the 
immediate post-Cold War period to the current War on Terror. 
 
I believe that I would be a strong candidate in the program 
as I have the specific interdisciplinary skills, which are 
necessary to understand the nuances of advanced 
policymaking. These skills were developed during my ten-year 
association with the Atlantic Council of Canada and through 
my international involvement with the Atlantic Treaty 
Association. 
 
I am also capable of contextualizing the various historical, 
political, economic, cultural and geographic factors that 
underpin the formulation of U.S. foreign and national 
security policy. For example, I had a long working 
relationship with Foreign Affairs Canada to place top- 
calibre young Canadians graduates at leading Washington- 
based think tanks to examine various international security 
and defence related issues. I negotiated placements with the 
Center for Strategic and International Studies, the Atlantic 
Council of the United States, the Brookings Institute and 
the Carnegie Centre for International Peace.  Facilitating 
these working relationships between the Government of 
Canada, U.S. institutions and the appropriate candidates, I 
had the opportunity to explore firsthand these key elements 
of American policy-thinking. 
 
I would be truly honoured to participate in the Winter 
Institute's program on U.S. National Security Policymaking 
in a Post- 9/11 World.  The experience and knowledge I gain 
from the program would filter beyond my own comprehension 
and be used to develop CTR programming and discussions on 
domestic and international security policy issues. Such 
programming would aim at strengthening and enhancing 
Canada-U.S. relations among senior policy-and-decision 
makers, something that I believe would be extremely 
beneficial to both our countries. 
 
I thank you for your consideration. 
Goran S. Pesic 
 
¶T.   Action Officer: 
Nicholas Giacobbe, Public Affairs Officer, U.S. Consulate 
General Toronto;  Tel 415-595-1721; fax 416-595-5250; Email 
giacobbenj@state.gov.  Please copy CAO Elizabeth Kauffman at 
kauffmanec@state.gov. 
 
End nominations. 
 
 
4)  Post appreciates the opportunity to nominate candidates 
for this very timely Institute. 
 
WILKINS