05OTTAWA3105
2004) REQUEST FOR CANADIAN MARITIME PATROL
Mon Oct 17 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ottawa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS OTTAWA 003105 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL/CARROLL, JOINT STAFF FOR J5, COGARD FOR 
KEISERMAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MARR PREL CA
SUBJECT: (2004) REQUEST FOR CANADIAN MARITIME PATROL 
AIRCRAFT SUPPORT FOR USSOUTHCOM/JIATF-S COUNTERDRUG 
OPERATIONS 
 
REF: A. (A) 04 OTTAWA 3368 (NOTAL) 
     ¶B. (B) 04 STATE 262028 
 
¶1. Post received the following response to reftel B request 
via diplomatic note dated 11 October 2005: 
 
BEGIN TEXT: 
 
Note no. IDR0485 
 
The Department of Foreign Affairs presents its compliments to 
the Embassy of the United States of America and has the 
honour to refer to the Embassy's demarche of 14 December 2004 
requesting Canada's assistance in counter-drug operations in 
the Caribbean and Eastern Pacific regions 
 
The Government of Canada is pleased to confirm its agreement 
to deploy Canadian Forces (CF) Maritime Patrol Aircraft 
(MPA), CP-140 Auroras to assist in United States-led efforts 
to enhance counter-drug detection and monitoring in the 
Caribbean and Eastern Pacific regions.  These regions remain 
a priority in terms of Canada's bilateral and multilateral 
engagement to enhance international security, with a 
particular focus on counter-narcotics efforts. 
 
Accordingly, Government of Canada cooperation with the 
Government of the United States of America will be guided by 
the following foreign policy principles: 
 
-- CF support will be limited to surveillance and information 
sharing with relevant authorities participating in United 
States-led efforts to stem  the trafficking of illicit drugs 
in the Caribbean and Eastern Pacific regions; 
 
-- CF surveillance operations are to be conducted only 
outside the claimed territorial waters and claimed 
territorial airspace of countries in the region. 
 
Canada's Department of National Defense will liaise directly 
with the United States' Department of Defense in order to 
identify appropriate windows of opportunity for the 
deployment of Canadian Maritime Patrol Aircraft. 
 
The Department of Foreign Affairs avails itself of this 
opportunity to renew to the Embassy of the United States the 
assurances of its highest consideration. 
 
OTTAWA, 11 October, 2005 
 
END TEXT. 
 
Visit Canada's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/ottawa 
 
WILKINS