05QUITO2499
GOE REJECTS IRANIAN REMARKS, CONSIDERING STATEMENT
Fri Nov 04 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Quito
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS QUITO 002499 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PINR PREL EC
SUBJECT: GOE REJECTS IRANIAN REMARKS, CONSIDERING STATEMENT 
 
REF: STATE 199225 
 
¶1. PolChief, British DCM Peter Evans, and PolOff delivered 
RefTel points on November 1 to Ambassadors Rafael Veintimilla 
and Marco Samaniego of MFA Bilateral Relations, requesting 
that the GOE publicly reject President Ahmadi-Nejad's call to 
"wipe Israel off the map."  Veintimilla said that the GOE 
found Ahmadi-Nejad's statement objectionable and 
reprehensible, but stopped short of offering to make a public 
statement.  He said he would raise US/UK objections with the 
FM.  PolChief urged Ecuador to raise its voice with the 
international community. 
 
¶2. Evans said British FM Straw had issued a statement and 
also cited the public objections of UN Secretary Kofi General 
Annan.  He later told us that he would deliver Straw's 
statement to the MFA later today, adding that the UK is also 
pressing other diplomatic missions in London.  The French 
Embassy declined to participate in this joint demarche, 
saying that France was instead raising its concerns directly 
with other embassies in Paris.  Veintimilla confirmed that 
the Russians had already raised the issue with the Ecuadorian 
mission in Moscow. 
 
¶3. Ambassador Veintimilla stated that Iranian Deputy Foreign 
Minister Saeed Jalili, visiting Ecuador recently, called on 
Foreign Minister Carrion.  According to Veintimilla, Jalili 
discussed enhancing bilateral relations, Iran's desire to 
develop nuclear capabilities for civilian use only, and 
conveyed Tehran's disappointment with the GOE's vote to refer 
Iran to the UNSC.  Veintimilla also reported that Carrion 
told Jalili that the GOE has no objection to civilian nuclear 
programs, but strongly rejected any proliferation of military 
nuclear technology. 
JEWELL