05SANAA3524
PLACEMENT OF HUMAN RIGHTS DAY OP-ED
Mon Dec 19 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Sanaa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SANAA 003524 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA, NEA/ARP, NEA/PD, NEA/RA, 
DS/OP/NEA AND S/CT 
CENTCOM FOR POLAD 
NEA/PPD FOR AFERNANDEZ 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM KMPI PGOV PHUM PREL YM HUMAN RIGHTS
SUBJECT:  PLACEMENT OF HUMAN RIGHTS DAY OP-ED 
 
¶1. Post has placed A/S Lowenkron's op-ed on 
International Human Rights day, entitled "Helping 
the Impossible Become the Inevitable," in Arabic 
and English in the media outlets below.  The 
Arabic translation was done by Public Affairs 
Section personnel at post. 
 
-- Al-Sahwa.Net (news website of primary 
opposition Islah Party), December 11 (Arabic 
version) 
-- Al-Motamar.Net (news website of the ruling 
General People's Congress Party), December 11 
(Arabic and English versions) 
-- Raynews.Net (news website of liberal opposition 
Rabita Party), December 11 (Arabic and English 
versions) 
-- NewsYemen.Net (widely-read independent news 
site), December 14 (Arabic and English versions) 
-- The Yemen Times (bi-weekly independent English 
language newspaper), December 15 print edition 
(English version) 
 
¶2. Post appreciates the opportunity to distribute 
and place this and similar opinion columns in the 
Yemeni media.  For future such offerings, post 
offers two recommendations.  First, post suggests 
that op-eds be translated in Washington, at least 
into major world languages, to avoid duplicative 
effort (and to ensure consistency in language). 
Second, post suggests that op-ed authors ensure 
that a recent photograph is available on the State 
Intranet or at the Operations Center to 
accommodate last-minute requests. 
 
KHOURY