05SANAA2781
IMI: INVITATION FOR BIDS - IFB#30/05 FOR THE
Mon Sep 19 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Sanaa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

191346Z Sep 05UNCLAS SANAA 002781 
 
SIPDIS 
 
RIYADH - PASS TO FCS NANCY CHARLES-PARKER. JEDDAH - PASS TO 
FCS AND ATO. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON YM ECON COM
SUBJECT: IMI: INVITATION FOR BIDS - IFB#30/05 FOR THE 
CONSTRUCTION OF AL ASHMOUR - MASWAR DC AND BAIT SALAH RURAL 
ROAD IN YEMEN 
 
 
¶1. The Rural Access Program of the Ministry of Public Works 
and Highway is inviting international companies to bid to 
construct Al Ashmour - Maswar District RR (22.33 KM) & Bait 
Salah (8.30 KM) in Amran Province.  The Construction period 
is 16 months. 
 
¶2. Bidding will be conducted through the International 
Competitive Bidding (ICB) procedures specified in the World 
Bank's Guidelines. 
 
¶3. Qualifications requirements include: 
 
     Average annual construction turnover of twice the 
project cost. 
     Substantial completion of 2 similar nature projects. 
Availability of liquid assets and/or credit facilities USD 
400 thousand. 
Availability of the construction equipment. 
 
¶4. A margin of preference for eligible national 
contractors/joint ventures shall be applied. 
 
¶5. A complete set of bidding documents in English may be 
purchased by interested bidders on the submission of a 
written application to the address above and upon payment of 
a non refundable fee of USD 150 or the equivalent in any 
freely convertible currency, plus the cost of courier for 
overseas delivery of USD 50.  The method of payment will be 
cashier's check or direct deposit.  The bidding documents 
will be sent by courier for overse4as delivery.' 
 
¶6. Bids must be delivered to the address below at or before 
11:00 AM, OCT 19, 2005.  Electronic bidding shall not be 
permitted.  Late bids will be rejected.  Bids will be opened 
physically at 11:00 AM, OCT 19, 2005 in the presence of the 
bidders' representatives who choose to attend in person. 
 
¶7. All bids shall be accompanied by a bid security of USD 70 
thousands or an equivalent amount in a freely convertible 
currency. 
 
¶8. Interested eligible bidders may obtain further 
information from: 
 
     The Ministry of Public Works and Highways 
     Rural Access Project, Central Management Office 
(RAPCMO) 
     Off 60m Ring Road and Algiers St.  Near Sanaa Expo 
Center 
     P.O. Box: 16472 
     Fax: 00967-01-448106 
     Tel: 00967-01-448109/104/449442 
     E-mail: rapcmu@y.net.ye 
     Sanaa, Republic of Yemen 
 
Krajeski