05TAIPEI4295
TAIWAN AVIAN FLU UPDATE
Sun Oct 23 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TAIPEI 004295 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/RSP/TC, G, OES/IHA 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO AIT/W 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TBIO AMED SENV CASC ECON TW WHO
SUBJECT: TAIWAN AVIAN FLU UPDATE 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 151549 
     ¶B. TAIPEI 3598 
     ¶C. TAIPEI 3742 
     ¶D. TAIPEI 3713 
     ¶E. TAIPEI 4067 
     ¶F. TAIPEI 4264 
     ¶G. TAIPEI 04128 
     ¶H. TAIPEI 4160 
 
¶1.  (U) Summary: This is a periodic update to our baseline 
report on Taiwan's efforts to combat avian flu (ref D).  In 
recent days, Taiwan authorities discovered H5N1 avian flu 
virus in a shipment of birds smuggled from China.  The stock 
market declined on avian flu concerns.  Authorities conducted 
a nationwide drill and a new avian flu emergency response 
team has been established.  Authorities are planning to 
produce Tamiflu in case of need and are proposing to 
manufacture and distribute avian flu vaccine through APEC. 
Taiwan is subsidizing the cost of netting for poultry and 
swine farms.  End Summary 
 
Avian Flu Reaches Taiwan Border 
------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  Taiwan authorities announced that on OCT 20 a smuggled 
shipment of 1,037 wild birds from the PRC tested positive for 
H5N1 avian flu virus (H5N1).  In a correction to reftel (see 
ref F), only eight out of forty six birds that were tested 
had H5N1.  Authorities stressed that this detection does not 
mean that avian flu is present in Taiwan because the birds 
were intercepted while on the ship.  The birds were then 
quarantined and destroyed.  This was a second occurrence, 
with the first happening in December 2003 when another 
smuggled shipment of birds from the PRC also tested positive 
for H5N1.  However, as noted in reftel (see ref F), smuggling 
between the PRC and Taiwan is commonplace which means that 
there is a chance the disease is already present in Taiwan. 
 
¶3.  Concerns that avian flu will eventually reach Taiwan 
caused the stock price index to drop 136.63 points to 
5,694.16.  In the first 19 days of October, Taiwan,s stock 
index has declined 6.9 percent.  Industries related to 
medical care, however, benefited from the news reports about 
avian flu.  Pharmaceutical, biotech and medical care stocks 
posted gains. 
 
Drills 
------ 
 
¶4.  On Oct. 19, a nationwide drill simulated a possible avian 
flu epidemic in Taiwan.  The drill involved almost 100 
participants from the Council of Agriculture, Ministry of 
National Defense, Ministry of the Interior, Department of 
Health, Environmental Protection Administration and local 
governments.  The goals of the drill were to: test 
communication among different levels of government in an 
epidemic; improve public reporting of the disease; implement 
measures to protect workers that come into contact with the 
virus and the handling of infected birds.  Premier Frank 
Hsieh attended the drill and announced that Taiwan was 
prepared to meet any possible AI outbreak. 
 
Emergency Response 
------------------ 
 
¶5.  In addition to the extensive infection control measures 
that have been put in place since SARS (see ref D), Taipei 
city established an emergency response team ready to be 
activated if a human case of H5N1 occurs.  The team is 
comprised of 108 nurses and doctors who will assemble at 
Hoping Hospital in the event a human case of avian flu 
appears.  In addition, starting Oct. 22, Taiwan authorities 
are recommending that all primary and secondary schools in 
Taiwan begin taking daily temperature measurements of 
students and staff.  Unlike during SARS, Taiwan is not 
requiring temperature measurements before entering public 
buildings. 
 
¶6.  Since both cases of H5N1 in Taiwan have occurred in 
smuggled shipments from the PRC, the Taiwan Coast Guard has 
set up a hotline to report any cases of animal smuggling. 
Premier Frank Hsieh announced on Oct. 19 that there is a 
NT$20 million ( US$595,000 ) fund set aside to give monetary 
rewards to anyone who provides information on smuggling that 
leads to an arrest.  In addition, Taiwan's Center for Disease 
Control has a hotline to report any possible cases of avian 
flu. 
 
¶7.  Taiwan health officials indicated that the most effective 
way to combat the disease is to increase public awareness. 
The Department of Health has printed a large number of AI 
pamphlets and has begun circulating them around the island. 
In addition, airline passengers to Taiwan are being asked to 
self screen for possible avian flu symptoms (see ref G). 
 
Protecting Poultry and Swine Farms 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  Efforts to use netting to protect poultry and swine farms 
from migratory fowl that carry H5N1 has had limited success. 
Taiwan committed NT$1 billion (US$31.2 million) to subsidize 
50% of the cost of each net, with farmers paying for the 
rest.  By the end of 2005, the Council of Agriculture (COA) 
estimates that 240 poultry farms will be covered with nets, a 
fraction of the over two thousand poultry farms in Taiwan. 
COA plans to begin subsidizing netting at swine farms next 
year. 
 
Producing Tamiflu 
----------------- 
 
¶9.  Per ref H, Taiwan officials announced that they are 
prepared to produce a generic version of Tamiflu if human to 
human transmission of avian flu occurs in Taiwan.  Taiwan 
will reportedly grant compulsory licensing rights to the 
National Health Research Institute (NHRI), a government 
laboratory, to mass produce the drug in the case of an avian 
flu outbreak.  NHRI indicated that it would take 
approximately 3-5 months to produce a supply for one million 
people.  NHRI plans to manufacture semi-finished medication 
ready to be turned into Tamiflu in the event the patent 
holder grants permission or if there is an outbreak of avian 
flu.  DOH Minister Hou sent a letter to Franz B. Humer, CEO 
of the Swiss Roche Pharmaceutical Company requesting 
authorization to mass produce the antiviral drug. 
 
Providing Avian Flu Vaccine through APEC 
---------------------------------------- 
¶10.  On Oct. 18, Vice Foreign Minister Michael Kao said 
Taiwan is preparing a proposal for next month's APEC summit 
in Busan, South Korea to distribute avian flu vaccine through 
APEC to other countries.  Kao said that Taiwan has the 
expertise to produce such a vaccine, once it is developed, 
but is still working on a proposal due to the high research 
costs involved.  AIT is preparing a more detailed report in 
septel. 
KEEGAN