05TAIPEI4290
MEDIA REACTION: RUMSFELD'S CHINA TRIP, AVIAN
Fri Oct 21 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TAIPEI 004290 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - ERIC 
BARBORIAK 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW ESTH
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: RUMSFELD'S CHINA TRIP, AVIAN 
FLU, CHINA'S SPACE PROGRAM 
 
¶1. Summary: Major Chinese-language Taipei dailies gave 
extensive coverage October 21 on the Council of 
Agriculture's (COA) confirmation of the first case of 
avian flu in Taiwan, and the follow-up probe into the 
alleged Kaohsiung mass rapid transit system scandal. 
The COA's confirmation that some birds smuggled from 
China to Taiwan have tested positive for the H5N1 bird 
virus carried the front-page headlines in most major 
Taiwan newspapers. The pro-independence "Liberty 
Times," Taiwan's biggest daily, is the only newspaper 
that reported on former President Lee Teng-hui's speech 
in Washington DC on its front page.  The newspapers ran 
a banner headline on its front page that read: "Lee 
Teng-hui Speaks in Washington, Advocating the 
Rectification of Taiwan's Name and Writing a New 
Constitution." 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, Chinese 
Council for Advanced Policy Studies Secretary-General 
Andrew Yang commented on U.S. Defense Secretary Donald 
Rumsfeld's China trip in an opinion piece in the 
centrist, pro-status quo "China Times."  According to 
Yang, Rumsfeld's visit to China signified that the Bush 
administration is still fine tuning its China policy, 
but it is not an easy job for Washington and Beijing to 
break their long-term distrust via high-level military 
exchanges.   The "Free Talk" column of the pro- 
independence "Liberty Times" discussed Taiwan's first 
case of avian flu, saying that Taiwan should take 
effective action to stop Chinese goods from being 
smuggled into the island.  Wang Kun-yi, associate 
professor in Tamkang University's Graduate Institute of 
International Affairs and Strategic Studies, discussed 
China's space program in the limited-circulation, pro- 
independence, English-language "Taipei Times."  Wang 
said given the fact that Taiwan's opposition parties 
continue to obstruct the passage of the arms- 
procurement package in the legislature, China's efforts 
to enhance its advanced military capabilities will 
result in a growing imbalance in the cross-Strait 
military strength, which is of the utmost significance 
for Taiwan's ongoing security.  End summary. 
 
¶1. Rumsfeld's China Trip 
 
"Donald Rumsfeld's Visit to China" 
 
Andrew Yang, Secretary-General of the Chinese Council 
for Advanced Policy Studies, commented in an opinion 
piece in the centrist, pro-status quo "China Times" 
[circulation:400,000] (10/21): 
 
". The Bush administration stated clearly that 
Washington-Beijing relations are complex and that it 
hopes China will become as a stakeholder that joins the 
United States in sustaining the development of the 
international system.  [Bush's statement] indicated 
that the United States still, to a certain extent, 
distrusts China and that it hopes Beijing will take 
concrete actions or make changes in accordance with the 
United States' expectations and thinking.  This 
statement not only demonstrated the pragmatism shown in 
the Bush administration's China policy in its second 
term of office but also served as a major backdrop for 
the constant exchange of visits and interactions 
between American and Chinese high-ranking officials 
over the past year.  Since U.S. Defense Secretary 
Donald Rumsfeld has also jumped on this pragmatic 
wagon, it is a major purpose of his China trip this 
time to see if such a visit will be able to promote 
bilateral military interactions that will help to build 
mutual trust between the two sides.  Nonetheless, it is 
not easy for Washington and Beijing to break their long- 
term distrust via high-level military exchanges. 
 
"Before his departure for China, Rumsfeld had 
repeatedly and strongly questioned China's military 
expansions over the past few years and doubted 
Beijing's strategic intentions.  Rumsfeld's moves 
clearly indicated the core of Washington's mistrust 
toward China's military. . Rumsfeld's performance and 
attitude [in China] are an effective demonstration that 
there is still a long and difficult road for the 
military of both sides to establish mutual trust.  Even 
though the United States' military interactions with 
China seem pragmatic on the surface, but [in reality,] 
they still stuck to Rumsfeld's usual style and attitude 
toward China, namely, he can act softly but can also be 
very tough sometimes.  Such an atmosphere of military 
interaction between the United States and China seems 
unlikely to be changed during Bush's term of office. . 
 
"Rumsfeld's visit to China symbolized that the Bush 
administration is still fine tuning its China policy. 
But given the fact that President Bush's power will 
continue to grow weaker [as he moves toward the end of 
his second term], Washington-Beijing relations will 
remain swinging in the trials." 
 
¶2. Avian Flu 
 
"China's Bird Flu Attacks Taiwan" 
 
The "Free Talk" column of the pro-independence "Liberty 
Times" [circulation: 600,000] wrote (10/21): 
". The Council of Agriculture confirmed Thursday that a 
seized cargo of birds smuggled from China to Taiwan 
have tested positive for the H5N1 bird virus.  Even 
though these birds have been destroyed and chances are 
therefore slim for the avian flu to spread [in Taiwan] 
this time, this incident can be viewed as a major 
warning signal for the island.  If Taiwan continues to 
overlook the problem of growing smuggled Chinese goods 
into the island and fails to take effective action to 
prevent them, things such as harmful foods or guns will 
enter Taiwan that will deteriorate the island's social 
order and the health of Taiwan people.  An even worse 
case will be the bird flu which will be spread from 
China to Taiwan . and put all Taiwan people in the 
purgatory of plague. ." 
 
¶3. China's Space Program 
 
"PRC's Space Program a Concern for Taiwanese" 
 
Wang Kun-yi, associate professor in Tamkang 
University's Graduate Institute of International 
Affairs and Strategic Studies, said in the pro- 
independence, English-language "Taipei Times" 
[circulation: 30,000] (10/21): 
 
". Since 1992, China has included manned spacecraft in 
its national development planning, which was later 
dubbed the Shenzhou manned flight project.  China 
successfully launched its first unmanned spacecraft in 
¶1999.  With the launch of the Shenzhou VI this year, 
China's second manned space flight, the rapidity and 
efficiency of China's space program can be observed. 
 
"Missiles that are capable rapidly changing their 
course and altitude during flight are also being 
developed as part of China's space program.  These 
missiles will be better able to evade interception from 
missile defense systems and will be extremely efficient 
themselves at intercepting other missiles. 
 
"After China has acquired such technology, it will be 
able to use long-range missiles to successfully counter 
the US missile defense system, which is currently under 
development.  This is one of the reasons for the US' 
expression of concern over China's development of space 
technology. 
 
"While China continues to enhance its advanced military 
capabilities, the opposition parties in Taiwan continue 
to obstruct the passage of the arms-procurement package 
in the legislature.  As a result, there will be a 
growing imbalance in cross-strait military strength, 
which is of the utmost significance for Taiwan's 
ongoing security." 
 
KEEGAN