05TAIPEI4743
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Tue Nov 29 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TAIPEI 004743 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - ERIC 
BARBORIAK 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
Summary: The major Chinese-language Taiwan dailies gave 
significant reporting and editorial coverage on November 29 
to the campaigns and mud-slinging of Taiwan's 3-in-1 
elections, which will be held December 3.  Taiwan Think Tank 
Director for Foreign Policy Studies Lai I-chung commented on 
U.S.-China-Taiwan relations in an opinion piece in the 
centrist "China Times."  According to Lai, the United 
States' policy toward the Asia-Pacific region is 
transforming; it is changing from the `congagement' 
strategy, which sees China as the main target, toward a 
`tuning strategy' that is aimed at adjusting America's role 
in the Asia-Pacific region.  End summary. 
 
"United States' Asia-Pacific Policy Under Adjustment" 
 
Lai I-chung, Taiwan Think Tank Director for Foreign Policy 
Studies, commented in the centrist, pro-status quo "China 
Times" [circulation: 400,000] (11/29): 
 
"The United States' policy toward the Asia-Pacific area is 
under transformation!  Such a development is related to the 
rise of China, normalization of Japan, strategic about-face 
of South Korea, emergence of India, and the fact that the 
United States' composite  national strength is incapable of 
sustaining its `unilateral' requests.  Washington's entire 
Asia-Pacific policy has started to move from the 
`congagement' strategy which sees China as the main target 
toward a `tuning strategy' that is aimed at adjusting its 
[America's] role in the Asia-Pacific region. . 
 
"First, regarding its China policy, Washington is rid of its 
prior polarized `containment vs. engagement' view.  The 
speech by the U.S. Deputy Secretary of State at Asia Society 
in late September showed that Washington hopes that China 
will become a `stakeholder' that shares joint interests with 
the United States.  This change of perception [by 
Washington] is related to its realization of China's 
powerful strength and the deep co-dependence between the two 
nations.  As a result, the `containment' [policy] to counter 
China's rise and the `engagement' [policy] that attempts to 
change China are neither viable.  That is why Washington 
sought to persuade China to see which development direction 
would meet the common interests of both nations and [affirm 
to China] that it has no intention to [play a part] in 
China's `peaceful evolution.'  In the meantime, Washington 
has been re-organizing its cooperative relationships in the 
Asia-Pacific region so that it can be ready in the event 
China confronts the United States; Washington also sought to 
restore its influence in Asia, some of which has been 
nibbled away by China. 
 
"[Such a trend] explains why U.S. President George W. Bush, 
in his speech [delivered in Kyoto], hailed Taiwan's 
democracy and `encouraged' China to move toward democracy 
instead of `blaming' it for not being democratic.  Likewise, 
it also explains why the United States is seeking to enhance 
security and cooperative relations with major Asian nations, 
the United States' old allies in the region, and the 
countries neighboring China all at the same time. . 
 
"Judging from this perspective, unless China intends to go 
right ahead and challenge the United States' domain of 
influence in the Taiwan Strait, chances are slim for the 
United States and China to `co-manage' Taiwan.  But if pro- 
China or pro-U.S. forces arise inside Taiwan ., `co- 
management' will definitely occur under the request of 
strategic adjustment by the United States and China." 
 
PAAL