05TAIPEI2909
EZPEER NOT GUILTY OF COPYRIGHT INFRINGEMENT
Tue Jul 05 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TAIPEI 002909 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/RSP/TC AND EB/TPP/IPE, STATE PASS AIT/W, 
USPTO AND USTR, USTR FOR WINELAND, WINTERS AND FREEMAN, 
USDOC FOR 4431/ITA/MAC/AP/OPB/TAIWAN/MBMORGAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON KIPR TW IPR
SUBJECT: EZPEER NOT GUILTY OF COPYRIGHT INFRINGEMENT 
 
REF: A. TAIPEI 458 
     ¶B. TAIPEI 495 
 
 ¶1.  Summary: Taipei's Shilin District Court on June 30 
announced its decision on the criminal copyright infringement 
case based on a complaint brought by the International 
Federation of Phonographic Industries (IFPI) against 
peer-to-peer (P2P) software provider EZPeer.  The Court ruled 
that providing P2P service is not illegal under Taiwan law, 
that EZPeer did not illegally reproduce or transmit 
copyrighted materials, and that EZPeer is not guilty of 
copyright infringement.  The Taiwan branch of IFPI vowed to 
appeal the decision.  The Court's decision did not address 
the matter of civil liability and stated clearly that EZPeer 
members who use P2P services to transmit copyrighted 
materials may be prosecuted for criminal copyright 
infringement.  The decision is a blow to efforts to protect 
copyrights in Taiwan and illustrates the difficulties 
rightsholders face when using Taiwan's judicial process to 
protect their intellectual property (IP).  A specialized IPR 
Court could offer rightsholders more effective tools to 
protect their IP.  End Summary. 
 
================================ 
EZPeer Not Infringing Says Court 
================================ 
 
¶2.  The first of two criminal cases filed in December 2003, 
based on IFPI complaints that P2P service providers EZPeer 
and Kuro were illegally facilitating the infringement of IFPI 
member music companies intellectual property, was decided 
June 30 by the Taipei Shilin District Court.  EZPeer and its 
President Weber Wu were acquitted of all charges of 
infringing IFPI members intellectual property.  The judiciary 
is expected to reach a decision in the case against Kuro by 
September 2005. 
 
¶3.  In its ruling, the Court said that EZPeer did not engage 
in illegal reproduction, nor did it illegally publicly 
distribute the works of copyright holders.  The Court ruled 
that Taiwan law does not prohibit the use of P2P networks, 
and the law neither bans nor limits legitimate file-sharing 
activities.  However, the Court also said that its ruling 
only addressed the criminal complaint against EZPeer and did 
not have any bearing on any civil suit the copyright holders 
may file.  The Court also clearly stated that users of P2P 
services who engage in the transmission and reproduction of 
copyrighted works may be liable for criminal copyright 
infringement. 
 
¶4.  EZPeer's President Wu, in a press conference following 
the announcement of the verdict pledged to negotiate with the 
record companies on an appropriate licensing fee.  IFPI has 
previously dismissed EZPeer and Kuro proposed licensing fee 
offers as unacceptably low.  IFPI's Taiwan Secretary General 
Robin Lee vowed to appeal the Court's decision "to the end". 
Lee also told the press that IFPI plans to begin to target 
individuals in Taiwan for legal action, a strategy that he 
claimed has successfully reduced internet piracy in the U.S. 
 
================= 
TIPO Disappointed 
================= 
 
¶5.  The Director of Taiwan's Intellectual Property Office 
(TIPO) Copyright division (Margaret Chen) told AIT that TIPO 
was disappointed but that the administration had no choice 
but to respect the decision of the Court.  She added that she 
expects that the case is far from over and that TIPO would 
continue to support efforts to educate internet users and to 
crack down on copyright infringers. 
 
¶6.  Comment: The decision by the Shilin District Court is a 
blow to efforts to protect copyrights in Taiwan and 
illustrates the difficulties rightsholders face in educating 
the judiciary about proper protection of IPR.  That the judge 
encouraged IFPI to pursue civil damages against EZPeer is 
cold comfort.  The lack of credible civil or administrative 
remedies for IP holders in Taiwan means that virtually every 
case goes through the criminal courts, which require a higher 
standard of evidence to bring a conviction.  Most 
rightsholders prefer not to file civil suits because these 
require rightsholders to post a sizeable bond.  Civil suits 
can drag on for years, judgments are often difficult to 
enforce, and plaintiffs risk the loss of their bond if the 
judgment goes against them.  Taiwan has proposed creating a 
specialized IPR Court and continues to debate whether that 
court should hear criminal, civil, and administrative cases 
or be limited just to civil and administrative cases.  A 
court that hears all types of IPR-related cases could 
usefully increase the number of tools available for 
rightsholders as they attempt to protect their intellectual 
property.  End Comment. 
KEEGAN