05TELAVIV2294
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Wed Apr 13 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 TEL AVIV 002294 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1. Bush-Sharon Meeting 
 
¶2. U.S.-China-Israel Relations 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Ha'aretz reported that Prime Minister Ariel Sharon 
presented President Bush with the latest Israeli 
intelligence assessments of Iran's nuclear weapons 
program and called on Bush to step up the diplomatic 
efforts to prevent Tehran from developing a nuclear 
bomb.  The Iranian issue was the main point of Monday's 
discussion during the lunch Bush served at his ranch to 
Sharon and the Israeli officials who accompanied him. 
Yediot Aharonot reported that in a meeting with Vice 
President Cheney, Sharon called on the U.S. to initiate 
UN sanctions against Iran. 
 
Isreal Radio at 07:00 AM cited Israeli Ambassador to 
the United States Danny Ayalon as downplaying the 
disagreements that emerged between Sharon and President 
Bush, saying that many achievements were made during 
the visit and that Washington's agreement to help with 
the development of the Galilee and the Negev is only 
one example.  He told the radio that the US 
administration and Israel expect Abu Mazen to meet his 
commitments in accordance with the road map. 
 
Ha'aretz followed up on Foreign Minister Silvan 
Shalom's visit to Egypt, in which he yesterday 
presented Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak with a new 
Israeli road map for peace with Arab and Muslim states. 
According to Shalom, Israel will launch diplomatic ties 
with seven states; though the names of those states 
were not mentioned, they are believed to be mainly 
North African and Gulf states.  The Egyptian response 
to the proposal was cool, noting that while Arab 
countries were free to do as they liked, the Arab peace 
initiative offers Israel full normalization with all 
Arab countries in exchange for a withdrawal from 
Palestinian territories.  The sides agreed to create a 
panel headed by the Israeli and Egyptian foreign 
ministers to deal with outstanding matters between the 
two states.  Later, on TV Channel 10, Shalom complained 
about press leaks that made Chad decide not to 
establish diplomatic ties this year with Israel. 
 
In economic news, Ha'aretz covered the visit by Deputy 
Prime Minister and Trade Minister Ehud Olmert to Japan, 
saying Israel has asked Japan to consider negotiating a 
free trade area agreement.  Olmert proposed the idea to 
Japanese Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi at a meeting 
yesterday in Tokyo.  According to Olmert, a free trade 
agreement would significantly increase economic 
cooperation and trade between Israel and Japan. 
 
Ha'aretz cited Palestinian sources as saying that PA 
President Mahmud Abbas issued an order this week 
forbidding the commanders of the PA's security services 
from meeting with foreigners, including Israelis and 
Americans, without explicit permission from PA Interior 
Minister Nasser Yusuf.  The order was issued against 
the background of mounting mutual suspicion between 
Yousef and some of the security chiefs who believe he 
plans to replace them. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that, speaking during a tour of the 
Erez Crossing to the Gaza Strip, Defense Minister Mofaz 
said there will be no Palestinian laborers in Israel by 
2008, as funds from donor countries will help the PA 
develop an autonomous economy that will provide most of 
the jobs there. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that Police Commissioner Moshe Karadi 
will visit Jordan today for a series of meetings with 
his counterparts in Amman. The meetings, arranged 
several days ago, have remained under wraps at the 
request of the hosts. Karadi and the Jordanian officers 
will discuss the cooperation between both countries' 
police forces. 
 
----------------------- 
¶1. Bush-Sharon Meeting: 
----------------------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Left-leaning, independent Ha'aretz editorialized: "In 
Texas on Monday, George W. Bush and Ariel Sharon marked 
out the furthest borders that any Israeli prime 
minister can dream of." 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Aluf Benn wrote from Texas in 
left-leaning, independent Ha'aretz:  "Despite the good 
intentions, the results only emphasized and highlighted 
the basic difference between the two leaders.... That 
gap is worrisome.... Nonetheless, maybe it was good he 
[Sharon] went to Texas, just to hear from the horse's 
mouth where Bush wants to go, and thus learn how deep 
the differences run between them." 
 
Washington-based correspondent Orli Azulay-Katz opined 
in mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot:  "Above 
all, the U.S. President made it clear that friendship 
is important.  The problem is that Bush's current 
interest is to show the Arab world and Europe that he 
is not in Sharon's pocket." 
 
Veteran op-ed writer and the late prime minister 
Yitzhak Rabin's assistant Eytan Haber opined in the 
lead editorial of mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot 
Aharonot: "But perhaps the fact that the settlements 
and the disengagement plan were in the limelight was 
meant to distract attention from the real issue 
discussed on the Texas prairies: the Iranian nuclear 
threat.  This is the real issue that should be on the 
world's agenda.... Far-sighted leaders must start 
thinking what to do, and do it." 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
¶1.  "The Borders Were Marked in Texas" 
 
Left-leaning, independent Ha'aretz editorialized (April 
13): "In Texas on Monday, George W. Bush and Ariel 
Sharon marked out the furthest borders that any Israeli 
prime minister can dream of.... It's doubtful Israel 
will ever find a friendlier president than Bush, and 
one more combative toward its enemies.... From Bush's 
statement it is clear that there is a connection 
between tactic and strategy in American policy.  The 
final goal is to achieve an agreement between the 
sides, and movement toward that goal will proceed 
according to the road map.  Israel's first step is 
evacuating Gaza and the northern Samaria area.  The 
first Palestinian step is a constant, thorough and 
effective campaign against terror.  Bush dictated to 
Sharon some commandments of the 'thou shalt not' 
variety: do not expand settlements, do not leave the 
outposts in place and do not beef up existing 
settlements." 
 
¶2. "Bush is from Mars, Sharon is from Venus" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Aluf Benn wrote from Texas in 
left-leaning, independent Ha'aretz:  "It is difficult 
to describe a pair more different from one another than 
George W. Bush and Ariel Sharon.... The invitation to 
Sharon to visit Bush's estate was meant to appear to be 
the peak of their closeness and intimacy.... But 
despite the good intentions, the results only 
emphasized and highlighted the basic difference between 
the two leaders.... That gap is worrisome.  Either 
Sharon does not plan to reach 'the day after,' or he 
expects the world to wait on the sidelines 'until the 
Palestinians become Finns,' without any demands of 
Israel to progress.  That trick worked in the days of 
Yasser Arafat. It is difficult to repeat with Mahmoud 
Abbas, an American favorite.  They regard him as the 
last Palestinian with whom they can work, and therefore 
it is important he succeed.  Sharon found it difficult 
to say what he could do to help strengthen the 
Palestinian chairman.  It raises the question of why 
Sharon even bothered to make the trip all the way to 
Crawford.  What did he expect to achieve there?  He did 
not resolve the dispute with the administration over 
the construction in the settlement blocs, he only 
sharpened it.  He did not strengthen the Bush promise 
from last year, about the blocs being annexed to Israel 
in the future.  His demand that the road map be 
postponed until terror is uprooted was not accepted. 
Nonetheless, maybe it was good he went to Texas, just 
to hear from the horse's mouth where Bush wants to go, 
and thus learn how deep the differences run between 
them.  Bush is from Mars, Sharon is from Venus." 
 
¶3. "Disputed Visit" 
 
Washington-based correspondent Orli Azulay-Katz opined 
in mass-circulation, pluralist Yedi'ot Aharonot: 
"Sharon understood full well what the president said 
(three times) during the press conference in the ranch. 
He demanded sharply and clearly from the Israeli 
government not to expand the settlements.  Sharon stood 
at his side and emphasized that he seeks to establish 
territorial contiguity between Maale Adumim and 
Jerusalem.  This was not the only disputed issue during 
the meeting in Texas: Sharon tried to sell Abu Mazen to 
Bush as the bad boy of the Middle East.  Bush was not 
buying it.... The third dispute touched on the 
implementation of the road map: Bush sees the 
disengagement from Gaza as the beginning of the 
implementation of the road map, and demands that Sharon 
move on to the next stage after the implementation of 
disengagement.  Sharon is opposed.... Above all, the 
U.S. President made it clear that friendship is 
important.  The problem is that Bush's current interest 
is to show the Arab world and Europe that he is not in 
Sharon's pocket." 
 
¶4. "Welcome Back" 
 
Veteran op-ed writer and the late prime minister 
Yitzhak Rabin's assistant Eytan Haber opined in the 
lead editorial of mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot 
Aharonot (April 13): "In the Prime Minister's Office 
jargon, Sharon's recent U.S. visit is described as 'a 
maintenance trip.'  Both Jerusalem and Washington need 
a few meetings each year to 'refuel' their relations, 
update, and consult each other.  The price of that is, 
sometimes, presenting the disagreements, as indeed 
happened in Texas two days ago.  There is nothing 
special in the fact that Sharon was invited to Bush's 
private ranch.  Reports on a wonderful friendship in 
the wake of this private invite were exaggerated.  More 
than it shows friendliness, it reflects the President's 
healthy way of life: this is a time to rest before the 
upcoming summer vacation.... Judging from remarks made 
in Texas, it does not look like Bush danced with joy 
when he heard Sharon speak of 'settlement blocs' and 
personally did not repeat this definition, which Sharon 
deems important.... But perhaps the fact that the 
settlements and the disengagement plan were in the 
limelight was meant to distract attention from the real 
issue discussed on the Texas prairies: the Iranian 
nuclear threat.  This is the real issue that should be 
on the world's agenda.... Far-sighted leaders must 
start thinking what to do, and do it." 
 
------------------------------- 
¶2. U.S.-China-Israel Relations: 
------------------------------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                        ------- 
 
Senior military correspondent Ze'ev Schiff wrote in 
left-leaning, independent Ha'aretz:  "The people in 
charge of managing the negotiations in the difficult 
dispute with the Pentagon over the sale of defense 
supplies to China should internalize what happened 
recently between Washington and some European countries 
on the same issue.... The U.S. relationship with China 
is like an elephant path from which it is best to stay 
away." 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"Stay off the U.S.-China Elephant Path" 
 
Senior military correspondent Ze'ev Schiff wrote in 
left-leaning, independent Ha'aretz (April 13):  "The 
people in charge of managing the negotiations in the 
difficult dispute with the Pentagon over the sale of 
defense supplies to China should internalize what 
happened recently between Washington and some European 
countries on the same issue.... The U.S. relationship 
with China is like an elephant path from which it is 
best to stay away.... The problem is that the matter 
has deteriorated into personal levels, as if Defense 
Ministry Director General Amos Yaron decided on his own 
about every deal with China. If there was a violation 
of an agreement, it was by the system, and not by any 
single individual in it.  Israel argues that it is 
diligent not to harm vital American interests, but 
Washington is right when it says that those who should 
decide what is in America's interests, and what 
endangers America, are Americans, and not the Israeli 
Defense Ministry.... Clearly, there's no balance in 
this, since on the one hand there is a small ally and 
on the other an ally that is a great power and grants 
considerable defense aid to Israel. That imbalance is 
not only expressed in the dimensions of the parties. 
Often, Washington, not Israel, decides what endangers 
or does not endanger Israel in the defense sales it 
makes to Arab countries.  As the small partner, which 
expects to get advanced American technology -- for 
example, the future warplane -- Israel must accept the 
demands made by the larger and richer partner." 
CRETZ