05TELAVIV271
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Fri Jan 14 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 TEL AVIV 000271 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Mideast 
 
¶2.  Proposed Russia-Syria Arms Deal 
 
¶3.  Stanley Fischer's Bank of Israel Nomination 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
All media reported that six Israeli civilians were 
killed and five others were wounded in a combined 
double suicide attack at the Karni Crossing at the 
border with the Gaza Strip, the vital channel for trade 
between Israel and the Strip.  The attackers first blew 
up the separation wall between the Palestinian and 
Israeli sides of the passage.  Hamas, the Al Aqsa 
Martyrs Brigades, and the Popular Resistance Committees 
(PRC) claimed joint responsibility for the operation, 
which was allegedly carried out in response to Israel's 
killing of a West Bank militant and other Palestinians 
in recent days.  Yediot quoted associates of PM Sharon 
as saying that the attack is a "warning bell" to 
recently elected PA Chairman Mahmoud Abbas (Abu Mazen) 
that if he does not wake up in the face of terror, he 
will fail.  Yediot further quoted them as saying: "If 
the Palestinians will not take any steps against 
terror, it will be impossible to make any progress." 
Maariv writes that the attack was Hamas's "resounding 
response" to Abbas, who has in recent days delivered 
unambiguous messages to the Palestinian organizations, 
demanding that they stop attacks against Israel. 
 
Israel Radio reported that this morning, at a high- 
level meeting, Sharon decided to close all crossing 
points with the Gaza Strip until the Palestinians take 
relevant measures.   Writing before Thursday night's 
attack, Ha'aretz reported that the IDF is disappointed 
with Abbas's attitude toward the militant Palestinian 
organizations. 
 
In a feature story by its Washington correspondent on 
the life and politics of secretary of state-designate 
Condoleezza Rice, Jerusalem Post quoted one official 
with an American Jewish organization as saying that she 
is expected to maintain her special relationship with 
Israeli officials. 
 
Leading media reported that on Thursday, PM Sharon held 
a special high-level debate on enforcing the law during 
the Gaza pullout, both in cases of soldiers refusing to 
obey orders an in instance of violence toward the 
security forces during the evacuation of illegal 
outposts.  Israel Radio quoted Sharon as saying that 
the various enforcement branches of the GOI are not yet 
ready for the withdrawal.  Ha'aretz reported that 
settlement rabbis have been warning in recent days 
against giving a literal interpretation to a speech 
about civil war made 31 years ago by the late Rabbi Zvi 
Yehuda Hacohen Kook, who is considered the spiritual 
father of the settlement movement.  Leading media 
reported that Ami Ayalon, the co-initiator of the 
Peoples' Voice petition and a new member of the Labor 
Party, discussed the phenomena of disobedience and 
violence with settler leader Pinchas Wallerstein on 
Thursday.  Hatzofe quoted Ayalon as saying that 
"empathy and dialogue" with the settlers are missing in 
the government's approach to disengagement. 
 
Leading media quoted FM Silvan Shalom on Thursday that 
Jerusalem has asked Moscow not to go through with a 
sale of sophisticated weapons to Syria.  Shalom's 
statement was the first public GOI acknowledgement of 
the deal.  Ha'aretz reported that Russian Defense 
Minister Sergey Ivanov and U.S. Defense Secretary 
Donald Rumsfeld agreed Thursday on the details of a 
treaty limiting the sale of mobile ground-to-air 
missiles.  Ha'aretz quoted Ivanov as saying that he had 
not heard an explicit request not to sell missiles to 
Syria from his American interlocutors.  Leading media 
reported that on Thursday, Russia and Syria blamed 
Israel for the crisis over the planned weapons deal. 
 
Jerusalem Post reported that Sharon told visiting EU 
foreign policy chief Javier Solana on Thursday that 
Israel is willing to move directly from the 
disengagement plan into implementation of the road map 
if the PA fulfills its commitments to fight terror. 
 
Leading media reported that on Thursday, Sharon and 
Vice Premier Shimon Peres agreed that Peres would be 
entrusted with concentrating international efforts to 
develop the Gaza Strip's economy after Israel's 
pullout.  Maariv reported that Peres asked Sharon not 
to include the Shas party in his coalition before it 
supports the disengagement plan.  Maariv cited the 
response of Sharon associates that the government would 
not be able to survive without Shas. 
 
Ha'aretz and Jerusalem Post reported that on Thursday, 
the High Court of Justice ordered a halt to 
construction of large sections of the West Bank 
separation fence between Jerusalem and Maccabim after a 
petition was filed by Palestinian villagers. 
 
Citing AP, Ha'aretz reported that, in its annual report 
released on Thursday, Human Rights Watch said that 
human rights conditions remained grave in Iraq and 
Israel, and have shown little improvement. 
 
All media reported that former Yahad (Meretz) party 
leader Yossi Sarid, who abstained at the Knesset vote 
that endorsed Sharon's new government on Monday, and 
party leader Yossi Beilin sharply squabbled at the 
party's convention on Thursday. 
Ha'aretz (English Ed.) quoted Larry Garber, former 
USAID mission director for Gaza and the West Bank, an 
international monitor who has overseen some 25 
elections around the world, as saying: "The PA 
elections were the best organized and most professional 
I have ever seen."  The newspaper also reported that 
members of the Palestinian-American community 
celebrated this week's elections with guarded optimism, 
as they marked an important democratic process that 
they said was particularly significant to their dual 
identity. 
 
Prof. Shai Feldman, the outgoing director of Tel Aviv 
University's Jaffe Center for Strategic Studies (JCSS), 
was quoted as saying in an interview with Yediot that 
Iran is not an "adventurous adversary," that "it would 
not be prepared to sacrifice one third of its 
population on the altar of a nuclear conflict," and 
that Israel has the capability to produce deterrence 
against a nuclear Iran in the future.  Feldman also 
said that if Iran has nuclear weapons, Egypt and Saudi 
Arabia will also aspire to nuclear capability. 
 
Jerusalem Post cited a petition filed Thursday with the 
High Court of Justice by Arieh King, a far Right 
activist, according to which the Arab chairman of a 
committee that serves as an intermediary between police 
and East Jerusalem residents is selling burial plots to 
Muslims in an area classified by the state as an 
archeological site and national park. 
 
Ha'aretz cited figures released by Nefesh B'Nefesh, 
which together with the Jewish Agency facilitates 
almost all American immigration to Israel, as saying 
that less than 4 percent of American immigrants to 
Israel last year settled over the Green Line. 
 
A Ha'aretz/Dialogue poll found that Sharon's 
"disengagement government" enjoys the support of the 
majority of voters.  However, the poll also shows that 
while 38.3 percent of the public supports 
implementation of the disengagement plan, 37.5 percent 
back a referendum, and 17.1 percent want new elections. 
7.1 percent are undecided. 
The poll, taken following the formation of the new 
government, shows that were elections to be held now, 
Shinui would lose four of its 15 seats in the Knesset, 
while Yahad would strengthen from six to eight MKs. 
The Likud would lose three of its 40 MKs and the Labor 
Party's political strength would remain unchanged at 19 
seats in parliament. 
A Maariv/Teleseker poll: 
-"In view of the latest developments, do you believe 
that Sharon will eventually succeed in evacuating the 
settlements in the Gaza Strip and the northern West 
Bank?"  Yes: 69 percent; no: 28 percent. 
-"Do you believe that Israel should help Abu Mazen 
establish his status by making a gesture such as 
facilitating passage at roadblocks and the release of 
security prisoners?"  Israel should make such a gesture 
when Abu Mazen acts to prevent terror: 59 percent; 
Israel should not make such a gesture: 23 percent; 
Israel should make such a gesture: 17 percent. 
 
------------ 
¶1.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Regional correspondent Ronni Shaked wrote in mass- 
circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot: "Abu Mazen 
cannot go to a meeting with Sharon now, and cannot look 
Israel in the eye, unless he can prove that he, the new 
'rais,' is implementing his statements about disarming 
and halting terror." 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Shimon Shiffer wrote in Yediot 
Aharonot: "The Bush administration, as far as the 
Europeans are concerned, will be tested by its measure 
of involvement in resolving the bloody conflict between 
the Israelis and the Palestinians." 
 
Extreme right-wing columnist Caroline B. Glick wrote in 
conservative, independent Jerusalem Post: "What if the 
doomsday scenarios we hear on a daily basis, arguing 
that Israel is about to be overrun by the Arab womb, 
are ... part of an ingenious Palestinian plan to 
psychologically manipulate Israel into capitulating?" 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
¶I.  "Abu Mazen's Test" 
 
Regional correspondent Ronni Shaked wrote in mass- 
circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot (January 14): 
"Abu Mazen is highly embarrassed.  On Thursday, he was 
dealt the first blow below the belt, and from his own 
men -- the members of Fatah's Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades. 
This is a particularly painful blow, since in recent 
days he has been holding talks with Hamas in an attempt 
to secure a cease-fire, and those acting against him 
are his own people.  Abu Mazen cannot go to a meeting 
with Sharon now, and cannot look Israel in the eye, 
unless he can prove that he, the new 'rais,' is 
implementing his statements about disarming and halting 
terror.... He has no choice: He must act 
immediately.... If he does not act immediately, he will 
lose all the confidence that top Israeli officials have 
in him -- not only on the part of the Prime Minister, 
but also in the Israeli public, which has pinned its 
hopes on him.  If he does not act, he will undermine 
his standing in the U.S., and here too, it will 
ultimately hurt the Palestinians themselves.  The 
terror attack at the Karni crossing is also a severe 
blow to Gaza's economy.... The Palestinians in Gaza 
must understand this time that terror is a double-edged 
sword, and the suffering will be theirs." 
 
II.  "New 'Rais,' Old Operating Disk" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Shimon Shiffer wrote in Yediot 
Aharonot (January 14): "The Israeli side continues to 
absorb terror attacks....'The old Arik Sharon,' says a 
senior aide in the Prime Minister's bureau, 'would have 
already aimed threats at the Palestinian Authority. 
The new Arik holds back.... Sharon is careful not to 
make threats at the present time.  He does not want to 
spoil the optimistic atmosphere.  On Thursday, EU 
foreign policy chief Javier Solana came to Ramallah and 
Jerusalem.  Solana wanted to be the first statesman to 
meet with Abu Mazen after his victory in the elections. 
The Europeans believe the arrangement between Israel 
and the Palestinians to be the most acute issue in the 
region -- even more than ending the war in Iraq.  They 
intend to place the matter at the top of their agenda 
[in their talks with] the Americans.  The Bush 
administration, as far as the Europeans are concerned, 
will be tested by its measure of involvement in 
resolving the bloody conflict between the Israelis and 
the Palestinians.... More or less, what has been is 
what will continue to be: the Palestinians, with 
European backing, will apply pressure to launch 
negotiations on the comprehensive, final status 
arrangement; whereas the Israeli side will continue its 
preparations for evacuating the Gaza Strip and northern 
Samaria, and no more." 
 
III.  "The Demographic Bomb Is a Dud" 
 
Extreme right-wing columnist Caroline B. Glick wrote in 
conservative, independent Jerusalem Post (January 14): 
"While terrorism is the outward face of the post-modern 
aggressor, social psychology is perhaps his greatest 
weapon.  If the target population can be manipulated to 
view itself as the aggressor, if it can be brought to 
view its position as untenable, then it will sue for 
peace and surrender.... What if the doomsday scenarios 
we hear on a daily basis, arguing that Israel is about 
to be overrun by the Arab womb, are all based on 
fraudulent data -- part of an ingenious Palestinian 
plan to psychologically manipulate Israel into 
capitulating?  This week a team of American and Israeli 
researchers presented a study of the Palestinian 
population statistics at the American Enterprise 
Institute and the Heritage Foundation in Washington.... 
All of the team's comparative analyses led to the 
conclusion that the Palestinian population forecasts 
upon which Israel is basing its current policy of 
withdrawal and uprooting of Israeli communities in the 
territories are faulty in the extreme." 
 
------------------------------------ 
¶2.  Proposed Russia-Syria Arms Deal: 
------------------------------------ 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized: 
"Israel must act to solve the crisis in close 
cooperation with the Americans.... [But] neglecting 
[the diplomatic channel with Syria] ... is liable to 
turn out to be a double-edged sword." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"Strained Relations With Russia" 
 
Independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized 
(January 14): "It seems that the Russian-Syrian 
rapprochement is directed mainly at the Americans and 
the Europeans, who recently worked together against the 
Kremlin's candidate for the Ukrainian presidency. 
Israel found itself involved in this wrestling match, 
to its detriment.... Political figures in Jerusalem 
made it clear that in its attempt to prevent the arms 
deal, Israel will be careful not to ruin relations with 
Moscow.  This approach is justified mainly because of 
the importance of ties with Russia.  Israel must act to 
solve the crisis in close cooperation with the 
Americans -- who are afraid that the Russian weapons to 
be sold to Syria will fall into the hands of hostile 
elements in Iraq.  In addition, Israel should look into 
the nature of the Syrian channel. Neglecting it -- one 
reason being the groundless claim that there is no 
point in negotiating with a weak partner -- is liable 
to turn out to be a double-edged sword." 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
¶3.  Stanley Fischer's Bank of Israel Nomination: 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
Chief Economic Editor and senior columnist Sever 
Plotker "advised" Bank of Israel governor-designate 
Stanley Fischer in mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot 
Aharonot: "Your glory as a leading international 
economist won't allow you to hide behind the walls of 
the Bank of Israel.... [Nonetheless,] feel at home ... 
this is your home as well as mine." 
 
Columnist Ari Shavit wrote in independent, left-leaning 
Ha'aretz: "Israeli society and Israeli democracy are 
not capable of bearing the moral costs of this 
unacceptable postmodern appointment." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
¶I.  "Advice to a New Immigrant" 
 
Chief Economic Editor and senior columnist Sever 
Plotker "advised" Bank of Israel governor-designate 
Stanley Fischer in mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot 
Aharonot (January 14): "Shortly after you successfully 
go through immigration procedures, arrange a meeting 
with the chairman of the Histadrut labor federation. 
He is the second most important person in Israel's 
economy.  You'll see how much you'll need his quiet 
support.... The percentage of Israelis living in 
poverty is the highest one in the Western world -- 
twice of that in America.... Your glory as a leading 
international economist won't allow you to hide behind 
the walls of the Bank of Israel and to claim that your 
only interest is monetary policy management and banking 
supervision.  More, much more is required of you.... 
Break with the treasury.  The Finance Ministry under 
Binyamin Netanyahu has accumulated a huge power.... 
Relinquish American citizenship -- neither immediately, 
nor with a suspicious delay.... Don't take everything 
to heart.  Rough, strident Israelis are only immigrants 
or children or grandchildren of immigrants.  Feel at 
home, Stanley Fischer, this is your home as well as 
mine." 
 
II.  "A Postmodern Governor" 
 
Columnist Ari Shavit wrote in independent, left-leaning 
Ha'aretz (January 14): "With all due respect to [Bank 
of Israel governor-designate Stanley] Fischer, he has 
not been a partner to our destiny until now.  The vice 
president of Citigroup accompanied us from Wall Street, 
and empathized with us from Wall Street, but did not 
take an active part in our lives.  He was not with us 
during our military service.  He was not with us during 
the trials of Israeli civilian life.  He was not with 
us during our aliyah (immigration) or our absorption of 
aliyah.  Not in peace and not in war.  Not in the sweat 
of reserve duty, and not in the exasperation of trying 
to obtain a mortgage.  Therefore, in the most profound 
sense, the man who was a candidate for the U.S. Federal 
Reserve Bank is not part of our glory.  Nor can he 
become one of the leaders of our community 
overnight.... It's true that the Israeli economy is 
likely to profit from Fischer's appointment.  But 
Israeli society and Israeli democracy are not capable 
of bearing the moral costs of this unacceptable 
postmodern appointment." 
KURTZER