05WARSAW3914
DEPUTY PM STRESSES LAW, VISAS IN MEETING WITH
Fri Nov 25 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Warsaw
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS WARSAW 003914 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KCRM CVIS PL
SUBJECT: DEPUTY PM STRESSES LAW, VISAS IN MEETING WITH 
AMBASSADOR 
 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY: In Ambassador Ashe's November 23 introductory 
call on Deputy Prime Minister and Interior Minister, Ludwik 
Dorn, discussion focused on law and order issues but also 
included visas as well as next-generation national 
leadership.  The Ambassador underscored his desire to host a 
luncheon for Dorn and new provincial governors sometime in 
Spring 2006.  END SUMMARY. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Enthusiasm About Law Enforcement Cooperation 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) Ambassador Ashe was one of the first to meet with Dorn 
in his official capacity.  (Dorn was named Interior Minister 
October 31 and Deputy PM November 21.)  After an exchange of 
pleasantries, Dorn immediately underscored Poland's desire to 
"assess and intensify" Poland's already close law enforcement 
cooperation with the US.   Noting that the bilateral 
relationship had been particularly fruitful on Internal 
Affairs/Homeland Security, Dorn provided Ambassador with a 
list of possible US training and cooperative programs for 
Polish law enforcement officials.  Ambassador recalled his 
success as Mayor of Knoxville, Tennessee, in lowering the 
crime rate without busting the budget by redeploying existing 
police from desks to patrol cars.  Dorn replied that he hoped 
to increase the number of cops on the beat in Poland by 50% 
with a similar approach.  He also foreshadowed a plan to 
replace the Deputy Chief of Police for logistics with a 
civilian expert, in an effort to increase agency transparency 
and efficiency.  Dorn also asked for US help in selecting an 
integrated nationwide communications system for law 
enforcement and emergency response services, "either the 
Tetra system or something else."  (n.b. Under the Lockheed 
Martin F-16 offset program, U.S. firm Motorola and Polish 
partners have been seeking a no-bid tender for the Polish 
Tetra system.  Embassy has been providing commercial advocacy 
in this case.) 
 
------------------ 
Concern over Visas 
------------------ 
 
¶3. (U) Ambassador thanked Dorn for Polish cooperation in the 
bilateral "Visa Roadmap" process, an effort to address Polish 
concerns over US non-immigrant visa policies, and asked 
Dorn's help in insuring that a DHS team coming to review the 
Immigration Advisory Program (IAP) at Warsaw Airport meet 
with the appropriate GOP officials.  Dorn concurred and noted 
a desire to "accelerate" the Visa Roadmap.  The Ambassador 
sympathized with Dorn's concerns and promised to keep the 
dialogue open with appropriate US authorities.  Dorn 
concluded, "I do not want to burden you, but this is a 
problem." 
 
------------------------------------------ 
The Next Generation of National Leadership 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶4. (U) The Ambassador noted that it was more common for city 
mayors to rise to national leadership in Europe than in the 
US.  Dorn cited Adenaeur, Chirac and Kaczynski as famous 
examples of European mayors elevated to national leadership. 
The two recalled that Poland's President-elect, Lech 
Kaczynski had mentioned that being Mayor of Warsaw was his 
toughest job.  The Ambassador said he hoped to invite Dorn 
and new wojewodas (provincial governors) to lunch sometime 
next Spring.  (n.b. The 16 wojewodas are political appointees 
of the government in power, under the supervision of the 
Minister of Interior.  Dorn is expected to nominate the new 
wojewodas within the next two weeks.) 
ASHE