05WELLINGTON613
USDA COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR U.S. SECRETARY OF
Fri Aug 12 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 WELLINGTON 000613 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USDA FOR FAS/FAA/YOUNG AND HODGE, FAS/ISS BUDGET STAFF, 
OIG/HOLST 
 
E.O 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR NZ
SUBJECT: USDA COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR U.S. SECRETARY OF 
AGRICULTURE MICHAEL O. JOHANNS AND DELEGATION 
 
TOFAS 08 
 
REF USDA FAS 673310 AND USDA 673342 
 
¶1. Embassy grants country clearance for U.S. Secretary of 
Agriculture Michael O. Johanns; Press Secretary Edgar 
Loyd; Under Secretary J.B. Penn; Foreign Agricultural 
Service Administrator A. Ellen Terpstra; FFAS Special 
Assistant Jennifer Ehn, OIG Special Agent James Holst; 
and OIG Special Agent Mark S. Hopko to travel to Auckland 
and Hamilton New Zealand, August 21 - August 23. Country 
Clearance also is granted for OIG Special Agent 
Christopher J. Acton and Director of Advance W. Scooter 
Slade to travel to Wellington, Hamilton, and Auckland 
August 17 to August 23 to support the visit of the 
Secretary. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
¶2. Secretary Johanns and delegation will be met upon 
arrival at Auckland airport and ground transportation 
provided as per travel arrangements sent under separate 
cover. 
 
¶3. Point of contact at the American Embassy is the 
Agricultural Attache David Rosenbloom.  His contact 
details are: 
 
Tel: 64-4-462-6012 
Cell phone: 64-274-512-534 
Fax: 64-4-462-6016 
Email: david.rosenbloom(at)usda.gov 
 
¶4.  Travelers can exchange currency at the airport upon 
arrival and ATM machines are readily available throughout 
New Zealand. 
 
¶5.  Biosecurity Fines: 
 
The government of New Zealand instituted fines for non- 
declared biosecurity hazards on travelers entering New 
Zealand with undeclared plant, animal or food material. 
Travelers found carrying these undeclared items will be 
immediately fined NZ$200 (US $150).  Biosecurity is a 
serious issue in New Zealand and fines will be 
administered immediately and without warnings. 
 
¶6.  Security Assessment: 
 
There are no local terrorist groups or support groups 
believed to be operating in New Zealand at this time.  In 
light of the worldwide security alert all visitors should 
heighten their security awareness and report any unusual 
incidents to the regional security office. 
 
b.  Anonymous telephonic threats and obscure threat mail 
have occasionally targeted U.S. diplomatic missions in 
New Zealand.  In response to U.S. policies and actions, 
various groups in New Zealand have demonstrated 
occasionally at the embassy in Wellington and at the 
consulate in Auckland.  These demonstrations were of a 
small scale and were peacefully conducted.  During these 
demonstrations, the host country police and protective 
services provided adequate protection to the embassy and 
consulate. 
 
c.  While New Zealand is considered a low threat crime 
environment, Wellington and Auckland have experienced an 
increase in violent and petty crimes.  Home invasion 
robberies and assaults, once very rare, are becoming more 
frequent.  Burglaries and thefts occur countrywide. 
Visitors should be aware that street crime is a daily 
occurrence in the larger cities, including Wellington and 
Auckland.  Common sense precautions should be taken, 
especially at night, to avoid becoming a target of 
opportunity. 
 
d. All forms of public transportation are generally safe 
at all times of the day. 
 
¶7.  USDA approval is requested for estimated costs 
incurred by the Embassy to support Secretary Johanns' 
travel to New Zealand as follows: 
 
Airfare          $2,300 
 
Per Diem         $4,100 
 
Overtime         $4,000 
 
Control Room/ 
Hospitality      $1,400 
 
Control Room/ 
Equipment    $250 (Room will include two computers 
                         with internet access, printer, 
                         and fax/copier 
 
Control Room 
DDI Lines/internet $200 
 
Cell Phone Rental  $175 (Estimate does not include usage 
                         charges.) 
 
Office Supplies    $100 
 
Vehicle Rental    $350 
 
¶8.  Representation costs associated with reception at 
at 
Langham Hotel on August 22 are estimated at $3,900.  This 
includes food and beverage costs for approximately 100 
guests representing New Zealand government, farm, 
agribusiness, and general business communities.  Post 
requests that FAS Wellington's representational funds 
authorized under Post's GA be increased to reflect this 
cost. 
 
¶9.  Daily room rate at the Langham Hotel is $174, 
including 12.5 percent GST.  This rate includes 
breakfast.  Lodging authorized for Auckland is $144. 
Embassy recommends that travel orders reflect actual 
lodging costs allowed. 
 
¶10.  Expenses incurred by OIG Agents for requested and 
authorized services and equipment, including estimated 
cost for two rental vehicles and cell phones (does not 
include phone usage charges) of $1,200 will be charged to 
separate accounting classification provided reftel. 
BURNETT