06ADANA20
SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY FOR JANUARY 30,2006
Tue Jan 31 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ADANA 000020 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU ADANA
SUBJECT: SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY FOR JANUARY 30,2006 
 
 
This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary for January 30, 
Â¶2006.  Please note that Turkish press reports often contain 
errors or exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch for 
the accuracy of the reports summarized here. 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
HTTP://WWW.NTV.COM.TR:  A bomb, presumably a percussion bomb, 
went off in the ladies' room of the Malatya Governor's Office. 
Security measures have been taken and bomb squad teams 
reportedly started examining the spot. (This summary is from a 
01/28 article.) 
 
YENI SAFAK / EVRENSEL / CUMHURIYET / RADIKAL / OZGUR GUNDEM / 
HURRIYET:       Police Officer Hakan Acil, who was kidnapped on 
October 9, 2005 on a road between Mardin and Sirnak provinces, 
was released by 15 PKK members in northern Iraq.  Two members 
from the delegation that was set up to save the police officer 
(see press summaries 01/03, 01/04 and 01/23) and Acil's father 
Muammer Acil reportedly took Acil from a village in Zaho. 
Turkish military and police officers, who heard that Acil would 
be released, blockaded the Habur border gate in Silopi and 
raised the security threat level at the border.  As the 
delegation waited at the Habur Border Gate, Turkish special team 
members entered Zaho with three military vehicles.  (This 
summary is from a 01/28 editions.) 
 
OZGUR GUNDEM:   Police Officer Hakan Acil, who arrived at 
Habur border gate on Friday at 1.30 p.m., went to Sirnak 
following the completion of the judicial investigation 
processes.  Acil paid a visit to the Sirnak Governor and thanked 
him on Saturday morning.  Acil reportedly said that in last 68 
days of the 111 days he was held hostage, he had been in Iraq. 
Acil further said that he was eager to go back to his hometown 
and see his family there.  (This summary is from a 01/29 
edition.) 
 
EKSPRES / BOLGE:        Investigation on an explosion that took place 
near the Children Protection Branch of the Adana Security 
Directorate has been continuing.  The bomb reportedly caused 
minor wounds in two people and material damage on a car.   (This 
summary is from a 01/28 edition.) 
 
ZAMAN / BOLGE / EKSPRES / EVRENSEL / SABAH (GUNEY):     Support 
for the workers of TEKEL Cigarette Factory in Adana has been 
growing, reported the daily.  Yesterday marked the 20th day of 
the workers' strike.  Yesterday, CHP (Republican People's Party) 
deputies, CHP's provincial and district women and youth 
branches, CHP's Commission Probing the Closure of the Tekel 
Cigarette Factories, and CHP members paid a visit to the workers 
to show their support for them.  Following the talks of the CHP 
members with the representatives of the workers in the CHP Adana 
premises, CHP members started a march on D-400 road, which ended 
at the cigarette factory. 
 
EKSPRES:        The TEKEL Cigarette Factory in Adana has not been 
operating for two months, reported the daily, because of the 
strike launched by its workers against the decision of the 
Privatization Authority to close down the factory. 
 
EVRENSEL / OZGUR GUNDEM:        Authorities from the Security 
Directorate and Jandarma reportedly talked with the chairperson 
of the Turkish Parliamentary Commission Probing the Semdinli 
Case on the phone and allegedly demanded that commission members 
keep the information provided to the commission confidential. 
 
EVRENSEL / OZGUR GUNDEM:         As a result of tests confirming 
avian influenza in three chickens in Samsun's Salipazari 
district, officials imposed quarantine in the district and in 
its several villages and started slaughtering poultry animals. 
 
OZGUR GUNDEM:   Two persons were allegedly kidnapped by JITEM 
(Jandarma Intelligence Center) members in Usak province as they 
were traveling from Adana province in southeastern Turkey to 
Izmir on the west coast.  Sister of Abdulaziz Yilmaz, one of the 
victims of alleged kidnapping, applied to Adana Human Rights 
Association concerning the case. 
 
RADIKAL / OZGUR GUNDEM: Fifth International Congress on 
Disappeared People will be held between May 16 and May 20 in 
Diyarbakir. The conference will be sponsored by ICAD 
(International Committee against Disappearances) and YAKAY-DER 
(Turkish Solidarity Association for People Whose Relatives 
Disappeared).  Meanwhile, YAKAY-DER Chairperson Pervin Buldan 
said during a press announcement that the case of Serdar Tanis 
and Ebubekir Deniz, who allegedly disappeared in 2001 at the 
Silopi Jandarma Command (see press summaries 01/23 and 24), will 
be on the agenda of the congress. 
 
EVRENSEL / OZGUR GUNDEM:        Village guards reportedly 
intervened when youth attempted to march in a quarter of the 
Sirnak province to protest the recent 20-day confinement of 
terrorist leader Abdullah Ocalan in his prison cell, which ended 
as of January 19.  A village guard was reportedly wounded as a 
result of the incident.  Meanwhile, the rolling hunger strike, 
which was started in Silopi three days ago to protest 
confinement of Ocalan in his cell, continues, and the second 
group took turns fasting. 
 
OZGUR GUNDEM:   Artist Ferhat Tunc, who has been invited by 
Freemuse (Free Arts Association) and International PEN, will 
deliver a speech in the Parliament of Denmark tomorrow.  Ferhat 
Tunc has been on trial in Turkey for two cases: 1-He faces 
charges under Article 301 of the Turkish Penal Code because of 
an article he wrote for Ozgur Gundem daily, 2-He faces charges 
for being a member of an unauthorized delegation that was set up 
to save Private Coskun Kirandi, who was kidnapped on the 
Tunceli-Pulumur road on July 11, 2005 by PKK terrorists (see 
press summary 01/03). 
 
ZAMAN / EVRENSEL:       A flag that was hung on a mast in an 
industrial area in Osmaniye's Kadirli district was brought down 
and burned partially by unknown person(s).  Two local chambers 
of assorted artisans and craftsmen condemned the incident. 
 
 RADIKAL:       Reportedly, a serious shortage of doctors has become 
a central issue for public hospitals especially in the four 
provinces of Adana, Osmaniye, Mersin and Kahramanmaras.  This 
shortage was reportedly triggered when the SSK (Social Security 
Institute) began to purchase some of the health services from 
the private sector. 
REID