06ADANA5
SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY FOR DECEMBER 30, 2005
Wed Jan 04 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ADANA 000005 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU ADANA
SUBJECT: SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY FOR DECEMBER 30, 2005 
 
 
This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary for December 30, 
Â¶2005.  Please note that Turkish press reports often contain 
errors or exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch for 
the accuracy of the reports summarized here. 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
EVRENSEL / OZGUR GUNDEM:        Diyarbakir's BAKEV (Wildfower 
Women's Center) in the Baglar quarter conducted a survey on 
women and family.  Results of the survey showed 86 percent of 
the families in the Baglar quarter were suffering seriously from 
very low standards of living and most families were on the brink 
of starvation.  According to the survey 31 percent of women 
suffered from violence and 51 percent of women were made to 
marry at a minor age. 
 
EVRENSEL / OZGUR GUNDEM:        According to the daily, Hakkari 
Governor Erdogan Gurbuz did not provide information to the 
Turkish Parliament's commission probing the Semdinli Case 
allegedly on grounds that he did not want to divulge state 
secrets.  Ozgur Gundem interpreted Gurbuz's attitude as an 
 
SIPDIS 
attempt to hold "JITEM establishment" immune against the 
prosecution process. 
 
EVRENSEL:       Zubeyir Amber, Hatay deputy from ANAP (Motherland 
Party), submitted a question to the Turkish Parliament and 
solicited information from the Minister of Foreign Affairs about 
the "secret" NATO radar facility that was established in Hatay's 
Arsus district.  Amber asked which international agreement 
allowed the building of such a facility to watch Middle East, 
and which country will make use of that facility. 
 
SABAH / HURRIYET:       Van's 3rd Heavy Penalty Court decided Van 
Centennial University rector Yucel Askin will not be held under 
arrest during his prosecution process.  The court ordered the 
rector's release today following a unanimous decision. 
 
HURRIYET:       Fourth Heavy Penalty Court initiated a lawsuit 
regarding the case of Hikmet Fidan, former national chairperson 
of HADEP (People's Democracy Party), who was kidnapped and 
murdered on July 6.  Charges were brought against two of the 
three defendants in the case claiming that they surrendered 
Fidan to his assassin.  Human Rights Association executives, Bar 
Association Chairperson Sezgin Tanrikulu, and spokesperson of 
Kurd-Der (Kurdish Association), which is known for its anti-PKK 
stance, attended the court hearing as observers.  Five of the 
attorneys for Fidan's family did not attend the court hearing on 
grounds that they were being threatened by the PKK. 
 
OZGUR GUNDEM:   On the eve of the New Year, farmers breeding 
turkeys have been badly affected by the outbreak of avian 
influenza in Igdir's Aralik district, and by the Ministry of 
Agriculture's latest sanctions on the selling of poultry in the 
markets. 
 
OZGUR GUNDEM:   Daily operations at the Habur Border Gate in 
Sirnak nearly came to a halt because of the ongoing 
anti-corruption operation at the gate.  The daily separately 
noted that nothing had been done about the well-known and 
long-established bribery mechanism at the gate. 
 
OZGUR GUNDEM:   The grave of a PKK militant was reportedly 
damaged by unidentified people in Tunceli's Orenonu village. 
The family of the militant claimed that soldiers damaged the 
grave as they were returning from a military operation on 
December 23. 
 
OZGUR GUNDEM:   Democratic Society Party administration 
announced that the governing AK Party and CHP (Republican 
People's Party), two major parties of Turkey, namely  have 
formed an alliance against the Kurds and dismissed any 
possibility that would pave the way for lowering the national 
election threshold. 
 
REID