06ADANA4
SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY FOR DECEMBER 29, 2005
Wed Jan 04 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ADANA 000004 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU ADANA
SUBJECT: SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY FOR DECEMBER 29, 2005 
 
 
This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary for December 29, 
Â¶2005.  Please note that Turkish press reports often contain 
errors or exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch for 
the accuracy of the reports summarized here. 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
ZAMAN / HURRIYET / OZGUR GUNDEM:        While authorities demanded 
additional detention period from the Prosecutor's Office for 10 
persons detained in connection with the anti-corruption 
operation at Sirnak's Habur Border Gate in order to continue 
suspecs' interrogation process, the operation at the Gate has 
concentrated its scrutiny on the police and military checkpoints 
where trucks are regularly being examined before crossing the 
border.  According to the allegations of bribery, instead of 
waiting for 15 days at a 40-kilometer queue, truck owners are 
reportedly paying money ranging between 100 and 400 USD to the 
officers to prioritize and shorten their customs procedures. 
 
HURRIYET:       Ministry of Foreign Affairs said that Turkish 
authorities cannot be held liable since action was brought 
against the suspects of the case of Abdullah Canan, the son of 
CHP (Republican People's Party) lawmaker Esat Canan's uncle, who 
was allegedly detained on February 17, 1996 in Van and his 
tortured dead body was found under a bridge in Van's Esendere 
quarter.  The court acquitted them as a result of the judicial 
proceedings, said Ministry officials.  According to the family, 
the judiciary "did not penalize the perpetrators" and redress 
the family's suffering.  The family applied to the European 
Court of Human Rights (ECHR) and it recently submitted as 
evidence the photographs of the victim at the place the victim 
was found.  The family rejected Ministry's 30,000 euro 
compensation proposal for amicable solution to the case. 
 
OZGUR GUNDEM / ZAMAN:   Musa Sivacioglu, Chairperson of the 
Turkish Parliament's commission for probing the Semdinli Case 
(TPCSC), said that the commission requested information from 
various offices including the National Jandarma Command (NJC). 
NJC's Intelligence Service Chairperson Mehmet Corten brought the 
information requested in person, and the allegations in the 
media that the visit was kept secret are false, said Sivacioglu. 
 Meanwhile, Hakkari Governor Erdogan Gurbuz and Semdinli 
Subgovernor Mustafa Cihat Feslihan told the commission that they 
were not knowledgeable about the intelligence undertakings of 
the two officers in Semdinli during the November 9 bombing in a 
bookstore. 
 
OZGUR GUNDEM:   Abdullah Tufan, a person in Adana's Seyhan 
district, filed a complaint with the Adana Chapter of the Human 
Rights Association for police's alleged four raids conducted at 
his house and business within 24 hours.  Tufan claimed that the 
police officers treated him badly. 
 
ZAMAN / OZGUR GUNDEM:   Sabri and Cetin Yagizer, the nephews of 
the Baskale Municipality Mayor (from AKP) in Van, claimed that 
two commissioned officers and a teacher attempted to kidnap them 
on December 24.  The two people, who barely freed themselves 
from this attempt, filed a complaint with the prosecutor's 
office.  The suspects gave their statements to the prosecutor's 
office and were released to await trial. 
 
OZGUR GUNDEM:   A lawsuit has been instituted against Mehmet 
Can Demir, former DEHAP Bitlis Provincial Chairperson, because 
of a press announcement he made on September 1.  Demir allegedly 
referred to PKK terrorists as "guerillas" during his speech and 
demanded an end to the policy of isolating prisoners in jails, 
particulary referring to the case (of terrorist leader Adullah 
Ocalan).  Meanwhile, Abdurrahman Dogar, former DEHAP Van 
Provincial Chairperson, who was detained following a raid 
conducted at his house on September 17 because of his speech 
"making a propaganda of the PKK and inciting people to 
violence", has still not been brought before the court although 
it has been four months since his arrest. 
 
ZAMAN / OZGUR GUNDEM:   An investigation has been started 
against former DEP (Democracy Party) deputies Selim Sadak and 
Hatip Dicle on charges that they took part in a television 
program of pro-PKK Roj TV on September 21 and made statements in 
a manner that "praised offensive actions and offenders." 
 
SABAH / HURRIYET / OZGUR GUNDEM / EVRENSEL:     Bird flu has 
been detected in the Igdir province of the eastern Turkey.  The 
temporary quarantine imposed has been prolonged and 350 poultry 
have been slaughtered as a precaution.  The tests revealed that 
H5 avian infuenza was the cause of the poultry deaths.  The 
officials ensured that the losses of the farmers will be 
compensated for. 
 
SABAH / HURRIYET:       The daily reported that Diyarbakir's Soz TV 
station and Sanliurfa's Medya FM radio station will start 
broadcasting in Kurdish as of January 15.  RTUK (Higher Board of 
Radio and Television) said that the other eight stations, which 
applied to obtain authorization for broadcasting in non-Turkish 
languages and dialects, will be able to obtain their licenses if 
they complete their missing application documents.   Meanwhile, 
it is reported that state-run TRT TV station and other private 
stations will join efforts to build satellite antennae in the 
southeastern region to enhance their broadcasting capabilities 
and to prevent pro-PKK Roj TV to gain wider audience in the 
region. 
REID