06AITTAIPEI3669
MEDIA REACTION: U.S. ARMS SALES TO TAIWAN
Fri Oct 27 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #3669/01 3000921
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 270921Z OCT 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2781
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5835
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 7051UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 003669 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - DAVID FIRESTEIN 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S. ARMS SALES TO TAIWAN 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies gave 
significant news coverage to AIT Taipei Director Stephen Young's 
press conference Thursday, which focused on U.S. arms sales to 
Taiwan.  Coverage also focused on the investigation results of the 
Presidential allowance for state affairs case; and other local 
political issues.  The pro-independence "Liberty Times," Taiwan's 
largest-circulation daily, front-paged a banner headline that said 
"Stephen Young: Arms Procurement Bill Should Be Passed This Fall." 
The paper also ran a banner headline on page three that read 
"Presidential Office: U.S. Gravely Concerned about Military 
Imbalance across the Taiwan Strait."  The pro-status quo "China 
Times," however, ran a banner headline on page two that said "Time 
Will Be Missed if [Arms Procurement Bill] Is Not Passed the Fall; 
Stephen Young Gives Ultimatum Regarding the Arms Procurement Bill." 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, a "Liberty Times" 
analysis said the United States has had enough of Taiwan's 
in-fighting, which even trumps the island's national defense.  A 
separate "Liberty Times" analysis said Young's remarks represented 
Washington's strong displeasure at the stalled arms procurement bill 
and its anxiety over the military imbalance in the Taiwan Strait. 
An editorial in the mass-circulation "Apple Daily" discussed a U.S. 
poll result, which showed fewer Americans support the United States 
sending troops to Taiwan's aid should China attack Taiwan.  The 
editorial said the poll results should serve as warning for Taiwan 
to pass the arms procurement bill as early as possible.  A "China 
Times" analysis and a pro-unification "United Daily News" analysis 
both said Young's diplomatic intimidation may easily bring about 
negative results for the arms procurement bill.  A "United Daily 
News" opinion piece, on the other hand, strongly criticized AIT 
Director Young, saying he is showing off his power, and his remarks 
have violated diplomatic protocol.  End summary. 
 
A) "In-fighting Prevails over National Defense; United States Has 
Had Enough" 
 
Journalist Tsou Jiing-wen commented in an analysis the 
pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 600,000] (10/27): 
 
"Stephen Young had a long and profound talk with A-bian last week 
following his consultations in the United States.  An appropriate 
description of the open remarks by this American representative in 
Taiwan yesterday should be that the U.S. side is unwilling to see 
any gaps in the cross-Strait security frontline resulting from the 
weakening of Taiwan's leadership. ...  Under Washington's 
instructions, the low-profile AIT, which has rarely held a press 
conference, did not hesitate to call out loud to the Blue camp 
[yesterday].  [AIT's move] was akin to sending an ultimatum [to 
Taiwan], and it also reflected that the United States, which has yet 
to drag itself out of the quagmire in the Middle East while 
confronting Pyongyang's constant challenges, can no longer tolerate 
that fact that some people in Taiwan want to 'nail down' the United 
States and obtain free defense [assistance]. ..." 
 
B) "Firing at Soong Immediately After Meeting [with Him]; United 
States Losing Its Patience" 
 
Journalist Wang Ping-yu noted in an analysis in the pro-independence 
"Liberty Times" [circulation: 600,000] (1027): 
 
"Stephen Young, speaking with a high decibel, slammed the blocking 
of the arms procurement as a move to 'get personal political gains' 
and a move to use political infighting to hold hostage Taiwan's plan 
to advance its self-defense capability.  The United States' 
displeasure with the stalled arms procurement bill has been shown 
clearly in its utterances and manners.  Taiwan's politicians, no 
matter how eloquent they may be, cannot cover up the fact that 
Washington has lost its patience [with Taiwan]. 
 
"... Young's move yesterday has in fact run the greatest risk of 
[his] diplomat professionalism and walked on the red line of the 
huge gray area of 'interfering with Taiwan's domestic politics.' 
Some legislators viewed Young's move as his personal behavior.  But 
such a view obviously indicated their failure to understand Young's 
skillful tactics as a senior professional diplomat and the fact that 
what he really represents is the strong displeasure from 
Washington's highest authorities toward the blocking of the arms 
sales and its pressing anxiety over the military imbalance in the 
Taiwan Strait. ..." 
 
C) "Warning from U.S. Polls" 
 
The mass-circulation "Apple Daily" [circulation: 500,000] 
editorialized (10/27): 
 
"Will the U.S. military come to Taiwan's aid should China attack 
Taiwan?  This is the most controversial issue that Taiwan is very 
concerned about.  Two U.S. associations do an opinion poll on [U.S.] 
foreign relations every two years, and the poll results they 
 
published yesterday showed that among the 1227 people polled, 61 
percent said they are opposed to the United States sending troops to 
assist Taiwan should China uses force against Taiwan, while 32 
percent said they support the move, and 6 percent said they are 
uncertain about it.  Among all the polls that have been done 
previously, this year's results showed the highest ratio of 
opposition to the U.S. sending troops to help Taiwan. ... 
 
"This year's poll results are a warning to Taiwan.  The Bush 
administration, when compared with its predecessors, is most 
supportive of Taiwan, but because of Bian's abuses, even U.S. 
civilians are opposed to the U.S. military coming to Taiwan's aid. 
The significance of the warning is as follows:  First, the [U.S.] 
arms procurements, whose price tag has been reduced, should be 
passed as early as possible, or else why would the United States 
want to protect a Taiwan which shows no sincerity in its own 
self-defense?  Second, when it comes to the diplomatic aspect, 
Taiwan-U.S. ties must be mended as quickly as possible, and they 
should not be randomly damaged because of Taiwan's domestic 
[problems].  Third, the ruling and opposition parties as well as the 
private sector should try their best to raise awareness of American 
society and lobby for Taiwan's goodwill and image of democracy and 
freedom.  After all, clinging to the United States is Taiwan's only 
security guarantee." 
 
D) "Diplomatic Intimidation Will Easily Produce Negative Effects" 
 
Journalist Lin Shu-ling said in an analysis in the pro-status quo 
"China Times" [circulation: 400,000] (10/27): 
 
"Stephen Young's remarks aroused polarized reactions from the ruling 
and opposition parties.  If judged against the backdrop of a bigger 
international framework, how serious it was for a U.S. diplomat, 
speaking in a tone that was close to intimidation and coercion, to 
comment on the domestic issues of the country he is posted in. ... 
But it is really difficult to predict whether the performances of 
the Presidential Office and AIT yesterday would create negative 
consequences for the arms deal.  It is a well-known fact that U.S. 
arms procurements are built upon its national interests and 
strategic values.  The United States does not want to see China 
emerge big and strong and it wants to maintain a cross-Strait status 
where Taiwan will not declare independence and China will not use 
force against Taiwan.  But does the arms deal really meet Taiwan's 
interests?  Should financially deprived Taiwan spend so much money 
in expanding its military buildup?  These are issues that can be 
widely discussed. 
 
"Young's remarks have quickly aroused resonance.  Taiwan is, after 
all, a sovereign state, and despite everything, an AIT director 
should not dictate when Taiwan's Legislative Yuan should pass which 
budget.  Young's remarks were not as strong as the most severe 
language used by a U.S. diplomat who lashes out at the country he is 
posted to, but they may very likely turn out to be a turning point 
in the Taiwan public's perception of the United States. ..." 
 
E) "The U.S. Is Afraid That the Cooked Duck Will Fly Away" 
 
Journalist Fan Ling-chia said in the pro-unification "United Daily 
News" [circulation: 400,000] (10/27): 
 
"Stephen Young, in opposition to diplomatic practice, gave an 
'ultimatum' regarding arms procurement.  The fact that he was 
willing to run the risk of [violating] the diplomatic taboo of 
'interfering in the internal affairs of other countries' and gave 
guidance to Taiwan's legislative body openly was naturally related 
to his distinct position.  In the meantime, it also reflected the 
sophisticated and complicated connection of the arms deal in the 
framework of the triangular interactions among the United States, 
China, and Taiwan. 
 
"Young's political inclination is no secret.  He criticized the 
opposition parties on Double Ten National Day unreservedly, saying 
'they should be more civil,' and he even directly picked on James 
Soong.  But the remarks a diplomat makes should not be aimed at 
expressing himself only.  The fact that Young tossed off a timeline 
for the arms deal at this moment is closely related to the domestic 
pressure that the Bush administration is suffering now. ...  Young's 
remarks may sound blunt, but they were actually traceable.  However, 
it is clearly inappropriate for Young, a '[U.S.] representative in 
Taiwan' to make such candid remarks, and they might even get the 
opposite result." 
 
F) "Showing off His Power, Arrogant and High-handed Stephen Young" 
 
Loh I-cheng, a retired diplomat, said in an opinion piece in the 
pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 400,000] (10/27): 
 
"... Even though Stephen Young said he wanted the Legislative Yuan 
to pass the arms procurement bill 'not for the United States' sake, 
 
but for Taiwan's,' such remarks had better be spoken in private to 
political leaders.  Young overlooked the fact that, in terms of 
diplomacy, having private talks and discussing the contents of the 
talks openly are two separate issues.  If he crosses the line, he 
has already violated diplomatic protocol.  Counting from Lee 
Teng-hui to James Soong, from Ma Ying-jeou to Chen Shui-bian, and a 
series of names of other government officials to show his 
familiarity with these people and to show off his power in front of 
the Taiwan people, and lecturing the legislators, Young has severely 
trespassed what is required of him [as a diplomat].  Should the same 
thing happen even in small countries in Central and South America, 
it would trigger a political upheaval.  Taiwan is a dignified, 
developed democratic country, and it cannot tolerate such a foreign 
representative. ..." 
 
YOUNG