06AITTAIPEI1560
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Mon May 08 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0019
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1560/01 1280819
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 080819Z MAY 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0048
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5174
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 6374UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001560 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - ERIC BARBORIAK 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
 
¶1. Summary: President Chen Shui-bian's transits en route to and from 
Paraguay and Costa Rica stayed in Taiwan's media spotlight May 6-8, 
while newspaper coverage alsofocused on the year-end Taipei and 
Kaohsiung mayoral races and other local issues.  The pro-status quo 
"China Times" ran a banner headline on page two May 8 that read: 
"To Counter the United States and China, Bian Will Make Big 
[Political] Moves After He Returns to Taiwan."  While several papers 
front-paged that Chen will transit Alaska on his way back to Taiwan 
this week, the pro-independence "Liberty Times," Taiwan's biggest 
daily, and the pro-independence "Taiwan Daily" both reported May 8 
that Chen may have other options in mind for his transit.  The 
"China Times" also ran a news story on page five May 8 headlined 
"Bian Seeks to Transit Miami on His Way Back." 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, a "Liberty Times" 
editorial criticized Washington for disrespecting Taiwan's elected 
leader and suggested that both Taipei and Washington find an 
immediate and effective way to mend their mutual relations.  A 
separate "Liberty Times" news analysis said the United States and 
China joining hands to deal a blow to Chen is akin to becoming the 
Taiwan people's enemy in public.  A "Taiwan Daily" editorial 
condemned Washington for disregarding Taiwan and Taiwan's core 
democratic values.  An editorial in the limited-circulation, 
pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" suggested that an 
increase in high-level official visits by Taiwan to other countries 
is the first step for the island to dissolve the widespread "China 
fever."  An editorial in the pro-unification "United Daily News" 
said the major setback Chen suffered during his transits was a 
result of his decision to cease the functions of the National 
Unification Council.  An editorial in the limited-circulation, 
 
conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" called 
Chen's transit a "diplomatic disaster," and a separate "China Post" 
editorial urged Chen to mend fences with Washington by showing that 
he is not a "trouble maker."  End summary. 
 
A) "Taiwan and the United States Can Look for Immediate and 
Effective Ways to Mend [Their Mutual Ties]" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 600,000] 
editorialized (5/8): 
 
"... We cannot help but recall the fact that the United States has 
repeatedly requested that China engage in dialogue with Taiwan's 
duly-elected government.  But the United States, like China, also 
disrespects Taiwan's elected government. ...  Washington has been 
chanting about democratic values all the time, but it regarded the 
leader of totalitarian China as an honorable guest while it ignored 
Taiwan's elected leader.  Such a move not only failed to match the 
impressive manner of a great country but was also incompatible with 
democratic values. 
 
"U.S. officials have said more than once that President Chen's plan 
not to transit Alaska would not affect Taiwan-U.S. relations.  This 
newspaper trusts that they are telling the truth, due to the common 
strategic interests shared by Taiwan and the United States.  But 
Chen is after all the elected leader of Taiwan, and it will not be 
conducive to Taiwan-U.S. relations if [Washington] fails to show 
adequate respect to Chen.  Washington might as well ponder which 
side will benefit from this [dispute].  Is it not China and the 
pro-China forces in Taiwan?  Isn't it true that both Taiwan and the 
United States are losers? ... This paper thus hopes that both Taiwan 
and the United States could creatively take advantage of the timing 
of Chen's trip back to Taiwan and find an immediate and effective 
way to mend [their mutual ties] like, for example, improving the 
treatment of Chen's transit. ..." 
 
B) "To Deal a Blow to Taiwan's Elected President Is to Become the 
Taiwan People's Enemy" 
 
Journalist Tsou Jiing-wen noted in a news analysis in the 
pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 600,000] 
 
"Can the president of a democratic country be treated separately 
from his people?  President George W. Bush has made a huge mistake! 
If Taiwan is a totalitarian country like China, the Taiwan 
government and Taiwan people are two different matters, and Bush can 
surely deal with them separately if he is upset with either of them. 
 But the matter is that Chen Shui-bian is a president elected by the 
Taiwan people.  If the United States and China join hands to deal a 
blow to Chen, it is akin to become the Taiwan people's enemy in 
public. ... 
 
"Uncle Sam was not pleased with the one country on each side of the 
Taiwan Strait doctrine, Taiwan's referendum, or [Chen's decision] to 
cease the functions of the National Unification Council.  But the 
question is:  Which of the above proposals is wrong?  They all 
represent the aspirations of the Taiwan people since they have 
become the masters of their country.  Chen would have not proposed 
them if he had not won adequate public support. ..." 
 
C) "U.S. Congressmen Protest of Washington [Refusal of Transit 
Approval] and Taiwan People's Plan to Welcome Chen at Airport Prove 
That President Chen Is Not Alone in Striving for Foreign Relations 
and Safeguarding National Dignity" 
 
The pro-independence "Taiwan Daily" [circulation: 100,000] 
editorialized (5/7): 
 
"... President Chen failed to transit the continental U.S. while 
visiting Central and South America, but Washington offered the 
treatment of a state leader to [Chinese President] Hu Jintao for his 
U.S. visit.  ...  Chen is an elected state leader who represents 
Taiwan during his overseas visit.  This is how democracy works. 
Washington's disrespect for Chen is akin to showing inadequate 
respect for the Taiwan people and ignoring Taiwan's core values of 
democracy. ..." 
 
D) "Judging Chen's Transit in a Balanced Way" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" [circulation: 
20,000] editorialized (5/8): 
 
"... While it is essential for leaders in both Taipei and Washington 
to improve communication and mutual trust and refrain from producing 
any unpredictable outcomes, it is also important for Taiwan to earn 
more respect and fair treatment from the U.S., regardless of China's 
influence.  Taiwan's democratic achievement is the country's most 
valuable diplomatic asset as a contrast to China's authoritarianism. 
 A democratically elected president of Taiwan deserves every 
opportunity to appear in the international arena.  No country should 
deprive Taiwan's leader of the freedom to travel. ..." 
 
E) "Oh, God! Does [Chen] Plan to Stop over in Alaska on His Way 
Back?" 
 
The pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 400,000] 
editorialized (5/6): 
 
"... This newspaper does not believe that 'transit diplomacy' is 
entirely meaningless because to a certain extent, it is an indicator 
of the [ups and downs of the] triangular relationship between 
Taipei, Washington and Beijing. ...  The major setback that Chen 
Shui-bian suffered during his transit in the United States this time 
resulted from the cessation of the functions of the National 
Unification Council, which has substantively damaged the essence of 
Taipei-Washington ties, and is thus reflected in the apparently 
downgraded treatment of Chen's transits.  But Chen was ignorant of 
such a situation and failed to fix the essence [of the bilateral 
ties]; instead, he made a 'childish' reaction, which will further 
destroy such essence.  Isn't such behavior incredible? ..." 
 
F) "Chen's Diplomatic Disaster" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] said in an editorial (5/8): 
 
"... We wish to join [Former Minister James] Huang in protesting to 
the United States, but not for the same reason.  We fully understand 
that Uncle Sam wants to punish President Chen for crowing his 
finesse in reneging on the promise with impunity.  But the tit for 
tat reaction was an overkill.  It insulted the president and the 
people of Taiwan he represents, albeit almost half of them do not 
think so.  There should have been a soft touch.  For one thing, 
Washington could have refused to let him set foot on the United 
States.  It's harsher but not insulting. ...  We pray President Chen 
would refrain from making any more state visits in the next two 
years so that no more diplomatic disasters should hit a 
diplomatically isolated Taiwan.  We don't think it's too much to 
ask." 
 
G) "Calling Washington's Bluff" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (5/6): 
 
"... There is still time for President Chen to mend fences with 
Washington by showing that he is not a 'trouble maker' who wants to 
ratchet up tensions with mainland China and thus embroiling the 
United States in regional hostilities.  He can demonstrate that he 
has no intention of altering the status quo, as he has promised to 
the world.  He must try hard to restore his credibility which is in 
tatters due to his repeated flip-flops that have ruined the mutual 
trust between Taipei and Washington." 
 
YOUNG