06ANKARA5395
COUNTRY CLEARANCE ANGELA M. THERIAULT - ANKARA AND
Fri Sep 15 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXYZ1129
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHAK #5395/01 2581431
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 151431Z SEP 06
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8727
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 1282UNCLAS ANKARA 005395 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OTRA OREP AMGT AFIN PGOV TU
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE ANGELA M. THERIAULT - ANKARA AND 
ISTANBUL 
 
REF: STATE 150753 
 
¶1. (U) Mission warmly welcomes and grants country clearance 
to Angela M. Theriault to travel to Turkey September 17 - 21, 
¶2006.  Embassy telephone is (90)(312) 455-5555, 24 hours a 
day. 
 
¶2. (U) Hotel reservations for Istanbul have been confirmed at 
the Ritz Carlton Istanbul, Suzer Plaza, Elmadag, 34367, 
Sisli, Istanbul Tel:  90-212-334 4444, Fax 90-21-2334 4455. 
Reservations for Ankara will be communicated in a separate 
communication. 
 
¶3. (U) Visas:  Please note that all Americans entering Turkey 
must have a valid Visa.  The only exception is military 
personnel under CINC control traveling on NATO orders. 
Military IDs are not/not acceptable travel documents. 
Travelers with tourist passports can obtain a Visa valid for 
one entry/three months at ports of entry upon payment of a 
USD 30 fee in cash.  (This fee is payable only U.S. dollars 
cash.)  Holders of official or diplomatic passports must 
obtain Visas from the nearest Turkish Embassy (not Consulate) 
before arriving in Turkey.  Visas for official and diplomatic 
passports will not/not be available at ports of entry. 
 
¶4. (U) Health Safety:  Information on vaccinations and other 
health precautions can be obtained from the Center for 
Disease Control and Prevention hotline for international 
travelers (tel: 1-877-394-747); fax 1-800-232-3299; or via 
the internet at HTTP//www.cdc.gov. 
 
¶5. (U) Security Assessment:  In the aftermath of Operation 
Iraqi Freedom (OIF) there continues to be the potential for 
both transnational and indigenous terrorist groups to target 
U.S. interests in Turkey.  After the Gulf War, the 
predecessor to the Turkish Terrorist Group Revolutionary 
People's Liberation Party/Front (DHKP/C) assassinated four 
Americans in Turkey and carried out numerous bombings of U.S. 
targets (mostly private sector businesses, although two 
rockets were directed toward the Consulate General in 
Istanbul).  Subsequent to the ending of OIF hostilities, 
there have been isolated terrorist bombings attributed to 
DHKP/C and other indigenous terrorist groups in protest of 
OIF.  Other Turkish terrorist groups with anti-Western 
sympathies include Marxist-Leninist Communist Party (MLKP), 
Turkish Communist Party/Marxist Leninist (TKP/ML), Turkish 
Workers and Peasants Revolutionary Army (TIKKO) and Islamic 
Greater Eastern Raiders/Front (IBDA/C). 
 
Al-Qa'ida threats to target U.S. facilities in Turkey have 
been public knowledge for some time.  On November 15, two 
synagogues in Istanbul were the targets of suicide car bombs. 
On November 20, 2003, the British Consulate General and the 
London-based HSBC bank in Istanbul were damaged by powerful 
explosions, killing dozens and wounding hundreds.  These 
incidents represent a significant change from prior attacks 
in Turkey, which have previously involved small-scale, random 
bombings and small numbers of casualties.  The investigations 
of these incidents in Istanbul remain open but transnational 
terrorist links are suspected.  The potential for violence 
and terrorist actions against U.S. citizens and interests 
continue. 
 
The Turkish National Police (TNP) is quite responsive in 
their role as protector of U.S. diplomatic and military 
interests in Turkey.  The TNP has provided enhanced coverage 
at each of our facilities in Ankara, Istanbul, Adana and 
Izmir.  The incidence of crime, both violent and the more 
traditional tourist crimes (pick pocketing, purse-snatching, 
etc.), is relatively low throughout Turkey.  Visitors to 
Istanbul should be aware that tourist-type crimes are more 
prevalent there, especially in the traditionalist tourist 
areas, such as Sultanahmet and Istiklal Caddesi.  The 
security office encourages visitors to report any security 
incidents, including surveillance, to the RSO immediately. 
 
Useful security information about Turkey is available on the 
following websites: 
 
--Embassy Ankara:  HTTP://WWW.USEMB-ANKARA.ORG.TR (Click on 
Security Matters) 
 
--Consulate General Istanbul: 
HTTP://USCONSULATE-ISTANBUL.ORG.TR 
 
¶6. (U) For further information regarding travel in Turkey, 
consult the consular information sheet.  The consulate 
information sheet and public announcements are available on 
the internet at:  HTTP://TRAVEL.STATE.GOV 
 
Other information is available on the following websites: 
 
--The State Department Consular Affairs (CA) websites: 
 HTTP://WWW.TRAVEL.STATE.GOV/TURKEY.HTML 
 
--US Embassy Ankara: 
HTTP://WWW.USEMB-ANKARA.ORG.TR 
 
 
Visit Ankara's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/eur/ankara/ 
 
WILSON