06ANKARA135
AVIAN INFLUENZA: REQUEST FOR MILITARY AIR SUPPORT
Fri Jan 13 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 000135 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MOPS PREL OTRA TU AR GG AZ
SUBJECT: AVIAN INFLUENZA: REQUEST FOR MILITARY AIR SUPPORT 
 
REF: ANKARA 134 
 
¶1. This is an action request.  See para 3. 
 
¶2. Based on information received January 13 from Washington, 
we expect an interagency team to arrive in the next few days 
to assess the AI situation in Turkey and what role the USG 
could usefully play to support GOT and international 
agencies' efforts to deal with the current situation.  We 
understand (and have encouraged) that this team, or a part of 
it, may then travel to the southern Caucasus region.  The 
remote and disparate locations where AI has been detected in 
Turkey suggests that military airlift would greatly 
facilitate the work of this team here.  Given the commercial 
availability and routing of flights from Turkey to the 
Caucasus as well as between Caucasus' capitals, military 
airlift for those movements may also assist the team in its 
work in that region.  For example, flights from Van (the 
closest commercial airport to Dogubayazit, where the fatal 
human cases were contracted) to the Tbilisi only leave five 
days/week and require backtracking to Istanbul -- twelve 
hours in total.  A direct flight would take a fraction of 
that time. 
 
¶3. Action Request: We request the Department initiate 
procedures for the provision of military airlift support for 
this team.  We are informed that the total team may consist 
of up to ten individuals, although a smaller number than that 
would be traveling at any one time.  We also do not yet know 
what the team's itinerary, which likely will not become clear 
until after initial consultations with the GOT in Ankara 
early in the week of January 16.  We have made initial 
contacts with EUCOM (the POC is Col Dennis D'Angelo).  We 
will keep the Department and others informed, but in the 
interest of time, we request the process of coordination with 
DoD and identifying resources for airlift support begin now. 
WILSON