06ANKARA843
TURKEY CTRY CLR GRANTED FOR DHS/NNTRAV KOENIG +1,
Wed Feb 22 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXYZ0027
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHAK #0843/01 0530741
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 220741Z FEB 06
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3371
INFO RUEAHLC/HOMELAND SECURITY CENTER WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHUNV/USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA PRIORITY 0080
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 9869UNCLAS ANKARA 000843 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DHS/ORNL FOR BGOULDY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KNNP PARM RS TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY CTRY CLR GRANTED FOR DHS/NNTRAV KOENIG +1, 
(02/28/2006- 03/05/2006) 
 
REF: STATE 28151 
 
¶1. (U) Mission welcomes and grants country clearance to USG 
team led by Mr. Zachary Koenig to travel to Turkey from 
February 28 through March 5, 2006. Embassy control officer 
for the visit is EXBS Advisor Kevin Lyon, who can be 
contacted 24 hours/day at (90)(312)455-5555, ext. 0.  Mr. 
Lyon will arrange for transportation to and from the airport 
and hotel reservations in Istanbul.  Hotel and transportation 
information will be forward via separate correspondence. 
 
¶2.  (U) Visas:  All Americans traveling to Turkey must have a 
valid visa.  Travelers without a visa can obtain a visa valid 
for one entry/three months at port of entry upon payment of a 
USD 20 fee.  This fee is payable only in U.S. dollars cash. 
There is no fee for official travel if the visa is obtained 
outside of Turkey. 
 
¶3.  (U) Health Safety:  Information on vaccinations and other 
health precautions can be obtained from the Center for 
Disease Control and Prevention hotline for international 
travelers (tel: 1-877-394-8747); fax 1-800-232-3299; or via 
the internet at HTTP//www.cdc.gov. 
 
¶4.  (U) Security Assessment:  In the aftermath of Operation 
Iraqi Freedom (OIF) there continues to be the potential for 
both transnational and indigenous terrorist groups to target 
U.S. interests in Turkey.  After the Gulf War, the 
predecessor to the Turkish Terrorist Group Revolutionary 
People's Liberation Party/Front (DHKP/C) assassinated four 
Americans in Turkey and carried out numerous bombings of U.S. 
targets (mostly private sector businesses, although two 
rockets were directed toward the Consulate General in 
Istanbul).  Subsequent to the ending of OIF hostilities, 
there have been isolated terrorist bombings attributed to 
DHKP/C and other indigenous terrorist groups in protest of 
OIF.  Other Turkish terrorist groups with anti-Western 
sympathies include Marxist-Leninist Communist Party (MLKP), 
Turkish Communist Party/Marxist Leninist (TKP/ML), Turkish 
Workers and Peasants Revolutionary Army (TIKKO) and Islamic 
Greater Eastern Raiders/Front (IBDA/C). 
 
Al-Qa'ida threats to target U.S. facilities in Turkey have 
been public knowledge for some time.  On November 15, two 
synagogues in Istanbul were the targets of suicide car bombs. 
 On November 20, the British Consulate General and the 
London-based HSBC bank in Istanbul were damaged by powerful 
explosions, killing dozens and wounding hundreds.  These 
incidents represent a significant change from prior attacks 
in Turkey, which have previously involved small-scale, random 
bombings and small numbers of casualties.  The investigations 
of these incidents in Istanbul remain open but transnational 
terrorist links are suspected.  The potential for violence 
and terrorist actions against U.S. citizens and interests 
continue. 
 
The Turkish National Police (TNP) is quite responsive in 
their role as protector of U.S. diplomatic and military 
interests in Turkey.  The TNP has provided enhanced coverage 
at each of our facilities in Ankara, Istanbul, Adana and 
Izmir.  The incidence of crime, both violent and the more 
traditional tourist crimes (pick pocketing, purse-snatching, 
etc.), is relatively low throughout Turkey.  Visitors to 
Istanbul should be aware that tourist-type crimes are more 
prevalent there, especially in the traditionalist tourist 
areas, such as Sultanahmet and Istiklal Caddesi.  The 
security office encourags visitors to report any security 
incidents, including surveillance, to the RSO immediately. 
 
Useful security information about Turkey is available on the 
following websites: 
 
--Embassy Ankara:  HTTP://WWW.USEMB-ANKARA.ORG.TR (Click on 
Security Matters) 
 
--Consulate General Istanbul: 
HTTP://USCONSULATE-ISTANBUL.ORG.TR 
 
¶5.  (U) For further information regarding travel in Turkey, 
consult the consular information sheet.  The consulate 
information sheet and public announcements are available on 
the internet at:  HTTP://TRAVEL.STATE.GOV 
 
Other information is available on the following websites: 
 
--The State Department Consular Affairs (CA) websites: 
HTTP://WWW.TRAVEL.STATE.GOV/TURKEY.HTML 
 
--US Embassy Ankara: 
HTTP://WWW.USEMB-ANKARA.ORG.TR 
WILSON