06BAGHDAD17
BAGHDAD PD RESULTS (09/01/05 - 12/24/05)
Tue Jan 03 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000017 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV OPRC OIIP KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: BAGHDAD PD RESULTS (09/01/05 - 12/24/05) 
 
¶1. Summary.  Embassy Baghdad PAS programming (09/01/05- 
12/24/05) addressed post's MPP themes of Democracy, 
Stability, Prosperity, and Mutual Understanding.  This 
programming produced positive results from exchange alumni, 
distribution of books to target audiences in Baghdad and 
beyond, and a meeting between Iraqi intellectuals and a 
visiting Senate Foreign Relations Committee staffer.  End 
Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
Exchange Participants Run in December 15 Elections 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶2.  Dr. Salam A. Mahdi, Ministry for Women's Affairs 
advisor and an alumna of June 2005 International Visitors 
Leadership Program (IVLP) project "Women's Leadership and 
Advocacy," ran as a candidate in the December 15 elections 
as part of Dr. Laith Kubba's slate "National Peace." 
Embassy Baghdad's political section nominated Dr. Mahdi for 
the program. Mithal Al-Alusi's list "Iraqi Nation Party" 
included Tamathir Al-Jenabi, director of the Iraqi Business 
Center. Al-Jenabi expects to go to the United States next 
January for the IVLP project "Women as Economic and 
Business Leaders." 
 
MPP Goal: Democracy 
 
--------------------------------------- 
New Code of Conduct for Iraqi Officials 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  Nadia K. Hessin, Ethics Advisor for the Iraq Commission 
on Public Integrity (CPI), expressed gratitude for an 
opportunity to participate in the International Visitor 
Leadership Program project "Accountability in Government 
and Business" (October 27 - November 17, 2005).  Hessin, 
who is responsible for development, approval, and 
implementation of the Iraqi government employee "Code of 
Conduct," told emboff she planned to review the Code of 
Conduct to ensure that government ministers did not put 
their political affiliation above their official duties. 
Nadia also plans to work with CPI's public relations 
department to publicize the Code of Conduct among the Iraqi 
public. 
 
MPP Goal: Stability 
 
------------------------ 
Books for Journalists... 
------------------------ 
 
¶4.  On November 15, the Cultural Affairs Office distributed 
40 copies of the Arabic version of IIP-produced "A 
Responsible Press Office: An Insiders Guide" and "Hi 
Magazine" at a reception for local Arab press.  The 
participants also received feedback forms to allow them to 
submit their comments and additional book requests. 
 
MPP Goals: Democracy/Mutual Understanding 
 
------------------------ 
...Provincial Leaders... 
------------------------ 
 
¶5.  At the September Tikrit Provincial Council meeting, 
Tikrit SET provided "The About America Series" book set to 
all 42 members of the Council.  Many looked at the books, 
although some were left behind by members who may be 
reluctant to be identified with the Coalition Forces.  The 
rest of the books may have been taken later, when doing so 
drew less attention. 
 
¶6.  In October, Tikrit SET gave "The About America Series" 
book set to the 16 members of the Dialogue and 
Communicating Committee hosted by the U.S. Commanding 
General.  The members from Salad Ad Din, Diyala, 
Sulaimaniya, and Kirkuk are from various sectors-- 
education, business, media, health and law.  One Kirkuk 
newspaper owner requested six more copies.  The SET also 
distributed them to various Salah Ad Din sheiks and 
government employees and found that they were well 
received. 
 
MPP Goals: Democracy/Mutual Understanding 
 
----------------------- 
... and School Children 
----------------------- 
 
¶7.  The Cultural Affairs Office delivered 100 copies of 
"What is Democracy" (60 in Arabic and 40 in English), 51 
copies of "Hi Magazine," and 20 copies of "Portrait of the 
USA," to the International Zone-based Optimist Club, a 
community-service group comprised of Americans and Iraqis. 
The Optimists distributed the books throughout primary and 
secondary schools in the International Zone to allow Iraqi 
students to learn about democracy and life in the United 
States.  The students were encouraged to complete feedback 
forms with their impressions and requests for future 
reading materials.  The students showed particular interest 
in "Portrait of America" because of their interest in 
various environments throughout the United States. 
 
MPP Goal: Mutual Understanding 
 
----------------------------------------- 
Exchanging Views with Iraqi Intellectuals 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  On November 8, the Public Affairs Counselor (PAC) 
hosted a dinner in honor of a visiting Senate Foreign 
Relations Committee staffer, which offered a rare 
opportunity for Embassy officers and American officials to 
meet with a group of prominent Baghdad intellectuals in a 
relaxed social setting and exchange views on major cultural 
and education issues facing Iraq.  The guests, a Ministry 
of Culture advisor, the University of Baghdad English 
Department head, a liberal newspaper editor-in-chief, and a 
leading Iraqi archaeologist, raised important issues 
dealing with Iraqi national identity and the need to 
preserve the country's cultural heritage and instill 
democratic values in the young generation.  The Public 
Affairs Section will follow up on proposals by the Iraqi 
guests for conferences and book translations with the goal 
of informing the Iraqi public about U.S. society, values, 
and culture. 
 
MPP Goal: Mutual Understanding 
 
-------------------------------- 
Humphrey Program Returns to Iraq 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶9.   The  Cultural Affairs Section interviewed twenty-three 
applicants  for  the Hubert H. Humphrey Fellowship  Program 
and  nominated  nine  candidates.  The  nominees'  selected 
fields  of  study  include  public  administration,   human 
rights, teaching English as a foreign language, journalism, 
and  public  health.  Five of the nominees  are  women  and 
three come from outside Baghdad, including the impoverished 
southern  regions.  PAS commenced the Humphrey  Program  in 
Iraq for the first time this year since the 198Os. 
 
MPP Goals: Democracy, Prosperity, Mutual Understanding 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
What Exchange Alumni Say About Their Programs 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶10.  Lt. Col Abbas, Babil Provincial Deputy Police 
Commander, recently returned from the IVLP project on 
"Border and Homeland Security."  After his first visit to 
America, Lt. Col. Abbas told emboff, "In America, there is 
no discrimination; all of the people are equal.  They have 
a great respect for the rule of law and are respectful of 
each other.  They exhibit Islamic values of honesty, 
faithfulness and devotion, even if they are not Islamic." 
 
MPP Goals: Stability, Democracy 
 
¶11.  Sunni Sheikh Majid I. Mohammed, Imam of the Grand 
Mosque in Sulaimania, spent nearly a month in the United 
States under an IVLP project "Promoting Interfaith 
Dialogue." Upon his return in December, the Sheikh told 
emboff he had immensely enjoyed the opportunity to 
experience America first-hand: "I was never so free and so 
happy as I was during my time there." 
 
MPP Goal: Mutual Understanding 
 
¶12.  Comment: PAS Baghdad's Arabic book program and the 
IVLP remain instrumental in developing contacts in the 
diverse spectrum of Iraqi society.  Post plans to 
investigate further the possibilities for greater media 
interaction with CAO program participants in order to 
enhance the positive messages they convey to Iraqi society 
and the region as a whole. End comment. 
 
Litt