06BEIJING6316
APRIL 4 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: SECRETARY  CHERTOFF'S
Tue Apr 04 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO1566
OO RUEHCN
DE RUEHBJ #6316/01 0941142
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 041142Z APR 06
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2061
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHOT/AMEMBASSY OTTAWA IMMEDIATE 3735
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS IMMEDIATE 3715
RUEHPG/AMEMBASSY PRAGUE IMMEDIATE 0811
RUEHSI/AMEMBASSY TBILISI IMMEDIATE 0090
RUEHWR/AMEMBASSY WARSAW IMMEDIATE 1376
RUEHUNV/USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA IMMEDIATE 0858
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA IMMEDIATE 0944
RHHMUNA/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HI IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 006316 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM PARM ECON KNNP CH JP
SUBJECT: APRIL 4 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: SECRETARY  CHERTOFF'S 
VISIT, CHINA-JAPAN RELATIONS, SIX-PARTY  TALKS, TAIWAN'S 
NUCLEAR FACILITIES, ORGAN TRANSPLANTS,  LANDMINES, SCO 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  Key points made at the April 4 MFA press briefing 
are as follows: 
 
- Homeland Security Secretary Chertoff and Politburo 
Standing Committee Member Luo Gan discussed bilateral 
cooperation in law enforcement, counterterrorism and 
repatriation of illegal immigrants. 
 
- China hopes relevant countries will not politicize 
illegal immigration issues and is prepared to work 
with other countries in combating the problem. 
 
- President Hu Jintao recently highlighted his 
determination to improve bilateral Sino-Japanese ties 
and his statements should be viewed as a very positive 
signal. 
 
- The current deadlock in the Six-Party Talks is 
primarily due to the lack of trust between the United 
States and North Korea. 
 
- The Chinese Government and the IAEA have reached an 
agreement on the safeguarding and monitoring of 
Taiwan's nuclear facilities. 
 
- The Falun Gong "plays tricks" to undermine China's 
stability and foreign relations and its reports on 
organ harvesting are "rumors." 
 
- China abides by international regulations on 
landmine production and has participated in UN efforts 
to remove land mines. 
 
- Leaders of SCO member and observer countries and 
some other nations will attend the June SCO Summit in 
Shanghai. 
 
- Defense Minister Cao Gangchuan is paying an April 4- 
19 visit to North Korea, Vietnam, Malaysia, Singapore 
and South Korea. 
 
- During Turkmenistan President Niyazov's visit to 
China, the two countries signed an energy cooperation 
agreement. 
 
- Georgian President Saakashvili will visit China 
April 10-15.  Vice Premier Hui Liangyu will visit 
Poland, Czechoslovakia, Albania and France April 12- 
¶25.  End Summary. 
 
Secretary Chertoff's Visit 
 
SIPDIS 
-------------------------- 
 
¶2.  U.S. Department of Homeland Security Secretary 
Michael Chertoff and Politburo Standing Committee 
Member Luo Gan discussed bilateral cooperation in law 
enforcement, counterterrorism and repatriation of 
illegal immigrants during their April 4 meeting, MFA 
Spokesperson Liu Jianchao reported at the regular 
April 4 MFA press briefing.  Stressing Beijing's 
opposition to illegal immigration, Liu maintained that 
China repatriates illegal immigrants once their 
identity has been verified.  Illegal immigration is a 
complicated matter, he remarked, adding that certain 
countries' granting of political asylum does not help 
counter illegal migration.  China hopes relevant 
countries will not politicize illegal immigration 
issues and is prepared to work with these countries to 
combat the problem.  Liu noted that Secretary Chertoff 
and Chinese officials agreed to promote personnel 
exchanges for education and business purposes.  China 
appreciates the U.S. decision to offer multi-entry 
visas to Chinese citizens traveling for these reasons 
and believes there is still potential to further 
expand personnel exchanges. 
 
Japanese Leaders "Responsible" for Bilateral Problems 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
 
BEIJING 00006316  002 OF 003 
 
 
¶3.  Questions on President Hu Jintao's reported 
suggestion about the possibility of resuming China- 
Japan summit meetings if Japanese leaders stop 
visiting the Yasukuni Shrine and on the current state 
of bilateral ties one year after the April 2005 anti- 
Japanese protests dominated the press briefing.  Liu 
repeatedly stressed that the Japanese leadership, not 
China or the Japanese people, is responsible for the 
current difficulties facing Sino-Japanese ties. 
Japan's leaders have adopted an "erroneous attitude" 
and insisted on visiting the Yasukuni Shrine, 
undermining the political basis of bilateral ties.  It 
is inaccurate to say that over the past two years 
Chinese leaders have not agreed to a summit meeting, 
Liu remarked.  China has made important endeavors to 
improve ties, but Japan has failed to respond 
positively in terms of its treatment of historical 
issues.  Beijing calls on Japanese leaders to change 
their incorrect actions and create conditions for the 
improvement of relations. 
 
¶4.  During his meeting with the delegation of Japanese 
China-Japan friendship associations led by former 
Prime Minister Hashimoto, President Hu highlighted his 
determination to improve bilateral ties.  His 
statements should be viewed as a very positive signal, 
Liu stressed, expressing the hope that Japanese 
leaders will recognize and respond positively to 
China's sincere hope for better relations.  Reflecting 
on last year's anti-Japanese demonstrations, Liu said 
that China does not view those events as "anti- 
Japanese" and argued that they were not targeted at 
the Japanese people but rather at the "erroneous 
attitude" of the Japanese leadership.  The Chinese 
Government encourages a genuine sense of patriotism 
among its people that is not intended to incite 
"narrow nationalist" sentiment.  Liu rejected 
accusations that Beijing has manipulated Chinese 
patriotism as a tool to handle Sino-Japanese 
relations, while also criticizing the extreme actions 
that were taken during the demonstrations.  Liu 
offered no information on the timing of the next round 
of China-Japan East China Sea negotiations but 
remarked that China's proposal during the last round 
would lead to mutual benefit by shelving differences 
and pursuing joint development. 
 
Future of the Six-Party Talks 
----------------------------- 
 
¶5.  Asked about the possibility that the Six-Party 
Talks will collapse, Liu argued that the current 
deadlock is primarily due to the lack of trust between 
the United States and North Korea and their failure to 
resolve disputes.  He stressed the need to insist on a 
nuclear-free Korean Peninsula and commitment to the 
Talks' resumption.  While China has tried to make a 
contribution to these goals, the key to a resolution 
lies in the hands of the United States and North 
Korea.  Liu called on the relevant parties to 
demonstrate flexibility and sincerity to promote a 
nuclear-free Korean Peninsula and the resumption of 
the Six-Party Talks.  China hopes the various contacts 
between the parties will help generate positive 
results. 
 
China-Australia Energy Cooperation 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  Asked about reported uranium-related agreements 
signed during Premier Wen Jiabao's April 1-4 trip to 
Australia and on Australia's sales of uranium to 
Taiwan, Liu stated that the Chinese Government and the 
IAEA have reached an agreement on the safeguarding and 
monitoring of Taiwan's nuclear facilities.  The IAEA 
has conducted these activities within a 
nongovernmental framework and in order to ensure their 
peaceful nature.  Liu noted that Premier Wen and his 
Australian counterparts expressed satisfaction over 
current bilateral cooperation, including in the areas 
of energy and natural resources.  Bilateral energy 
cooperation has great potential, and the two countries 
 
BEIJING 00006316  003 OF 003 
 
 
will continue to strengthen cooperation in a manner 
outlined in bilateral agreements. 
 
Falun Gong Accusation and Organ Transplants 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  Asked about reported U.S. inquiries into reports 
about the harvesting of detained Falun Gong 
practitioners' organs, Liu insisted that people should 
not believe such "rumors."  The Falun Gong is outlawed 
in China and "plays tricks" to undermine China's 
stability and foreign relations.  China does not 
restrict foreigners from receiving organ transplants 
and Chinese citizens donate these organs voluntarily, 
Liu maintained.  In order to save lives, criminals 
sentenced to death can voluntarily donate their organs 
following the same procedures as other donors.  Noting 
the enactment of temporary regulations and the current 
drafting of a law on organ transplants, Liu remarked 
that China is working to fill the legal gaps in the 
organ transplant field. 
 
Landmines 
--------- 
 
¶8.  Although China is not a party to the Ottawa 
Convention, Beijing supports its principles and has 
signed the Amended Landmine Protocol, Liu stated in 
response to a Spanish News Agency reporter's question. 
China abides by international regulations on landmine 
production and has participated in UN efforts to 
remove land mines. 
 
Shanghai Cooperation Organization Summit 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶9.  The June Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) 
Summit in Shanghai will be important for enhancing the 
SCO's role in economic cooperation, personnel 
exchanges and regional stability.  The leaders of 
member and observer countries as well as some other 
nations will attend the Summit. 
 
Defense Minister Cao Visits DPRK, Other Asian Nations 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶10.  Liu confirmed that Cao Gangchuan, Vice Chairman 
of the Central Military Commission and also Defense 
Minister, is paying an April 4-19 visit to North 
Korea, Vietnam, Malaysia, Singapore and South Korea. 
China and North Korea maintain regular military 
exchanges and cooperation, Liu said. 
 
Turkmenistan President's Visit 
------------------------------ 
 
¶11.  Asked about the content of the energy agreement 
signed during Turkmenistan President Niyazov's visit 
to China, Liu simply noted that the two countries' 
firms signed an energy cooperation agreement during 
the visit. 
 
Upcoming Visits 
--------------- 
 
¶12.  Georgian President Saakashvili will visit China 
April 10-15, Liu announced.  Vice Premier Hui Liangyu 
will visit Poland, Czechoslovakia, Albania and France 
April 12-25. 
RANDT