06BEIJING21987
OCTOBER 17 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: UNSCR 1718;
Tue Oct 17 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO1294
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1987/01 2901001
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 171001Z OCT 06
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0003
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 021987 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM CH KN
SUBJECT: OCTOBER 17 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: UNSCR 1718; 
CHINA-DPRK BORDER CONTROLS; SECRETARY RICE VISIT; NEPAL 
BORDER SHOOTING 
 
 ¶1.  Key Points made at the October 17 Press Briefing were: 
 
-- China will implement UNSCR 1718 seriously and in a 
responsible manner. 
 
-- Regarding reports that China is controlling truck traffic 
from China to North Korea and that banks in Dandong are 
restricting transfers of money into North Korea, China is 
obliged and will follow strictly the measures described in 
UNSCR 1718. 
 
-- Begun in 1990, China's boundary defense plan includes 
setting up wire netting and creating patrol roads in border 
areas, including along China's border with North Korea but 
this not related to the DPRK's recent nuclear test. 
 
-- China noticed the DPRK's statement calling UNSCR 1718 "an 
act of war" but the important thing is for all parties to 
refrain from escalating tension. 
 
-- China firmly opposes any North Korean nuclear test, is 
committed to denuclearization and opposes nuclear 
proliferation.  UNSCR 1718 sent an important message to North 
Korea and requires the DPRK to take a responsible attitude. 
 
-- China has always provided humanitarian assistance to North 
Korea and will continue to do so. 
 
-- Japan, as an NPT signatory, must stick to the three "no 
nuclear principles." 
 
-- Secretary Rice will visit China October 20-21. 
 
-- France's President Chirac will visit China October 25-28. 
 
-- All relevant information has already been released about 
television footage showing Chinese border patrol officials 
shooting apparently unarmed Tibetans crossing from China into 
Nepal. 
 
DPRK Nuclear Test and UNSCR 1718 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  At the October 17 regularly scheduled MFA Press Briefing, 
Spokesperson Liu Jianchao said China will implement UNSC 
Resolution 1718 seriously and in a responsible manner, but 
would not comment on news reports that China was imposing 
additional controls on trucks crossing into North Korea from 
China or that banks in Dandong were not allowing Chinese to 
send money to the DPRK.  When pressed on the issue of 
possible Chinese financial sanctions, Liu said UNSCR 1718 has 
a clear description of measures to be taken towards North 
Korea, China and all nations are obliged to follow 1718, and 
any other questions regarding financial matters should be 
referred to Chinese commercial authorities. 
 
¶3.  Responding to a question about China building a wall 
along its border with North Korea, Liu said that since 1990, 
China has gradually implemented a boundary defense plan that 
includes setting up wire netting and creating patrol roads in 
border areas.  Emphasizing that any current activity along 
China's border with North Korea is not related to the DPRK's 
recent nuclear test, Liu stated the purpose of putting up 
netting is to improve border control and maintain order in 
border areas and that the current situation along the 
China-DPRK border is normal. 
 
¶4.  Liu said China noticed the DPRK's statement calling UNSCR 
1718 "an act of war" but the important thing is for all 
parties to refrain from escalating tension, to make efforts 
to resume the Six-Party Talks and to resolve issues through 
dialogue and consultation in order to maintain peace and 
stability on the Korean Peninsula. 
 
¶5.  When asked to comment on rumors of another DPRK nuclear 
test, Liu responded that China firmly opposes any North 
Korean nuclear test, is committed to denuclearization and 
opposes nuclear proliferation.  UNSCR 1718 sent an important 
message to North Korea and requires the DPRK to take a 
responsible attitude, said Liu.  UNSCR 1718 is the common 
expression of the will of the international community, said 
Liu, and all parties should exercise restraint. 
 
¶6.  Responding to a question about China's Ambassador to the 
UN Wang Guangya's statement that Beijing would not stop or 
board DPRK ships, Liu said UNSCR 1718 shows UN consensus and 
sends a strong message to the DPRK that its actions were 
unacceptable.  To improve the current situation, all parties 
must act to relax tensions, said Liu.  Actions that could 
further worsen the situation will not help the common 
interest of resolving the issue peacefully, he said. 
 
BEIJING 00021987  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
¶7.  China is acting on the assumption that the DPRK did, in 
fact, conduct a nuclear test on October 9, and as more 
information is made available it appears clear that such a 
test did occur, said Liu. 
 
CHINA'S FOOD AID TO DPRK AND HEALTH MINISTER VISIT 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶8.  In response to a comment that the World Food Program 
reported China reduced its food aid to the DPRK by two-thirds 
in recent months, Liu said he was not sure where the reporter 
got his statistics as China has always provided humanitarian 
assistance to North Korea and will continue to do so as it is 
the correct thing to do. 
 
¶9.  Liu had no information about a purported visit by the 
Chinese Minister of Health to Pyongyang or about any other 
Chinese official contact with the DPRK. 
 
JAPAN'S NUCLEAR OPTION 
---------------------- 
 
¶10.  China's reaction to recent comments by Japanese 
officials that Japan should examine its own nuclear options 
is that Japan, as an NPT signatory, must stick to the three 
"no nuclear principles," said Liu. 
 
SECRETARY RICE TO VISIT OCTOBER 20-21 
 
SIPDIS 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶11.  Liu confirmed that U.S. Secretary of State Rice will 
visit China October 20-21 at the invitation of Foreign 
Minister Li Zhaoxing.  She will meet with FM Li and other 
Chinese officials. 
 
FRENCH PRESIDENT CHIRAC TO VISIT OCTOBER 25-28 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶12.  France's President Chirac will visit China October 25-28 
at the invitation of President Hu Jintao, said Liu, noting 
that as both China and France are members of the UNSC the 
issue of North Korea will likely be discussed. 
 
CHINA-NEPAL BORDER SHOOTING 
---------------------------- 
 
¶13.  Liu said he had no new information or comments about 
television footage showing Chinese border patrol officials 
shooting apparently unarmed Tibetans crossing from China into 
Nepal, stating that all relevant information is already 
released. 
Randt