06CAIRO6821
PANDEMIC INFLUENZA: CAIRO PREPARATIONS FOR POSSIBLE
Thu Nov 09 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHEG #6821 3131527
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 091527Z NOV 06
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 2540UNCLAS CAIRO 006821 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/ELA, OES/WINN, A/GSSI FOR PACKER, CA/OCS FOR KRICHTER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AMGT AMED TBIO ASEC CASC KFLU KSAF KSEO
SUBJECT: PANDEMIC INFLUENZA: CAIRO PREPARATIONS FOR POSSIBLE 
SHELTER-IN-PLACE 
 
REF: STATE 177681 
 
¶1. (U) Since the outbreak of Avian Influenza in Egypt and 
neighboring countries in 2005, post has actively urged both mission 
members and the wider AMCIT community to prepare for pandemic 
influenza.  In order to alert the community on the basics of AI and 
pandemic influenza preparation, the Embassy health unit published 
"shelter-in-place" instructions in our weekly circular, conducted 
numerous town hall meetings within and outside of the mission 
community, and spoke at two regional conferences for international 
schools.  The health unit routinely reminds mission members to keep 
a 12-week supply of food and water in their homes. In keeping with 
worldwide guidelines, DOS supplied post with enough Tamiflu to 
provide treatment for 35% of American and LES employees and American 
family members. 
 
¶2. (U) The Consular section, in addition to disseminating several 
warden messages to the community, also posted the State Department 
fact sheet on AI on the ACS website with links to relevant DOS, CDC, 
and other USG websites.   Since Egypt has the second highest number 
of human cases in the world this year, the Consular section is 
prepared to rapidly inform the AMCIT community of any changes in the 
disease, such as sustained human to human transmission, through 
email, text messages, and a telephone hotline.  Post is distributing 
a DOS produced video on preparing for pandemic influenza both within 
and outside of the mission community. 
 
¶3. (U) Water supply: Embassy Cairo, one of the largest missions in 
the world, recognizes and takes seriously the potential water 
shortage situation that could occur in the event of pandemic 
influenza.   Due to the size of the mission, we estimate a 12-week 
water supply to be roughly 126,000 gallons.  Therefore, post 
constantly reminds mission members to maintain individual supplies 
of water in their homes.  Additionally, the Embassy commissary 
maintains a supply of 100 cases of local water, and 100 cases of 
imported water.  In preparation for Y2K, post purchased several 
back-up water tanks.  The commissary has 425 liters of bleach in 
supply, for potential use in water purification while the Embassy 
chancery has an additional 75 liters. 
 
¶4. (U) Avian Influenza Working Group:  Post's AIWG meets on a 
regular basis both internally and with Egyptian authorities. The 
AIWG has established a series of tripwires, outlining appropriate 
steps for the EAC, CONS, MED, and RSO.  The wealth of USG agencies 
in Cairo, including FAS, NAMRU, USAID, and many State offices, is a 
great asset to post's AI and pandemic influenza preparation. 
 
RICCIARDONE