06CAIRO258
PRESIDENTIAL SPOKEMAN'S STATEMENT FOLLOWING
Wed Jan 18 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

181103Z Jan 06UNCLAS CAIRO 000258 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV SY IZ IS IR EG UN IAEA
SUBJECT: PRESIDENTIAL SPOKEMAN'S STATEMENT FOLLOWING 
MUBARAK-VICE PRESIDENT MEETING 
 
 
In a press conference on January 17 following President 
Mubarak's meeting with Vice President Cheney, Presidential 
Spokesman Soliman Awwad made the following statement: 
 
Begin statement: 
 
The Mubarak-Cheney talks lasted for two hours and touched on 
various issues, including the Middle East, Sharon's health, 
Palestinian elections, Iran, Iraq, the Syrian-Lebanese 
situation, multilateral relations, and bilateral relations. 
 
Iraq: 
 
The talks dealt with means of restoring calm, stability, and 
independence and maintaining Iraqi unity while achieving 
dtente among various factions.  Egypt has trained Iraqi 
troops and security elements in Egypt and is still offering 
to help Iraq rebuild its cadres.  Through ORASCOM Telecom, 
Egypt is taking part in the reconstruction of Iraq despite 
the difficult conditions Iraq is going through. 
 
Iran: 
 
There has to be a certain quorum for an emergency IAEA 
meeting in Vienna to discuss referring Iran's nuclear file to 
the SC.  Egypt calls for continuing the (international) 
dialogue with Iran through diplomatic channels.  Israel is 
the only country in the region whose nuclear establishments 
are not subject to inspection and the guarantees of the IAEA. 
 We call for internationalizing the NPT and having all 
countries abide by the provisions of the Treaty, including 
Israel.  We also urge Iran to show further flexibility and 
transparency because the Middle East does not need a nuclear 
weapon race.  Egypt's call for removing all WMD from the 
region goes back 15 years.  The credibility of the EU 
position towards Iran,s nuclear program will remain 
dependent on (adopting) a similar position towards 
internationalizing the NPT without any double standards. 
 
Syria-Lebanon: 
 
We can't say that the Mubarak-Cheney talks today came up with 
solutions, yet the talks were part of Mubarak's contacts with 
various international and regional leaders.  The issue is not 
simple, but it has to be based on conformity with legitimacy 
and the implementation of SC resolutions.  Egypt always calls 
for complying with UN and SC resolutions.  You cannot call 
for adhering to legitimacy with regard to the Palestinian 
issue and the peace process and not to other issues.  Syria 
has responded (positively) to the investigating commission 
and declared compliance with the legitimacy of the (relevant) 
UN resolutions.  We keep on encouraging the Syrian and 
Lebanese sides to comply with legitimacy and reach the best 
method of normalizing and restoring bilateral relations to 
their healthy course.  Mubarak's consultations with VP Cheney 
are just like his consultations with French President Chirac 
on January 4, as well as his contacts with regional and 
international parties with the aim of reaching an appropriate 
formula that would allow Syria to cooperate with the 
international investigating commission.  One of these 
formulas is how to find a way out to continue the cooperation 
while maintaining Syria's dignity and sovereignty. 
 
Egypt-U.S.: 
 
Mubarak did not have time last year to visit the U.S.  His 
last visit was in April 2004.  The year 2005 was a busy year 
that was full of major political developments that changed 
Egypt's democratic experience in December 2005.  All options 
are open for a Mubarak visit to the U.S. this year but this 
issue was not discussed and no date has been set.  Bilateral 
relations are deep and fixed and bilateral cooperation is 
diverse and multifaceted even if viewpoints are not identical 
on one issue or another.  The Mubarak-Cheney meeting is 
expressive of the U.S. appreciation of Egypt's role.  The 
U.S. VP comes to hear Mubarak's views just like Mubarak heard 
the U.S. views on various regional issues. 
 
Reform: 
 
Friends in Washington know that Egypt is not going to go back 
on reform.  Egypt has declared this on many occasions and so 
did the President himself.  Egypt's democratic image in 
December 2005 was totally different from January 2005. 
 
End statement. 
 
RICCIARDONE