06DAMASCUS3491
Damascus Media Reaction: Israeli Operation in Lebanon
Wed Jul 19 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0001
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #3491/01 2000446
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 190446Z JUL 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0382
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6109
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 3955
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2489
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7152
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1142
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4528
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0748
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 6887UNCLAS DAMASCUS 003491 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: Israeli Operation in Lebanon 
(7/17-18) 
¶1.  Summary: Syrian papers reported that President Asad received 
a message from Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad expressing 
support for Syria in the face of any threat or attack. The 
 
message was conveyed by Iranian Foreign Minister Manouchehr 
Mottaki when President Asad received Mottaki and an accompanying 
delegation on Monday. Talks during the meeting dealt with the 
continuing Israeli aggression against Lebanon, regional and 
international positions on the Israeli war against Lebanon and 
Palestine, and means of backing the Lebanese and Palestinian 
peoples. Both sides stressed the necessity of continuing 
consultations between the two countries regarding outstanding 
issues. 
Papers also reported a statement by Information Minister Mohsen 
Bilal that "Syria vowed a "harsh and direct" response if it is 
attacked by Israel. "Any aggression against Syria will have a 
firm and direct response, not limited in time or means." 
Papers also reported that the regional Leadership of the Al-Baath 
Party reviewed the latest political and military developments in 
the region in light of the continuing Israeli operation in 
Lebanon, means that should be taken to confront it, and possible 
developments, asking the government to outline suitable plans and 
take procedures to confront all possibilities. The Regional 
Leadership renewed support for the resistance in confronting the 
Israeli aggression, stressing the legitimate right of the 
resistance to use all means to liberate its lands and restore 
usurped rights. 
Papers also reported that the Syrian Ministry of Health on Monday 
sent a new shipment of aid for the Lebanese people, including 6 
tons of emergency medical and nutritional materials. Meanwhile, 
the Lebanese Ministry of Social Affairs said that Syria continued 
offering its human support to the Lebanese people in the face of 
the Israeli terrorist offensive against the country, in 
cooperation with the Lebanese-Syrian Higher Council in solidarity 
with the Lebanese people. For its part, the Lebanese National 
News Agency reported that the Syrian Ministry of Social Affairs 
has installed centers at the borders to receive Lebanese refugees 
and take them to Damascus and offer them needed help. 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"A message to President Asad from Iranian President Ahmadinejad: 
Iran supports Syria in facing any threat or aggression. Iranian 
FM Motakki: Israeli aggression on Lebanon and Gaza is 
premeditated" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 7/19) 
 
"The Regional Command of the Al-Baath Party stresses support for 
Lebanese resistance, praises positions of the Arab people, and 
reviews political and military developments in light of the 
Israeli aggression on Lebanon and means of confronting all 
possibilities" (Government-owned Tishreen, 7/18) 
 
"The Syrian people voices support of the national resistance in 
angry demonstrations" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 7/18) 
 
"Haifa is under shelling again. A million Israeli settlers go to 
shelters. The UN Security Council fails to adopt a resolution. 
Warnings against a regional war. French Prime Minister calls for 
humanitarian truce, calls on Israel to exercise self-restraint" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 7/18) 
 
"Information Minister Bilal: 'Any Israeli aggression against 
Syria will be met with a firm and direct response with no 
limits.' The Central Command of the Ba'ath Party Progressive 
Front hails the steadfastness of the resistance: The Israeli 
aggression is a model of state terrorism" (Government-owned Al- 
Thawra, 7/17) 
 
"Another day of Israeli massacres in Lebanon before the world 
community's eyes. Hizbollah SecGen Nasrallah: We are doing well 
and Israel is heading toward defeat. Hizbollah shells Haifa with 
missiles. Scores of Israelis killed and injured. Speaker of the 
Lebanese Parliament Berri: 'The UN is a partner in the Marwahin 
Massacre.' Lebanese Amal Movement joins Hizbollah in the battle 
against Israel. The enemy uses internationally prohibited 
weapons" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 7/17) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delegation on Monday. Talks during the meeting dealt with the 
continuing Israeli aggression against Lebanon, regional and 
international positions on the Israeli war against Lebanon and 
Palestine, and means of backing the Lebanese and Palestinian 
peoples. Both sides stressed the necessity of continuing 
consultations between the two countries regarding outstanding 
issues. 
Papers also reported a statement by Information Minister Mohsen 
Bilal that "Syria vowed a "harsh and direct" response if it is 
attacked by Israel. "Any aggression against Syria will have a 
firm and direct response, not limited in time or means." 
Papers also reported that the regional Leadership of the Al-Baath 
Party reviewed the latest political and military developments in 
the region in light of the continuing Israeli operation in 
Lebanon, means that should be taken to confront it, and possible 
developments, asking the government to outline suitable plans and 
take procedures to confront all possibilities. The Regional 
Leadership renewed support for the resistance in confronting the 
Israeli aggression, stressing the legitimate right of the 
resistance to use all means to liberate its lands and restore 
usurped rights. 
Papers also reported that the Syrian Ministry of Health on Monday 
sent a new shipment of aid for the Lebanese people, including 6 
tons of emergency medical and nutritional materials. Meanwhile, 
the Lebanese Ministry of Social Affairs said that Syria continued 
offering its human support to the Lebanese people in the face of 
the Israeli terrorist offensive against the country, in 
cooperation with the Lebanese-Syrian Higher Council in solidarity 
with the Lebanese people. For its part, the Lebanese National 
News Agency reported that the Syrian Ministry of Social Affairs 
has installed centers at the borders to receive Lebanese refugees 
and take them to Damascus and offer them needed help. 
End of summary. 
 
"Syrian aid to the Lebanese people continues. Syrian facilitation 
for arrivals from Lebanon through al-Arida crossing-point" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 7/18) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
--------------------------------------- 
 
"The Real Objectives of the Aggression" 
 
--------------------------------------- 
 
Muhammad Khair al-Jamali, a columnist in government-owned Al- 
Thawra, commented (7/17): "Israel is telling a flagrant lie when 
it says that it has launched its open war on Lebanon, with a 
systematic methodology that surpasses Nazi methods, to remove the 
threat of the Lebanese resistance, or to bring back its two 
captive soldiers who are held by Hizbollah. For what does the 
bombing of civilians have to do with ensuring the security of 
Israel?  What does this savage devastation of all these vital 
facilities have to do with bringing back the two captured 
soldiers?  And what does the terrorizing of peaceful residents 
have to do with bringing back the two soldiers? 
 
"This aggressive madness seeks revenge from Lebanon and its 
resistance for the defeat they inflicted on Israel and its army 
when they forced it to withdraw from southern Lebanon six years 
ago.... Another aim is to eliminate Lebanon as a role model for 
resistance which has corrected the equation of the conflict in 
the Arabs' favor and proved for the first time in the history of 
the conflict that it is possible to achieve liberation through 
patient, steadfast, and stubborn resistance. 
 
"The third aim is to isolate the resistance by mobilizing the 
domestic Lebanese front against it and robbing it of popular 
support, which is the key to its strength, to its steadfastness, 
and to its ability to achieve a balance of fear and deterrence. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delegation on Monday. Talks during the meeting dealt with the 
continuing Israeli aggression against Lebanon, regional and 
international positions on the Israeli war against Lebanon and 
Palestine, and means of backing the Lebanese and Palestinian 
peoples. Both sides stressed the necessity of continuing 
consultations between the two countries regarding outstanding 
issues. 
Papers also reported a statement by Information Minister Mohsen 
Bilal that "Syria vowed a "harsh and direct" response if it is 
attacked by Israel. "Any aggression against Syria will have a 
firm and direct response, not limited in time or means." 
Papers also reported that the regional Leadership of the Al-Baath 
Party reviewed the latest political and military developments in 
the region in light of the continuing Israeli operation in 
Lebanon, means that should be taken to confront it, and possible 
developments, asking the government to outline suitable plans and 
take procedures to confront all possibilities. The Regional 
Leadership renewed support for the resistance in confronting the 
Israeli aggression, stressing the legitimate right of the 
resistance to use all means to liberate its lands and restore 
usurped rights. 
Papers also reported that the Syrian Ministry of Health on Monday 
sent a new shipment of aid for the Lebanese people, including 6 
tons of emergency medical and nutritional materials. Meanwhile, 
the Lebanese Ministry of Social Affairs said that Syria continued 
offering its human support to the Lebanese people in the face of 
the Israeli terrorist offensive against the country, in 
cooperation with the Lebanese-Syrian Higher Council in solidarity 
with the Lebanese people. For its part, the Lebanese National 
News Agency reported that the Syrian Ministry of Social Affairs 
has installed centers at the borders to receive Lebanese refugees 
and take them to Damascus and offer them needed help. 
End of summary. 
 
"The fourth aim is to serve notice to Arabs that the toll of the 
approach based on resistance to the Zionist-US enterprise in the 
region is huge devastation that is similar to the devastation 
Israel is now causing in Lebanon.  The administration of the 
neoconservatives has been carrying out such devastation in Iraq. 
 
"It is shameful to see some Arabs weakening and caving in to the 
aggression and its terrorist tools by blaming the resistance for 
these hostilities, overlooking the fact that the real cause of 
all this lies in Israel's arrogance, in its expansionist 
aggressive policy, in its determination to perpetuate its 
occupation of Arab territories, in its incessant threats against 
the Arabs, in its attempt to silence each and every resisting 
voice, and before all else, in the flagrant US bias in favor of 
Israel, which has been seen by successive Israeli governments as 
encouragement for aggression against the Arabs, carried out 
whenever they so wish." 
 
----------------------- 
 
"From Qana to Marwahin" 
 
----------------------- 
 
Omar Jaftali, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen 
commented (7/17): "Any observer of regional developments is bound 
to call into question the roles and responsibilities of the 
United Nations and the Security Council.... 
 
"Has this international organization, which is supposed to be the 
guarantor of world security and peace, turned into an umbrella 
for protecting Israel? 
 
"This question is prompted by the nature of the Israeli 
aggression and international complicity in this terrorist 
criminal aggression, which has been pouring its wrath on Lebanese 
towns, villages, and cities since the Qana massacre of 1996 up to 
the Marwahin massacre and the massacres being perpetrated in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delegation on Monday. Talks during the meeting dealt with the 
continuing Israeli aggression against Lebanon, regional and 
international positions on the Israeli war against Lebanon and 
Palestine, and means of backing the Lebanese and Palestinian 
peoples. Both sides stressed the necessity of continuing 
consultations between the two countries regarding outstanding 
issues. 
Papers also reported a statement by Information Minister Mohsen 
Bilal that "Syria vowed a "harsh and direct" response if it is 
attacked by Israel. "Any aggression against Syria will have a 
firm and direct response, not limited in time or means." 
Papers also reported that the regional Leadership of the Al-Baath 
Party reviewed the latest political and military developments in 
the region in light of the continuing Israeli operation in 
Lebanon, means that should be taken to confront it, and possible 
developments, asking the government to outline suitable plans and 
take procedures to confront all possibilities. The Regional 
Leadership renewed support for the resistance in confronting the 
Israeli aggression, stressing the legitimate right of the 
resistance to use all means to liberate its lands and restore 
usurped rights. 
Papers also reported that the Syrian Ministry of Health on Monday 
sent a new shipment of aid for the Lebanese people, including 6 
tons of emergency medical and nutritional materials. Meanwhile, 
the Lebanese Ministry of Social Affairs said that Syria continued 
offering its human support to the Lebanese people in the face of 
the Israeli terrorist offensive against the country, in 
cooperation with the Lebanese-Syrian Higher Council in solidarity 
with the Lebanese people. For its part, the Lebanese National 
News Agency reported that the Syrian Ministry of Social Affairs 
has installed centers at the borders to receive Lebanese refugees 
and take them to Damascus and offer them needed help. 
End of summary. 
 
Beirut's southern suburbs.... 
 
"While the world is talking about the two captive Israeli 
soldiers, and saying that Israel has the right to defend itself, 
nobody cares about the rights and sovereignty of the Lebanese. 
 
"In the past few days, having received a warning to leave their 
village, the residents of Marwahin sought shelter with the UN 
monitors [UNIFIL personnel]. What was their fate? They were 
kicked out, and then they met an aerial bombardment that killed 
them, dispersing body parts and shedding more blood of innocent 
people. Is it not shameful and disgraceful for the United 
Nations' role to reach this level of complicity with Israel?  And 
what is the lesson that the Arab nation is supposed to learn from 
this?" 
 
--------------------------------------- 
 
"Different War and Burning Battleships" 
 
--------------------------------------- 
 
Michel Khayyat, an op-ed writer in government-owned Al-Ba'th, 
wrote (7/17): "While the surprise of the [1973] October 
liberation war, which broke the long arm of the Zionist-Israeli 
enemy and brought down its warplanes by the hundreds, was known 
as SAM [surface-to-air missiles], which were competently used by 
the Arab fighters of Syria and Egypt, the new surprise for this 
arrogant, stubborn, and mentally retarded enemy was the torching 
of the battleship off the Beirut coast--the battleship that 
terrorized unarmed civilians, particularly in sisterly 
Lebanon.... 
 
"Israeli battleships poured their lava on southern Lebanon during 
Operation Grapes of Wrath in 1996.... Israeli battleships, 
sophisticated warplanes, artillery, and surface-to-surface 
missiles, which Israel has used massively, have failed to achieve 
any victory unless the criminal invaders, who came to Palestine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delegation on Monday. Talks during the meeting dealt with the 
continuing Israeli aggression against Lebanon, regional and 
international positions on the Israeli war against Lebanon and 
Palestine, and means of backing the Lebanese and Palestinian 
peoples. Both sides stressed the necessity of continuing 
consultations between the two countries regarding outstanding 
issues. 
Papers also reported a statement by Information Minister Mohsen 
Bilal that "Syria vowed a "harsh and direct" response if it is 
attacked by Israel. "Any aggression against Syria will have a 
firm and direct response, not limited in time or means." 
Papers also reported that the regional Leadership of the Al-Baath 
Party reviewed the latest political and military developments in 
the region in light of the continuing Israeli operation in 
Lebanon, means that should be taken to confront it, and possible 
developments, asking the government to outline suitable plans and 
take procedures to confront all possibilities. The Regional 
Leadership renewed support for the resistance in confronting the 
Israeli aggression, stressing the legitimate right of the 
resistance to use all means to liberate its lands and restore 
usurped rights. 
Papers also reported that the Syrian Ministry of Health on Monday 
sent a new shipment of aid for the Lebanese people, including 6 
tons of emergency medical and nutritional materials. Meanwhile, 
the Lebanese Ministry of Social Affairs said that Syria continued 
offering its human support to the Lebanese people in the face of 
the Israeli terrorist offensive against the country, in 
cooperation with the Lebanese-Syrian Higher Council in solidarity 
with the Lebanese people. For its part, the Lebanese National 
News Agency reported that the Syrian Ministry of Social Affairs 
has installed centers at the borders to receive Lebanese refugees 
and take them to Damascus and offer them needed help. 
End of summary. 
 
to set up a Zionist entity there, think that their destruction of 
homes, their torching of farms, the damage they cause to bridges, 
and their elimination of innocent civilians is victory.... As a 
matter of fact this only hastened their abysmal defeat at the 
hands of the heroic Lebanese resistance in May 2000 thanks to 
great Syrian support.... 
 
"And here is the heroic Lebanese resistance torching the 
battleship and causing it to sink. The Israelis thought that 
their battleships and other combat ships were unsinkable. That is 
why they deployed them off the Lebanese coast as if they were on 
a picnic. Well, this is no longer the case. Have the Israelis 
realized that their war with the resistance is no longer a 
picnic, that their battleships will be set ablaze, that their 
planes will be shot down, that their soldiers will be captured, 
and that they and their cities will meet the same fate as has 
been meted out against Arab homes and cities in Lebanon and 
Gaza?" 
 
Seche