06KABUL2234
EXBS Afghanistan Advisor Monthly Reporting Cable ?
Tue May 16 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO6432
PP RUEHDBU RUEHIK RUEHYG
DE RUEHBUL #2234/01 1361451
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 161451Z MAY 06
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0256
INFO RUCNEXC/ECRBS COLLECTIVE
RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHXP/ALL NATO POST COLLECTIVE
RUCNIRA/IRAN COLLECTIVE
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2546
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 5956
RUEHUNV/USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA 1368
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHDC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDC
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHDC
RUEFHLC/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHDC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 KABUL 002234 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR ISN/ECC PVANSON, ACHURCH, KCROUCH AND JLCOLLINS; 
CBP/INA FOR JKELLY; DOE/NNSA FOR RSTUBBLEFIELD; DOC FOR 
ELOCKWOOD-SHABAT; DOT FOR APARAMESWARAN; SECDEF FOR 
MHOFFMANN, FLIGHT, AND RVIERKANT 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: ETTC PARM PREL KSTC KNNP AF
 
SUBJECT: EXBS Afghanistan Advisor Monthly Reporting Cable ? 
April 2006 
 
KABUL 00002234  001.3 OF 006 
 
 
I.QSUMMARY 
 
1.Q(U) The Border Management Initiative (BMI), spear- 
headed by the Afghan Reconstruction Group (ARG), Embassy 
Kabul, has an overarching objective to increase border 
security and customs revenues through interagency, inter- 
ministerial, and international coordination and 
synchronization of reform efforts at key Border Crossing 
Points (BCPs).  To meet these twin objectives, Embassy 
Kabul is recommending development of a transitional force 
to develop and manage implementation of the BMI initiative. 
 
2.Q (U) During this reporting period, the EXBS Advisor 
for Afghanistan met with the BMI Working Group which 
consists of senior level administrators from the above 
mentioned organizations and the Islam Qalah Sub-Working 
Group consisting of senior level administrators, planners 
and advisors from the various organizations to prepare for 
the deployment of the International Border Management Team 
(IBMAT) to the Herat Province on the Iranian border. 
 
3.Q (SBU) On April 11 ? 16, 2006, the IBMAT, accompanied 
by officials from ARG, USAID-funded Bearing Point and the 
Ministries of Interior, Finance, and Commerce, conducted a 
detailed border security and customs operations assessment 
in the Afghan province of Heart. 
 
END SUMMARY 
 
II. ITEMS OF BROAD INTEREST. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The Afghan Ministries of Interior and Finance are 
in the process of reviewing a Memorandum of Understanding 
(MoU) dated and signed September 4, 2005 that delineates 
the Areas of Responsibility (AoR) of the Afghanistan Border 
Police (ABP) and Customs Police at the Customs Border 
Crossing Points (BCPs).  Although the Customs Police and 
the ABP are part of the Ministry of Interior (MoI), the 
Customs Police fall under the direction of the Ministry of 
Finance (MoF) while performing their duties within the 
Customs BCP facility.  This crossover responsibility of the 
Customs Police has created a ?turf battle? between the ABP 
and the Customs Police.  A recent copy of the MoU has been 
translated into Dari that has been provided to the two 
agencies to use as a guide. Furthermore, as a result of an 
assessment for the Islam Qalah BCP project, officials from 
MoI and MoF have teamed up together at the Islam Qalah BCP 
to lay out their respective AoRs in an attempt to end their 
disputes. MoI and MoF have agreed to promote this practice 
and adhere to the MoU nation-wide. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The Ministries of Commerce and Finance have 
reached agreement pertaining to the ownership of BCP 
property in several of the major BCPs including Islam Qalah 
and Towraghundi. The land owned by the Ministry of Commerce 
(MoC) is being turned over to the MoF at these locations, 
affording MoF the opportunity to improve their 
infrastructure at the customs facility and thereby 
providing greater control and a more effective and 
efficient facility to conduct customs operations.  It is 
hoped that these agreements will pave the way for future 
cooperation between the MoC and MoF in reform efforts at 
other BCPs. 
 
III. COMPLETED ACTIONS FOR THE REPORTING PERIOD. 
 
¶6. (SBU) On April 3, 2006, a meeting was held with the 
Islam Qalah Sub-Working Group (IQSWG) in preparation of an 
 
KABUL 00002234  002.3 OF 006 
 
 
assessment of the Islam Qalah BCP customs operations and 
border security.  The IQSWG consists of representatives 
from the ARG/BMI; international donors; Combined Forces 
Command of Afghanistan (CFC-A); Combined Security 
Transition Command of Afghanistan (CSTC-A) (formerly Office 
of Security Cooperation of Afghanistan (OSC-A)); and the 
Ministries of Finance, Interior, and Commerce.  Items 
discussed were the itinerary of the IBMAT, logistical 
support, team members, GoA dignitaries attending the 
assessment, and targeted assessment items of interest. The 
items of interest included the examination of customs 
processes and procedures, inspection and valuation of 
cargo, infrastructure, personnel salaries, personnel 
literacy, training, managerial capacity, immigration, 
security procedures, corruption, and issues in dispute 
between the Ministries of Finance, Interior, and Commerce. 
Letters of authorization from the relevant ministries were 
received authorizing the IBMAT access to their respective 
properties and facilities. 
 
¶7. (SBU) On April 10, 2006, a meeting was held with the 
IQSWG  to introduce group members to the USG IBMAT from 
Washington, DC and familiarize the USG IBMAT with their 
international partners who would be joining them during the 
assessment.  The members of the IBMAT included subject- 
matter experts from the Department of Homeland Security 
Office of Customs and Border Protection (DHS/CBP) headed by 
the South Asia program manager from the Bureau of 
International Security and Non-Proliferation Office of 
Export Control and Cooperation (ISN/ECC), Washington, DC; 
the Export Control and Related Border Security Advisor for 
Afghanistan; German Police and Project Office (GPPO); and 
CSTC-A Police Reform Directorate (PRD).  Officials from the 
Italian Guardia di Finanza and USAID Bearing Point joined 
the USG IBMAT for portions of the assessment.  An advisor 
to the Ministry of Finance explained the status of the 
Management Intervention Teams (MITs) that were installed at 
the Islam Qalah BCP and the Herat Inland Container Depot 
(ICD) one month prior to the assessment.  The MITs were 
deployed to replace managers suspected of weak performance 
and possible corruption.  It was intended that these MITs 
prepare the two customs facilities for a cooperative and 
transparent environment during the IBMAT assessment.  The 
IBMAT was briefed on the items discussed at the April 3, 
2006 meeting and given the opportunity to have a Q&A 
session prior to beginning their assessment. 
 
IBMAT VISITS HERAT PROVINCE 
 
¶8. (SBU) On April 11 ? 16, 2006, the IBMAT team, led by Ms. 
Jimmie Collins, South Asia Program Manager (ISN/ECC), 
traveled to Herat Province where, during their stay, they 
met with DynCorp police training instructors and mentors, 
Afghanistan Customs Authorities, Customs Police and the ABP 
6th Brigade Commander and his staff. 
 
¶9. (SBU) The IBMAT team assessed the Herat ICD; Regional 
Training Center (RTC); ABP 6th Brigade HQ; Islam Qalah, 
Towraghundi, and Kalatanizar BCPs.  (NOTE: the Kalatanizar 
crossing point is considered an ?unofficial? BCP and is not 
part of the thirteen GoI priority BCPs.  END NOTE).  The 
assessment concentrated on the detailed evaluation of human 
capital, infrastructure and traffic flow, equipment and 
supplies, policies and procedures, and resourcing as they 
relate to Afghan border security and customs operations. 
Preliminary assessment findings, in general, mirrored 
findings of previous USG and international donor 
assessments and studies.  The findings also highlighted 
 
KABUL 00002234  003.3 OF 006 
 
 
additional issues not previously identified and that were 
contributing to the lack of proper operational performance. 
 
¶10. (SBU) The IBMAT assessment found deficiencies in BCP 
security; proper payment of salaries; training for Customs 
officials and advanced training for ABP; organizational 
structure; roles & responsibilities; employee oversight; 
immigration and customs procedures; resource management; 
risk management; cargo processing; and revenue collection. 
The IBMAT team will provide a formal report of its findings 
and recommendations to interagency partners in Washington, 
DC, as well as to the IQSWG. 
 
¶11.  (SBU) During the assessment, officials and advisors 
from the Ministries of Finance, Interior, and Commerce 
reached tentative agreements on disputed topics as they 
toured the assessment sites. 
 
IBMAT OUT-BRIEF AT U.S. EMBASSY 
 
¶12.  (SBU) On April 16, 2006, the IBMAT team provided an 
out-brief to the Kabul Embassy Acting DCM, Alonzo Fulgham. 
Members of the IQSWG, and representatives from USAID, Kabul 
Embassy?s Economic Section, CFC-A, and CSTC-A were also 
present.  The team reviewed their preliminary findings, 
including findings related to GoA and USG/international 
donor border security and customs reform efforts.  The 
IBMAT team lead also provided recommendations related to 
IBMAT findings with respect to ARG/BMI staffing to manage 
the BMI. 
 
IBMAT OUT-BRIEF WITH COMMANDING GENERAL 
 
¶13.  (SBU) On April 17, 2006, the IBMAT team out-briefed 
Lieutenant General Eikenberry, Commanding General, CFC-A, 
reiterating  findings and recommendations as presented to 
the Kabul Embassy Acting DCM.  General Eikenberry commented 
that the use of the reach back concept was less effective 
in managing programs than having the appropriate personnel 
in country.    General Eikenberry and Ms. Collins 
discussed in detail the potential options for in country 
staffing of BMI implementation, including the methods of 
integrating the on-going efforts of USG, international and 
GoA reforms.  General Eikenberry offered CFC-A assistance 
in support of the BMI implementation team including 
possibly housing the team at the CFC-A compound in Kabul. 
 
IBMAT REPORT REQUIREMENTS 
 
¶14.  (SBU) On April 18, 2006, the IBMAT team compiled 
assessment reports from all IBMAT members and provided a 
draft report of findings and recommendations to Edward 
Smith, Chief of Staff for the Afghan Reconstruction Group 
and Border Management Initiative. 
 
¶15. (SBU) The IBMAT team is currently in the process of 
preparing a final report of its findings and 
recommendations.  This report will be forwarded to the 
ARG/BMI Chief of Staff for submission to the IQSWG for 
review and discussion on the recommended reforms to be 
implemented. 
 
IBMAT ASSESSMENT FOLLOW-UP MEETINGS 
 
¶16.  (SBU) On April 24, 2006, the IQSWG reviewed the draft 
IBMAT findings and discussed potential implementation of 
IBMAT recommendations prior to receipt of the final report. 
Additional items discussed included the April 22, 2006 
 
KABUL 00002234  004.3 OF 006 
 
 
deployment to Herat of CFC-A Engineers.  These engineers 
were tasked with assessing the Islam Qalah and Towraghundi 
BCP properties for the purpose of planning future police 
and border security projects directed by CSTC-A.  CSTC-A 
has announced it would construct 450 border security posts 
throughout Afghanistan.  MoC requested better coordination 
by MoF regarding tariff policies set by MoC and implemented 
by MoF.  (NOTE: MoC alleged that MoF has been independently 
making tariff policy without consulting with MoC, which in 
turn has been receiving a large number of complaints from 
traders.  END NOTE.) 
 
¶17.  (SBU) On April 25, 2006, the BMI Working Group 
circulated the draft findings of the IBMAT team to its 
members.  Additionally, the Working Group further refined 
their Sub-Working Group structure as follows: 
 
a. IQSWG ? Combined with the Ministries of Interior and 
Finance MoU SWG during the trial project period (NOTE: the 
trial project is focused on the 6th ABP Brigade AoR.  END 
NOTE.) 
 
b. Donor Coordination SWG ? No changes.  It is focused on 
collection of donor contributions and program/project 
coordination amongst donors. 
 
c. Trade Facilitation SWG ? No changes.  It is intended to 
coordinate efforts between the Ministries of Commerce, 
Interior, Finance, and Transportation. A draft MoU between 
Commerce and Finance will be prepared to address mutual 
issues and interests at the BCPs to avoid overlapping and 
de-confliction of AoRs. 
 
d. Infrastructure SWG ? No change.  The objective of this 
SWG is to collect the functional requirements of a BCP from 
the Ministries of Interior, Finance, Commerce, Agriculture, 
and Transportation and the Da Afghanistan Bank (Central 
Bank) to develop a site adaptable design of a model BCP. 
 
e. Budget SWG ? This SWG is to be combined with the Metrics 
SWG to identify sources and application of funds to 
discover any gaps that need to be addressed. 
 
¶18. (SBU) The BMI Working Group discussed the following 
items of interest: 
 
a. Strongly encourage the Ministry of Interior to 
participate fully at BMI meetings and be fully engaged in 
decision-making processes with other Ministries engaged 
within the BMI. 
 
b. Ministry of Finance to contact the Spanish Ambassador 
regarding the consignment of Spanish subject-matter experts 
to assist Customs at the Islam Qalah BCP and Herat ICD. 
 
c. UNOPS and World Bank Customs Reform Unit (CURE) embedded 
in the MoF is to prepare a short briefing for the IBMAT 
team on Afghanistan Customs Department?s fast track finance 
institute; bonded carrier system; bonded warehouse system; 
rewards system; and other programs of interest to inform 
them of activities currently underway or completed. 
 
d. Italian Embassy to provide defined specifications of the 
Guardia di Finanza technical assistance. 
 
e. World Bank CURE acquisition of special stamp and inks to 
prevent forgery of customs documents, e.g. Afghanistan 
Customs Clearance Document (ACCD). 
 
KABUL 00002234  005.3 OF 006 
 
 
 
f. USAID Bearing Point exploring the authority of the 
Deputy Minister of Finance in an effort to empower the 
Deputy to fire Customs Officials. 
 
g. U.S. Army Corp of Engineers (ACE) to deploy teams in 
mid-June 2006 to conduct a reconnaissance/assessment during 
seven trips to the twelve remaining major BCPs to be 
completed within two and a half months. 
 
h. Ministries agree with and will take steps to have all 
cargo cleared at the BCPs and not the ICDs. 
 
i. BMI Ministries seeking Cabinet approval to appoint the 
MoF as the ?lead? Ministry having managerial oversight at 
the BCPs. 
 
j. MoC drafting the port handling/transshipment act that 
will include the issuance of private licensing for 
privatized port handling. 
 
k. MoC and MoF to continue constructive dialogue on the 
appropriate use of BCP land and facilities to prevent donor 
funded approved projects from expiring during the current 
fiscal year. 
 
l. Ministries agreed that the collection of revenue at the 
BCPs must be deposited into the GoA general treasury fund 
and are seeking a Presidential decree to establish these 
procedures and the establishment of an MoI and MoF budget 
for the Border Police and Customs. 
 
m. The Ministries of Commerce, Finance, and Interior are 
working out agreements to resolve outstanding issues 
relating to the BCP under construction at Shir Khan Bandar 
on the Afghanistan and Tajikistan border. 
 
n. BMI is establishing a timeline for MoC approval of a BCP 
site-adaptable design. 
 
o. Immediate steps to be taken include the implementation 
of the border management MoU between the MoI and MoF; 
development of SOPs in accordance with the MoU; training of 
MoI and MoF Officers on the SOPs; and quality assurance 
measures. 
 
¶19.  (U) TRAINING CONDUCTED DURING REPORTING PERIOD. 
 
Nothing to report. 
 
¶20. (U) EQUIPMENT DELIVERED DURING REPORTING PERIOD. 
 
Nothing to report. 
 
¶21. (U) IMMINENT TRAINING OR EQUIPMENT STATUS UPDATE. 
 
Nothing to report. 
 
¶22. (U) SIGNIFICANT DEVELOPMENTS IN EXPORT CONTROLS, 
NONPROLIFERATION, OR RELATED BORDER SECURITY. 
 
Nothing to report. 
 
¶23. (U) OTHER SIGNIFICANT ISSUES/EVENTS. 
 
¶1.  EXBS: The Afghanistan EXBS Advisor issued invitations 
to the Senior Advisor to the Minister of Commerce and to 
the Director of International Transit and Trade 
 
KABUL 00002234  006.3 OF 006 
 
 
Facilitation to participate as observers at the 8th Central 
Asia and Caucasus Regional Forum on Export Controls.  This 
conference is being held in Tbilisi, Georgia on May 16-18, 
¶2006.  Ministry representatives agreed to discuss the 
inclusion of EXBS Program assistance into their five-year 
plan and begin to identify the offices and ministries 
within the GoA that would participate in such a program 
after their return from the conference.  Both delegates 
agreed that they would explore the possibility of beginning 
the process by instituting laws and regulations as a basis 
for such a program in the immediate future. 
 
¶2. In subsequent meetings with USAID and ARG, held May 8- 
10, the new Director General of Customs reiterated his 
preference to streamline donor assistance to customs reform 
through USG support. He informed USAID and ARG officials 
that the World Bank CURE project would end and support from 
DfID would end in September 2006.  USAID representative 
informed the Director General that resources to expand 
technical assistance through Bearing Point are unavailable. 
 
 
¶20. (U) RED FLAG U ISSUES.  None to report. 
 
¶21. (U) Please direct any questions or comments to Barry f. 
Lory, EXBS Advisor to Afghanistan; +93-070-234-236, 
extension 4735; lorybf@state.gov or to Jimmie L. Collins, 
South Asia Regional Program Manager, Office of Export 
Control Cooperation, 202-647-1778, collinsjl2@state.gov. 
 
NEUMANN