06MADRID2810
SPAIN COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR R&D TEAM
Thu Nov 02 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Madrid
VZCZCXYZ0007
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMD #2810 3061650
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 021650Z NOV 06
FM AMEMBASSY MADRID
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 1231UNCLAS MADRID 002810 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/WE 
S/CT JAKUB AND DEES 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OTRA SP PTER
SUBJECT: SPAIN COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR R&D TEAM 
 
REF: SECSTATE EMAIL DTD 10/31/06 
 
¶1.  Embassy grants country clearance to the U.S. technical 
representatives; Adam Tarsi, TSWG International Program 
Manager, Mary Ungar, Executive Director IIHS, Ralph Pasini, 
Director, IIHS, Timothy Corcoran, Principal, IIHS, Timothy 
Armstrong, Analyst, IIHS, Jame Boswell, Facility Security 
Officer, IIHS, Todd Brethauer, TSWG Science Advisor, Matthew 
Hardin, Contract Specialist, CTTSO, Matthew Maher, Research 
Assistant, IIHS, Hallie Neumann, Administrative Assistant, 
IIHS, Steven Perkins, IT Manager, IIHS, and Edward Shubert, 
Treasurer, IIHS to Madrid, Spain from November 1 to November 
12, 2006.  The purpose of this visit is to consult with the 
Spanish organizers of a conference on Improvised Explosive 
Devices. 
 
¶2.  Post understands no assistance is required. 
 
¶3.  Visitors are reminded that bearers of diplomatic and 
official passports coming to Spain on official business need 
to obtain a Spanish visa prior to arrival to Spain. 
 
¶4.  THREAT ASSESSMENT: 
 
In general, Spain is safe.  However, Madrid, Barcelona and 
other large cities in Spain -- including resort/convention 
areas such as Benidorm -- attract a large number of criminals 
and pickpockets and frequent incidents of crime of 
opportunity against the unwary do occur.  Carry only 
essential items including a photocopy of your passport's 
photo page.  Visitors can protect themselves against crime by 
being street-smart, alert and aware of their surroundings. 
In the event you are victimized by crime, or experience any 
security-related incident, please contact the Embassy's 
Regional Security Office at 91-587-2550 or after hours at 
91-587-2355.  Official visitors to the Embassy in Madrid or 
the Consulate General in Barcelona are encouraged to receive 
a security briefing from the RSO office at their earliest 
convenience.  Additional information regarding safety and 
security in Spain is available on the U.S. Department of 
State's website (www.embusa.es). 
 
Travelers are encouraged to review the most recent Worldwide 
Caution issued by the Department of State. As the Department 
of State continues to develop information on any potential 
security threats to Americans overseas, it shares credible 
threat information through its Consular Information Program 
documents, available on the Internet at 
http://travel/state.gov.  In addition to information on the 
Internet, U.S. travelers can hear recorded information by 
calling the Department of State in Washington, D.C. at 
202-647-5225 from their touch-tone telephone, or receive 
information by automated telefax by dialing 202-647-3000 from 
their fax machine. 
AGUIRRE