06MINSK1255
BELARUS: LIBETDACT
Thu Dec 07 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Minsk
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHSK #1255/01 3411248
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 071248Z DEC 06
FM AMEMBASSY MINSK
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 5413UNCLAS MINSK 001255 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPT FOR WHA/CCA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD ETTC PREL BO CU
SUBJECT: BELARUS: LIBETDACT 
 
REF: STATE 191752 
 
¶1. Summary: The GO is building economic ties with Cuba, 
strongly spports the Cuban government, and has no interest 
n promoting democracy, the protection of human rigts or 
free market reform.  End summary. 
 
Belarsian-Cuban Investment, Trade and Exchanges 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶2.   Question 1: Belarus and Cuba actively seek spheresof 
economic cooperation.  On November 22, Belaruian Foreign 
Minister Viktor Gaisyonok stated at he Belarusian-Cuban 
Commission on Trade and Econmic Cooperation, "today we are, 
above all, intersted in the stabilization of trade between 
Belaru and Cuba, the development of relations in the baning 
and finance spheres, cooperation in biomedicne and an 
increase in supplies of medicines and quipment to Cuba." 
 
¶3.    As of November 1, the OB reported that 
Belarusian-Cuban trade and investment totaled USD 17.7 
million, up 25.7 percent from this time last year. 
Belarusian exports to Cuba totaled USD 6.2 million in goods, 
including trucks (USD 2.4 million), engines (USD 1 million), 
tractors (USD .5 million), spare parts for machinery (USD .2 
million) and radio equipment (USD .3 million), tires (USD .2 
million), busses, vehicles, footwear, petrochemicals, and 
electronics.  Cuban exports to Belarus totaled USD 11.5 
million and included raw sugar cane, medicine, tobacco 
products, hard liquor, and citrus products. 
 
¶4.    Belarusian traders and investors in Cuba include the 
National Bank of Belarus, Belvneshekonombank, Priorbank, 
Belagroprombank, Belarusbank, Belinvestbank, Minsk Tractor 
Works, MAZ (bus and truck factory), Minsk Engine Plant, BelAZ 
(dump truck factory), Belarusian State Television and Radio 
Company (BSTRC).  OAO Amkodor plans to open a construction 
equipment factory in Cuba.  Cuban companies investing in 
Belarus include Cuba's Central Bank and Cuban Institute of 
Radio and Television. 
 
¶5.    Question 2: On September 3, 2000, Belarus and Cuba 
signed two separate trade agreements, the Agreement Between 
the Government of the Republic of Belarus and the Government 
of the Republic of Cuba on Trade and Economic Cooperation and 
the Agreement Between the Republic of Belarus and Republic of 
Cuba on Friendly Relations and Cooperation, which sought to 
promote and protect mutual investment, develop mutual trade, 
assist businesses in the respective countries in conducting 
joint investment projects, and create financial and 
industrial groups and joint ventures.  On February 26, 2003, 
Belarus and Cuba signed the Agreement Between the Committee 
on Standardization, Metrology and Certification with the 
Council of Ministers of the Republic of Belarus and the 
National Bureau on Standardization of the Republic of Cuba, 
which allowed for freer movement of goods between the nations. 
 
¶6.    In addition, press reports indicate that the GOB has 
ratified other bilateral agreements within the past two 
months, which promote greater cooperation and exchange in 
transportation, air service, politics, legal matters, 
information exchange and municipal services.  New agreements 
are currently in the works to enhance cooperation between the 
central banks and increase trade of potash fertilizers, 
fabrics, clothes, and dried milk. 
 
¶7.    Question 3: On November 23, Belarus and Cuba signed an 
accord to reinitiate educational exchange programs, which 
have been frozen since the fall of the Soviet Union.  On the 
same day, the Belarusian State Television and Radio Company 
signed an agreement with the Cuban Institute of Radio and 
Television allowing the two institutions to exchange radio 
and TV news, culture, music and entertainment programs. 
 
Belarus and Cuba: Friends Forever 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶8.    Question 4: Belarus considers Cuba to be one of its few 
close friends and allies on the world stage and has no 
interest in promoting democracy or human rights in Havana. 
Belarus actively supports Cuban initiatives in international 
fora.  On November 9, Cuban Ambassador to Belarus Omar Medina 
Quintero expressed his country's gratitude to Belarus for its 
support and assistance in the international arena and in 
opposing one of the great powers (i.e. the United States). 
 
¶9.    This support in the international arena is mutual.  On 
October 30, Belarusian Prime Minister Sergey Sidorskiy 
expressed Belarus' mutual gratitude to a visiting Cuban 
delegation led by parliamentary president Dr. Ricardo Alarcon 
for Cuba's support of Belarus policies and initiatives, 
stating "we feel the personal support of Ricardo Alarcon, 
which he renders to Belarus in international organizations as 
a professional in politics." 
 
¶10.   Question 5: In September, President Aleksandr 
Lukashenko traveled to Havana for the Non-Aligned Movement 
Summit.  Following his visit, representatives from Cuba's 
Central Bank came to Minsk on October 8-12 to discuss a 
possible bank cooperation agreement.  On October 30, the 
Cuban National Assembly President Dr. Alarcon called on the 
Belarusian Parliament in Minsk to discuss measures to promote 
closer economic cooperation between the two countries.  In 
conjunction with the Belarusian-Cuban Commission on Trade and 
Economic Cooperation on November 21-23, Cuban Deputy Prime 
Minister for foreign investment and economic cooperation 
Ricardo Guerrero Blanca visited Minsk. 
Stewart