06PARIS4176
FRENCH TV TF-1 REQUEST TO INTERVIEW POTUS
Mon Jun 19 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS PARIS 004176 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR R, EUR, EUR/PPD, EUR/WE 
DEPT PASS TO FOREIGN PRESS CENTER 
 
¶E. O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO PREL FR
SUBJECT:  FRENCH TV TF-1 REQUEST TO INTERVIEW POTUS 
 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY.  France's leading private television station has 
contacted the Ambassador to request an interview with President Bush 
in advance of the G-8 meetings.  We strongly endorse this request 
and ask (para 6) Department concurrence and support in securing 
White House approval.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  France's TF-1 television's primetime hour-long evening newscast 
boasts 39% of the audience share for that time slot, thanks in part 
to its refusal  - unusual in this media environment - to take an 
identifiable editorial line.  TF-1 draws viewers from across the 
French middle classes because of its popular series programmed for 
immediately after the nightly newscast. 
 
¶3.  TF-1's nightly news anchorman Patrick Poivre d'Arvor is a 
well-respected media figure, one of the most identifiable in France, 
and akin to Walter Chronkite in his heyday.  He has interviewed 
guests ranging from movie stars to heads of state, including 
Secretary of State Colin Powell in 2003.  Despite repeated requests 
 
SIPDIS 
to the White House through its Washington bureau, TF-1 has not 
interviewed an American President since President Clinton in 1999. 
 
¶4.  At a lunch for Ambassador Stapleton and in subsequent contacts, 
Poivre d'Arvor raised the idea of an interview with President Bush. 
He has proposed to do this in the run-up to the G-8 meetings in St. 
Petersburg.  Questions would focus on the U.S. agenda for the G-8, 
U.S.-European relations, Iraq, Iran, and the U.S.-French bilateral 
relationship.  Details such as precise topics and exact date remain 
to be negotiated with TF-1. 
 
¶5.  U.S. and French positions are close on a number of key issues 
including Iran, Syria/Lebanon, Hamas, non- and counter-proliferation 
and other aspects of our global agenda.  Partly as a result of 
France's own experience, French officials are restrained on 
difficult issues such as Guantanamo and the allegations of secret 
detainee flights in Europe.  A Presidential interview with TF-1 
would constitute a major media event, reach the prime TV viewership 
here and affirm the positive momentum in our bilateral relations and 
the importance of U.S.-European cooperation in support of the 
freedom agenda. 
 
¶6. ACTION REQUESTED:  Embassy strongly endorses TF-1's interview 
request and requests Bureau and Department concurrence as well as 
support in securing White House approval for this interview. 
 
STAPLETON