06PARIS574
USUNESCO GUIDANCE REQUEST:  NEW INFORMATION
Mon Jan 30 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 000574 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FROM USMISSION UNESCO PARIS 
E.O. 12958:    N/A 
TAGS: KPAO ECPS ETRD ECON EINT ETTC EAID UNESCO
SUBJECT:  USUNESCO GUIDANCE REQUEST:  NEW INFORMATION 
ON POSSIBLE IPDC BUREAU CANDIDATES 
 
 
¶1.   (SBU) SUMMARY AND GUIDANCE REQUEST:  Mission has 
obtained new information on possible Dutch and Greek 
candidacies for the International Program for the 
Development of Communication Bureau (IPDC).  Mission 
has learned that although the Dutch have given 2 
million USD to the program over the past twenty-five 
years, none of it was donated in recent years.  Mission 
has also learned that Greece is interested in running 
for the Bureau.  They have given $78,882 to the IPDC 
over the past 25 years.  In light of this information 
and the Secretary's emphasis on Transformational 
Diplomacy, Mission requests guidance from IO/UNESCO on 
whether to reconsider running for the IPDC Bureau. 
Mission outlines four possible courses of action below. 
END SUMMARY AND GUIDANCE REQUEST. 
 
----------------------- 
DUTCH NOT RECENT DONORS 
----------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  Mission has obtained new information about 
The Netherlands possible IPDC Bureau candidacy. 
Mission has learned that the Netherlands, a 
historically significant contributor to the IPDC, has 
not made any donations in recent years.  Mission has 
learned that the Netherlands has now asked their 
National Commission to form a committee to see how they 
might be able to identify resources and possible 
funding for the IPDC in order to explore options. 
 
------------------------ 
POSSIBLE GREEK CANDIDACY 
------------------------ 
 
¶3.  (SBU) In the meantime, Mission has learned that the 
Greek delegation to UNESCO is considering a run for the 
IPDC Bureau.  (COMMENT:  The Greek Ambassador to UNESCO 
is a former journalist, which may explain their 
interest in this small but worthy program.  END 
COMMENT.) Mission notes that the Internet Governance 
Forum (IGF), an outcome of the World Summit on the 
Information Society (WSIS) Tunis Agenda, will be held 
in Athens this fall and that Greece has indicated an 
interest in hosting the IGF secretariat on a permanent 
basis. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
AN EU EDGE IN THE COMMUNICATION SECTOR? 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Mission observes that if either the 
Netherlands or Greece represents Group One at the IPDC, 
it would give the EU countries an even stronger voice 
in the area of Communication and Information at UNESCO. 
France already chairs the Information for All Program, 
which is the other main program in UNESCO's 
Communication and Information Sector. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
VALUE OF THE IPDC FOR DEMOCRACY BUILDING 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  Mission recommends increasing USG 
involvement with the IPDC because it is an ideal means 
to advance the Secretary's Transformational Diplomacy 
agenda by developing independent media worldwide.  IPDC 
projects require relatively small sums for local 
initiatives using radio, television and the Internet to 
succeed.  One example is "the Voice of Afghan Women" a 
women's community radio project to which the USG 
donated 60,000USD through the IPDC in FY05.  The 
program was so successful that the women now have a TV 
station to reach an even wider audience.  Mission 
believes that this example, among many others, 
demonstrates how the IPDC can be an excellent vehicle 
for strengthening active participation in civil 
society, especially by women.  It also compliments USG 
initiatives on education for democracy. 
 
------------------------------- 
FOUR POSSIBLE COURSES OF ACTION 
------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  Mission outlines four possible courses of 
action for Washington to consider: 
     ¶1.   Mission remains on the IPDC Council, does not 
run for the Bureau, and does not designate ICSECA funds 
for the IPDC. 
     ¶2.   Mission remains on the Council, does not run 
for the Bureau, but designates some ICSECA funds to the 
IPDC. 
     ¶3.   Mission remains on the Council, does not run 
for the Bureau, and supports either The Netherlands or 
Greece for the Bureau. 
     ¶4.   Mission runs for the IPDC Bureau, and 
Washington commits to designating some ICSECA funds to 
the IPDC. 
Oliver