06PARIS217
AVIAN FLU:  WORLD ORGANIZATION FOR ANIMAL
Thu Jan 12 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PARIS 000217 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FROM USMISSION UNESCO 
 
STATE FOR IO/EDA SHARON KOTOK, IO/T AMY BRIDGMAN 
IO/UNESCO KEVIN PILZ, OES HAROLD FOSTER, BARRIE RIPIN, 
OES/STAS ANDREW W. REYNOLDS, OES/IHA JOHN S. BLODGETT, G 
STATE FOR NSC GENE WHITNEY 
STATE FOR NSF INTERNATIONAL OFFICE 
STATE FOR USDA PETER FERNANDEZ, RON DEHAVEN, AND MICHAEL 
¶J. DAVID 
STATE FOR USAID DENNIS CARROLL 
 
E.O. 12958:     N/A 
TAGS: EAID TBIO SOCI SENV TSPL KSCA EAGR OIE
SUBJECT:  AVIAN FLU:  WORLD ORGANIZATION FOR ANIMAL 
HEALTH DG OUTLINES PLANS TO COUNTER THREAT IN ADVANCE OF 
JANUARY 17-18 BEIJING PLEDGE CONFERENCE 
 
 
¶1. Summary: In Advance of the January 17-18 International 
Conference on Avian and Human Pandemic Influenza, The 
Director General of the World Organization for Animal 
Health (OIE) is pleased with the level of cooperation 
among the various international organizations leading 
this effort (World bank, FAO, WHO).  OIE Director General 
Dr. Bernard Vallat also expressed satisfaction that U/S 
Dobriansky consulted with him in September 2005 on USG 
efforts.  Vallat reported that the work of his 
organization had informed proposals that the World Bank 
will table for consideration by donors in Beijing.  He 
underlined his organization's willingness to continue to 
take a leading role in enhancing mechanisms to improve 
veterinary services at the global and regional levels. 
Vallat stressed that sustainability and capacity building 
will be key to countering avian flu and to averting 
future crises, as is the case in current international 
efforts to establish a tsunami mitigation network. 
Vallat noted that in addition to the threat posed to 
human life, animal diseases (epizooties) also pose a 
sometimes devastating, though less well-publicized, 
threat to the livelihood of many rural poor. 
 
¶2.  In addition, Vallat stressed his organization's work 
in countering the threat of bio-terrorism, including with 
the Ames laboratory.  Vallat described working relations 
with the USG good overall, expressing satisfaction with 
the OIE's role in providing a scientific basis for 
resolving potential trade disputes, stemming from its WTO 
mandate.  He also highlighted other potential areas of 
U.S. engagement (paras 7-8).  End Summary. 
 
In Beijing run-up, OIE posed to work globally, regionally 
 
¶3.  USUNESCO Science Officer met with World Organization 
for Animal Health (OIE) Director Bernard Vallat to 
preview the OIE's role at the January 17-18 Beijing 
pledging conference.  USDA secondee Alejandro Thiermann 
also attended the meeting.  On avian flu, Vallat 
reported, the World Bank is taking the lead in 
coordinating potential donors.  He said that the Bank 
would table detailed proposals, informed by the work of 
the OIE.  The price tag will total approximately 1 
billion USD, half of that going to animal health (mainly 
control), half to human and public health (mainly 
prevention and preparation). 
 
¶4.  Vallat said that international efforts to counter 
avian influenza need to be organized on three levels.  At 
the global level, there should be a coordination 
mechanism (with the participation of international 
organizations, funding agencies and private sector 
players) to promote good governance mechanisms for 
veterinary health policies.  This would entail working 
with stakeholders to define priorities for governance, 
standards, capacity building and training, with a focus 
on sustainability.  A global approach is necessary, 
because inadequate veterinary service standards 
prevailing in any single country now pose a threat to 
all. 
 
¶5.  At the regional level, what is needed are "mirror 
structures" that could be operated out of the OIE's eight 
existing regional offices (that participate in a OIE/FAO/ 
WHO partnership).  These regional structures would set up 
"Quality Centers" to provide technical support to member 
states and evaluate national projects.    These regional 
structures would adapt "input" from the global level to 
regional needs.  They would promote appropriate 
governance models, implement capacity building programs, 
and provide technical support to projects to improve 
national veterinary services.  A specialized team would 
organize seminars at the regional level including both 
developed and developing countries.  For many years, 
Vallat reported, the OIE has worked to enhance capacity 
building in all regions -- working with national 
representatives and delegations - to improve local 
knowledge, for example organizing 6-7 seminars annually 
in each region.  Other collaborative efforts focus on 
harmonization of policies.  Thanks to recent health 
crises, these efforts have gained more recognition. 
 
¶6.  At the national level, Vallat explained that the OIE 
has developed standards associated with the quality of 
governance and public policy; this is in accordance with 
WHO goals to manage public health issues according to 
scientific standards.  These standards are key to 
fighting avian flu.  As of now, more than 100 developing 
countries cannot comply with standards designed to detect 
and control disease.  Up until now, it has not been easy 
to interest the donor community in these efforts, 
because they have not been perceived as "demand-driven." 
Capacity building to improve the ability of countries to 
control diseases -- including vulnerability assessments 
of national veterinary services - is essential.  Vallat 
observed that on-site staff training is a priority in 
some countries, as is improving national legislation, and 
assessing implementation of existing legislation.  (Note: 
The OIE works in the context of the Standards and Trade 
Development Facility, established in 2002 in order to 
assist developing countries in meeting their WTO-SPS 
agreement obligations.  THE WTO, FAO, and WHO also 
partner in this effort.  End Note). 
 
¶7.  Vallat said that although there are many 
international organizations involved in current efforts 
to counter avian flu - including the World Bank, the WHO, 
the FAO -- the various players had succeeded in arriving 
at a common position and ongoing dialogue in the run-up 
to Beijing. At the November 7-9 Geneva Meeting on Avian 
Influenza, the OIE succeeded in gaining recognition of 
the importance of good governance, adequate veterinary 
standards, and effective legislation and administrative 
practices, as well as technical competence.  Even before 
the current outbreak of avian flu, West Nile Disease and 
SARS taught the international community that if 
infrastructure is not strengthened, we will not be able 
to detect or prepare for future crises.  Vallat noted 
increased interest in animal diseases due to their 
potential impact on public health, but stressed that 
these diseases also have a sometimes devastating impact 
on the livelihood of the rural poor.  He seized Science 
Officer's analogy that efforts to put in place measures 
to counter avian flu and future crises are similar to 
current efforts to establish an international tsunami 
mitigation system:  the challenge is to set up suitable 
infrastructure before a catastrophe takes place. 
 
IOE-USG "Harmonization" on Avian Influenza is Positive 
 
¶8.  Vallat expressed appreciation at the fact that U/S 
Dobriansky called him in September 2005 to "harmonize" 
the communication and substance of USG measures to 
counter avian influenza.  Overall, Vallat described the 
U.S. role within the OIE as positive, highlighting the 
fact that Amcit Alejandro Thiermann is president of the 
most important commission of the OIE - of the 
international animal health code -- and acts as his 
special advisor.  Vallat expressed satisfaction that 
OIE's science-based standards were useful in resolving 
trade disputes between the U.S. and Canada and Japan. 
 
¶9.  Vallat said that he faces only two challenges 
regarding the OIE's relations with the US.  The first is 
linked to the fact that the U.S. does not systematically 
implement OIE-agreed international standards.  He said 
that this might over the long term hinder the U.S. 
position in countering trade barriers erected by other 
countries -- although he acknowledged the complexity of 
the U.S. regulatory system.  The second challenge relates 
to the U.S. voluntary contribution to the OIE; U.S. 
annual dues to the OIE total 130,000 USD, the same as for 
other industrialized countries.  Vallat encouraged the 
U.S. to increase its voluntary contribution - it 
currently ranks twelfth among member states.  One 
possible opportunity would be to help finance the OIE's 
regional office located in Argentina and financed by the 
Argentine government.  Vallat stressed that the U.S. 
benefits from this office, because it helps resolves 
trade problems before they lead to crises. 
 
An "old lady" faces new challenges -- including terrorism 
 
¶10.  Vallat explained that the IOE dates from 1924.  Its 
work has generated more interest post-mad cow: 
"Policymakers understand that we have an important role 
to play in policy relating to the link between animal 
health and public health."  Vallat stressed that 
globalization -- and the attendant increase in the 
movement of goods and people -- provides pathogens the 
opportunity to travel, and to become more dangerous via 
mutation and the exchange of genetic material.  Vallat 
stressed as a particular concern the potential use of 
viral pathogens by terrorists; he cited the OIE's work 
with AMES lab in identifying potential terrorist tools, 
and devising guidance for governments on how to counter 
these. 
 
¶11.  Organizationally, the OIE includes 167 member 
states; the organization provides a network to facilitate 
direct contact in order to arrive at common positions at 
the technical level.  Member states are represented by 
their chief veterinary officers, who provide a link 
between technical experts and those implementing policy. 
Vallat observed that most governments are more apt to 
invest more in animal diseases that pose a direct threat 
to human health.  In furtherance of its goals, the OIE 
provides weekly updates on the propagation of 100 
diseases, immediate alerts, and well as annual statistics 
related to animal health.  This would be of use in 
combating bio-terrorism in that it would help identify 
sources of pathogens. 
 
¶12.  Another aspect of the OIE's mission stems from the 
fact that it is recognized by the WTO's as a standard 
setting body for veterinary services.  The 150 labs 
affiliated with the OIE provide a scientific "common 
denominator" for these standards that are adopted by 
member states at annual meetings. 
Oliver