06TAIPEI13
MEDIA REACTION: PRESIDENT CHEN SHUI-BIAN'S NEW YEAR
Wed Jan 04 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 TAIPEI 000013 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - ERIC 
BARBORIAK 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: PRESIDENT CHEN SHUI-BIAN'S NEW YEAR 
SPEECH 
 
¶1. Summary: Major Chinese-language Taiwan dailies focused 
their coverage January 2-3 on two issues: President Chen 
Shui-bian's New Year speech, and the U.S. arms procurement 
bill.  President Chen Shui-bian said Sunday in his New Year 
speech that his administration would adopt a new policy, 
"Proactive Management, Effective Liberalization," to deal 
with future cross-Strait economic and trade issues.  Chen 
also said he looks forward to a civilian-drafted bill for 
"Taiwan's New Constitution" in 2006, adding that he hopes 
that the bill could be passed by 2007.  The second issue in 
the news is that KMT Legislator John Chiang revealed Monday 
in the Legislative Yuan that AIT Director Douglas Paal told 
him that the items and prices of U.S. arms to be procured by 
Taiwan are adjustable, depending on Taiwan's own needs. 
 
¶2. In terms of Chinese- and English-language newspaper 
editorials, the most scrutinized news development was 
President Chen Shui-bian's New Year speech. Every Taiwan 
daily followed their individual, traditional pro- 
independence or pro-unification stance when commenting on 
the speech.  The pro-independence dailies, "Liberty Times," 
"Taiwan Daily," "Taiwan News," and "Taipei Times," applauded 
President Chen's speech and said they hoped that Chen could 
carry out the goals outlined in the speech.  "Liberty Times" 
said President Chen needs to take actual action in pursuit 
of the goals set by him.  "Taiwan Daily" urged Chen not to 
hesitate when carrying out the goals set forth in his 
speech.  The English-language "Taiwan News" editorialized 
that Chen has finally found the clear role and goals of the 
DPP government.  The English-language, "Taipei Times" 
applauded President Chen for the aggressive stance he will 
take to deal with old problems. 
 
¶3. The pro-unification "United Daily News" criticized 
President Chen for using Taiwan's future as the last bet for 
his presidency and the independence movement.  The pro- 
unification, English-language, "China Post" commented that 
Chen's speech declared war on China and domestic political 
parties. 
 
¶4. The centrist, pro-status quo "China Times" said President 
Chen's closed-door policy has been proven to be the wrong 
policy and will not benefit Taiwan in the future.  Another 
op-ed piece in "China Times" said President Chen's 
unwillingness to seek domestic reconciliation and to improve 
relations with China will leave Taiwan spinning futilely. 
End summary. 
 
A) "Anticipating President Chen to Take Actual Actions under 
Correct Directions" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 600,000] 
noted in its editorial (1/2): 
 
". Regarding the so-called civilian version of a draft of a 
`new Taiwan constitution,' the so-called `referendum on a 
new constitution,' the earlier proposals for [Taiwan] name 
rectification and a new constitution, and a variety of 
reforms, the public, in fact, have never pressed the 
government to complete them in a timely manner.  They only 
hope that the government will spare no effort to reach these 
goals.  If President Chen is dedicated to it, [we] believe 
the people will be happy to see him be successful.  The key 
lies in that if one wants to pursue these goals, he cannot 
take the route of promoting economic affairs and political 
affairs in the opposite direction [economic dependence on 
China and political independence from China].  President 
Chen's term will end in more than two years.  It is not a 
short time.  As long as there is a will, there is a way. 
From now on, let's wait and see President Chen's actions." 
 
B) "2008 New Constitution is the Key to Taiwan's Fate, and 
We Should Fortify Internal and External Communications to 
Facilitate Constitutional Reforms" 
 
The pro-independence, limited circulated "Taiwan Daily" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (01/03): 
 
". We hope that the President does what he says without any 
more hesitation, so that Taiwan's new constitution can be 
put to a referendum during his term.  This will be Chen's 
historical move to answer to Taiwan's history, and to have 
hope for Taiwan's future. ." 
 
C) "Chen Finally Finds Strategic Clarity" 
 
The pro-independence "Taiwan News" [circulation: 20,000] 
editorialized (01/03): 
 
"The most important message conveyed by President Chen Shui- 
bian in his `Democratic Taiwan: Thriving Onward' New Year's 
Day message is that his Democratic Progressive Party 
administration has finally attained a degree of strategic 
clarity about the role and goals of the DPP government and 
how to get the needed popular support to achieve at least 
some of its goals. 
 
". Chen also specifically declared that it was essential for 
the DPP government to `stand on the side of the people' and 
`link with social forces' to promote realization of the 
repossession of ill-gotten KMT party assets, the passage of 
the long-delayed defensive arms procurement bill and other 
political, social and economic reforms obstructed by the 
conservative pan-Blue legislative majority. 
 
". We can see genuine evidence that Chen has engaged in 
`self-examination' regarding the reasons for the DPP's 
recent electoral setbacks. The main shortcoming of the DPP 
government during the past five and a half years has been 
its reluctance or lack of confidence in promoting a new 
philosophy of governance based on the values of the `Taiwan 
democratic road,' namely democracy, freedom, human rights, 
peace, social justice and environmental sustainability. ." 
 
D) "The Grim Road Ahead" 
 
The pro-independence, English language "Taipei Times" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (01/03) 
 
"President Chen Shui-bian's New Year message was different 
from his previous speeches that pretended everything was 
going well. 
 
"This time, he adopted a more aggressive attitude in dealing 
with problems that have plagued the government since 2000. 
 
"Commentators say that since the Democratic Progressive 
Party (DPP) took power, the party has been living in a dream 
world in which "reconciliation" with the opposition is 
possible. This led the government to support a policy of 
`active opening, effective management' over China and 
`reconciliation and coexistence' with the opposition. 
But Chen has finally realized that what the opposition 
really wants is the power to rule. . 
 
". Although Chen placed considerable emphasis on the 
importance of clean government, he retains a number of 
people of dubious character around him and failed to 
satisfactorily address the question of Presidential Office 
staff playing the stock market during office hours. 
 
"His promise to establish a government ethics and anti- 
corruption office under the Ministry of Justice, however, is 
simply adding to the already formidable bureaucracy. If this 
office is to be established, it should be directly under the 
Presidential Office. Regardless, the sheer volume of talk 
and the absence of action on government and other corruption 
have been acutely disappointing. 
 
"A number of Chen's idealistic proposals, such as a 
referendum on a new constitution, are likely to sustain 
confrontation between the government and the legislature. 
But without any clear strategy to have these items appeal to 
lawmakers, it is likely that 2006 will be yet another year 
of gridlock, stalling and impotent speeches." 
 
E) "The World Sees a Chen Shui-bian Who Drinks Poison to 
Heal His Wound!  And an Exasperated and Ferocious War 
Proclamation" 
 
The pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 
400,000] editorialized (1/2): 
 
"Chen Shui-bian's New Year remarks can be seen as an all-out 
proclamation of war against [our] national identity, the 
Republic of China Constitution, mainland China and the 
opposition camp. 
 
"The whole speech indicates that, after nearly one month of 
deliberations since the DPP's major defeat in the three-in- 
one elections, Chen Shui-bian has chosen an even tougher and 
more radical route as the one last bet for his own political 
life and the Taiwan independence movement. . 
 
". We must say that such a `general route' like this is a 
bold gamble by Chen Shui-bian and the Taiwan independence 
movement.  Taiwan or the Republic of China must consider 
whether it wants to be used by Chen Shui-bian and the Taiwan 
independence movement as their last single bet.  The people 
can tell from the remarks, which were filled with bigotry 
and autocracy, that Chen Shui-bian has not really reflected 
on the reasons for his government's failure, and that he has 
selected the wrong strategy to re-create vitality for 
himself and the DPP. ." 
 
F) "Declaration of `War' on Dtente" 
 
The pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (01/02) 
 
"President Chen Shui-bian has done it again. 
 
"In a New Year's Day address, Chen declared war yesterday on 
dtente between Taiwan and China as well as the budding 
reconciliation between his ruling Democratic Progressive 
Party and the opposition Kuomintang. He surprised 
practically everybody, who had been led to believe -- the 
President had warned he was going to make a crucial policy 
speech much more important than either of his two inaugural 
addresses -- that he would offer another olive branch to 
China following the election debacle his party suffered on 
Dec. 3. 
 
". Why President Chen did not even try to offer some 
platitudes to placate the people looking forward to a morale- 
boosting speech on the first day of the year is beyond our 
comprehension. He remains just as combative as he used to 
be. But everybody knows he often does not to say what he 
means. We hope he was his usual self when he spoke before 
the nation yesterday." 
 
 
G) "How Long Can One Close the Door and Act Like an 
Emperor?" 
 
The centrist, pro-status quo "China Times" [circulation: 
400,000] editorialized (01/03): 
 
"If President Chen really wants to promote peaceful 
development across the Strait, the most important thing is 
to restore gradually his credibility [in the eyes of] the 
[Taiwan] people and foreign political figures.  If people 
cannot find consistent information in the President's 
announcements and speeches over the past years, the people 
would feel that they have lost a trustworthy national leader 
even though President Chen still thinks he holds power (and 
is not a lame duck). 
 
". President Chen should understand that trends relating to 
cross-Strait economic and trade relations are not dominated 
either by political figures, or by think-tank consultants, 
but by `the market.' . [Former President] Lee Teng-hui 
suggested the `Go Slow, Be Patient' policy, but he could not 
stop Taiwan industries from moving to China.  President Chen 
suggested the `Effective Management' policy, but he also 
cannot stop entrepreneurs from taking other indirect routes 
to China. . 
 
"President Chen's New Year speech is on the dark green side 
of the spectrum, but one might not have a strong feeling 
from the angle of politics.  The interpretation from 
Industry, however, is quite pessimistic, as is evident in 
the drop of 86.28 points in Taiwan Stock Market Exchange 
yesterday. ." 
 
H) "[Let's] Continue to Spin Futilely and Fight Among 
Ourselves For Another Two Years" 
 
The centrist, pro-status quo "China Times" [circulation: 
400,000] editorialized (01/03): 
 
"Not surprisingly, President Chen Shui-bian officially 
realized his promise in his New Year address, the promise 
made prior to the "3-in-1" elections, to tighten cross- 
Strait relations if the pan-Blue camp won a landslide 
victory. All the optimistic speculations foreign investors 
and legal entities made before the elections are now proven 
to be completely self-indulgent.  Plus President Chen 
directly criticized the opposition parties several times to 
[KMT Chairman] Ma Ying-jeou's face. Everything points toward 
the same direction: President Chen, for quite some time to 
come, no longer seems to seek cross-party reconciliation or 
a keen improvement in cross-Strait relations.  This kind of 
statement [i.e. the New Year speech] can probably entail 
only one conclusion: Everything will continue to spin 
futilely. ." 
 
PAAL