07AITTAIPEI1452
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Tue Jun 26 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1452/01 1770840
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 260840Z JUN 07
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5800
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 6969
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 8221UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001452 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - DAVID FIRESTEIN 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies continued to focus 
news coverage June 26 on the 2008 presidential election; on the 
arrest of a second suspect allegedly involving in a murder case in 
May; and on the aftermath of a tour bus crash Sunday.  In terms of 
editorials and commentaries, an op-ed in the limited-circulation, 
pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" commented on the 
Chen Shui-bian administration's push for a referendum on the 
island's bid to join the United Nations under the name "Taiwan." 
The article urged Washington to "cherish Taiwan's democracy by 
showing more support for Taiwan in the international arena."  An 
editorial in the limited-circulation, pro-independence, 
English-language "Taiwan News" also chimed in by calling on the 
United States and the international community to respond positively 
to the calls by the Taiwan people to join the world community.  End 
summary. 
 
A) "Fighting China's Diplomatic Warfare" 
 
Liu Kuan-teh, a Taipei-based political commentator, opined in the 
pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] (6/26): 
 
"While the administration of US President George W. Bush has 
officially objected to the administration of President Chen 
Shui-bian using the name 'Taiwan' to apply for UN membership this 
year, calling it a move to unilaterally change the cross-strait 
'status quo,' Washington seems to be overlooking measures by Beijing 
to wage diplomatic warfare against Taiwan's participation in the 
international arena. ... 
 
"... In addition to his predecessor Peter Rodman's accusation that 
China violated the 'status quo' last year, [US Deputy Assistant 
Secretary of Defense Richard] Lawless is the first US official to 
 
SIPDIS 
confirm Beijing's military expansion has 'changed' the cross-strait 
'status quo.'  Not only have those two statements illustrated the 
complicated nature of US-Taiwan relations, they have also 
demonstrated an essential need for leaders of both Washington and 
Taipei to engage in a more candid, cooperative and constructive 
dialogue in the next nine months prior to Taiwan's presidential 
election. 
 
"Some analysts have emphasized that since the Bush administration is 
preoccupied with North Korea and Iraq, Taiwan should remain quiet 
and refrain from giving Beijing reasons to pressure the US over 
Taiwan policy.  But even if Taiwan plays the good kid, to what 
extent has Washington successfully urged Beijing to give more space 
to Taipei on the playground?  Bush's recent speech in Prague earlier 
this month serves as an example for Taipei and Washington to rethink 
their bilateral relationship. ... 
 
"If Bush and his administration are serious about this, they should 
cherish Taiwan's democracy by showing more support for Taiwan in the 
international arena.  The Taiwanese government's attempts to 
safeguard its sovereignty in the face of China's constant attempts 
at international isolation and military intimidation should be 
viewed as a model democracy counteracting authoritarian suppression. 
 Who more than Taiwan deserves the promise behind Bush's strategy of 
'seeking and supporting the growth of democratic movements and 
institutions in every nation?'  The US-Taiwan relationship could 
benefit from following such a strategy." 
 
B) "U.N. Referendum Aims to Defend Taiwan's Status" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" [circulation: 
20,000] editorialized (6/26): 
 
"We approve of the decision by the governing Democratic Progressive 
Party to persist with its petition campaign for a national 
referendum on whether Taiwan should apply to join the United Nations 
despite the open demand issued last Tuesday by the U.S. State 
Department for President Chen Shui-bian 'to exercise leadership by 
rejecting such a proposed referendum.'  As noted last week, 
Washington's protest was an improper action for a country that touts 
its commitment to democratic principles, especially since the U.S. 
State Department was obviously mistaken about the nature of the 
referendum drive. ... 
 
"Indeed, Washington policy makers may not appreciate that the 
referendum calling on the government to apply as 'Taiwan' for U.N. 
entry is itself a relatively moderate option in that it does not 
involve any declaration of a change in Taiwan's status or official 
moniker, but only urges the U.N. membership to grant the people of 
Taiwan their just representation in the U.N. in order to prevent the 
erosion of Taiwan's actual autonomy and democracy, the protection of 
which is of priceless value to the world community. ... Given 
Beijing's opposition, such entry is obviously not likely to be 
realized on the short term but a direct application buttressed with 
a demonstration of overwhelming popular support in Taiwan would put 
the issue on the international agenda and serve as a 'reality check' 
 
for world powers (apparently including the Untied States) which 
persist in turning a blind eye to the real state of affairs in the 
Taiwan Strait. 
 
"Moreover, if global powers including the U.S. refuse to take action 
to curb the PRC's drive to 'legalize' its claim over Taiwan in the 
international community, calls in Taiwan for a national referendum 
on more fundamental questions will undoubtedly intensify. ... 
Instead of blaming the victim of the PRC's expansionist ambition, 
the U.S. and the rest of the international community should respond 
to the calls by Taiwan's people and thus preserve both democracy and 
peace in the Taiwan Strait." 
 
YOUNG