07AITTAIPEI1125
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS, TAIWAN'S MILITARY
Fri May 18 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0009
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1125/01 1380904
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 180904Z MAY 07
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5308
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 6795
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 8041UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001125 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - LLOYD NEIGHBORS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS, TAIWAN'S MILITARY 
EXERCISE, INTER-KOREAN RELATIONS 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies all gave 
front-page coverage May 18 to New York Yankees pitcher Wang 
Chien-Ming, whose steady performance Wednesday helped his team 
defeat the Chicago White Sox.  News coverage also focused on the 
DPP's primary results for the year-end legislative elections, on the 
cabinet personnel reshuffle, and on the 23rd Hankuang Military 
Exercise.  The pro-independence "Liberty Times" ran an exclusive 
banner headline on page four that read "[Former Chief of the General 
Staff] Lee Tien-yu Will Head the Ministry of National Defense."  The 
news story also said Lee's accommodating posture will be conducive 
to the passage of the U.S. arms procurements budget. 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, an editorial in the 
mass-circulation "Apple Daily" discussed the lethal factor in 
Taiwan's handling of its foreign relations.  The article said Taiwan 
views the United States as its sole target when handling its foreign 
relations, which has put the island in a position that is constantly 
restricted by the United States.  An editorial in the 
limited-circulation, pro-independence, English-language "Taipei 
Times" criticized Taiwan's Han Kuang military exercise, saying the 
military exercise should "focus on using the available means of 
defense rather than becoming a showcase for expensive weapons 
systems the nation does not possess."  A column in the centrist, 
pro-KMT leaning "China Times" discussed inter-Korean relations and 
said the historic border crossing by North and South Korean trains 
Thursday will have positive significance for the future 
normalization of Seoul-Pyongyang ties.  End summary. 
 
¶3. U.S.-Taiwan Relations 
 
"Lethal Factor and Reflections on Taiwan's Foreign Relations" 
 
The mass-circulation "Apple Daily" [circulation: 520,000] 
editorialized (5/18): 
 
"... There is one lethal factor when it comes to Taiwan's foreign 
relations:  They are directed at the United States only, viewing it 
as the sole target of the island's foreign relations.  The 
consequence is that it leaves Taiwan no elbow room and no depth 
strategically and puts the island in a position of being constantly 
restricted by the United States in all respects.  As a result, once 
the United States, out of its macro-strategic needs, tilts towards 
China, Taiwan will immediately feel that it has lost its support and 
will push itself into a corner and not know what to do.  Even when 
it wants to strive to find a way out, it could be insulted and fail 
because of the United States' suppression. ... Taiwan has violated a 
major taboo when dealing with its foreign relations; it has lost its 
useful value and thus makes itself expendable.  [Taiwan] should 
really spend time to contemplate working out viable resolutions with 
China so as to expand its room and opportunities [in the 
international community] to gain leverage in the relations among 
Washington, Beijing, and Taipei." 
 
¶4. Taiwan's Military Exercise 
 
"Han Kuang: No Guts, All Glory" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] editorialized (5/18): 
 
"For all their pomp and circumstance, the annual Han Kuang ("Han 
Glory") series of military exercises are empty theater.  The 
exercises have only marginal value for preparing the armed forces to 
defend the nation. ...  The focus of this year's exercises -- as 
with most exercises in recent years -- has more to do with the 
ministry taking on the role of arms-purchase advocate than defender 
of the realm.  Thus, after the computer-simulated war games last 
week, we heard that the nation needs more anti-missile systems.  How 
fortuitous:  the Cabinet just happens to have been pushing the 
procurement of PAC-3 Patriot anti-missile system for years. 
 
"For military exercises to be useful, they must focus on using the 
available means of defense rather than becoming a showcase for 
expensive weapons systems the nation does not possess.  Were China 
to attack, the People's Liberation Army (PLA) would unlikely be 
deterred by the fact that Taiwan is 'in the process' of procuring a 
coveted weapons system.  It is no secret that China is rapidly 
developing its military into a relatively advanced fighting force, 
and that Taiwan cannot hope to compete with Beijing on defense 
spending.  But being able to compete with Chinese military spending 
is not the key to defending Taiwan.  The nation's military planners 
must focus on making the outcome of military action against Taiwan 
costly and uncertain.  There are many ways to do this without having 
to purchase billions of dollars of expensive foreign military 
equipment, which would likely be the first items to be targeted in 
an armed conflict.  Taiwan should instead invest in the basics: 
Training, conventional armaments and infrastructure -- marksmanship, 
sniper rifles and bunkers, for instance. ..." 
 
 
¶5. Inter-Korean Relations 
 
"Significance behind the Border Crossing of Korean Trains' " 
 
The "International Outlook" column in the centrist, KMT-leaning 
"China Times" [circulation: 400,000] noted (5/18): 
 
"Trains started running Thursday on two railroads that crossed the 
border between North and South Korea. ...  This development, without 
a doubt, has positive significance for the normalization of ties 
between Seoul and Pyongyang. ...  Now that Pyongyang is in 
possession of nuclear weapons, it has full confidence to haggle with 
Washington over the nuclear issue.  Pyongyang also needs to create 
an image of improved relations with Seoul in an attempt to impose 
increasing pressure on the United States.  Given the complexities of 
the 'Six-Party Talks,' Pyongyang needs Seoul to tilt toward its 
side; as a result, the development that is conducive to the [future] 
normalization of the bilateral relations was naturally a correct 
course [for Pyongyang] to take.  The rail project that has been 
stalled for a long time has finally come to fruition, and perhaps 
other developments will ensue.  Pyongyang will unlikely give up such 
an opportunity [for development] while South Korean President Roh 
Moo-Hyun still remains in office." 
 
YOUNG