07BEIJING889
FEBRUARY 6 MFA PRESS BRIEFING
Tue Feb 06 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO9337
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #0889/01 0371305
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 061305Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4543
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 000889 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL CH
SUBJECT: FEBRUARY 6 MFA PRESS BRIEFING 
 
¶1. Key points made at the February 6 MFA press conference 
were: 
 
-- The Six-Party Talks will resume February 8. 
 
-- The Deputy Spokesperson refused to comment on detained 
AIDS activist Gao Yaojie, referring questions to local 
authorities. 
 
-- China's anti-satellite test does not pose a threat and 
U.S.-China space cooperation will continue. 
 
-- China says Diaoyu islands are territories of China and a 
Chinese survey ship's activities are normal. 
 
-- China remains committed to "developing a normal 
relationship with the DPRK." 
 
-- FM Li will visit India and Japan in February; Premier Wen 
will visit Japan in April. 
 
-- China takes global warming seriously and has low emissions 
on a per capita basis. 
 
Six-Party Talks 
--------------- 
 
¶2. At the regularly scheduled February 6 MFA press briefing, 
Deputy Spokesperson Jiang Yu reiterated that the Six-Party 
Talks will begin on February 8.  Initial meetings will 
include a heads of delegation meeting, a plenary meeting and 
bilateral consultations between the parties.  The Deputy 
Spokesperson said China hopes that all parties can take 
coordinated steps to implement the joint statement to reach 
the goal of nuclear free Korean Peninsula. 
 
AIDS Activist Gao Yaojie 
------------------------ 
 
¶3. The Deputy Spokesperson refused to comment to numerous 
questions about reports that AIDS activist Gao Yaojie was put 
under house arrest after receiving an invitation to attend a 
conference in the United States.  Jiang only stated since 
these reports came from localities, questions should be 
referred to the relevant local authorities.  Chinese 
government puts a great importance on prevention and 
treatment of AIDS, Jiang said. 
 
ASAT Test and U.S.-China Space Cooperation 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. When asked to comment on China's recent anti-satellite 
test, Jiang said China's test does not target or threaten any 
other countries.  Jiang stated that China is opposed to an 
arms race in outer space.  She also stated that space 
cooperation between the United States and China will be 
carried out in accordance with an agreement reached between 
two countries in September 2006.  The United States and China 
will hold regular meetings between their two space agencies 
to explore cooperation in the fields of space and earth 
science, she stated.  Jiang added that there are no specific 
plans for such cooperation at the moment. 
 
China and Japan Dispute over Diaoyu Islands 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. Noting the continuing dispute between China and Japan over 
the Diaoyu islands in the East China Sea, a Japanese reporter 
raised the presence of a Chinese survey ship in the disputed 
waters and asked whether China notified Japan in accordance 
with the 2001 agreement on providing notification of such 
activities.  Stressing the PRC position that the Diaoyu 
Islands are Chinese territory, Jiang said Beijing does not 
accept Tokyo's claim to the Islands.  Chinese ships are 
conducting a normal maritime scientific survey, Jiang added. 
When asked again about this issue, Jiang stated that China 
has the sovereign right over the Diaoyu islands and this 
issue is not related to the notification mechanism. 
 
China-DPRK Relations 
-------------------- 
 
¶6. When asked about recent reports that 20 North Korean 
border guards fled to China, Jiang stated that relevant 
authorities from China and North Korea have effective 
practices for management and maintaining order in border 
areas.  More broadly, Jiang said China remains committed to 
"developing a normal relationship with the DPRK" and that 
China and North Korea maintain normal trade relations.  She 
added that from January 2006 to November 2006, trade between 
two countries increased by five percent.  Jiang also stressed 
that China's "resolute position" on the denuclearization of 
the Korean Peninsula. 
 
BEIJING 00000889  002 OF 003 
 
 
 
China's Defense Budget 
---------------------- 
 
¶7. Jiang was asked if the 14.7 percent rise in China's 
official defense budget is related to North Korea's nuclear 
test and concerns about Japan.  Jiang replied that China will 
abide by the principle of coordinated development of national 
defense budget and the economy to decide the budget on 
military expenditure.  Compared to other countries, she 
argued that China's defense budget accounts for only a 
limited proportion of China's entire budget. 
 
Darfur and China-Africa Cooperation 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶8. Asked about President Hu's visit to Africa and his talks 
in the Sudan, Jiang said that he explained China's position 
to Sudanese President al-Bashir while expressing appreciation 
to the Sudanese Government for trying to solve the Darfur 
issue.  The Deputy Spokesperson said China will abide by 
following principles in dealing with Darfur issue: (1) 
sovereignty of Sudan must be respected, (2) stick to dialogue 
and peaceful negotiations, (3) The African Union and the EU 
should play a constructive role in Darfur issue and (4) 
efforts should be made to promote stability and to improve 
the livelihood of the people of Sudan.  Jiang said China 
announced that it will provide 40 million RMB (approximately 
USD 5.1 million) of assistance in the Darfur region. Jiang 
said that President al-Bashir expressed appreciation to China 
for its humanitarian assistance and stated that Sudan 
accepted former UNSYG Kofi Annan's plan in principle and will 
take part in "peaceful negotiations to restore stability." 
 
¶9. When a reporter mentioned reports criticizing China for 
engaging in a "new colonialism," Jiang responded by saying 
that "African friends have not made those comments about 
China."  She said that China-Africa relations are based on 
"sincerity and joint development to strengthen cooperation 
and self-development capacity in Africa."  China hopes to 
bring benefits to African nations and to finalize the eight 
proposals proposed at the Beijing summit, Jiang said. 
 
President Hu's Africa Trip Update 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶10. President Hu paid a state visit to Zambia and was 
welcomed warmly by the people of Zambia, according to the 
Deputy Spokesperson, responding to a question about protests 
by saying that there were no signs of protests or 
demonstrations against China.  Jiang highlighted that the 
President of Zambia said China has become a strategic partner 
for Africa and that Zambia welcomes investment by more 
Chinese companies. 
 
Protests in Front of Chinese Embassy in Washington 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶11. When asked to comment on reports of demonstrations by 
Uighurs in front of the Chinese Embassy in Washington that 
accused the Chinese government of killing people in 1997, 
Jiang refused to respond.  She stated that the Chinese 
government protects normal religious activities of Chinese 
citizens in accordance with law. 
 
China and WTO compliance 
------------------------ 
 
¶12. In response to a question about President Bush's recent 
comments on the lack of Chinese compliance with WTO 
regulations, Jiang referred to comments made by Chinese 
officials from the Ministry of Commerce. 
 
Premier Wen Jiabao to Visit Japan in April 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶13. Jiang said that Premier Wen Jiabao will visit Japan in 
April to "enhance mutually beneficial cooperation" between 
the two countries.  Details of this visit are still under 
discussion.  Jiang stated that 2007 marks the 35th 
anniversary of normalization of relations between China and 
Japan and is a year of cultural and sports exchanges.  China 
hopes that two countries can use this opportunity to press 
ahead with further development of bilateral ties. 
 
Visit By Burmese Military Leader 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶14. In response to a reporter's question, Jiang confirmed 
that Burmese military leader Thura Shwe Mann is visiting 
China from January 30 to February 6.  The purpose of this 
visit is to improve friendly relations between China and 
Myanmar, said the Deputy Spokesperson, who also confirmed 
 
BEIJING 00000889  003 OF 003 
 
 
that Shwe Mann will meet with Premier Wen Jiabao. 
 
China's Position on Global Warming 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶15. When asked about where China stands in the issues related 
to global warming, Jiang stated that environment and 
sustainable development are in the long-interest of all 
countries.  Settlement of global environmental issues must 
have a joint participation of international community, Jiang 
added.  She stated that climate changes are the result of 
long term emissions by developed countries, which should take 
the responsibility to reduce their emissions in accordance 
with the Kyoto Protocol.  Currently, China's emissions are 
quite low on a per capita basis, she said.  China stands 
ready to make due contribution in reducing gas emission and 
has already made visible achievements in environmental 
protection, Jiang added. 
 
Flood in Jakarta 
---------------- 
 
¶16. Noting that severe floods in Jakarta have left 29 dead 
and 350,000 homeless, Jiang announced that FM Li sent a 
telegram of condolence expressing concern for the victims. 
China's Red Cross will provide  USD 20,000 in assistance to 
the Indonesian government. 
 
FM Li Zhaoxing to Visit India and Japan in February 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶17. At the invitation of Indian FM Pranab Mukherjee, FM Li 
Zhaoxing will pay an official visit to India February 11-14, 
announced Jiang.  During his visit, he will meet with his 
Indian and Russian counterparts at a trilateral meeting.  FM 
Li will also have separate meetings with Indian FM Mukherjee 
and PM Singh to exchange views on bilateral relations and 
other issues of common interests.  China hopes to promote 
friendly relations and strategic partnership between the two 
countries, according to Jiang.  In addition, FM Li will 
attend the opening ceremony of the China-India Tourism 
Friendship Year.  450,000 trips were made between China and 
India last year, Jiang added. 
 
¶18. Jiang said that FM Li will visit Japan February 15-17 to 
meet with Japanese FM Taro Aso.  Other arrangements are still 
under discussion, she stated. 
 
Nine Chinese Citizens Freed in Nigeria 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶19. Asked about the nine recently freed Chinese citizens who 
had been kidnapped in Nigeria, Jiang said that they will be 
returning to China very soon. 
RANDT