07DAMASCUS323
COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR CODEL ISSA, APRIL 5-6.2007
Sun Apr 01 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0008
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0323/01 0911501
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 011501Z APR 07
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3249
INFO RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 6691
RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD PRIORITY 0239UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000323 
 
SIPDIS 
 
CODEL 
SIPDIS 
 
NEA/ELA; H FOR BUTTE DAHL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OREP AMGT ASECAFIN SY
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR CODEL ISSA, APRIL 5-6.2007 
 
REF: SEC STATE 40702 
 
¶1. (U) Embassy Damascus welcomes and grants country clearance 
for the visit of Congressman Darrel Issa, and the other 
members of the delegation: David Abruzzino and Jeremy Bash. 
 
¶2. (U) Control officer and point of contact for this visit is 
Econ Officer Stacey Jones, who can be reached at work: 
(963)-(11) 3391-4444; cell: (963) 093-302-143; home: (963)- 
11) 371-3279; or embassy fax number: (963)-(11) 3391-3999. 
 
¶3. (U) Fiscal Information:  Post has received fiscal data to 
hold rooms and charge official expenses.  Costs include, but 
are not limited to, American and FSN overtime, border 
crossing fees, field travel by Embassy employees, 
transportation costs for official vehicles, long distance 
telephone calls, equipment rentals, representational events, 
and other costs directly attributable to the visit. 
 
¶4. (U) Visa Requirement: Every traveler must have a valid 
Syrian visa prior to departure for Damascus. The Syrian 
government will not normally grant airport or border visas. 
Travelers should apply for visas well in advance, as 
processing time is often slow. 
 
¶5. (U) Security Requirements:  Please forward security 
clearance information for the delegation via cable or email. 
 
¶6. (U) Transportation:  Embassy officers will meet 
Congressman Issa and the other members of his delegation on 
April 5 at the Syrian/Jordanian border.  Post will also 
arrange for transportation to and from official meetings. 
Embassy officers will see Congressman Issa and his delegation 
off at the Syrian/Jordanian border on April 5 or at the 
Damascus airport on April 6 as needed. 
 
¶7. (U) Accommodation: Reservations were made for the 
delegation at the Sheraton Hotel for April 5. Hotel telephone 
number is 963 (11) 373-4630 or 222-9300, fax: 963 (11) 
224-3604.  The daily room rate is USD 125, plus 11 percent 
tax.  It is within per diem and breakfast is included.  The 
maximum time granted for free cancellation is 24 hours prior 
to the day of arrival. 
 
¶8. (U) Communications Support: Post will provide Congressman 
Issa and other members of his delegation with an 
international cell phone for official use while in-country. 
Long-distance telephone calls can also be placed from the 
Embassy.  The internet can be accessed through a stand-alone 
PC in the Embassy. There is no charge for this service.  The 
internet can also be accessed from hotels in Damascus by 
dialing to one of three different ISP's in Syria. 
 
¶9. (U) Currency Exchange: Post will disburse per diem to the 
delegation for April 5.  During normal Embassy business 
hours, the Embassy Class B Cashier provides accommodation 
exchange from dollars to Syrian pounds at the current rate 
for institutions, against cash, traveler's checks, and, with 
the authorization of the financial management officer, 
personal checks.  Cashier hours are Sunday - Thursday, 10:00 
- 13:00, closed Tuesday.  Travelers should minimize the 
amount of Syrian pounds exchanged because reverse 
accommodation exchange is not authorized on the local 
economy.  Reverse accommodation exchange is available at the 
embassy cashier for official visitors.  Travelers may also 
purchase pounds at hotels, private banks and branches of the 
Commercial Bank of Syria.  Most purchases in the Old City can 
be made in USD. 
 
¶10. (U) Photography:  Photography of individuals in uniform 
(including police), government buildings, and military 
installations is strictly forbidden. 
 
¶11. (U) Departure Tax:  Syria charges a departure tax of 
SP200 (approximately $4), payable in SP cash only.  Travelers 
with diplomatic passports are exempt, but those with official 
passports must pay. 
 
¶12. (U) Health:  Health facilities in Damascus are not up to 
U.S. or European standards, and facilities outside Damascus 
are extremely limited.  Only personnel covered under the 
State Department's medical program and with a valid medical 
clearance for Syria are eligible for medevac at USG cost.  It 
is recommended that all other travelers have medical 
evacuation insurance sufficient to cover evacuation by 
chartered air ambulance, or ensure that their agency will 
cover the cost. 
 
¶13. (U) Threat Assessment:  Political developments and 
security in the Middle East sometimes change quickly. The 
Embassy was attacked, without warning, in September 2006, by 
a small group of terrorists using automatic gunfire and 
grenades. They attempted, unsuccessfully, to detonate a 
vehicle-borne improvised explosive device at the rear gate. 
One local guard was seriously injured and there was at least 
one Syrian fatality in addition to the killing of the four 
attackers.  Since the attack, the Embassy has taken 
additional measures to improve its security posture. 
 
In February 2005, the former Prime Minister of Lebanon was 
assassinated in Beirut, prompting the U.S. to recall its 
Ambassador to Syria for consultations.  There are no plans to 
assign a replacement, reflecting the ongoing difficulties in 
U.S.-Syrian relations.  Government-sanctioned demonstrations 
have occasionally included expressions of anti-American or 
anti-Western sentiment. Violent mobs attacked three 
Scandinavian embassies in February 2006. 
 
In general, Americans in Syria should vary their schedules, 
avoid large crowds and gatherings, and report suspicious 
incidents to the Regional Security Officer.  They should also 
avoid electronic financial transactions and should not carry 
valuables or large amounts of cash in crowded shopping 
districts.  Visitors should also read and follow the guidance 
in the latest public announcements and State Department 
travel advisories for Syria. 
 
 
CORBIN