07HONGKONG915
EXTRANCHECK: PRE-LICENSE CHECK: HANG TAT
Fri Mar 30 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Hong Kong
VZCZCXYZ0011
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHHK #0915/01 0890629
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 300629Z MAR 07
FM AMCONSUL HONG KONG
TO RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
INFO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1152
RHMFIUU/HQ BICE WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS HONG KONG 000915 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USDOC FOR 532/OEA/LHINES/DFARROW 
USDOC FOR 3132 FOR FCS/OIO REGIONAL DIRECTOR WILLIAM 
ZARIT 
BICE FOR OFFICE OF STRATEGIC INVESTIGATIONS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BMGT BEXP HK ETRD ETTC
SUBJECT: EXTRANCHECK: PRE-LICENSE CHECK: HANG TAT 
ELECHANG TAT ENTERPRISES CO 
 
REF: A) USDOC 02122 
 
1.Unauthorized disclosure of the information provided 
below is prohibited by Section 12C of the Export 
Administration Act. 
 
¶2. As per reftel A request and at the direction of 
the Office of Enforcement Analysis (OEA) of the USDOC 
Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS), Export Control 
Officer Philip Ankel (ECO), accompanied by Commercial 
Assistant, Sandy Lai, conducted a pre-license check 
(PLC) at Hang Tat Electronic Enterprises Co., Room 
2608, Technology Plaza, 29-35 Sha Tsui Road, Tsuen 
Wan, Hong Kong (Hang Tat). The items in question are 
nine CMOS 8-Bit microcomputer/microcontrollers valued 
at USD 405.  The export control classification number 
(ECCN) for these items is 3A001.  According to Reftel 
A, these items are controlled for nuclear 
nonproliferation (NP) and national security (NS) 
reasons and require a license for export to Hong 
Kong. The license applicant is Falcon Electronics, 
Inc. of Commack, New York. 
 
¶3.  According to the Hong Kong Inland Revenue 
Department Business Registration Office, Hang Tat has 
been in existence since 1991.  The company is a sole 
proprietorship (as a result, it is not listed in the 
Hong Kong Companies Registry). Hong Kong identity 
holder Sau Luen Chan is listed as owner.  A Hong Kong 
Trade Development Council profile of Hang Tat lists 
Mr. Cho-Man Wong as manager.  It states that Hang Tat 
is a trading company specializing in electronics 
trade. 
 
¶4.  The ECO, accompanied by Commercial Assistant 
Sandy Lai, visited Hang Tat at the address referenced 
above on March 29, 2007 and met with a Mr. Wong.  The 
meeting had taken some time to schedule as Mr. Wong 
claimed, for two weeks, to be tracking down the name 
of the end-user and the projected end-use of the 
items.  Mr. Wong stated that Hang Tat is a trading 
company with a long history of operations in Hong 
Kong.  Hang Tat's business model consists of sourcing 
electronic components for mainland Chinese trading 
companies.  When asked for background on typical end- 
users for his items, Mr. Wong stated that because he 
receives so many orders, he cannot verify end-uses or 
end-users for every order.  When asked again, in more 
general terms, about the eventual end-users of Hang 
Tat's products, Mr. Wong demurred. 
 
¶5.  When asked for a business card, Mr. Wong stated 
that the office of the company had recently moved and 
he was in the process of obtaining new business 
cards.  When asked for a business card listing the 
old address, Mr. Wong stated that he had thrown them 
all away.  Mr. Wong stated that Hang Tat did not have 
any company brochure or other marketing information 
to provide to the ECO. 
 
¶6.  Mr. Wong stated that when U.S. vendors or Hong 
Kong agents for suppliers request end-use or end-user 
information, he provides it.  At the same time, he 
stressed that his trading company customers in 
mainland China have close relationships with 
manufacturers and are not willing to disclose 
proprietary information about potential customers. 
Even when mainland Chinese trading companies provide 
end-use/end-user information, Mr. Wong stated that he 
cannot vouch for the accuracy of such information. 
 
¶7.  As to the transaction that is the basis for the 
license application, Mr. Wong stated that he had no 
purchase order or related documentation.  He stated 
that the buyer is a regular customer but Hang Tat 
does not have a purchase order, as yet.  Mr. Wong 
pointed to a page of an Intel Purchase catalog (dated 
1996-1997) to indicate the type of items he had 
ordered (Intel 12 MHZ-MIL-STD 833).  He stated that 
his customer believes Atmel now manufactures the 
items (www.Atmel.com). 
 
¶8.  When asked for the name of Hang Tat's customer, 
Mr. Wong declined to provide it, stating that this is 
confidential information.  The ECO stressed that all 
 
SIPDIS 
information would be held in confidence and further 
that it would prove difficult to approve an export 
 
 
 
license without more information on the end-user/end- 
use.  Mr. Wong stated that it is not uncommon for his 
orders to be cancelled because his buyers are 
unwilling to provide further background on the end- 
use and end-user.  He eventually stated that the 
items would be used as part of a mud logging unit in 
oil exploration and drilling.  This information is 
inconsistent with the stated end-use noted in reftel 
¶A. 
 
¶9.  At the conclusion of the meeting, Mr. Wong 
stressedthat Hang Tat complies with Hong Kong export 
conrol regulations and conducts his business in full 
compliance with applicable laws.  He also stressed 
thathe is familiar with Hong Kong export contro 
rules and with TID (the entity that implement'sHong 
Kong's export control system).  The ECO proided 
information on U.S. reexport controls (BIS 
publication 'Guidance on the Department of Commerce's 
Reexport Controls'). 
 
¶10.  Mr. Wong provided only cursory information about 
Hang Tat and the eventual end-use of the items.  He 
provided no information about the eventual end-user 
of the items or the intermediate buyer in mainland 
China.  The ECO recommends that this PLC of Hang Tat 
be considered Unfavorable. 
Cunningham