07HONGKONG3115
EXTRANCHECK: POST SHIPMENT VERIFICATION: SOLTECH INDUSTRY
Mon Dec 31 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Hong Kong
VZCZCXYZ0010
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHHK #3115/01 3650650
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 310650Z DEC 07
FM AMCONSUL HONG KONG
TO RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
INFO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3766
RHMFIUU/HQ BICE WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS HONG KONG 003115 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USDOC FOR 532/OEA/LHINES/ADYSON/SSILVER 
USDOC FOR 3132 FOR FCS/OIO REGIONAL DIRECTOR WILLIAM ZARIT 
BICE FOR OFFICE OF STRATEGIC INVESTIGATIONS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BMGT BEXP HK ETRD ETTC
SUBJECT: EXTRANCHECK: POST SHIPMENT VERIFICATION: SOLTECH INDUSTRY 
CO LTD. 
 
REF: A) USDOC 09957 
 
1.Unauthorized disclosure of the information provided below is 
prohibited by Section 12C of the Export Administration Act. 
 
¶2. As per reftel A request and at the direction of the Office of 
Enforcement Analysis (OEA) of the USDOC Bureau of Industry and 
Security (BIS), Export Control Officer Philip Ankel (ECO) conducted 
a post shipment verification (PSV) of Soltech Industry Co. Ltd., 1A, 
Fook Ying Building, 379 Kings Road, North Point, Hong Kong 
(Soltech). The items in question are two shipments of multiple 
pallets of Electrica brand wire exported to Soltech on or about 
September 7, 2007 and October 30, 2007 and collectively valued at 
approximately USD 746,000.  The items are likely not on the Commerce 
Control List (EAR99) and are therefore likely only controlled to 
restricted destinations and to restricted end-users/uses. 
Electro-Mechanical Systems International of Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania exported the items. 
 
¶3.  ECO was unable to obtain contact details for Soltech using 
information provided by OEA nor from independent searches of various 
Hong Kong information sources.  Commercial Assistant Carrie Chan was 
eventually able to contact a representative of the freight 
forwarding company to which the items were shipped.  That company is 
Conquest Express (HK) and it is the Hong Kong office of Taiwanese 
freight forwarder, Conquest Express Co. Ltd. (www.conquest.com.tw). 
 
¶4.  According to the representative of Conquest Express in Hong 
Kong, Soltech is a Taiwanese company.  The representative for 
Soltech with which Conquest interacts is named Amber.  No last name 
was given.  Ms. Amber travels in the region and is not stationed in 
Hong Kong.  The conquest representative stated that the Hong Kong 
office of Conquest Express is used as Soltech's shipment location. 
Initially, Conquest Express declined to provide shipping documents 
relating to the items in question. 
 
¶5.  Subsequently, Commercial Assistant Carrie Chan received a call 
from Eddy, calling on behalf of Soltech.  He stated that the Kings 
Road address of Soltech noted above is actually not the headquarters 
of Soltech.  He stated that he lends the office address to others as 
a favor.  He stated he knows nothing about Soltech or the items in 
question.  He stated that Ms. Amber arranges for pick-up and 
delivery of items on behalf of Soltech.  Eddy did not provide his 
full name.  An address search of the Soltech address noted in the 
applicable invoices and in reftel A reveals that this address is 
associated with Hong Kong company Von Development Ltd. 
(www.vonhk.com). Eddie Yuen is listed as the CEO of this company.  A 
Hong Kong Companies Registry search reveals that this company has 
been in existence since 1988.  Hong Kong residents Yuen, Chi Choi 
and Yuen, Kwok Wing are listed as directors.  Yuen, Chi Choi is also 
a director of Hong Kong company, Top Way Limited.  According to the 
Von Development Ltd. web site, it sells various electronic switches 
and power supplies.  Its production facility is listed as being 
located in Shenzhen, mainland China. 
 
¶6.  Commercial Assistant Carrie Chan subsequently received a call 
from Ms. Amber, calling on behalf of Soltech.  She stated that she 
would be willing to meet the ECO and Ms. Chan at the offices of 
Conquest Express.  ECO and Ms. Chan met with Ms. Amber and Conquest 
Express Branch Manager Eunice Cheung on December 6, 2007 at the 
premises of Conquest Express, Flat B&C, 29/F, Tsuen Wan 
International Centre, 68 Wang Lung Street, Tsuen Wan, Hong Kong. 
The Conquest Express premises are located in a larger warehouse 
building.  One of the company's offices is in use by administrative 
staff while the second serves as warehouse space for the company. 
There is no signage within the building or at Conquest Express's 
entrance indicating that Conquest operates at this location. 
 
¶7.  During the meeting, Ms. Amber stated that Soltech is not 
officially registered in Hong Kong although it acts as the buying 
agent for mainland Chinese company Naztech in Shenzhen, mainland 
China. She stated that Naztech produces electronic components, 
telecommunications products and power supplies.  It acts as a 
contract manufacturer but also produces products under its own brand 
name.  She subsequently provided additional background information 
on Naz Technology Co., Ltd. in Shenzhen (Naztech) consistent with 
the information provided during the interview.  That information can 
be found at the web site: www.nastec.net.  When asked about Soltech 
in Taiwan (listed as a purchaser for one of the Hong Kong bound 
shipments), Ms. Amber stated that the Taiwan operation operates in 
much the same way as the Hong Kong operation.  When asked whether 
Naztech resells any of the inputs it receives through Hong Kong, Ms. 
Amber stated that she did not know.  She was also unaware of the 
location of the customers for Naztech's end products.  Subsequent 
research reveals that the Shenzhen address provided for the mainland 
China production facility of Von Development Limited is the same 
address as that of Naztech. 
 
 
¶8.  After some discussion about the reason for Soltech and Naztech's 
corporate structure, Ms. Amber stated that this structure was 
essentially a tax avoidance mechanism.  Ms. Amber stated she was 
quite nervous about the potential legal ramifications of such an 
approach to procurement by Naztech.  Despite several requests, Ms. 
Amber declined to provide a business card or her full name. 
 
¶9.  As to the specific shipments in question, Ms. Amber stated (and 
Ms. Cheung confirmed) that most of the pallets received as part of 
the applicable shipments had been forwarded to Shenzhen.  When asked 
for shipping or other documents confirming such shipment, Ms. Cheung 
left the room and subsequently provided receipts indicating that 13 
skids of electrical wire had been turned over to Soltech.  The 
receipts included what appeared to be the Soltech seal but no 
signature.  They also included no defining details about the skids 
or whether they had actually been shipped to Shenzhen.  Ms. Amber 
stated that Naztech had arranged for a freight forwarder to pick up 
the skids from Conquest Express.  When asked why Conquest would 
accept unsigned documents for electrical wire valued at several 
hundred thousand USD, Ms. Cheung stated that she is not in position 
to determine the actual makeup of the wire and therefore does not 
require more specificity in the documents.  ECO does not believe 
this statement to be credible. 
 
¶10.  Ms. Cheung and Ms. Amber subsequently showed ECO and Ms. Chang 
the remaining 19 skids of wire located in the warehouse portion of 
the Conquest Express premises.  Ms. Amber stated that the wire is 
used in cable television wiring related products. 
 
¶11. ECO provided Ms. Amber and Ms. Cheung with information about 
U.S. reexport controls, stressing that shipments to embargoed 
destinations may be subject to special licensing requirements. Both 
Ms. Amber and Ms. Cheung agreed to closely review the information. 
 
¶12.  Ms. Amber's explanations concerning Soltech and Naztech's 
operations are consistent with procurement channels that make use of 
Hong Kong's free port status to minimize mainland Chinese import 
duties and other taxes.  Nonetheless, ECO did not find Ms. Amber and 
Ms. Cheung's presentations to be credible and recommends close 
scrutiny be given to any shipments to Soltech, Conquest Express, Von 
Development Limited, Naztech and to their respective addresses.