07KIGALI94
RWANDA: FIVE INFLUENTIAL WOMEN
Wed Jan 31 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kigali
VZCZCXYZ0019
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHLGB #0094 0311459
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 311459Z JAN 07
FM AMEMBASSY KIGALI
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 3701UNCLAS KIGALI 000094 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR S/WE SASHA MEHRA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWMN PHUM RW
SUBJECT: RWANDA: FIVE INFLUENTIAL WOMEN 
 
REF: STATE 11245 
 
Post offers the following five Rwandan women as our 
contribution to the roster of key women requested by the 
Department: 
 
Jeannette Kagame, First Lady of Rwanda.  Participates in a 
wide variety of civil society efforts to expand opportunities 
for women and vulnerable populations.  Contact information: 
Presidency Press Secretary Yolande Makolo, telephone 
(250)0830-6800, ymakolo@gov.rw. 
 
Aisa Kirabo-Kacyira, Mayor of Kigali, President of RALGA 
(Rwanda Association of Local Government Authorities). 
Activist and dynamic mayor of the capital city, also heads 
the autonomous civil servant association that takes a leading 
role in shaping the extensive decentralizataion effort now 
underway in Rwanda. Contact information: telephone (250) 
573-684, akirabo@kigalicity.org. 
 
Domitilla Mukantaganzwa, Executive Secretary of the National 
Service of Gacaca Jurisdictions.  Directs the nationwide 
exercise in justice and reconciliation being conducted by 
1545 gacaca courts (modernized versions of traditional 
village courts), trying genocide suspects and establishing 
the truth of the events of the 1994 genocide.  Contact 
information: telephone (250) 58-66-48, 
gacaca@rwandatel1.rwanda1.com. 
 
Joy Ndungutse, CEO of Gahaya Links, a booming handicraft 
export business with supply contracts with Macys department 
store and other American outlets, works with women's 
cooperatives who supply the baskets and other items, 
expanding economic opportunity for rural women.  Contact 
information: telephone (250) 0830-7250, 
joyndungtse@yahoo.com. 
 
Jacqueline Rusilibya, President of Profemme Twesehamwe, an 
umbrella organization of women's NGOs, takes leading role is 
shaping women's issues and civil society concerns throughout 
Rwanda. Contact information: Executive Secretary Agnes 
Mujawayezu, telephone (250) 0850-3211, auwayez@yahoo.fr. 
ARIETTI