07KIGALI42
Rwanda 2007 Investment Climate Statement
Thu Jan 18 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kigali
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHLGB #0042/01 0181535
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 181535Z JAN 07
FM AMEMBASSY KIGALI
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 3650UNCLAS KIGALI 000042 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR AF/C 
DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDC 
TREASURY FOR DO/JWALLACE, USDOC FOR ITA/SMATHEWS, USTR FOR DWEINER, 
OPIC FOR RO'SULLIVAN 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV BFIN ETRD ELAB KTDB PGOV RW
SUBJECT: Rwanda 2007 Investment Climate Statement 
 
REF: 05 STATE 178303 
 
Â¶1.  In response to reftel, the following is the 2007 Investment 
Climate Statement for Rwanda: 
 
 
OPENNESS TO FOREIGN INVESTMENT 
------------------------------ 
 
The GOR is making progress economically as it recognizes that the 
private sector is an essential engine of development. The government 
is extremely welcoming of foreign investment in policy and in 
practice. 
 
In March 2006, the government enacted an updated investment law to 
facilitate investors to obtain necessary licenses, visas, work 
permits, and tax incentives.  The law provides permanent residence, 
citizenship, and access to land for investors who invest USD 500,000 
in Rwanda. This law also fixed the minimum initial capital 
investment requirement for foreign investors at USD 250,000. 
 
In 2006, foreign companies successfully opened operations, merged 
with local companies, and participated in privatization programs. No 
statutory limits on foreign ownership or control exist, and there is 
no official economic or industrial strategy that has discriminatory 
effects on foreign investors.  In fact, there isn't a single 
statutory restriction of investment in any sector in Rwanda. 
 
Nonetheless, the legal infrastructure is still in the developing 
stages.  For example, the judicial system has difficulty upholding 
the sanctity of contracts because there are no commercial courts. 
The law establishing commercial courts was approved by Ministerial 
council December 13, 2006. There is currently no specialized 
commercial court in Rwanda. The government is working to develop the 
necessary investment infrastructure; however, much remains to be 
done. 
 
A business law reform commission is in place to draft major business 
laws including intellectual property protection, contract law, 
bankruptcy regulations and arbitration law. 
 
There is no mandatory screening of foreign investment but the Rwanda 
Investment and Export Promotion Agency (RIEPA) does evaluate 
business plans with the objective of recording incoming foreign 
investments, allocating investment incentives to qualified foreign 
investors, and determining the commitment of investors. The 
evaluation is not mandatory for those who do not need tax incentives 
or an investment certificate. This practice does not limit 
competition or protect domestic interests. 
 
In fact, the government through tax incentives and outreach has 
proven to be extremely welcoming and encouraging of foreign 
investment. The only difference in treatment between foreign company 
and a domestic one is the initial capital requirement for official 
registration - $250k for foreign investors, $100k for domestic 
investors. This has not proven to be a barrier because foreign 
investors who are not interested in an investment certificate and 
tax incentives can start businesses irrespective of the initial 
capital requirement. 
 
Foreign investors can acquire real estate but there is a general 
limit on land where both Local and foreign investors are not allowed 
to own land. Land is owned by the government, but both foreign and 
local investors acquire land through lease-hold agreements that 
extend from 50 to 99 years. They are given property titles which are 
binding as collateral by commercial banks. 
 
The government of Rwanda established the Privatization Secretariat 
and the National Tender Board to ensure transparency and foreign 
companies have participated equally and successfully. 
 
In 2005, the law establishing the Rwanda Investment Promotion Agency 
was expanded to include export promotion. A one stop shop center for 
investors became fully operational in the same year of 2005. 
Licenses, approvals, work permits and tax advisory are granted in 
the one shop center. No discrimination has been reported against 
foreign investors who pass through the Rwanda Investment and Export 
Promotion Agency.  Investors who do not pass through RIEPA, however, 
are likely to have clearing agents who demand petty bribes to 
facilitate quick service.  Legally, foreign firms are treated 
equally with the regards to taxes, access to lisences, approvals, 
and procurement. 
 
No laws exist specifically authorizing private firms to adopt 
articles of incorporation or association which limit or prohibit 
foreign investment, participation, or control.  No such practices 
have been reported either. 
 
RIEPA organized two investment conferences in attempts to attract 
 
foreign investment. On many occasions RIEPA directors and local 
businesses joined the President of Rwanda in tours around the world 
to attract foreign investors. Conferences to encourage investors 
were held in the US, China, India, Mauritius and South Africa. RIEPA 
assists potential investors in securing all required approvals, 
certificates, land for their projects, work permits and obtaining 
tax incentives. 
 
In 2006, Rwanda Investment Promotion Agency registered 69 investment 
projects worth $245.5millions, foreign direct investments accounted 
for 49%.  By comparison, only 40 investment projects were registered 
in 2005. 
 
 
CONVERSION AND TRANSFER POLICIES 
-------------------------------- 
 
There is no difficulty in obtaining foreign exchange, or 
transferring funds associated with an investment into a freely 
usable currency and at a legal market clearing rate. In 1995 the 
government of Rwanda established a market-determined exchange rate 
system under which all lending and deposit interest rates were 
liberalized. The Central Bank holds weekly foreign exchange auctions 
freely accessed by commercial banks and foreign exchange bureaus. 
 
Investors can remit payments only through authorized commercial 
banks, not through any parallel markets. There is no limit on the 
inflow or outflow of funds, but justification for high value 
transfers is required by the central bank to facilitate the 
oversight of potential money laundering. 
 
There is no limitation on the inflow of funds for remittances but 
there some restrictions on the outflow of export earnings. Export 
earnings must be repatriated within three months after the goods 
cross the border unless the exporter makes arrangements to have more 
time. Tea proceeds must be deposited after the auction in Mombasa. 
Repatriated export earnings deposited in commercial banks must match 
the exact declaration the exporter used on crossing the border. 
Justifications are required to transfer more than USD 50,000 per 
year from Rwandan commercial banks. Rwandan working overseas can 
make remittances to their home country. 
 
It takes three days to transfer money using SWIFT financial services 
and investors are allowed to use many other financial services such 
as Western Union and MoneyGram, which may be faster. 
 
The Rwandan Franc (RwF) is convertible for essentially all business 
transactions since March 6, 1995. Rwanda has a liberal monetary 
system and complies with IMF Article VIII and all Organization for 
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) convertibility 
requirements. The Rwandan Franc exchange rate is set against a batch 
of currencies, including the Euro, the Pound Sterling, and the USD. 
 
 
EXPROPRIATION AND COMPENSATION 
------------------------------ 
The Government of Rwanda is authorized to expropriate property if 
"in the public interest" and "for qualified private investments." 
Under the recently released Rwandan land tenure law compensation is 
negotiated directly between the buyer and the seller. 
Expropriatory actions have been common in the capital because Kigali 
is undergoing major development, although it does not appear to be 
done in a discriminatory fashion.  No industrial plant has been 
expropriated thus far, as expropriation has been limited to 
residential and small farming plots. Expropriated citizens often 
complain of late and unfair compensation when the government is 
responsible for payments.  This will continue to be an issue until 
the expropriation law and commercial courts are finalized and 
implemented. 
 
There are no laws that force local ownership, but the government has 
decreed that owners risk losing land that they let lie fallow. 
 
 
 
DISPUTE SETTLEMENT 
------------------ 
The government of Rwanda established an arbitration center in 1998 
as an alternative dispute resolution mechanism but it has not lived 
up to expectations according to businesses that have utilized it. 
Rwanda is a member of the International Center for the Settlement of 
Investment Disputes (ICSID) and African Trade Insurance Agency 
(ATI), which are supported by the World Bank and Lloyds of London. 
ATI covers risks against restrictions on import and export 
activities, inconvertibility, expropriation, war, and civil 
disturbances. 
 
Rwanda currently has no specialized commercial court but the 
government approved the creation of commercial courts on December 
 
13, 2006. Meanwhile the recent justice system reform should reduce 
the bulk of cases reaching supreme courts and should pave way for 
commercial cases. 
 
Until commercial courts and contractual laws are enacted and operate 
appropriately, there will be no effective means for enforcing 
property and contractual rights.  The law governing commercial 
establishments, the investment law, the law on privatization and 
public investment, the land law and the law on protection and 
conservation of the environment are main laws governing investments 
in Rwanda.  A law on public procurement, a law on privately financed 
infrastructure projects and a law on insurance and mining are still 
lacking. 
 
Judgments of foreign courts and governing law clauses in agreements 
are accepted and enforced by local courts according to the above 
stipulation. There have been few private investment disputes in 
Rwanda, and the government has never been involved as a complainant 
or respondent in World Trade Organization dispute settlement. 
 
A US investor is currently involved in a commercial dispute that was 
not resolved through arbitration.  Restructuring of the court system 
has created continuous delays and frustration for the investor. 
Rwanda signed and ratified the Multilateral Investment Guarantee 
Agency (MIGA) convention on October 27, 1989. MIGA issues guarantees 
against non-commercial risks to enterprises that invest in member 
countries. 
 
 
 
 
PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS AND INCENTIVES 
--------------------------------------- 
 
The Government maintains measures that are alleged to violate the 
WTO's TRIMs text where custom valuation on imported used goods does 
not respect transaction invoices and parallel imports of goods where 
patents and original trade marks are not registered and recognized. 
However, as a least developed country Rwanda has up to 2013 to abide 
by specific WTO's Trade Related and Investment measures. 
 
 
 
Performance requirements are not imposed as a condition for 
establishing, maintaining, or expanding investment. They are mostly 
imposed as a condition to access tax and investment incentives. 
Investors who demonstrate capacity to add more value, technology 
transfer, and invest in priority sectors enjoy more tax and 
investment incentives which include VAT exemptions on all imported 
raw materials, 100% write-off on research and development costs, 5% 
to 7% reduction in corporate income tax if the company exports 
products and services valued from USD 3 to USD 5 million, duty 
exemption on equipment and a favorable accelerated rate of 
depreciation of 50% in the first year. 
 
Although there are no legal obligations regarding these matters, 
foreign investors are encouraged to transfer technology and 
expertise to local staff in the development of human resources. Work 
permits are granted to foreign expatriates as long as they are key 
personnel and fall into categories of skilled labor where Rwandans 
are not available. 
 
RIEPA was established in 1998 to encourage investment and has been 
relatively successful in developing important incentives and 
publicizing investment opportunities. Registered investors obtain 
certificates that bring benefits, including exemption from 
value-added tax and duties when importing machinery, equipment, and 
raw materials. RIEPA also assists with the issuance of expatriate 
work permits, securing all the required government permits, and 
assisting with land acquisition if required. Grants and special 
access to credit is provided to investors promoting rural areas. 
There no import quotas for investors. 
 
There is no legal requirement that investors purchase from local 
sources or export a certain percentage of output. In order to 
benefit from incentives of the free export zone, a certain 
percentage of the finished product must be exported. There is no 
condition regarding access to foreign exchange in relation to 
exports. 
 
More tax incentives are given to investors who create significant 
export-oriented growth, since export enterprises in Rwanda may 
qualify for the benefits of the Free Export Economic Processing Zone 
(FEEPZ). Determination is made upon request and is based on several 
factors: exports must total at least 80% of production or exports 
total at least 10% if manufacturing under bond; the entity must be 
engaged in the export of services; and capital investment is at 
least USD $100,000 (local investors and COMESA members) or USD 
$250,000 (foreign and non COMESA investors). The Rwandan investment 
 
code is currently under review to determine precise duration for 
exemption from taxes and to provide more incentives for investors. 
There is no requirement for physical presence at the FEEPZ.  Any 
exporter who fulfills conditions can legally access the free export 
processing zone incentives without being physically present in the 
actual zone. The investment law released in March 2006 is intended 
to assist investors in obtaining the necessary licenses and provides 
more incentives. 
 
There is no legal obligation that nationals own shares in foreign 
investments or that shares of foreign equity be reduced over time. 
Technology transfer can only be imparted to local employees. There 
is no condition that technology be transferred on certain terms. 
 
Procurements are at the sole discretion of the investor but specific 
procurement requests can only be approved in case there is need for 
tax exemption. The Government imposes conditions on permission to 
invest only in the free export zone. This mainly concerns a specific 
geographical area located in Kigali and export requirement, special 
authorization can be provided to invest in other geographical areas 
if conditions for the Free Economic Zone are met.  Permission to 
invest in the FEZ does not concern specific percentage of local 
content whether in goods or services or local equity. 
 
The government is not involved in assessing the type and source of 
raw materials as a pre requisite for performance but the National 
Bureau of Standard determines quality standards. Investors are not 
required to disclose proprietary information to government 
authorities. 
 
U.S. and other foreign firms are allowed to participate in 
government/authority financed and/or subsidized research and 
development programs on a national treatment basis. In fact foreign 
firms are given special priority in research projects because 
Rwandan professionals are not well developed in research issues, and 
foreigners are considered experts. 
 
There are no onerous visa residence or work permit requirements that 
inhibit foreign investors' mobility.  U.S. nationals are not 
required to have visas for the first 90 days of their stay in 
Rwanda. Other foreign nationals have their visa processed timely as 
well. Rwanda Investment and Export Promotion Agency facilitates 
potential investors to obtain visa and work permits. 
 
Rwanda, in fact, has no discriminatory practices affecting foreign 
investors. 
 
 
 
RIGHT TO PRIVATE OWNERSHIP AND ESTABLISHMENT 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
Local and foreign investors have the right to own and establish 
business enterprises in all forms of remunerative activity. Private 
ownership is preserved in the constitution of Rwanda.  The 
constitution stipulates that every person has the right to private 
ownership of other types of property, whether personal or in 
association with others. It cannot be violated except in the public 
interest, and with procedures that are determined by law, and is 
subject to fair compensation. 
 
Private entities are also allowed to acquire and to dispose of 
interests in business enterprises. Foreign nationals may hold shares 
in locally incorporated companies. 
Competing with public enterprises is not a serious concern for the 
private sector, as the government has divested and continues to 
divest in public enterprises that would compete with the private 
sector. 
 
 
 
PROTECTION OF PROPERTY RIGHTS 
----------------------------- 
The legal system protects and facilitates acquisition and 
disposition of all property rights. Investors involved in extensive 
agriculture have land titles and investors are able to secure 
property titles, if needed. The recently passed land law stipulates 
modalities of property registration, but no registries have been 
established yet. Land titles may be held even without any 
developments on land and they can be donated or sold. 
 
There is adherence to key international agreements on intellectual 
property rights and adequate protection of intellectual property 
rights but as a least developed country, Rwanda has up to 2013 to 
abide by specific TRIP's arrangements.  As a member of COMESA, 
Rwanda is automatically a member of ARIPO, the African Regional 
Intellectual Property Organization. It is also a member of WIPO, the 
World Intellectual Property Organization, and is currently working 
towards conformity of its legislation to WTO trade-related aspects 
 
of intellectual property. The Ministry of Commerce (MINICOM), the 
Rwandan Revenue Authority (RRA), and the Rwandan Bureau of Standards 
(RBS) work together to address issues involving counterfeit products 
on the Rwandan market. In fact, Rwanda has received much recognition 
and appreciation from an American firm for destroying contraband 
shoe polish that had entered the country illegally.  Through the 
Rwanda Bureau of Standards and the Rwanda Revenue Authority, Rwanda 
has earned accolades for its protection of intellectual property 
rights, but many goods make it to market, nonetheless, that violate 
patents, especially pharmaceutical drugs. 
 
Rwanda has not yet ratified WIPO internet treaties, but steps to 
implement and enforce the WTO TRIPS agreements have taken place. 
Intellectual property bills covering patents, trademarks and 
copyrights have been adopted and will soon be sent to parliament. 
Registration service agency due to be established will further 
improve intellectual property rights. 
 
 
TRANSPARENCY OF THE REGULATORY SYSTEM 
------------------------------------- 
 
The government uses transparent policies and effective laws to 
foster clear rules of the game, all seemingly consistent with 
international norms. Institutions such as the Rwanda Revenue 
Authority, the Ombudsman's office, the Bureau of Standards, the 
Rwanda Utilities Regulatory Agency, the National Tender Board, the 
Privatization Secretariat, and the Environment Protection Agency all 
have clear rules and procedures. 
 
Drafts of some laws including the constitution and the land law were 
passed though civil society representatives for comments, but there 
is not a formalized mechanism to publish draft laws for public 
comment.  Nonetheless, there is no government effort to restrict 
foreign participation in industry standards-setting consortia or 
organizations. 
 
Some investors complain that the strict enforcement of tax, labor, 
and environmental laws impede investment, but the transparency and 
lack of corruption in the regulatory framework is actually a boon to 
the investment climate for legitimate businesses. 
 
Bureaucratic procedures including those for licenses and permits are 
not sufficiently streamlined. A draft law establishing a Rwanda 
Registration Service Agency is currently in parliament. The law is 
intended to steam line procedures for obtaining trade permits and 
licenses which are currently exist as unnecessary red tape. 
 
Rwanda established an ombudsman's office in 2004 that monitors 
transparency and compliance to regulation in all governmental 
sectors. The Rwanda Utility Regulation Agency, the Auditor General's 
Office, the Anticorruption Division in the Revenue Authority, the 
National Bureau of Standards, and the National Tender Board are all 
in place to enforce regulations as well. Moreover, the press has 
openly exposed instances of bad debts and malfeasance this year 
involving private citizens and GOR leaders. This has led to some 
resignations within the GOR and Rwanda continues fighting 
corruption. 
 
There are no informal regulatory processes managed by 
nongovernmental organizations. Legal, regulatory and accounting 
systems are transparent and consistent with international norms but 
their results do not display required effects because they lack 
autonomy in certain circumstances. 
 
A key component of the GOR's regulatory system is the Auditor 
General's Office, established in 1999 to continuously audit 
government adherence to fiscal controls. The office managed to make 
substantial progress in making government finances more transparent 
according to IMF officials. The Auditor General' report for 2006 
cited many accounting irregularities. The report issued to 
Parliament in October 2006 will be used to examine official conduct 
of government business; the executive has encouraged the parliament 
to take action. 
 
There are no private sector or government authority efforts to 
restrict foreign participation in industry standards-setting 
consortia or organization. Consumer protection and producers 
associations exist and run independently. Through the Rwanda Private 
Sector Federation, the business community has been involved in the 
formation of most if not all of the economic policy and regulatory 
framework of the country. 
 
 
EFFICIENT CAPITAL MARKETS AND PORTFOLIO INVESTMENT 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
Access to affordable credit is a serious challenge in Rwanda, as 
interest rates are relatively high. Nonetheless credit is allocated 
 
on market terms and foreign investors are able to get credit on the 
local market if they have collaterals and bankable projects. 
 
The private sector has limited access to credit instruments because 
most Rwandan banks are still conservative and trade in limited 
commercial products. A variety of credit instruments were introduced 
with the privatization of the commercial banks. Leasing was 
introduced in 2006 but is limited to two commercial banks and 
mortgages are being introduced in a single bank.  Credit cards are 
still lacking but debit cards have been introduced. 
 
Rwanda does not have a stock exchange. The central bank encourages 
and facilitates investments through the sale of treasury bills and 
bonds, but capital markets and the associated regulatory systems do 
not exist. 
 
A 2006 United Nations Conference on Trade and Development 
publication reported that the ratio of non-performing loans to total 
loans is 24%. 
 
Since 2001, the total capital requirement for commercial bank has 
been RF 1.5billion (USD 3 million) and RF 3 billion for investments 
banks. 
 
Since there is no public stock exchange, corporations trade shares 
among themselves. No hostile takeovers have occurred involving 
foreign investors, and both the Central Bank and the Rwandan 
government have been very active in seeking foreign investors for 
the banking sector.  Likewise, private firms have not engaged in 
arrangements to restrict foreign investment. 
 
Plans are underway to develop capital markets. Ministry of Finance 
officials are studying the preconditions for such a step and the 
creation of a regulatory authority. An effective regulatory system 
is monitored by the Central Bank, which is given high marks by the 
IMF. 
 
 
 
POLITICAL VIOLENCE 
------------------ 
 
Rwanda remains a stable country with little violence. A strong 
police and military provide an umbrella of security that continues 
to minimize criminal activity and political disturbances. There have 
been no incidents involving politically motivated damage to projects 
or installations since the 1994 war. 
 
Elections in 2003 were peaceful, although significant voting 
irregularities were documented.  Rwanda no longer faces insurgent 
activity from rebel groups operating in the Democratic Republic of 
Congo.  Rwanda acts in concert with its neighbors to fight crime and 
terrorism, and the GOR actively cooperates in efforts to identify 
and freeze the assets of known terrorist individuals or 
organizations. 
 
 
 
 
 
CORRUPTION 
---------- 
 
The GOR senior leadership maintains a consistent policy and law of 
combating corruption within Rwandan society.  Although less corrupt 
than many other African governments, the GOR, despite its firm hold 
on public policy, is confronted with periodic allegations of 
misconduct or persons using their office for personal gain. In 
general, such incidents do not go unpunished when proved and 
enforcement is equal for both foreign and local investors. When 
corruption involves high-ranking officials, they are dismissed or 
prosecuted.  Senior government officials appear to take pride in 
Rwanda's reputation as being tough on corruption, and the National 
Assembly takes an active role in investigating public officials 
accused of corruption and, in concert with the recently established 
Ombudsman Office, has exposed corrupt public officials, several of 
whom have been forced to resign. 
 
Rwanda has signed and ratified the UN Anticorruption Convention. It 
is a signatory of the OECD Convention on Combating Bribery. It is 
also a signatory of the African Union Anticorruption Convention. 
Giving and accepting a bribe is a criminal act penalized by law, and 
penalties depend on circumstances surrounding the specific cases. 
As a result, U.S firms have not identified corruption as obstacle 
for investment. 
 
Corruption if generally very low but the 2006 Auditor General report 
highlighted irregularities in government procurement.  Businessmen 
report occurances of petty corruption in the customs clearing 
 
process, but there is almost no reported corruption in transfers, 
dispute settlement, regulatory system, taxation and performance 
requirement. 
 
A local company cannot deduct a bribe to a foreign official from 
taxes.  In fact, a bribe by a local company to a foreign official is 
a crime in Rwanda. 
 
Institutions including the Ombudsman office, the Anti-Corruption 
Unit in the Rwanda Revenue Authority, the Auditor General's Office 
identify corruption cases, but the police and national prosecutor's 
office prosecute the actual acts. The National Tender Board and 
Rwanda Revenue Authority were also established to combat 
corruption. 
 
Transparency International or other regional non governmental 
organizations do not operate in Rwanda, yet periodically issue 
reports on Rwanda. 
 
 
BILATERAL INVESTMENT AGREEMENTS AND AGOA 
---------------------------------------- 
 
Rwanda is eligible for trade preferences under the African Growth 
and Opportunity Act (AGOA), which the United States enacted to 
extend duty-free and quota-free access to the U.S. market for nearly 
all textile and handicraft goods produced in eligible beneficiary 
countries. A Trade and Investment Framework Agreement (TIFA) was 
signed between the U.S. and Rwanda in 2006, and initial discussions 
have begun to lay the groundwork for a Bilateral Investment Treaty. 
 
 
 
 
OPIC AND OTHER INVESTMENT INSURANCE PROGRAMS 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
The Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC) has had a single 
investment guarantee in Rwanda: Sorwathe, an American-owned tea 
factory received an additional loan guarantee from OPIC in spring 
Â¶2004. 
 
The exchange rate regime is stable in the event an inconvertibility 
claim arises.  OPIC currently has no loan program in Rwanda but 
given the enduring stability in the country and pending investment 
climate changes, OPIC officials have expressed strong interest in 
expanding OPIC involvement in Rwanda. OPIC is expected to expand its 
program for Rwanda working with the Rwanda Housing Bank. 
 
The Export-Import Bank (EXIM) continues its program to insure 
short-term export credit transactions involving various payment 
terms, including open accounts that cover exports to the U.S. of 
consumer goods, services, commodities, and certain capital goods. 
Rwanda is a member of the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency 
(MIGA) and the African Trade Insurance Agency (ATI). 
 
 
 
LABOR 
----- 
 
General labor is availability and improving, but there is a shortage 
of skilled labor, including accountants, lawyers and technicians. 
Higher institutes of technology, many private universities, and 
vocational institutes are improving and producing more and more 
qualified graduates each year. A new labor code that respond to 
investor's demand of eliminating labor rigidities in under review. 
 
Rwanda attempts to adhere to ILO convention protecting worker rights 
at same time balancing to minimize complaints from investors. 
Policies to protect workers in special labor conditions exist, but 
enforcement remains questionable.  On-the-job training and 
technology transfer to local employees is encouraged but not 
obligatory. 
 
The national labor code was revised in 2000 to eliminate gender 
discrimination, restrictions on the mobility of labor, and wage 
controls.  Laws relating to insurance are being prepared. Companies 
will find skills deficits in many sectors when hiring in Rwanda, but 
these deficits will continue to shrink as literacy rates increase 
and more qualified people graduate from Rwandan institutions of 
higher learning. The general population's literacy rate continues to 
improve each year since the 1994 Genocide and war. Before 1994 the 
rate was 64%; for 2003 the rate was 52%, 2006 rate is not available. 
More than 1,000 students each year for the past three years have 
completed training at the Kigali Institute of Technology (KIST) and 
the National University of Rwanda (NUR). These students are fluent 
in French, English, or both. Several hundred Rwandan students 
complete their studies abroad each year and return to work in the 
 
country. It is also possible to find qualified labor from South 
Africa or from neighboring countries such as Congo, Uganda, and 
Kenya.  Movement of this skilled labor force will be further 
facilitated by entry into the EAC. 
 
 
 
FOREIGN TRADE ZONES/FREE PORTS 
------------------------------ 
 
Rwanda is a member of several sub-regional economic organizations, 
such as the Economic Community of Central African States (CEEAC), 
the Economic Community of the Great Lakes (CEPGL), and the Common 
Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA), and since 2006 the 
East African Community (EAC).  Member countries in COMESA have a 
free trade agreement. Goods originating from COMESA countries that 
fill condition of rules of origin qualify for duty free status. 
Value addition on imported raw materials must be 35% to qualify for 
rules of origin of COMESA member states.  Rwanda plans to establish 
a free trade zone in the near future. 
 
 
FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT STATISTICS 
------------------------------------ 
 
Foreign direct investment statistics from 2001 to 2004 as provided 
by UNCTAD are as follows.  In 2001 FDI was USD 3.8 million and 2.3 
in $ per $1000 of GDP, 2002 it was USD 7.4 millions and 4.5 in $ per 
$1000 of GDP, In 2003 FDI was USD 4.7 millions and 3.0 in $ per 
$1000 of GDP, In 2004, FDI was USD 10.9 and 5.9 in $ per $1000 of 
GDP. FDI Statistics for 2005 and 2006 are not yet released. 
 
ARIETTI