07PRETORIA2222
SOUTH AFRICAN ENVIRONMENT, SCIENCE, AND TECHNOLOGY MONTHLY
Thu Jun 21 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Pretoria
VZCZCXRO1332
RR RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHJO RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHSA #2222/01 1720425
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 210425Z JUN 07
FM AMEMBASSY PRETORIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0460
RUCNSAD/SOUTHERN AF DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY COLLECTIVE
INFO RUEHTN/AMCONSUL CAPE TOWN 4542
RUEHDU/AMCONSUL DURBAN 8956
RUEHJO/AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG 6998UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PRETORIA 002222 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR OES/PCI, OES/ENV, AND AF/S 
DEPT PASS EPA/OIA, 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: SENV SOCI ETRD SF
SUBJECT:  SOUTH AFRICAN ENVIRONMENT, SCIENCE, AND TECHNOLOGY MONTHLY 
BRIEFINGS, MAY 2007 
 
PRETORIA 00002222  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1.  (U) Summary:  This is the South African Environment, Science and 
Technology Monthly Briefings newsletter, May 2007, Volume 2, Number 
2, prepared by the U.S. Embassy Pretoria, South Africa. 
 
Topics of the newsletter: 
 
-- South Africa's Top CO2 Emitters in Carbon Disclosure Program 
 
-- Department of Minerals and Energy Challenged Over Mining 
Licenses 
 
-- Canned Lion Hunting Law Reform Postponed 
 
-- SA Changes Name of World Heritage Site 
 
-- DME Proposes Green Tax on Heavy Polluting Sports Vehicles 
 
-- South Africans Encouraged to Embrace Greening Campaign 
 
-- SA Celebrates National Science Week 
 
End Summary. 
 
SOUTH AFRICA'S TOP CO2 EMITTERS IN CARBON DISCLOSURE PROGRAM 
 
¶2.  (U) Leading South African companies will participate in a carbon 
disclosure program (CDP).   CDP, launched by the UK in 2000, is 
designed to determine the impact of business on the environment. 
According to findings already submitted, business contributes to 
climate change through greenhouse gases emitted during different 
working processes.  South African coal companies are beginning to 
find it more difficult to penetrate European coal markets.  Some 
European authorities argue that coal imported from South Africa, 
relative to other import sources, tends to be higher in oxide and 
carbon dioxide emissions when burned.  The EU's Large Combustion 
Plant Directive, which limits nitrogen oxides and sulphur dioxide 
emissions, could also pose significant problems for South African 
coal exports.  Some studies report that South African carbon dioxide 
(CO2) production has increased significantly from 1980 to 2004, with 
South Africa now ranking higher than Brazil which has four times 
South Africa's production.  The World Resource Institute estimated 
South Africa's CO2 production at 417 million tons for 2000, making 
South Africa the world's 19th largest emitter of the gas. 
 
DEPARTMENT OF MINERALS AND ENERGY CHALLENGED OVER MINING LICENSES 
 
¶3.  (U) The Mpumalanga Lake District Protection Group (MLDPG) has 
instituted legal proceedings to stop proposed open-pit coal mining 
in the Lake District of Mpumalanga, even though the Department of 
Minerals and Energy (DME) previously issued mining licenses to the 
prospective investors.  Local communities and the MLDPG fear that an 
open-pit coal mine jeopardizes the indigenous species and the 
ecosystem in the area.  MLDPG argues that no proper environmental 
impact assessment (EIA) was conducted, and that an EIA would have 
clearly indicated the environmental and social impacts of coal 
mining.  University of the Witwatersrand (Wits) geoscientist 
Terrence McCarthy noted that mine areas normally become permanently 
"sterilized" and that the ground water becomes contaminated, 
destroying the cave, lake and pan habitats of indigenous birds, 
frogs and other living organisms in the area.  The Department of 
Environmental Affairs and Tourism (DEAT) stated that it could not 
get involved because DME owns the mining rights, has the power to 
issue mining licenses, and has the authority to regulate its own 
EIA.  The court case will determine whether DME prevails. 
 
CANNED LION HUNTING LAW REFORM POSTPONED 
 
¶4.  (U) Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism Marthinus Van 
Schalkwyk announced that the effective date for the Protected 
Species Regulations (which will govern canned lion hunting) has been 
postponed from June 1, 2007 to February 1, 2008.  Van Schalkwyk's 
decision was prompted by concerns raised by Provincial Environment 
Ministers who had complained that they could not enforce the 
regulations without more time to prepare.  The proposed regulations 
would regulate canned predator hunting and would prohibit hunting 
captive-bred predators within two years of their release into a game 
farm for the purpose of hunting.  North West Agriculture, 
Conservation and Environment Minister Mandlinkosi Mayisela welcomed 
Van Schalkwyk's postponement of the implementation date.  He said 
the delay gave the provincial authorities time to "engage further in 
discussions with the National Minister, with the hope of striking a 
favorable compromise."  Mayisela noted that over 350 lions are 
hunted each year in North West province alone.  In the intervening 
months before the effective date, DEAT will hold countrywide 
information sessions to ensure that the public and all other 
stakeholders are informed about the new regulations and prepared to 
 
PRETORIA 00002222  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
implement them on February 1, 2008.  DEAT encouraged interested 
parties to apply for licenses or permits to avoid an unnecessary 
backlog on the effective date.  The new regulations were developed 
in terms of the National Environmental Management Biodiversity Act 
10 of 2004. 
 
SA CHANGES NAME OF WORLD HERITAGE SITE 
 
¶5.  (U) Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism (DEAT) 
Marthinus Van Schalkwyk announced in May the change of the name of 
one of South Africa's World Heritage Sites, from the Greater St. 
Lucia Wetlands Park to iSimangaliso Wetlands Park.  iSimangaliso, a 
Zulu word meaning amazement or miracle, was chosen from 60 other 
proposed names.  The cabinet approved the name change.  Selection of 
a new name involved an extensive consultation process, including 
public meetings, advertisements in the newspapers, radio and TV, and 
circulation of 10,000 briefing documents to the community at large. 
According to the Minister, the consultations took about two years, 
and there was an overwhelming consensus from the majority of the 
participants for a more descriptive name in one of the indigenous 
languages. 
 
DME PROPOSES GREEN TAX ON HEAVY POLLUTING SPORTS VEHICLES 
 
¶6.  (U) Department of Minerals and Energy (DME) Director of Energy 
Efficiency Dr. Elsa Du Toit reported that the DME is considering the 
introduction of a 33 percent tax on the selling price for SUVs, and 
a doubling of the their annual license fees.  Du Toit said the funds 
from these taxes and fees would be used to mitigate the 
environmental degradation caused by SUVs.  She also hoped the higher 
selling price and fees would reduce the purchases of SUVs to 12 
percent of the market by 2015.  Thus far, higher fuel prices and 
escalating bank interest rates have not discouraged the South 
African market for SUVs.  Du Toit said that since market forces are 
not working to reduce SUV purchases, South Africa must now follow 
the world trend of imposing punitive measures to enforce behavioral 
change in people.  DME official reports indicate that SUVs consume 
double the amount of fuel of an ordinary sedan, and emit 9,000kg of 
carbon dioxide compared to the 4,500kg of the lighter cars.  If DME 
endorses the "energy efficiency levy", a vehicle that costs $119,700 
could have an additional tax of $39,400, plus a 100 percent levy on 
the annual license fees.  Environmental activist groups welcome 
DME's proposal to establish the green tax, while automotive industry 
economists argue that the levy is too steep and could put some jobs 
at risk. 
 
SOUTH AFRICANS ENCOURAGED TO EMBRACE GREENING CAMPAIGN 
 
¶7.  (U) Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism (DEAT) 
Marthinus Van Schalkwyk urged individual South Africans, businesses 
and industries to adopt and embrace environmental activism during 
the launch of South Africa's national environmental campaign known 
as "Indalo Yethu" (Our Environment).  Indalo Yethu CEO JP Louw said 
that the campaign's primary purpose was to arouse "eco-activism" and 
to advocate greening big projects such as housing, transportation 
and the 2010 World Cup Soccer tournament.  The campaign encourages 
project developers to introduce energy and water saving technologies 
as well as to reduce pollution and waste.  Louw said that the Indalo 
Yethu campaign logo (a butterfly draped in the colors of the SA 
national flag) would be awarded to complying companies, while a 
"green tax" may be imposed on non-compliers.  According to Louw, the 
campaign will involve a series of education and awareness projects, 
including a nationwide tour of former U.S. Vice President Al Gore's 
documentary film on climate change, "An Inconvenient Truth." 
 
¶8.  (U) The Department of Science and Technology (DST) celebrated the 
National Science Week (NSW) May 12-19, 2007.  NSW was designed to 
help make science accessible and attractive to youth, educators, 
women, and previously disadvantaged communities.  Few South African 
students currently enroll in math, science and technology in schools 
and tertiary institutions.  NWS attempted to encourage students to 
pursue careers in science engineering and technology, and to 
highlight the important roles those professions play in daily life. 
NSW included interactive exhibitions, science shows, workshops and 
broad education and entertainment.  DST official Lebs Mphahlele said 
this year's event, entitled, "Tomorrow's Science and Technology are 
in Our Youths' Hands," was planned to ensure that activities were 
relevant to the areas where people lived.  NSW had two sub-themes: 
Indigenous Knowledge Systems and promoting science activities in 
areas where South Africa clearly has knowledge and geographic 
advantage. NSW activities will be celebrated in all nine provinces 
at 43 centers.  The NSW program is on the third leg of a five-year 
program designed to run until 2009. 
 
BOST