07SANJOSE2838
HAITI: DEFINING AN ENVIRONMENTAL AGENDA
Wed Jan 03 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy San Jose
VZCZCXYZ0019
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHSJ #2838/01 0032118
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 032118Z JAN 07
FM AMEMBASSY SAN JOSE
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6919
RUEHPU/AMEMBASSY PORT AU PRINCE 0559UNCLAS SAN JOSE 002838 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PLEASE PASS TO OES/PCI (LSPERLING) AND WHA/CAR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV EAGR ECON EAID HA
SUBJECT:  HAITI: DEFINING AN ENVIRONMENTAL AGENDA 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  REO visited Embassy PAP November 20-21 to meet with officials 
from the Ministry of Environment (MOE), the World Health 
Organization (WHO), the World Bank (WB) and the United National 
Development Program (UNDP).  GOH and NGO representatives explained 
environmental problems and opportunities, and assessed projects 
carried out by other donors. Major challenges include limited 
resources, weak government capacity and ongoing security concerns. 
 
 
¶2.  NGO contacts identified integrated watershed management and 
disaster response/ risk management as top priorities.  MOE officials 
focused on capacity building, natural resources degradation, 
protected areas management and urban waste management. WHO is 
building on its ongoing engagement on health issues like HIV to 
anchor new initiatives on avian influenza (AI) and chemical safety. 
Embassy PAP might consider engaging the Haitian government on 
ratifying the Convention on International Trade in Endangered 
Species (CITES); integrated watershed management; children's 
education; and debt relief.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶3.  REO visited Embassy PAP November 20-21 to discuss environmental 
priorities with MOE Director of Soil and Ecosystems Vernet Joseph; 
HIV and AI with WHO program Directors Paulo Fernando Teixeira and 
Vely Jean-Francois; disaster response with WB Coordinator for 
Environmental Programs Sylvio Etienne; watershed management with 
UNDP officials Arnold Dupuy, Ovidio Ibanez Lopez and Laura 
Lopez-Ortum Collado; and sustainable development with USAID 
Environment specialist Ben Swartley and Environment officer Lionel 
Poitevien.  REO also met with acting DCM Jay Smith. 
 
Haitian Environmental Priorities 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  With the new government in place for less than a year, the MOE 
is in the early stages of developing an environmental agenda.  When 
asked to identify the MOE's greatest needs, government and donor 
contacts consistently provided a variant on "everything."  Soil and 
Ecosystem Director Joseph flagged the following priorities, which 
largely captured ongoing cooperation priorities with donors: 
 
Priority 1: Building Capacity 
----------------------------- 
 
 
¶5.  According to Joseph, one of the GOH's environmental priorities 
is to strengthen the MOE's capacity to implement environmental 
policy.  The MOE faces the challenge of ensuring that more 
established ministries take environmental priorities, particularly 
Haiti's obligations under international law, into account.  For 
example, Joseph doubted that Customs officials were aware of the 
paperwork needed to trade in endangered species, or their obligation 
to screen for ozone-depleting substances.  The MOE and USAID are 
preparing a National Plan of Action on the Environment which will 
provide a framework for implementing environmental policy 
objectives. 
 
Priority 2:  Halting the Degradation of Natural Resources 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶6.  GOH and NGO officials recognized that deforestation is an 
obstacle to Haiti's development and a threat to biodiversity. 
Joseph emphasized its impact on agriculture (soil degradation and 
loss), rural availability of water, and fishing (water siltation). 
Reservoir silting also reduces production of hydroelectricity, 
increasing reliance on fossil fuels for energy production.  The WB 
allotted USD 12 million for civil protection (disaster early warning 
system), reforestation, and disaster management in coordination with 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and U.S. Southern Command 
(SOUTHCOM).  UNDP, Canada, Spain and the U.S. plan to adopt key 
river basins to promote integrated watershed management and address 
disaster risks.  These projects emphasize community-led development, 
with key duties farmed out to municipal/local stakeholders.  The 
projects will encourage consolidation of local government and 
grassroots democracy by stimulating local action in target 
watersheds to reconcile the concerns of both downstream economic 
interests (farmers or bottlers, for example) and riverine 
communities who face diminished access to fresh water and heightened 
exposure to natural hazards. 
 
¶7.  According to UNDP officials Dupuy, Lopez and Collado, the 
organization anticipates sufficient coordination across donor 
agencies to generate a Haitian model for watershed management. 
Efforts in natural disaster risk mitigation, community-led watershed 
management and sustainable production might benefit from the 
expertise of Haitian geographical information system managers 
trained with European Union assistance. 
 
¶8. Integrated watershed management could find valuable partners 
among private sector and NGO stakeholders.  The WB is seeking 
support from NGOs for economic governance reform, stressing in 
particular anti-corruption, transparency and public participation. 
USAID and USDA/APHIS have worked for years with the formal sector to 
promote specialty organic and fair trade coffee, small-grower mango 
production, and sustainably produced cacao.  REO encouraged 
interlocutors to consider White Water to Blue Water Partnership 
(www.ww2bw.org) precedents and partners in planning their projects. 
 
 
Priority 3: Consolidating Protected Areas 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶9.  Joseph noted that Haitian management of parks and protected 
areas needed to accommodate the communities that have since settled 
within park borders.  Many parts of Haiti, including key watersheds 
in its central areas, have experienced deforestation, but USAID and 
UNDP representatives stressed that Haiti is not completely the 
treeless country of international perception.  The southeast and 
southern peninsula pine forests are the best preserved of the wooded 
areas.  Appropriate management of these areas could provide an 
opportunity for sustainable logging.  In the north, the World Bank 
is looking to reforestation to help combat drought and 
desertification. 
 
¶10.  Both protected areas and natural resource conservation may 
benefit from the prospect of adventure tourism in Haiti.  Although 
violence is an ongoing concern in Port au Prince, relative calm in 
rural areas has stirred a tentative interest in adventure tourism -- 
a solar-powered ecolodge is now open for business and Royal 
Caribbean is scouting out new opportunities for cruise ship visitors 
in northern Haiti.  (Note: Econoff recently returned from a visit to 
Cap Haitien and noted that Royal Caribbean's Labadie tourist 
enclave, previously advertised as part of "Hispaniola," is now being 
marketed as Haiti.  End note.) 
 
Priorities 4 and 5: Urban Waste and Educational Outreach 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶11.  Port-au-Prince's garbage could well be the most relentlessly 
visible environmental challenge facing the government.  There are no 
recycling facilities in Haiti and only a handful of garbage trucks 
to service Port-au-Prince.  (Note: The garbage trucks that currently 
service Port-au-Prince are USAID-funded, but, at the Madrid Donor's 
Conference, the Venezuela government announced the donation of five 
additional garbage trucks.  End note.)  Garbage typically 
accumulates at key intersections across the city until a torrent of 
rain washes the trash away, or exasperated residents either burn it 
or hire a truck to haul it off.  In addition, the city's sewage 
pours untreated into the Gulf of Gonave, rendering freshly caught 
fish a potential health hazard. 
 
¶12.  Joseph acknowledged MOE's responsibility in raising 
consciousness about environmental problems.  His terse responses to 
questions from Emboffs on the subject, however, suggest little 
progress to date. 
 
Constructive WHO Engagement on Human Health 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶13.  According to WHO Project Chief Teixeira, the most dramatic 
success on the health front is the reduction of HIV prevalence from 
approximately 7 percent of Haiti's population at the height of the 
HIV crisis to 2.2 percent(UN AIDS 2006 statistics) in 2006 - an 
accomplishment achieved despite years of political instability.  WHO 
officer Francois expressed satisfaction that Haiti had completed the 
development of an AI response plan that produced closer coordination 
among Health, Finance, Trade and Agriculture ministries.  He 
appeared less sanguine however, that GOH ministries have the 
capacity to implement the plan if called upon.  Francois said the 
likeliest vector for avian flu's appearance in Haiti is migratory 
birds.  Other WHO projects include: 
 
--  Boosting MOE's capacity to manage chemicals and to prepare a 
National Plan for Chemical Safety, which would focus primarily on 
labor practices. 
 
--  Drafting an institutional analysis of the water sector, which 
would be used to identify pilot projects for investment. 
 
Next Steps 
---------- 
 
¶14.  Staffing levels and security concerns pose difficult challenges 
for incorporating environmental issues in the Embassy agenda.  In 
general, the Embassy might use its authority to convoke key 
government officials and donor experts to discuss environment and 
health priorities.  Tools such as the Embassy Science Fellows 
Program, the American Fellows Program, and video conferences could 
bring U.S. expertise to bear in support of programs carried out by 
USAID, UNDP, WHO and others.  Some opportunities: 
 
-- Haiti is the sole country in the Western Hemisphere (by REO's 
count) not party to CITES.  Embassy PAP might consider whether the 
notional USAID plan to strengthen Customs could serve as an 
opportunity to educate key ministries about CITES, and lobby for 
Haitian ratification of the agreement.  More generally, the USAID 
effort with Customs might take into account Green Customs 
(www.greencustoms.org) elements.  (Note:  REO noted that endangered 
hawksbill turtle products were being marketed to tourists at his 
Port au Prince hotel and at the Airport Duty Free stores.  Haiti is 
not a party to CITES, but sale of hawksbill shell souvenirs to 
visitors from other countries risks exposing them to penalties on 
their arrival home.  End note.) 
 
-- The MOE's interest in integrated watershed management provides an 
opportunity to tap into the expertise of the White Water to Blue 
Water Partnership (www.ww2bw.org) for partners, precedents, and 
primers. 
 
-- Haitian environmental education might benefit from the 
introduction of Project GLOBE (www.globe.gov) to the Ministries of 
Education and Environment.  GLOBE is a USG-supported program to 
teach children how to use science to interpret changes in their 
environment.  Schools in key watershed areas might be able to use 
GLOBE techniques in support of watershed management goals. 
 
-- Debt relief mechanisms like the Tropical Forest Conservation Act 
can bring significant resources to bear in support of sustainable 
development and forest protection, respectively.  To qualify, Haiti 
would need to demonstrate quality forests and meet certain economic 
criteria.  While some expect Haiti to benefit from outright loan 
forgiveness, post may wish to consider whether a debt swap could be 
an element of any debt forgiveness strategy. 
 
FRISBIE