07STATE145251
DEMARCHE REQUEST: RUSSIA'S CONTRIBUTION TO THE
Wed Oct 17 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0018
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #5251 2901557
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 171548Z OCT 07
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY MOSCOW PRIORITY 0000UNCLAS STATE 145251 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID RS SOCI TBIO
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE REQUEST: RUSSIA'S CONTRIBUTION TO THE 
GLOBAL POLIO  ERADICATION INITIATIVE 
 
¶1. This is an action request. See paragraph 5. 
 
¶2. SUMMARY.   In 2006, there were serious setbacks in the 
global fight to end polio with the increased numbers of polio 
cases in Nigeria and India, continuing challenges in 
Afghanistan and Pakistan, and imported cases appearing in 
countries previously declared polio-free. There is a critical 
$60 million funding gap for 2007 and $355 million for 2008 
for the Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI).  Russia 
should be commended for taking quick action to fulfill its G8 
commitments and has committed $10 million for 2006-2008. 
Please slug responses to OES/IHB's (Tierra Copeland and 
Patricia Murphy). End Summary 
 
¶3.  BACKGROUND:   Substantial progress has been made since 
the launch of the Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI) 
in 1988, when polio was endemic in more than 125 countries, 
paralyzing 350,000 children each year.   The GPEI partnership 
includes the World Health Organization (WHO), the United 
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), Rotary International, and 
U.S. Government agencies (USAID and the Department of Health 
and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention HHS/CDC).  The U.S. Government has been the 
leading financial donor to the effort providing over $1.3 
billion since 1988 and representing nearly thirty percent of 
the global contributions. 
 
¶4.  As noted by U/S Dobriansky in a policy speech on polio 
delivered October 10, 2006, significant progress has been 
made globally; still, there have been recent setbacks that 
put eradication efforts at risk.  In 2006, 1,998 people were 
paralyzed by polio and now only four countries (Afghanistan, 
India, Nigeria, and Pakistan) still suffer from endemic polio 
transmission.  Global polio eradication is feasible; however, 
donor enthusiasm and financial contributions in the global 
polio eradication efforts are waning, even in the face of 
re-emerging infections and increasing risk for polio to 
regain a global foothold.  Challenges facing the polio 
eradication effort include: 
 
-- There is a major global funding gap of $60 million for 
GPEI to support vaccination campaigns and emergency 
operations in outbreak areas for the remainder of 2007.  A 
shortage of polio funds needed for 2007 will result in a 
negative cash flow which can potentially produce an immediate 
reduction of polio eradication activities in the remaining 
infected countries, Nigeria, India, Pakistan, and 
Afghanistan.  In addition, temporary cutbacks will result in 
re-infection of polio- free areas, an increase in polio 
paralyzed children, delays in outbreak response, and an 
increase in overall costs.  It is estimated that there is a 
shortfall of pledges of, at least, $355 million for 
eradication activities projected for 2008. 
 
-- During the 2004-2005 period, polio spread from Northern 
Nigeria and India  to 21 previously polio-free across the 
Middle East and as far east as Indonesia. 
 
-- Spread of polio has increased in 2006, with twice as many 
polio cases in five states in Northern Nigeria, and five 
times as many cases in India compared to the same period in 
¶2005. 
 
-- The remaining areas and populations of polio infections 
and transmission are among the poorest of the poor and are 
the most difficult to reach. 
 
-- Socio-political issues have complicated vaccination 
efforts. For example, in the critical areas of India and 
Nigeria, there is great distrust of government and government 
programs, and resistance to vaccination, particularly among 
Muslim communities. 
 
-- Political will on the part of the governments of 
Afghanistan, India, Nigeria, and Pakistan is being severely 
tested to follow through on commitments to polio eradication 
in their respective countries. 
 
¶5.  ACTION:  Embassy is requested to urge senior Foreign 
Affairs, Health, and Finance Ministry officials that Russia 
consider increasing its support for the WHO and UNICEF-led 
Polio Eradication Initiative, including an additional pledge 
for 2008-2009. Embassy may draw on the following talking 
points: 
 
Begin Talking Points 
 
-- The United States is very concerned that given the 
continued endemic transmission of polio in Nigeria, India, 
Afghanistan, and Pakistan, a threat remains for importation 
to polio-free countries. 
 
-- We are at a critical point in global efforts to eradicate 
polio. We are urging the four endemic countries to strengthen 
their efforts to eradicate polio and close gaps that have 
allowed the number of cases to expand. 
 
-- The United States acknowledges and appreciates Russia's 
exemplary past contributions to the Global Polio Eradication 
Initiative.  There is an urgent $60 million funding gap for 
the remainder of 2007 and $355 million for 2008 for the 
Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI). 
 
-- The United States has given generously -- $132 million in 
2007 alone -- and we are urging our partners to help close 
the funding gap. 
 
End Talking Points 
RICE