07STATE154860
REQUEST FOR WIREC FOLLOW-UP; MR. SMALL (ASSISTANT
Fri Nov 09 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0015
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #4860 3131901
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 091844Z NOV 07
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY OTTAWA IMMEDIATE 0000UNCLAS STATE 154860 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
FOR ECON AND ESTOFF 
FOR COPHENHAGEN PLEASE PASS TO REO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG KPAO SOCI TRGY CA
SUBJECT: REQUEST FOR WIREC FOLLOW-UP; MR. SMALL (ASSISTANT 
DEPUTY MINISTER, GLOBAL ISSUES) 
 
 
    ¶1.  THIS IS AN ACTION CABLE, PLEASE SEE PARA 3. 
 
¶2. SUMMARY: On July 16, 2007, OES P/DAS Reno Harnish met 
with Canada's Political Minister Kevin O,Shea and Energy 
Counselor Paul Connors 
to discuss the Washington International Renewable Energy 
Conference (WIREC 2008). 
As part of that discussion, Harnish highlighted the need for 
strong developing country participation and requested 
Canada's consideration of providing financial support 
(REFTEL).  This letter follows up on those conversations and 
requests the Government of Canada's financial support for 
developing country participants to attend WIREC 2008. END 
SUMMARY. 
 
¶3. ACTION:  Post is requested to deliver the letter dated 
November 5, 2007 to Mr. Small.  (NB:  The hard copy of the 
letter has been delivered to the DCM at their embassy in 
Washington) 
 
¶4. BEGIN TEXT 
Dear Mr. Small: 
 
     On October 16, I had the pleasure of meeting with 
Political Minister Kevin O,Shea and Energy Counselor Paul 
Connors to discuss the Washington International Renewable 
Energy Conference (WIREC 2008), which will be held March 4-6, 
2008 at the Washington Convention Center.   I enjoyed meeting 
them, and look forward to our continued interaction 
concerning WIREC 2008. 
 
     As the third global ministerial-level event on renewable 
energy, WIREC 2008 is expected to draw 2,000 senior level 
participants from around the world, including leaders from 
national and sub-national governments, the private sector, 
and civil society.  Based on discussions between the U.S. 
Embassy in Ottawa and your government, I understand that 
Canada's delegation may include representatives from your 
Ministries of Foreign Affairs and International Trade, 
Natural Resources, Environment, Agriculture and Agri-Food, as 
well as representatives from provincial and local governments 
and civil society.  Canada,s strong presence at WIREC is 
very welcome.  WIREC 2008 will also feature a co-located 
trade show/business conference, separately managed by the 
American Council on Renewable Energy and other U.S. and 
international renewable energy organizations 
 
     Last month, the U.S. government hosted WIREC,s kick-off 
event, which drew over two hundred representatives from the 
private sector, civil society and foreign governments.  Under 
Secretary of State for Democracy and Global Affairs 
 
SIPDIS 
Dobriansky and Under Secretary of Agriculture for Rural 
Development Tom Dorr provided opening remarks at the October 
2nd event.  Representatives from the White House, the 
Departments of Energy and Commerce and the Environmental 
Protection Agency also participated.  Please see 
www.wirec2008.gov for additional information. 
     Robust developing country participation by government 
officials (federal and subnational), the private sector and 
civil society will enhance the success of WIREC 2008.  We 
would like to provide financial support for both official 
delegations as well as key developing country renewable 
energy experts.  We estimate that $5,500 will be needed to 
cover the travel and per diem costs for each developing 
country participant.  During my meeting, Minister O,Shea 
indicated the possibility of Canada providing funds to 
support the attendance of developing country delegates.  The 
purpose of my letter is to formally follow up on that 
discussion.  I would be grateful for any assistance the 
Government of Canada could provide to help us achieve our 
goal.  I have also sent similar requests to colleagues in the 
EU, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, and the United Kingdom. 
 
      If you wish to provide support for developing country 
travel, you may provide funds to a special account 
established by the US Energy Association (USEA) for this 
purpose.  USEA, a non-governmental entity, has served a 
similar coordinating role for previous Ministerial-level 
conferences and is also serving as our contractor for other 
aspects of WIREC 2008.  USEA will coordinate with donor 
governments to handle the necessary travel arrangements and 
provide donor governments with an accounting for the 
sponsored delegations.  Ms. Marjorie Jean-Pierre, Deputy 
Program Manager, is the USEA point of contact.  She can be 
reached by phone at 1-202-312-1230 or via e-mail at 
mjean-pierre@usea.org. 
 
     Please let me know if you have any questions regarding 
this request, as I am eager to hear your suggestions and 
recommendations.  I would welcome the chance to discuss WIREC 
2008 with you with you in greater detail either when you are 
next in Washington or via a video or telephone conference 
call.  I would also appreciate your providing me with a 
working contact in your ministry for my staff to discuss 
WIREC,s progress in detail.   Sincerely, Reno Harnish 
Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary."  End text. 
 
¶5. No hard copy to follow. 
RICE