07STATE166776
GUIDANCE FOR 13 DECEMBER 2007 SECURITY COUNCIL
Thu Dec 13 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO1273
OO RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHC #6776/01 3472017
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O R 131958Z DEC 07
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0012
INFO DARFUR COLLECTIVE
RUEHGI/AMEMBASSY BANGUI 0857UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 STATE 166776 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPKO UN SU
SUBJECT: GUIDANCE FOR 13 DECEMBER 2007 SECURITY COUNCIL 
CONSULTATIONS ON UNAMID 
 
REF: USUN NEW YORK 001154 
 
¶1.  PURPOSE.  This is an action request.  The Department asks 
USUN to draw upon the following three themes for the United 
Nations (UN) Security Council consultations on the UN-AU 
Mission in Darfur (UNAMID) on 13 December 2007: 
 
A)  Welcome the progress between the UN and Government of 
Sudan (GOS) on UNAMID deployment during the December 8 
meeting in Lisbon on the margins of the European Union-Africa 
Summit. 
 
--We welcome the UN-GOS discussions last week regarding 
advancing the deployment of UNAMID. 
 
--We understand that the GOS has promised to resolve all 
outstanding issues hampering deployment this week. 
 
--While we welcome the new spirit of cooperation the GOS has 
shown, we will be most attentive to the new realities on the 
ground.  We will expect UNAMID to proceed with its deployment 
without undue hindrance. 
 
--We welcome the agreement by all parties to allow each 
UNAMID troop to wear a UN blue beret, a UN armband, an 
African Union (AU) armband, and a hybrid scarf. 
 
B)  Push for Sudanese implementation and follow through. 
 
--The international community expects the GOS to cooperate in 
all aspects of UNAMID's deployment, such as by consistently 
providing flight clearance, including at night; consistently 
allowing access to land and water; and consistently issuing 
visas. 
 
--Regarding use of land for UNAMID, we look forward to the 
GOS providing all necessary signatures for the contract for 
land in Zalingei.  We also look forward to the GOS providing 
a viable option for land in El Geneina, as the three options 
previously offered by the GOS are not tenable. 
 
--Regarding flight clearances, we expect the GOS to allow the 
UN uninhibited access, instead of limiting night flight to 
medical evacuations only. 
 
--The international community also expects the GOS to provide 
a formal acceptance of the UN-AU list of troop-contributing 
countries (TCCs), including contributors from outside the 
African continent, this week, as promised by the GOS. 
 
--In addition, we look forward to the resolution of the 
Status of Forces Agreement negotiations.  We urge the UN and 
AU to work closely with the GOS in resolving all the steps 
necessary for UNAMID's rapid deployment. 
 
C)  Ask the UN Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) 
to clarify its redlines on force composition and how it plans 
to compensate for any adjustments to the TCC list.  Push for 
urgent deployment of those capabilities for which DPKO 
already has TCC commitments. 
 
--We continue to urge states to contribute the tactical and 
utility helicopters and heavy transport units necessary for 
UNAMID's effectiveness. 
 
--We ask DPKO to specify what elements of the force are 
absolutely necessary and what alternative plans it may have 
to compensate for a lack of some elements.  We cannot afford 
to have UNAMID's effectiveness suffer from lack of critical 
enablers. 
 
--Regarding rapid deployment of existing elements, we urge 
the UN Department of Peacekeeping Operations and TCCs to 
coordinate closely to expedite the steps required for 
deployment.  We are disappointed by the limited amount of 
UNAMID personnel that are on the ground and want to see rapid 
deployment of additional assets. 
 
--We understand the very difficult environment that UNAMID 
faces on the ground.  We have heard new reports of threats 
against Chinese troops deployed to UNAMID and Chinese oil 
field workers.  We strongly condemn such threats and call 
upon all parties to refrain from any threats or acts of 
violence, particularly against UN peacekeepers, humanitarian 
workers, and all civilians.  We urge all parties to respect 
an immediate ceasefire and to allow humanitarian workers full 
 
STATE 00166776  002 OF 002 
 
 
access to those in need. 
 
¶2.  BACKGROUND.  The GOS' letter dated 5 December 2007 
attempts to rebut Under Secretary-General for Peacekeeping 
Operations Guehenno's statement to the UN Security Council on 
27 November on the following:  1) The Status of Forces 
Agreement (SOFA).  The GOS claimed that DPKO has been 
delaying meetings.  On 12 December, USUN reported that a 
UNAMID-GOS meeting on SOFA began 11 December in Khartoum.  2) 
The issue of land.  The GOS claimed the UN must visit 
Zalingei so it can receive its allotment.  On 12 December, 
USUN reported that the UN visited Zalingei and the UN is now 
waiting for the GOS to sign the contract.  The GOS also 
claimed the UN has yet to decide among three options for land 
in El Geneina.  On 12 December, USUN reported that none of 
these options is acceptable and is waiting for the GOS to 
offer a viable option.  3) The issue of six helicopters.  GOS 
said the lack of parking space in El Fasher prompted the UN 
to relocate these helicopters to Nyala.  On 12 December, USUN 
reported this is true.  4)  Flying at night.  The GOS said it 
has given its consent to night flying "in all cases of 
medical evacuation."  On 12 December, USUN reported this is 
correct, but that the UN wants uninhibited access.  5) UNAMID 
communications equipment in El Fasher.  GOS claimed the UN 
did not follow the correct procedures for notifying the GOS. 
GOS said the issue will be closed this week, after it gets 
the necessary technical information.  On 12 December, Embassy 
Khartoum reported the GOS released the communications 
equipment.  6) Use by UNAMID of El Obeid Logistics Base.  GOS 
said it has given its consent for UNAMID to use the El Obeid 
logistics base, pending the establishment of a separate 
logistical base for UNAMID.  On 12 December, USUN reported 
this is true.  7) UNAMID Accoutrements.  The GOS said this 
issue will be discussed with other details at the SOFA 
discussions.  On 12 December, USUN reported that all parties 
have agreed that the uniform will include a blue UN beret, UN 
armband, AU armband, and hybrid scarf.  In addition, on 12 
December, USUN reported that the GOS has yet to respond to 
the UN-AU TCC list. 
 
On 8 December, the UN met with the GOS on the margins of the 
EU-Africa Summit in Lisbon (reftel).  According to SYG Deputy 
Chief of Staff Kim Won Soo, the GOS agreed to resolve all 
outstanding issues with UNAMID deployment by 12 December, 
including the SOFA, land for bases, night flights, equipment 
seizures, visas, etc.   The Sudanese also agreed to provide a 
response to the UN-AU TCC list.  Kim predicted that the GOS 
would accept the Thai and Nepalese units, but would reject 
the Nordic unit.  A UNAMID-GOS meeting took place 11 December 
in Khartoum to finalize agreement on the remaining deployment 
issues and is apparently on-going, as not all issues have 
been resolved as of 12 December. 
 
Kim also reported on the negative replies to SYG Ban's 
request for helicopters.  Kim offered the idea of accepting 
the Jordanian offer of pilots and equipping them with 
appropriate aviation assets from a third country.  DPKO had 
rejected Jordan's offer only because Jordan's helicopters do 
not have the right capabilities.  Jordan, however, does have 
pilots trained to fly U.S. helicopters.  Kim asked if the 
U.S. could provide the appropriate aviation assets or if 
U.S.-model helicopters could be rented from Kuwait, Saudi 
Arabia, or elsewhere.  USUN said it was highly unlikely that 
the U.S. would provide helicopters, but would forward the 
proposal to Washington.  The Department is reviewing this 
request. 
 
¶3.  POINT-OF-CONTACT:  Grace M. Kang, IO/PSC 202-736-7735. 
RICE