07STATE56784
RECRUITING TRANSFORMATIONAL DIPLOMATS FOR FIELD
Fri Apr 27 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO9702
RR RUEHAG RUEHAO RUEHAP RUEHAT RUEHBC RUEHBI RUEHBL RUEHBZ RUEHCD
RUEHCHI RUEHCI RUEHCN RUEHDA RUEHDBU RUEHDE RUEHDF RUEHDT RUEHDU
RUEHED RUEHEL RUEHFK RUEHFL RUEHGA RUEHGD RUEHGH RUEHGI RUEHGR RUEHHA
RUEHHM RUEHHO RUEHHT RUEHIHL RUEHIK RUEHJO RUEHKN RUEHKR RUEHKSO
RUEHKUK RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHLH RUEHLN RUEHLZ RUEHMA RUEHMC RUEHMJ RUEHMR
RUEHMRE RUEHNAG RUEHNG RUEHNH RUEHNL RUEHNP RUEHNZ RUEHPA RUEHPB
RUEHPD RUEHPT RUEHPW RUEHQU RUEHRD RUEHRG RUEHRN RUEHROV RUEHRS RUEHTM
RUEHTRO RUEHVC RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHC #6784/01 1171616
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 271608Z APR 07
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO ALL DIPLOMATIC AND CONSULAR POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHTRO/AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI 3031
INFO DARFUR COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 STATE 056784 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AU CJ HO SOCI SU US
SUBJECT: RECRUITING TRANSFORMATIONAL DIPLOMATS FOR FIELD 
TOURS IN DARFUR 
 
-------------------- 
BOTTOM LINE UP FRONT 
-------------------- 
 
¶1. (U) This cable is intended to advertise and recruit 
individuals to serve four-six month TDY tours in Darfur in 
support of the Embassy Political Section and Washington's 
foreign policy objectives in Sudan.  S/CRS personnel, with 
stop-gap support from Embassy political officers, have 
manned Post's Darfur presence for roughly one year, but 
expect to wind down full-time support by mid- to late- 
summer.  The Department is seeking to identify qualified 
personnel so that Post can minimize any staffing gaps in 
Darfur, which remains a top U.S. foreign policy priority 
and a prime transformational diplomacy opportunity. 
 
--------- 
THE PITCH 
--------- 
 
¶2. (U) There are few higher U.S. foreign policy priorities 
than alleviating the mass displacements and human suffering 
in Darfur and pursuing peace in the conflict-ridden region. 
Darfur presents a unique and challenging political, 
security, social and functional environment that is well 
outside the traditional scope of most Embassy operations. 
Daily activities in the field may range from gathering 
information about the latest ceasefire violations, to 
accompanying peacekeeping patrols, to coordinating high- 
level visits, to interacting with UN field staff, civil 
society, Sudanese officials and military figures.  As one 
of only a few USG officials on the ground and likely the 
only State Department representative, the opportunity to 
serve in Darfur requires an ability to work in an 
ambiguous, fast-paced environment where collaboration, 
flexibility, initiative and creativity are essential 
attributes.  The Secretary cited the importance of this 
work, stating that in Darfur "several members of our team 
moved in fast and light.  They acquired a space to call 
their headquarters.  And they have been working for the 
past few months to help transform the conditions on the 
ground, with everyone from Sudanese rebel groups, to 
African Union peacekeepers, to international aid workers." 
To serve as a field officer in Darfur is to be at the 
vanguard of transformational diplomacy, where policy is put 
into practice and possibilities abound to act as an agent 
of change in support of peace. 
 
---------- 
BACKGROUND 
---------- 
 
¶3. (U) Shortly after the May 2006 signing of the Darfur 
Peace Agreement (DPA), a small team from the Active 
Response Corps (ARC) of the Office of the Coordinator for 
Reconstruction and Stabilization (S/CRS) deployed to Darfur 
to assist Embassy Khartoum in creating a forward USG 
presence and provide ground-level reporting.  The team was 
also charged with establishing and operationalizing DPA 
Implementation Offices, also known as Peace Secretariats, 
which serve as platforms to expand awareness of the peace 
process, enhance African Union Mission in Sudan (AMIS) 
political and outreach capacity, provide needed 
communications and office capabilities to DPA signatories, 
and serve as practical venues for implementation 
coordination and civil society activities.  The ARC team 
quickly established field operations in North Darfur state 
capital El Fasher, where both AMIS and the UN Mission in 
Sudan (UNMIS) have central headquarters. 
 
¶4. (U) Over several months, ARC members oversaw the 
refurbishment of two residences that now have full and 
redundant communications capabilities and serve as a base 
of operations in the field.  With dedicated support from 
both Embassy Khartoum and Washington, the ARC team acquired 
field staff, including interpreters and drivers, procured 
vehicles, established operating and reporting procedures, 
and laid the foundation for a self-sustained and long-term 
presence in Darfur.  Field officers also cultivated a broad 
network of contacts in the international, civil society, 
local and humanitarian communities.  In September 2006, ARC 
members - in close collaboration with USAID - opened the 
Peace Secretariat in El Fasher.  Led by the African Union 
(AU) and supported behind the scenes by Embassy field 
officers, this facility continues to evolve as one of the 
hubs for peace process-related activities in Darfur.  The 
 
STATE 00056784  002 OF 003 
 
 
U.S. is currently the only country maintaining a permanent 
diplomatic presence in Darfur, though other countries, 
including Canada, the UK and the Netherlands, have taken 
note of the USG's leadership in the field and are 
considering similar means of enhancing their own ground- 
level visibility. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
UNCONVENTIONAL DIPLOMATIC OPERATIONS AND DUTIES 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶5. (U) The scope of responsibilities and duties for a 
Darfur field officer continues to evolve as the political, 
security, social and humanitarian dynamics on the ground 
change.  At a minimum, however, the officer may be expected 
to fill both managerial and substantive roles.  On the 
management side, the officer will oversee a foreign service 
national staff that includes drivers, 
interpreters/assistants, a local guard force, an 
administrative assistant, and cleaners.  He/she will also 
be ultimately responsible for the smooth functioning of 
logistic, financial and administrative requirements related 
to Darfur field operations, cooperating closely with all 
Embassy staff sections and the U.S. contracting officer 
technical representative (COTR), who is also based in El 
Fasher. 
 
¶6. (U) On substance, the field officer(s) are responsible 
for providing substantive reporting to Embassy and 
Washington on critical political, security, economic, 
social and humanitarian matters. Moreover, officers must 
manage relationships with AMIS, provide advisory support to 
the AU political affairs section in El Fasher, continue to 
publicize and develop the role and effective functioning of 
the Peace Secretariat, and maintain contact with both DPA 
signatory and non-signatory representatives.  As the peace 
process morphs, the field officer will be responsible for 
identifying areas where the USG may play a constructive 
role, whether that is supporting ongoing multilateral 
efforts to bridge differences between the GoS and non- 
signatory groups or unilateral actions, such as funding 
grassroots reconciliation efforts.  As needed, the officer 
may serve as the U.S. representative on the AMIS Ceasefire 
Commission (CFC) or other bodies created under the DPA. 
He/she should continue to develop relationships with senior 
UN, NGO, civil society and government officials throughout 
Darfur and must continue to facilitate and report on 
coordination between the AU, UN and other stakeholders in 
DPA implementation or peace process-related activities.  As 
plans for the introduction of a UN Light and Heavy Support 
Package and, ultimately, a hybrid force move forward, the 
field officer shall report on progress, identify capacity 
gaps and suggest measures that the U.S. may take to 
expedite these processes.  The field officer will also be 
expected to coordinate all manner of visits - ranging from 
Embassy officials to Congressional delegations - to Darfur. 
Periodically, he/she may travel to other parts of Darfur to 
monitor specific issues or respond to Embassy taskings, and 
shall return to Khartoum every two-three weeks to read 
classified traffic and synchronize policy and program 
efforts between the field and capital. 
 
----------------- 
LIFE IN THE FIELD 
----------------- 
 
¶7. (U) A TDY tour in Darfur is a transformational 
diplomatic experience.  While living and working conditions 
have improved significantly since the first ARC members 
arrived in June 2006, life in the field is dramatically 
different than serving in the capital.  The two USG 
residences in El Fasher provide a functional base of 
operations for field officers to live and conduct business. 
Unlike in Afghanistan or Iraq, where there are significant 
USG logistical footprints, Darfur field officers must be 
prepared to improvise and fend for themselves, tapping into 
locally available resources.  Internet connectivity is 
generally reliable and there are redundant forms of phone 
communication (local cell network and satellite).  Still, 
power outages, extreme climatic conditions, temperamental 
water supply, government-imposed curfews, logistical 
challenges, scant social outlets, limited local 
availability of goods and services, and fluctuating 
security conditions are just a few of the factors that 
shape life in the field. 
 
 
 
------------------------------------- 
WHAT IT TAKES - RECRUITING PARAMETERS 
------------------------------------- 
 
STATE 00056784  003 OF 003 
 
 
¶8. (U) Candidates for TDY tours in Darfur must, above all, 
be flexible self-starters capable of working in ambiguous 
and fluid conflict-affected environments.  Qualified Civil 
Servants and Foreign Service Officers are eligible. 
Individuals who are available for deployment as early as 
mid-March are encouraged to apply.  Because of the heavy 
interaction with AMIS, rebel movements and Sudanese Armed 
Forces (SAF), candidates with a military/security 
background or significant political-military reporting 
experience are desired.  Previous experience working in 
austere environments or conflict zones, such as Provincial 
Reconstruction Teams (PRT) in Iraq or Afghanistan, and a 
solid understanding of international and humanitarian 
organizations' field activities are also important 
qualifications.  Candidates are not required to speak 
Arabic, though this is an advantage.  Potential field 
officers must have a Class I medical clearance; strong 
analytical, interpersonal, written and oral communication, 
organizational and managerial skills are essential. 
Candidates should be willing to work long hours in less 
than ideal conditions with little or no direct supervision. 
Continuity is prized in the field and candidates willing to 
serve six month tours (or more) will be highly considered. 
Ties, loafers and formal office attire can be left at home. 
 
------- 
BENNIES 
------- 
 
¶9. (U) The greatest benefit in volunteering to serve as a 
Darfur field officer is the satisfaction of contributing to 
one of the USG's highest foreign policy priorities.  This 
exciting field position allows expansive room for 
initiative and creativity and provides a unique 
transformational diplomatic experience that few others in 
the State Department may gain.  Beyond personal and 
professional enrichment, a field officer on a four-six 
month TDY will receive a one-week regional R&R at mid tour. 
Field officers are entitled also to 25 percent Post 
differential (after 42 days on the ground) and 25 percent 
danger pay (immediately).  Personnel serving in Darfur will 
be expected to return to Khartoum periodically for a hot 
shower and decent meal. 
 
------------ 
HOW TO APPLY 
------------ 
 
¶10. (U) Post is seeking to backfill positions in the field 
within the May/June timeframe at the latest.  Applications 
should consist of a detailed resume and cover letter 
explaining the candidate's interest and relevant functional 
or regional experience.  Candidates should obtain at least 
provisional agreement beforehand from their home offices or 
duty stations that, if selected, they will be able to 
deploy to Darfur for four-six months as soon as May/June. 
Complete applications should be sent as soon as possible 
via email to AF/SPG Deputy Director Jason Small, who, in 
conjunction with Embassy Khartoum, will select suitable 
candidates.  As we expect these positions in Darfur to 
continue, candidates who are not selected for the period 
beginning in May may be considered for tours at a later 
time. 
 
¶11. (U) Interested candidates should contact Jason Small in 
AF/SPG.  Eythan Sontag in S/CRS can reply to specific 
questions on substantive field issues and provide first- 
hand insights into this field assignment. 
 
¶12. (U)  Minimize Considered. 
RICE