07USUNNEWYORK741
62ND UNGA PRESIDENT PLANS FOR TAIWAN ISSUE
Tue Sep 11 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
USUN New York
VZCZCXYZ0031
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUCNDT #0741 2542309
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 112309Z SEP 07
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2564
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 0955UNCLAS USUN NEW YORK 000741 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TW UNGA XE ZO
SUBJECT: 62ND UNGA PRESIDENT PLANS FOR TAIWAN ISSUE 
DISCUSSION 
 
¶1.  Action Request Para 5. 
 
¶2.  Summary.  UN General Assembly President-elect H.E. Mr. 
Srgjan Kerim convened informal consultations of the 62nd UNGA 
General Committee on September 6 to discuss procedures for 
considering the request for inscription of a new agenda item 
on Taiwan.  The Chinese urged the Committee to follow past 
procedure and restrict discussion to two states speaking in 
favor of inscription and two against.  Eighteen committee 
members agreed but two supporters of Taiwan objected to any 
restrictions on the debate.  When the Committee convenes on 
September 19, it will have to agree on the procedure as well 
as decide whether to inscribe the item on the agenda of the 
General Assembly.  End Summary. 
 
¶3.  China led the discussion of how the General Committee 
should deal with the request to inscribe a new item, "Urging 
the Security Council to process Taiwan's membership 
application pursuant to rules 59 and 60 of the provisional 
rules of procedure of the Security Council and Article 4 of 
the Charter of the United Nations".  The proposal was 
submitted by Belize, Burkina Faso, El Salvador, the Gambia, 
Honduras, Kiribati, Malawi, the Marshall Islands, Nauru, 
Palau, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Vincent and the 
Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Solomon Islands, Swaziland 
and Tuvalu.  The Chinese PR said that China is resolutely 
against inclusion of the item on the agenda.  He asked 
members of the Committee to follow past practice and settle 
the matter within the General Committee.  He proposed: 
 
a) The General Committee would hear two speakers for and two 
against after which the Committee Chair (GA President) would 
make a ruling.  (In the past the ruling has been that there 
was no agreement to inscribe). 
 
b) In order to save time, no delegations should speak when 
the Report of the General Committee is considered in the 
General Assembly Plenary. 
 
¶4. China's procedural proposal was supported by Bahamas, 
Benin, Botswana, Cyprus, DRK, Egypt, France, Iceland, Iraq, 
Jamaica, Mauritius, Moldova, Russia, Sri Lanka, Turkey, 
Turkmenistan, UK and Uruguay. The U.S. did not make a 
statement but privately assured the Chinese and the GA 
President that we support the procedure proposed by China. 
 
The Representative of Palau, however, pointed out that the 
proposed procedural approach was not consistent with Rule 43 
of the General Assembly Rules of Procedure which indicates 
that those members who have asked for inscription of an item 
should be permitted to speak. Gambia supported Palau's 
position but Honduras, also a sponsor of the inscription 
request, said that they would be flexible as to the procedure. 
 
¶5.  The issue of whether to limit debate as well as the issue 
of whether to inscribe the item will be before the General 
Committee when it meets on September 19.  The outcome of 
General Committee action will be considered by the General 
Assembly Plenary on September 21 when it will be asked to 
adopt the Committee Report.  ACTION REQUEST:  USUN requests 
instructions (for the General Committee and Plenary) on 
whether to speak in support of the Chinese procedural 
proposal?  Vote for it?  Speak against inscription of the 
Taiwan item?  Vote against inscription? 
 
 
KHALILZAD