08AITTAIPEI395
MEDIA REACTION: TAIWAN'S UN REFERENDA
Thu Mar 20 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0010
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0395/01 0800913
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 200913Z MAR 08
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8428
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 7986
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 9240UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000395 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: TAIWAN'S UN REFERENDA 
 
 
Summary:  Taiwan's presidential election, which will be held 
Saturday in tandem with two referenda seeking the island's UN 
membership, continued to stay in the spotlight of the Taiwan media 
on March 20.  The pro-unification "United Daily News" front-paged a 
news story on AIT Taipei Director Stephen Young's visit to KMT 
Chairman Wu Poh-hsiung Tuesday; the story ran with the headline 
saying "The United States Expresses Concern about Whether Political 
Power Will Be Transferred Peacefully."  Several other papers also 
carried similar news story on their inside pages.  In terms of 
editorials and commentaries, editorials in the pro-independence, 
English-language "Taipei Times" and "Taiwan News" both called on the 
Taiwan voters to cast their ballots for Saturday's UN referenda so 
as to demonstrate to the world that "Taiwan is a sovereign nation." 
End summary. 
 
A) "It's Use It or Lose it on Saturday" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] editorialized (3/20): 
 
"Anyone who believed that China respects Taiwanese people should 
have been roused from their stupor after Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao 
on Tuesday reiterated Beijing's line that Taiwan is an inseparable 
part of China.  The timing of Wen's comments -- concurrent with 
Beijing's bloody crackdown on protesting Tibetans -- drives home the 
need for Taiwanese to vote in Saturday's referendum and make it 
known that Taiwan is not a province of China. ...  The more 
Taiwanese democracy draws the attention of the international 
community, the better it can demonstrate that Taiwan is a sovereign 
nation. 
 
"Clinging to Wen's coattails, US Deputy Assistant Secretary of State 
for East Asian and Pacific Affairs Thomas Christensen also spoke on 
Tuesday against the referendums, branding them 'pointless and 
destabilizing' and 'unnecessary and unhelpful.'  Wen and Christensen 
simply will not concede that Taiwanese democracy is an issue for 
Taiwanese. 
 
"On Saturday, Taiwan has the opportunity to show the world just how 
different it is from autocratic China.  The issue is all the more 
important after the UN Office of Legal Affairs on Tuesday again 
snubbed an expression of support by Taiwan's allies for the nation's 
admission into the world body.  The new government to be formed on 
May 20 may very well give up on the UN bid if neither referendum 
succeeds. Indeed, how can Taiwan ask its allies to speak for it if 
the nation doesn't stand up for itself on Saturday?" 
 
B) "Importance of Referendums" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" [circulation: 
20,000] editorialized (3/20): 
 
"... The result of Saturday's vote may well determine whether Taiwan 
follows a road toward integration with the People's Republic of 
China and restores KMT 'one-party domination' or maintains its 
independence, democracy and a Taiwan-centric path of development. 
...  The two referendums, especially the DPP-sponsored 'U.N. for 
Taiwan' initiative, offer the first opportunity in our history for 
the 23 million people of Taiwan to express our collective will on 
whether they wish to have their own distinct representation in the 
world community.  Approval of either referendum will not directly 
lead to actual U.N. membership, since only the members of the U.N. 
itself have the right to approve our application. 
 
"However, passage of the initiative calling for an application to 
join the U.N. under the name of 'Taiwan' or even approval of the 
'readmission' version will immeasurably bolster the legitimacy of 
Taiwan's effort to affiliate with the U.N. and will compel the U.N. 
to face the substantial question of the lack of representation for 
the people of Taiwan in the U.N.  However, if both referendums fail 
to receive valid approval from the electorate, the Beijing regime 
will undoubtedly claim to the international media and world 
governments that the results confirm its position that calls for 
Taiwan's independence or self-determination or retaining our 
democratic system are only the 'voice of a small minority' or even 
declare that the majority of Taiwanese hope for unification with the 
PRC. 
 
"Beijing will thereby receive more legitimacy to squeeze Taiwan out 
of international organizations or push for the subordination of our 
representation under its umbrella as 'Taipei, China,' similar to 
'Hong Kong, China.'  Last but not least, it will be virtually 
impossible for Taiwan's official allies or democratic friends in the 
U.N. to rebut Beijing's claim that 'Taiwan is a province of the 
People's Republic of China' and does not merit separate 
representation in the U.N. or other international bodies.  What is 
even more painful is the fact that the KMT's decision to boycott 
both referendums for narrow partisan objectives will prevent 
Saturday's voting from truly reflecting the genuine collective will 
 
and voice of the Taiwan people, whom favor U.N. participation by an 
overwhelming majority according to virtually all opinion polls.  We 
urge all voters to set aside partisanship and realize that March 22 
offers the first and perhaps only chance for the people of Taiwan to 
make their collective will heard in the world community." 
 
YOUNG