08AITTAIPEI1331
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS, U.S. DEFENSE
Mon Sep 08 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0004
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1331/01 2520854
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 080854Z SEP 08
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9913
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 8588
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0034UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001331 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS, U.S. DEFENSE 
STRATEGY 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused news 
coverage September 6-8 on the Ma Ying-jeou Administration's various 
moves to stimulate Taiwan's sluggish economy, following extensive 
and severe criticisms against President Ma's failure to realize his 
economic platform in his first 100 days in office; on the continued 
probe into former President Chen Shui-bian's money laundering case; 
and on an announcement by China's Taiwan Affairs Office on Sunday to 
expand exchanges across the Taiwan Strait. 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, an op-ed in the 
centrist, KMT-leaning "China Times" said President Ma's cross-Strait 
policy, which allegedly favors China, has made Ma a troublemaker to 
the United States, as evidenced by the United States's alleged 
refusal to sell Taiwan F-16C/D fighter jets.  An editorial in the 
pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" also criticized 
Ma's arbitrary definition of cross-Strait relations as "a special 
non-state-to-state relationship," saying that the move has 
downgraded Taiwan's sovereignty.  An editorial in the conservative, 
pro-unification, English-language "China Post," on the other hand, 
hailed U.S. President George W. Bush's change in his defense 
strategy by placing the "long war" against extremism above 
conventional challenges from China and Russia.  End summary. 
 
¶3. U.S.-China-Taiwan Relations 
 
A) "[Taiwan's] Three Major Bargaining Chips Have Suffered Severe 
Erosion" 
 
Former DPP Legislator Lin Cho-shui opined in the centrist, 
KMT-leaning "China Times" [circulation: 300,000] (9/7): 
 
"Judging from the United States' decision to turn down the F-16 C/D 
fighter jets deal [to Taiwan], [it appears that] President Ma 
Ying-jeou has got himself in rather big diplomatic trouble with the 
United States. 
 
"China must be very happy that Ma has ruined Taiwan's relations with 
the United States, but what Beijing offered Ma was not rewards. 
During the former Chen Shui-bian Administration, it was normally 
Beijing that took the initiative to talk about the three-link issue 
[with Taiwan].  Now, with the second round of negotiations between 
the Taiwan's Straits Exchange Foundation and China's Association for 
Relations across the Taiwan Strait looming, Taiwan was eager to 
propose issues [to Beijing], but Beijing has been lukewarm in 
response in terms of what issues need to be discussed or even 
whether there are issues that really need to be discussed.  What's 
even worse is that Beijing has turned around and blamed Ma for being 
too rude by demanding immediately after he was elected that Beijing 
honor his two [campaign] checks about launching direct chartered 
flights on July 4 and allowing Mainland tourists to [come to] 
Taiwan.  It appears that [China] is about to follow the lead of the 
United States in treating Ma as a troublemaker. 
 
"... When it comes to foreign relations, China is an old hand at 
manipulating power politics.  China is clearly aware that for Taiwan 
to be able to stand up in front of Beijing, the island must in 
principle possess three major bargaining chips:  First, the United 
States must treat Taiwan as a friend; second, there must be an 
internal pro-independence force in Taiwan that is strongly opposed 
to unification [with China]; and third, Taiwan's [must possess its] 
own economic strength.  These three major bargaining chips have all 
undergone severe erosion since President Ma assumed office.  First, 
Ma's ambiguous concept of sovereignty and his position of 'putting 
cross-Strait [relations] ahead of [the island's] foreign relations' 
as well as the strategies derived from such a position have resulted 
in Washington's reduced support for Taiwan; [the United States'] 
refusal to sell F16C/D fighter jets to Taiwan is in itself a very 
strong indicator [of lowered U.S. support].  Second, even though 
public opinion in Taiwan supporting Taiwan independence is still 
mounting, the DPP, a leader of the pro-Taiwan independence power, 
has already stepped down following a severe [electoral] defeat. 
High-ranking KMT officials, on the other hand, have been striving 
and rushing to visit Beijing in order to fawn on China.  Finally, 
the Ma Administration has totally given up on Taiwan's economic 
development based on its own initiative, and all it wants is to rely 
completely on China. 
 
"Given that [Taiwan's] three major bargaining chips have been 
severely eroded Beijing certainly believes now is the best time for 
it to further compress Taiwan's road for survival in the 
international community.  Surely it does not have to behave politely 
toward Taiwan any more. ...  If the Ma Administration continues not 
to adjust its cross-Strait and diplomatic strategies that invite 
insult, then Taiwan will only sink deeper in its predicament." 
 
B) "Ma's Confusion is Taiwan's Disaster" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" [circulation: 
STRATEGY 
 
20,000] editorialized (9/8): 
 
"... Ma's arbitrary redefinition of 'special state-to-state 
relations' into 'region to region' relations is by no means 
harmless.  His definition of Taiwan as a 'region' undermines our 
claim to full, equal and distinct representation in the 
international community as a democratic independent state and 
negates the right of democratic self-determination of our 23 million 
people under the principle of 'people's sovereignty' embraced by Lee 
and underlining the DPP's May 1999 'Resolution on the Future of 
Taiwan.' 
 
"Ma's redefinition also opens questions about his own status, namely 
whether he considers himself to be the constitutionally mandated 
head of state of the state composed of Taiwan's 23 million citizens, 
the 'chief executive' of a 'region' or, megalomanically, the sole 
legitimate 'president' of a 'great ROC' including over 1.3 billion 
people in the PRC, Mongolia and Taiwan. ...  We call on Ma either to 
retract his statement, submit his definition that Taiwan is merely a 
'region' for approval or rejection by our 23 million citizens 
through national referendum or resign his post for having won 
election through fraud." 
 
¶4. U.S. Defense Strategy 
 
"A Change in U.S. Defense Strategy" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (9/8): 
 
"President George W. Bush is making, belatedly, a change in U.S. 
defense strategy.  He has to step down early next year and nobody 
knows his successor in the White House may change that change again. 
 But Bush's change makes sense.  The United States now places the 
'long war' against extremism above potential conventional challenges 
from China and Russia s the top priority of the military in the 
coming years.  It's the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq that made the 
Pentagon to change the strategy despite a steady and huge defense 
buildup in China and an invasion by Russia of its former Soviet 
republic of Georgia during the Summer Olympics in Beijing. ... 
 
"It seems that Washington has finally come to accept the plain truth 
that neither Russia nor China is a real potential enemy.  The Pax 
Americana makes the United States the world's policeman.  It has to 
see to it that it has more and better asymmetrical military 
capabilities to wage the long war against violent extremist 
movements." 
 
YOUNG