08BASRAH61
BASRAH DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION PROMOTES INVESTMENT IN
Wed Jun 18 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
REO Basrah
VZCZCXRO2093
PP RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHBC #0061/01 1700925
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 180925Z JUN 08
FM REO BASRAH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0773
INFO RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD PRIORITY 0356
RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE
RUEHBC/REO BASRAH 0810UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BASRAH 000061 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV EPET ENRG ECON KCRM IZ
SUBJECT: BASRAH DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION PROMOTES INVESTMENT IN 
SOUTHERN IRAQ 
 
BASRAH 00000061  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. (U) Summary:  Since the establishment of the Basrah 
Development Commission (BDC) in October 2007, the British 
Government and the Basrah Provincial Council have been working 
closely on strategies to promote development and attract foreign 
investment in southern Iraq.  The BDC has undoubtedly served as 
an excellent resource in helping local government officials and 
business leaders shape their development strategy for the 
province.  However, supported by the UK-led Provincial 
Reconstruction Team (PRT), BDC initiatives have primarily 
targeted British and regional audiences.  Since its inception, 
the BDC has sparingly reached out to potential American 
investors and, as the commission becomes more entrenched in 
Basrah's economic future, U.S. investors will find themselves at 
a distinct disadvantage absent a comparable U.S. foreign 
commercial presence. End Summary 
 
¶2. (U) Established in October 2007, the Basrah Development 
Commission (BDC) is a joint UK-Iraqi initiative with two 
principal objectives:  to assist local government in 
implementing a regional development strategy and to promote 
foreign investment.  Since December 2007, the BDC has been 
supported by the British-led PRT; with a large staff funded by 
DFID's Coffey contractors.  Its efforts to support economic 
development have been consistent with Provincial Council 
initiatives, including the council's Provincial Development 
Strategy.   The USD 215 million strategy is the most 
comprehensive plan created and endorsed by the stakeholders who 
live in the province.  It provides a broad picture of economic 
and social development conditions, and it outlines over 2000 
projects covering seven provincial districts and 16 service 
sectors.  As a uniquely local assessment, the BDC and the 
Provincial Council hope the strategy serves as the principal 
tool in developing a coordinated effort to revitalize the 
province's struggling economy.  However, with 70 percent 
shortfall in funding, the Council realizes it must aggressively 
attract foreign investment. 
 
¶3. (U) As Iraq's economic gateway, Basrah accounts for around 
70% of the country's oil reserves and has its only deep sea 
port.  The region has historically had a thriving agricultural 
sector and was once one of the world's largest producers of 
dates.  Basrah (by air or land) is the traditional port of entry 
for most pilgrims to the Shia holy sites to the North.  The 
province has the potential to develop into a hub for business 
travel and tourism.  Understanding Basrah's importance to the 
overall economic health of the country, promoting foreign 
investment has become Provincial Council's most important 
economic objective.  During an June 3 meeting, Zuhair Ali 
Akbair, General Manager for the Basrah Branch of the Central 
Bank, asked the REO for USG assistance in attracting foreign 
banks to Basrah.  He emphasized the important role foreign banks 
could play in promoting greater security and improving good 
governance, adding that an influx of capital would promote both 
foreign and local investment toward the development of new 
businesses which would, in turn, create long-term employment 
opportunities.  Zuhair also stressed the need for foreign 
assistance in supporting the provinces many state-owned 
enterprises. 
 
¶4. (U) Absent a locally-based foreign commercial service in 
Basrah, the BDC has taken the lead in serving as the liaison 
between foreign investors and the provincial government.  In 
March, the BDC hosted its first conference, held in Kuwait, to 
engage with investors to discuss how the commission can help 
foreign companies enter the market.  In mid-May, the BDC held 
another event in London for 54 investors interested in 
opportunities across sectors.  The BDC is also developing the 
Basrah Development Fund to address weaknesses in the banking 
system and improve access to credit for local small and medium 
enterprises. 
 
¶5. (U) During the past two months, the Basrah Governor Mohammed 
Waeli has met with selected BDC Commissioners to discuss the 
development of the Basrah Investment Promotion Agency (BIPA). 
The National Investment Law (No 13 of 2006) mandates the 
establishment of a National Investment Commission and regional 
or governorate level investment commissions with powers to grant 
investment licences, identify strategic investment 
opportunities, promote investment and give effect to and 
guarantee the provisions of the investment law.  The BIPA has 
the vision that Basrah will be a destination of choice for 
discerning foreign and local investors, and the destination of 
choice in Iraq.  According to the Iraq National Investment 
Commission, excluding matters related to oil and gas exploration 
and banking and insurance, no legal investment into Basrah can 
take place without the formation of an investment promotion 
agency and appointment of a suitably qualified Board. Waeli has 
agreed to take the appointment of the BIPA Board forward at the 
earliest opportunity. Once the BIPA is formed, it will be 
charged with attracting investment to Basrah, stimulating 
economic development, and implementing a procedural standard for 
 
BASRAH 00000061  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
trade and investment in the province.  The BDC recently sent a 
BIPA Lead Adviser from London to Basrah to assist with the 
creation of a BIPA Charter, help with the BIPA's organization 
development, and assist in the formulation of the BIPA 
operational and business plan. 
 
¶6. (U) The specific objectives of BIPA are to promote investment 
and transfer modern technologies in order to contribute to the 
process of developing and enhancing Basrah, and expanding and 
diversifying its production and service base; encourage the 
Iraqi and foreign private sector to invest in Basrah by 
providing the required facilities for establishing investment 
projects and enhancing Basrah's competitive advantage; help to 
protect the rights and property of investors; foster expansion 
of exports and improvement of the balance of payments and the 
balance of trade of Iraq; and foster development of human 
resources based on market demand to create work opportunities 
for Iraqis in Basrah. 
 
¶7. (U) COMMENT:  Without USG direct involvement, the 
British-Iraqi organized investment plan places future U.S. 
investment at a disadvantage.  In addition to a non-existent 
U.S. role in the development of the provinces legal framework 
for foreign investment, the BDC can potentially influence uneven 
trade and investment restrictions on U.S. businesses and other 
foreign investors in the region.  The aim of the BDC to promote 
foreign investment is salutary and important. Our only concern 
is that it may not cast a wide enough net to attract U.S. 
investors that would be equally important for southern Iraq's 
future.  REO suggests that the U.S. Foreign Commercial Service 
or the REO as its proxy seek to integrate more with the BDC to 
make it truly a Coalition effort.  No PRT U.S. coalition members 
are part of the team.  Credit should be given where credit is 
due, and recognizing that this is a UK initiative supported by 
the UK-led PRT is important, but partnering with the U.S. and 
other coalition countries (Denmark, Romania, Australia) as well 
as other donor nations (Japan, Italy) might lead to more overall 
success.  Failing this, perhaps a companion effort by the USG 
would bear fruit, especially in some obvious areas such as oil 
and gas.  END COMMENT. 
HOWARD