08BEIJING929
March 13 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: TIBET PROTESTS,
Thu Mar 13 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO3813
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #0929/01 0731125
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 131125Z MAR 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5697
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 000929 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM KOLY CH JA KS PE
 
SUBJECT: March 13 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: TIBET PROTESTS, 
 
¶1. Key points at the March 13, 2008 regular MFA Press Briefing were: 
 
 
-- In recent days a few monks in Lhasa have made "a disturbance" and 
tried to sow political unrest.  China resolutely opposes the 
attempts of the "Dalai group" to split China and, thanks to efforts 
by the local government, "the situation has been stabilized." 
 
-- China opposes the United States' issuance of the Human Rights 
report and its "point(ing) fingers" at other countries' human rights 
records while never reflecting on its own record.  The Information 
Office of the State Council has issued its own human rights report 
to let others know that the United States also has human rights 
issues. 
 
-- China is earnest and responsible in its adherence to its 
regulations regarding foreign journalists and relevant authorities 
have made tremendous efforts in carrying them out.  It is undeniable 
that there are some problems with the implementation and enforcement 
of the regulations, but both the authorities and the journalists 
need to do a better job. 
 
-- The Ministry of Public Security will send a team of poisoning 
experts and investigators to Japan for interviews with Japanese 
police on the dumpling poisoning case and for "relevant tests." 
 
Tibet Protests 
-------------- 
 
¶2. At the March 13 regular MFA press briefing, spokesperson Qin Gang 
said that in recent days a few monks in Lhasa had made "a 
disturbance" and tried to sow political unrest.  He said the 
disturbance was a political scheme by the "Dalai group" and that the 
monks involved were attempting to split China and ruin the normal, 
peaceful and harmonious lives of the Tibetan people.  Thanks to the 
efforts of the local government and the Democratic Administration 
Commission of the local temple, he said, "the situation has been 
stabilized." 
 
¶3. Qin stressed that Tibet began democratic reform forty-nine years 
ago when millions of serfs were liberated.  Tibet has witnessed 
great changes and it is the common aspiration of the Tibetan people 
to safeguard national unification, ethnic solidarity and social 
harmony.  The "scheme" of the "Dalai group" is doomed because the 
development of Tibet cannot be blocked by any forces.  The Chinese 
government and people's determination to safeguard territorial 
integrity is resolute, he said. 
 
¶4. Asked about Tibetan protests in India, Qin reiterated that China 
resolutely opposes the "Dalai group's" efforts to engage in 
activities to separate China and ruin ethnic solidarity.  No 
countries have recognized Tibet as an independent country and Tibet 
has been an inalienable part of China since ancient times.  This 
stance is reflected in a promise made by the Indian government to 
China in which Indian officials said they would never support the 
"Dalai group's" separatist activities.  He added that China hopes 
India will proceed in the interest of bilateral relations and honor 
its commitments to China. 
 
¶5. In a follow-up answer, Qin acknowledged that there are some 
Tibetans that are trying to cross the border, but that China is 
resolutely opposed to their separatist activities.  He said that 
Tibetans can come back to China if they admit that Tibet is part of 
China and that they are citizens of China. 
 
Dueling Human Rights Reports 
---------------------------- 
 
¶6. China resolutely opposes the United States' issuance of its 
annual Human Rights report and its "point(ing) fingers" at other 
countries' human rights records while never reflecting on its own 
record.  "If it cannot rectify itself how can it rectify others?" 
The United States has no right to issue reports accusing others, he 
said.  Qin said the Information Office of the State Council has 
issued its own human rights report to let others know that the 
United States also has human rights problems.  It is natural for 
countries to have some human rights problems, but countries should 
have dialogue and communication on the basis of equality and mutual 
respect to mend differences. He stated that China resolutely opposes 
countries' exerting pressure and interfering in other countries' 
internal affairs in the name of human rights. 
 
Rights of Foreign Journalists 
----------------------------- 
 
¶7. Asked about the current environment in China for foreign 
journalists, Qin said that the regulations on the foreign media 
issued on January 1, 2007 honor Beijing's commitment to the 
Olympics.  China is earnest and responsible in its adherence to 
these regulations and relevant authorities have made tremendous 
efforts in carrying them out.  Any journalist without bias can see 
that in recent years the environment for foreign reporters in China 
 
BEIJING 00000929  002 OF 002 
 
 
is friendlier and the availability of services and facilities is 
growing.  He characterized the general situation for the foreign 
media as "good." 
 
¶8. Qin said it is undeniable that there are some problems with the 
implementation and enforcement of the regulations.  China is a big 
country with a big population and different localities have 
different conditions.  Better efforts from local governments are 
necessary, he said.  However, China also believes that journalists 
involved in some cases should reflect on their own conduct.  Some 
journalists don't respect people being interviewed, force people to 
be interviewed or distort facts. To better implement the 
regulations, create a better environment for foreign journalists and 
ensure that Chinese citizens remain willing to be interviewed by 
foreign reporters, the Chinese government should do a better job and 
journalists should reflect on themselves and doa better job as 
well. 
 
Dumpling Investgation 
---------------------- 
 
¶9. After consltations between Chinese and Japanese police agncies, 
the Ministry of Public Security will send a team of poisoning 
experts and investigators to Japan for interviews with Japanese 
police on the investigation of the poisoned dumpling case and for 
"relevant tests."  Qin said the trip is a good opportunity for 
police in the two countries to move ahead with the investigation, 
find out the truth and make a responsible assessment to the people 
and enterprises of the two countries. 
 
South China Sea Negotiations 
---------------------------- 
 
¶10. Asked if China agrees with a Japanese report calling for the 
resolution of the South China Sea issue in international courts, Qin 
said that China's position on the South China Sea is solidly based 
on international law.  He said according to the UN Convention on the 
Law of the Sea China and Japan should solve their disputes through 
negotiations and consultations.  Both governments agree that it is a 
complicated issue that cannot be solved overnight and requires 
patience and compromise from both sides. 
 
Upcoming Visits 
--------------- 
 
¶11. Qin announced a March 19-20 visit by Peruvian President Alan 
Garcia and said Garcia will meet with Hu Jintao, Chairman Wu 
Bangguo, Premier Wen Jiabao, CPC member Li Changchun and other 
central government leaders.  He will exchange views on bilateral 
relations as well as regional and international issues of common 
interest.  Qin characterized Peru as a good friend and partner of 
China. 
 
¶12. Qin also announced a March 20-22 visit by South Korean Foreign 
Minister Yu Myung Hwan, saying that he would meet with FM Yang 
Jiechi and "other state leaders."  Asked if President Hu would be 
traveling to Japan on May 8, Qin said that Foreign Ministries on 
both sides are still having active consultations regarding the visit 
and will release the relevant information in due course.