08DAKAR52
2008 GUINEA-BISSAU INCSR PART II: FINANCIAL CRIME AND MONEY
Mon Jan 14 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Dakar
VZCZCXYZ0001
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDK #0052/01 0141047
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 141047Z JAN 08
FM AMEMBASSY DAKAR
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9860
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDCUNCLAS DAKAR 000052 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL, AF/RSA, AF/W, EB/ESC/TFS, INR/AA 
JUSTICE FOR AFMLS, OIA, AND OPDAT 
TREASURY FOR FINCEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN KCRM KTFN PTER SNAR PU
SUBJECT: 2008 GUINEA-BISSAU INCSR PART II: FINANCIAL CRIME AND MONEY 
LAUNDERING 
 
REF: 07 STATE 138226 
 
OVERVIEW 
-------- 
¶1.  This cable is Part Two of the 2007-2008 National Narcotics 
Control Strategy Report (INCSR), Financial Crimes and Money 
Laundering report for Guinea-Bissau.  Included is a narrative 
overview (paras 2-11).  Para 12 contains responses keyed to the 
numbered questions beginning with Reftel paragraph 16. 
 
¶2.  Despite increased drug trafficking and the prospect of oil 
production, Guinea-Bissau's instability and tiny economy make it an 
unlikely site for major money laundering, except as the placement 
point for proceeds from drug payoffs, theft of foreign aid and 
corrupt diversion of oil and other state resources headed for 
investment abroad. 
 
¶3.  On November 2, 2004, Guinea-Bissau became the third WAEMU 
country to enact the WAEMU Uniform Law on Money Laundering (the 
Uniform Law).  The new legislation largely meets international 
standards with respect to money laundering; it does not comply with 
FATF recommendations concerning politically-exposed persons, and 
lacks certain compliance provisions for non-financial institutions. 
The law does not deal with terrorist financing. 
 
¶4.  The penal code of Guinea-Bissau criminalizes terrorist 
financing.  However, there are no reporting requirements or 
attendant regulations.  The BCEAO is working on a directive against 
Terrorist Financing.    If adopted, the member states would be 
directed to enact a law against terrorist financing, which most 
likely would be presented as a Uniform Law in the same manner as the 
AML law.  Because, like the AML law, it is a penal law, each 
national assembly must then enact the law.  In addition, the 
FATF-style regional body for the 15-member Economic Community of 
Western African States (ECOWAS), African Anti-Money Laundering 
Inter-governmental Group (GIABA) has drafted a uniform law, which it 
hopes to have enacted in all of its member states, not just the 
WAEMU states.  GIABA will present its draft at a conference November 
21-23 in Niamey. 
 
¶5.  Guinea-Bissau is working with external donors to establish a 
functioning FIU.  Real progress, however, will be hampered if not 
entirely stalled by corruption, instability, and distrust 
(particularly of the judicial sector), and lack of capacity.  As one 
banker commented, Guinea-Bissau is small and the judiciary is 
indiscreet; accordingly, only a blatant transaction would likely 
cause the bank to incur the risk of filing a STR. 
 
¶6.  Three banks operate in Guinea-Bissau.  Western Union and 
MoneyGram are associated with the banks.  The Central Bank of West 
African States (BCEAO), based in Dakar, is the Central Bank for the 
countries in the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU or 
UEMOA):  Benin, Burkina Faso, Cote d'Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, 
 
SIPDIS 
Niger, Senegal and Togo, all of which use the French-backed CFA 
franc currency, which is linked to the euro.  The Commission 
Bancaire, responsible for bank inspections, is based in Abidjan. 
 
¶7.  Official statistics regarding the prosecution of financial 
crimes are unavailable.  There are no known prosecutions of money 
laundering.  In November 2007, Guinea-Bissau's government Audit 
Office set up a commission to investigate illegal acquisition of 
wealth by present and former government officials 
¶8.  The UN 1267 Sanctions Committee consolidated list is circulated 
both by the BCEAO to commercial financial institutions and the 
Ministry of Finance.  To date, no assets relating to terrorist 
entities have been identified.  The WAEMU Council of Ministers 
issued a directive in September 2002 requiring banks to freeze 
assets of entities designated by the Sanctions Committee. 
 
¶9.  Multilateral ECOWAS treaties deal with extradition and legal 
assistance.  Other bilateral accords are not known.  Under the 
Uniform Law, once established, the FIU may share information freely 
with other FIUs in WAEMU. 
 
¶10.  Guinea-Bissau is a party to the 1988 UN Drug Convention, has 
signed but not ratified the UN Convention against Transnational 
Organized Crime, and has not signed or ratified the UN Convention 
against Corruption.  The status of the 1999 UN International 
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism and the 
African Union Convention on Terrorism Finance is not known. 
 
¶11.  The Government of Guinea-Bissau should continue to work with 
its partners in WAEMU and ECOWAS to establish a comprehensive 
anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist financing regime. 
Guinea-Bissau should fully install its FIU, and work to improve the 
training and capacity of its police and judiciary to combat 
financial crimes. 
 
 
RESPONSES TO SPECIFIC REFTEL QUESTIONS 
-------------------------------------- 
¶12.  The following responses are to specific Reftel 
paragraphs/questions: 
 
GENERAL QUESTIONS 
----------------- 
(Para) Question 16: Is the country (or territory or dependency) 
considered an important regional financial center (such as Hong 
Kong, Singapore, Panama, Switzerland, etc.)?  What is its 
significance in terms of money laundering? 
 
-- Guinea-Bissau is neither a regional financial center nor is money 
laundering thought to be significant.  Bissau's banking sector is 
governed by the BCEAO, which issues the euro-pegged CFA franc 
(CFAF).  Along with the BCEAO, the "Commission Bancaire" is a 
supranational supervisory entity, based in Abidjan, Cote d'Ivoire, 
created in April 1990 to control and oversee financial institution 
operations.  There are three banks in Guinea-Bissau, two of which 
(Banco da Uniao and Banco Regionale de Solidariedade) began 
operations in 2006 and have between 6,000 and 9,000 accounts each. 
The third bank, Banco da Africa Ocidental (BAO), began operating in 
1999 as an investment bank and entered the retail market after the 
failure of then-other bank in Bissau, the Banco Internacional da 
Guine-Bissau, in 2002.  As of 2004, the BAO had approximately 7,000 
accounts. 
 
Question 17: To the extent it is known, is money 
laundering/terrorist financing primarily related to narcotics 
proceeds?  (If applicable, specify drug.)  If not, what is the major 
source(s) of the proceeds?  Also to the extent known, do the 
criminal proceeds laundered in the jurisdiction derive primarily 
from domestic or foreign criminal activity?  Are the money 
laundering proceeds controlled by local drug-trafficking 
organizations, organized crime, or terrorist groups? 
 
-- Guinea-Bissau is increasingly being used by drug traffickers 
transiting between Latin America and Europe.  A recent boom in 
construction of luxury homes and businesses and the proliferation of 
pricey foreign cars is not in keeping with the consistently poor 
local economy.  It is likely that at least some of the new wealth in 
Guinea-Bissau is money laundered from drug trafficking.  Some of the 
drug proceeds are likely laundered abroad, as well. 
 
Question 18: Is there a significant black market for smuggled goods 
in the country?  If so, do you believe it is significantly funded by 
narcotic proceeds or other illicit proceeds?  Does contraband 
smuggling generate funds that are laundered through the banking 
system? 
 
-- Arms smuggling likely occurs and may be funded in part by drug 
money. 
 
Question 19: Does money laundering/terrorist financing occur in the 
banking system, within an offshore financial center or free trade 
zone, or in the non-bank financial system (e.g., exchange houses) or 
via alternative remittance systems such as hawala, or all areas?  Is 
the country experiencing an increase in financial crimes, not 
limited to money laundering or terrorist financing, such as bank 
fraud and counterfeit currency?  Please explain. 
 
-- The banking sector demonstrated a relatively high awareness of 
money laundering risks and all banks reportedly had compliance 
programs in place.  However, banking officials believed Bissau to be 
vulnerable to laundering, particularly via over- and under-invoicing 
of imports.  Guinea-Bissau has no known free trade zones and is not 
linked to offshore centers.  Official statistics regarding 
prosecution of financial crimes are unavailable. 
 
Question 20: To the post's knowledge, do the country's financial 
institutions engage in currency transactions involving international 
narcotics trafficking proceeds that include significant amounts of 
United States currency or currency derived from illegal drug sales 
in the United States or that otherwise significantly affect the 
United States? 
 
-- Guinea-Bissau is a transit point between Latin America and Europe 
and does not significantly affect the U.S.  Bissau's financial 
institutions do not appear to have a significant role in laundering 
drug proceeds. 
 
OFFSHORE FINANCIAL CENTERS 
-------------------------- 
Questions 21 to 23: These questions are not applicable, and are not 
reproduced, as Bissau has no offshore banking or other 
institutions. 
 
 
FREE TRADE ZONES 
---------------- 
Question 24: Are there free trade zones operating in the 
jurisdiction?  If so, please give the number and briefly describe 
operations, capability and function. 
 
-- Bissau has no known free trade zones. 
 
Questions 25 and 26 pertain to free trade zones and are not 
reproduced. 
 
LAWS AND REGULATIONS TO PREVENT MONEY LAUNDERING 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
Question 27: Is money laundering a criminal offense in this 
country? 
 
-- Yes, in 2004, Guinea-Bissau became the third WAEMU country to 
pass WAEMU harmonized legislation establishing a uniform law on 
money laundering. 
 
Question 27 (continued): Does the law apply only to drug-related 
money laundering?  Does the country list specific crimes or take an 
all serious crimes approach?  Note: In some jurisdictions, 
anti-money laundering laws cover "all serious crimes" which are 
defined as crimes that carry a threshold minimum sentence in the 
jurisdiction's penal code.  If the country lists specific crimes, 
what offenses are covered?  If there is a threshold minimum, what is 
that threshold? 
 
-- Under the new legislation, the source of the proceeds is not 
specific to any crime. 
 
Question 28: Has the country enacted secrecy laws that prevent 
disclosure of client and ownership information by domestic and 
offshore financial services companies to bank supervisors and law 
enforcement authorities? 
 
-- The uniform law on money laundering enables banking information 
to be shared with law enforcement authorities.  The law states: 
"Notwithstanding all contrary legal provisions or rules, 
professional secrecy may not be invoked . . . to refuse providing 
information to the control authorities." 
 
QUESTION 29: Do current laws provide for the establishment and 
funding of a financial intelligence unit (FIU)? 
 
-- The current law provides for the establishment, albeit not 
funding, of an FIU.  A directive establishing an FIU was signed in 
May 2006, but the FIU has not yet begun operations. 
 
FINANCIAL SECTOR 
---------------- 
Question 30: Who supervises and examines financial institutions for 
compliance with anti-money laundering/counter-terrorist financing 
laws and regulations? 
 
-- The Banking Commission has the responsibility to supervise 
financial institution compliance with AML/CTF laws and regulations. 
The Commission reportedly has conducted some AML compliance 
examinations; however, due to the fact that half of the member 
states have not adopted the uniform law, its efforts have been 
limited. 
 
Question 31: Are banks and other financial institutions required to 
know, record, and report the identity of customers engaging in 
significant transactions, including the recording of large currency 
transaction at thresholds appropriate to the country's economic 
situation?  What is the statutory threshold? 
 
-- National Assembly resolution number four in 2004 deals with money 
laundering.  Article 26 stipulates that if a banksuspects money 
laundering it must obtain a declaration of all properties and assets 
from the suspet and notify the Attorney General who is then 
reuired to appoint a judge to investigate. 
 
Questin 32: Are banks and other financial institutions rquired to 
maintain for an adequate time records ncessary to reconstruct 
significant transactions hrough financial institutions in order to 
be abl to respond quickly to information requests from apropriate 
government authorities in narcotics-related or other money 
laundering or terrorist finance cases?  For how long? 
 
-- The law requires financial institutions to preserve records for 
at least ten years. 
 
Question 33: Are the money laundering controls applied to 
 
non-banking financial institutions, such as exchange houses, stock 
brokerages, cash couriers, casinos, insurance companies, etc., and 
to intermediaries, such as lawyers, accountants, or brokers/dealers? 
 Who supervises such entities for compliance? 
 
-- The law applies to a host of sectors, including all of those 
listed above and others.  Some entities have government regulatory 
authorities; others (such as attorneys and accountants) have 
professional supervisory authorities, while others have no effective 
regulator. 
 
Question 34: Do financial institutions report suspicious 
transactions?  Is such reporting mandatory or voluntary?  Is 
reporting required for all suspicious transaction, or is there a 
threshold amount below which suspicious transaction reports are not 
required?  Are non-bank financial institutions required to report 
such transactions? 
 
-- The law requires financial institutions to report suspicious 
transactions to the FIU; there is no minimum threshold.  Non-bank 
financial institutions are also required to report.  As yet, 
however, there is no FIU. 
 
Question 35: Are reporting individuals (bankers and others) 
protected by law with respect to their cooperation with law 
enforcement entities? 
 
-- Reporting individuals and their supervisors are accorded full 
civil and criminal immunity (as well as protection from professional 
sanctions) for information provided to the FIU in good faith. 
 
FINANCIAL INTELLIGENCE UNIT/INVESTIGATION 
----------------------------------------- 
Question 36: Has the country established and adequately staffed a 
financial intelligence unit (FIU)?  Where in the Government is it 
housed; e.g., within the finance or national police ministry, as an 
independent agency, etc. 
 
-- By law, the FIU will be within the Ministry of Economy and 
Finance, although its staff will be drawn from several ministries. 
 
Question 37: Describe the authorities and functions of the FIU.  Is 
it an administrative body that performs analytical duties or does it 
also have criminal investigative responsibilities?  Does it have 
regulatory responsibilities? 
 
-- According to the law and decree, a senior Ministry of Finance 
official will administer the FIU.  Its mission, among other things, 
is to receive and analyze suspicious activity declarations, and, 
where appropriate, to refer files to the Prosecutor General.  It is 
to be an administrative-type FIU, but has the authority to obtain 
information through "correspondents" within police entities (as well 
as within other government entities).  It also includes two senior 
police inspectors and a customs officer on staff.  Some of its 
functions could be viewed as investigative, but it is not clear 
where the limits of its investigative authority lie.  It does not, 
as currently envisioned, have regulatory responsibilities. 
 
Question 38: Does the FIU have access to the records or databanks of 
other government entities?  Financial Institutions?  Does it have 
formal mechanisms in place to share information domestically or with 
other FIUs? 
 
-- By law, the FIU has the authority to request information from any 
government entity through its "correspondents" as well as from any 
reporting entity (i.e., financial and designated non-financial 
entities).  Under the uniform law, information can be shared freely 
among the FIUs in WAEMU; at present, however, there are only two 
operational FIUs (Senegal and Niger). 
 
Question 39: How many suspicious transaction reports (STRs) were 
received in 2006?  How many were the subject of investigation or 
resulted in referrals to law enforcement for investigation? 
 
-- None. 
 
Question 40: Which government bodies are responsible for 
investigating financial crimes, including money laundering and 
terrorist financing?  Are they adequately staffed and trained to 
fulfill their responsibilities? 
 
-- Apart from the FIU, the judicial police and prosecutors are 
responsible for investigating money laundering and terrorist 
financing.  There is a small unit at the Attorney General's office 
charged with investigating corruption and economic crimes.  Capacity 
is low; in the words of one judicial police officer: "null."  The 
police cite lack of training and means, no collaboration with banks, 
 
and institutionalized corruption as impediments to investigations. 
Both police and the public prosecutors office complained of 
corruption within Customs hindering the ability to get documents 
necessary for investigations. 
 
In 2007, Guinea-Bissau's government Audit Office reportedly set up a 
commission to investigate illegal acquisition of wealth by present 
and former government officials, although actual activities by the 
commission have not been made public. 
Question 41: Have there been arrests and/or prosecutions for money 
laundering or terrorist financing since January 1, 2007.  How many? 
Please report highlights of any major cases not previously 
reported. 
 
-- No. 
 
Question 42: Has the jurisdiction criminalized the financing of 
terrorism as required by the United Nations Security Council 
resolution 1373?  If so, please provide title of act, date of 
enactment, and pertinent details.  If the jurisdiction has an "all 
serious crimes" anti-money laundering law, please indicate if 
terrorism and terrorist financing are considered "serious crimes." 
 
-- Guinea-Bissau has criminalized terrorist financing since October 
13, 1993.  See Penal Code, Title VI, Article 203.  The law 
criminalizes, inter alia, the financing of terrorist groups or 
organizations.  These in turn are defined as groups of two or more 
persons, acting in concert, with the intent to harm the integrity or 
independence of the nation, to impede ... or subvert the functioning 
of constitutionally mandated state institutions, force a public 
authority to commit an act, refrain from or tolerate an act, or to 
intimidate certain persons, group of persons or the population 
generally through a criminal act. 
 
As happened with the uniform law against money laundering, the BCEAO 
is taking the lead in drafting a directive against terrorist 
financing, which it will present to the WAEMU Ministers. 
Presumably, once adopted by the Ministers, a uniform law will be 
drafted and be available for adoption by the parliaments of member 
states.  GIABA has drafted a uniform law for all ECOWAS states, 
which has yet to be approved. 
 
Question 43: Has the jurisdiction circulated to its financial 
institutions the list of individuals and entities that have been 
included on the UN 1267 sanctions committee's consolidated list as 
being linked to Usama bin Ladin, members of the Al Qa'ida 
organization or the Taliban, or that the USG or the EU have 
designated under relevant authorities.  If so, did the jurisdiction 
identify, freeze, seize, and/or forfeit related assets in 2007?  If 
so, please provide dollar amount. 
 
-- The list is circulated by the BCEAO  to commercial financial 
institutions.  To date no assets relating to terrorist entities have 
been identified. 
 
Question 44: Does the jurisdiction acknowledge the existence and use 
of indigenous alternative remittance systems that by-pass, in whole 
or part, financial institutions?  Describe the steps the 
jurisdiction has taken regarding regulating alternative remittance 
systems, such as hawala, black market exchanges, money remitters, 
trade-based money laundering, cross border cash smuggling, or the 
misuse of gold, precious metals and gems. 
 
-- In theory, unlicensed remitters and exchanges are illegal.  Banks 
acknowledge the use of over/under invoicing, but it is not known 
whether this practice is related to money laundering or is simply 
tax fraud.  Authorities cite porous borders and cash smuggling as 
problems, in part because of reportedly rampant corruption in 
Customs. 
 
Question 45: Discuss the efforts the jurisdiction has taken to 
thwart the misuse of charitable and/or non-profit entities that can 
be used as conduits for the financing of terrorism? 
 
-- The current regulation of charities is not known.  The WAEMU 
uniform AML law covers charitable and non-profit entities, which are 
required to file suspicious transaction reports.  The draft 
terrorist financing directive includes provisions to strengthen the 
supervision of NGOs. 
 
CROSS BORDER TRANSPORTATION OF CURRENCY AND NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
Question 46: Are there statutory requirements for limiting or 
monitoring the international transportation of currency and monetary 
instruments? 
 
-- In general, all incoming currency and monetary instruments must 
 
be deposited in a bank, the post office, or changed at an authorized 
foreign exchange bureau within 30 days.  There is no limit on the 
amount.  The entities report receipts monthly to the BCEAO. 
Outgoing transfers must be handled by banks, the post office, or, in 
the case of cash or travel checks for travelers, by authorized 
change bureaus.  Regulations provide a long laundry list of 
justifications for transfers; such transfers can be done by the 
financial institutions without authorization as long as the 
transferor provides documentation of the purpose of the transfer 
(and, in the case of the Post and change bureaus, is within a 
certain amount).  A notable exception is the transfer for the 
purpose of foreign investment, which, as with any other purpose not 
on the list, must be approved by the Minister of Finance.  Financial 
institutions report outgoing transfers monthly to the BCEAO. 
 
Question 47: Please describe cross-border currency reporting 
requirements, including those that apply to cash couriers?  Are cash 
smuggling reports entered into a database?  Is such data shared 
between host government agencies? 
 
-- On entry, non-residents must declare in writing any currency from 
outside the "zone franc" in the amount of CFAF one million 
(approximately USD 2,000) or more, as well as monetary instruments 
denominated in cash in any amount.  On exit, non-residents must 
declare in writing any non-franc-zone currency above approximately 
USD 1,000 as well as all monetary instruments from foreign entities. 
 Residents are not required to declare currency on entry; on exit, 
they must declare in writing amounts of any foreign currency and any 
monetary instruments greater than approximately USD 4,000.  These 
requirements are for the purpose of currency control and are not 
well enforced.  There is no functioning database, and information is 
not readily shared among government agencies. 
 
ASSET FORFEITURE AND SEIZURE LEGISLATION 
---------------------------------------- 
Question 48: Has the country enacted laws and established systems 
for identifying, tracing, freezing, seizing, and forfeiting 
narcotics-related assets as well as assets derived from or intended 
for other serious crimes?  If so, please describe the authority 
(regulatory or judicial).  Are new legislation or changes in current 
laws, regulations, judicial or administrative authorities, being 
considered? 
 
-- The uniform AML law provides for the freezing, seizing, and 
confiscation of property by judicial order.  In addition, the FIU 
can order the suspension of the execution of a financial transaction 
for 48 hours.  The BCEAO can also order the freezing of funds held 
by banks.  In addition, judicial authorities can order the seizure 
and confiscation of property used in crime; in a recent cocaine 
seizure case, the authorities seized a truck and several boats. 
 
Question 49: What are the obstacles or disincentives to enacting 
such laws, regulations, other authorities? 
 
-- Guinea-Bissau is a civil law country.  As such, it does not have 
a tradition of civil forfeiture. 
 
Question 50: What are the major provisions in current and/or 
proposed legislation?  For example, what assets can be seized?  Do 
they include: instruments of crime such as conveyances used to 
transport narcotics, or farms on which illicit crops are grown or 
which are used to support terrorist activity, or intangible property 
such as bank accounts?  Can substitute assets be seized or must a 
relationship to the crime be proven? 
 
-- The uniform law allows the freezing, seizure and confiscation of 
any property, corporal or incorporeal, on order of the investigating 
judge as a conservation measure.  Upon conviction for money 
laundering or attempted money laundering, the law provides for 
obligatory confiscation of property that is the proceeds of 
laundering; property into which that property has been converted, 
commingled, invested or transformed; and any proceeds (income) 
derived from that property.  There is an exception for an owner who 
can establish that s/he was unaware of the illegal source of the 
property.  The court may also order, as penal sanctions, the 
confiscation of any property used or intended to be used in the 
offense, and the confiscation of other property of the convicted 
person (the latter does not appear to be "substitute assets" as that 
term is understood in the U.S.; the provision does not relate the 
amount of licit property subject to confiscation to the amount 
laundered or put beyond the reach of the court). 
 
Question 51: What government entities are responsible for tracing, 
seizing and freezing assets?  Is there a period of time ascribed to 
the action of freezing, after which the assets are released?  Are 
frozen assets confiscated?  If yes, by what government entity?  Who 
receives proceeds from asset seizures and forfeitures? 
 
 
-- The FIU can order a 48-hour freeze (in the form of a delay on the 
execution of a transaction).  Such action must be converted to a 
judicial order within 48 hours or the freeze must be lifted.  As 
noted above, the investigating judge can issue orders freezing or 
seizing assets as a conservatory measure.  Confiscated property goes 
to the public treasury. 
 
Question 52: Does the banking community cooperate with enforcement 
efforts to trace funds and seize/freeze bank accounts? 
 
-- As far as is known, there have been no enforcement efforts 
involving banks. 
 
Question 53: Does the law allow for civil as well as criminal 
forfeiture? 
 
-- The uniform law allows explicitly for criminal forfeiture.  There 
is no provision for American-style civil forfeiture.  It is not 
clear what happens to property seized if no prosecution results and 
no owner is identified. 
 
Question 54: Does the Government enforce existing drug-related asset 
seizure and forfeiture laws?  Does the jurisdiction have adequate 
police powers and resources to trace, seize and freeze assets?  If 
so, can the jurisdiction freeze assets without undue delay? 
 
-- As noted above, police in a recent cocaine case had seized an 
SUV, several boats and weapons.  The suspects were released and it 
is not known what happened to the seized property.  The total number 
of confiscations is not known. 
 
Question 55: Does the government have an independent system and 
mechanism for freezing terrorist assets? 
 
-- National Assembly resolution number four in 2004 deals with money 
laundering and it is the same resolution that would be used to 
respond to terrorist assets.  The government could use that 
authority to obtain a declaration of all properties and assets from 
the suspect and notify the Attorney General who is then required to 
appoint a judge to investigate. 
 
Question 56: What was the dollar amount of narcotics-related, 
terrorist-related and other criminal-related assets frozen, 
forfeited and/or seized in the past year?  How does this amount 
compare to amounts seized in previous years? 
 
-- Statistics on the value of seized assets are unavailable. 
 
Question 57: Has the country enacted laws for the sharing of seized 
narcotics assets, as well as the assets from other serious crimes 
with other governments? Is the Government engaged in bilateral or 
multilateral negotiations with other governments to enhance asset 
tracing freezing and seizure? 
 
-- The uniform law provides that the sharing of seized narcotics 
assets with other governments can be negotiated on a case-by-case 
basis.  Guinea-Bissau is required by the uniform law on money 
laundering to freely exchange information with the FIUs of each of 
the WAEMU countries, although at present only Senegal and Niger have 
a functioning FIU. 
 
INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION 
------------------------- 
Question 58: Has the country adopted laws or regulations that allows 
for the exchange of records with the United States on narcotics and 
narcotics related money laundering, as well all-source money 
laundering, terrorism and terrorist financing investigations and 
proceedings?  Has the jurisdiction reached agreement with the United 
States authorities on a mechanism for exchange of records in 
connection with such investigations and proceedings?  If not, is the 
country negotiating in good faith with the United States to 
establish such an exchange mechanism?  Does the jurisdiction have 
similar arrangements with other jurisdictions? 
 
-- With respect to money laundering, the uniform AML law provides 
that the FIU may enter into cooperation accords with other FIUs. 
The law also contains extensive provisions for the exchange of 
information on a judicial level.  These provisions comport with 
international standards. 
 
Question 59: Identify all treaties, agreements, or other mechanisms 
for information exchange that host country has entered into with the 
USG or other countries, including agreements between the FIU and its 
counterparts, and those with home country supervisors to facilitate 
the exchange of supervisory information regarding banks and trust 
companies operating in the host country.  Describe the status of 
 
efforts to update such agreements or arrangements. 
 
-- Not known. 
 
Question 60: Has the country cooperated, when requested, with 
appropriate law enforcement agencies of the USG and other 
governments investigating financial crimes related to narcotics, 
terrorism, terrorist financing and other crimes?  If the country has 
cooperated on important cases with USG agencies, please describe. 
 
-- Not known. 
 
Question 61: Please detail any instances of refusals to cooperate 
with foreign governments, as well as any action taken by the USG and 
any international organization to address such obstacles, including 
the imposition of sanctions or penalties? 
 
-- Mission is unaware of any refusals to cooperate with foreign 
governments in routine cases. 
 
Question 62: Is the country a party to the UN International 
Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and 
Psychotropic Substances (Vienna Convention), the UN Convention 
against Transnational Organized Crime, and, the UN Convention 
against Corruption or other applicable agreements and conventions? 
Does it adhere to relevant international money laundering standards, 
such as the recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force, the 
policy directive of the EC, and the legislative guidelines of the 
OAS and/or other similar declarations?  If so, what steps is it 
taking to implement them?  If not, what, if any, steps are the 
country taking to become a party or implement? 
 
-- Guinea-Bissau is a party to the 1988 UN Drug Convention, has 
signed and ratified the UN Convention against Transnational 
Organized Crime, and has not signed or ratified the UN Convention 
against Corruption.  The status of the 1999 UN International 
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism and the 
African Union Convention on Terrorism Finance is not known.   The 
uniform AML law largely meets the FATF recommendations for money 
laundering, and Guinea-Bissau is attempting to implement them 
through, inter alia, the installation of an FIU. 
 
MULLALLY