08JAKARTA2069
EMBASSY SCIENCE FELLOWS PROGRAM
Mon Nov 10 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Jakarta
VZCZCXYZ0007
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHJA #2069/01 3150225
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 100225Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0584UNCLAS JAKARTA 002069 
 
 
SIPDIS 
UNCLASSIFIED 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/MTS, EAP/EX, IIP/STC, OES/STC, ATTENTION EILEEN KANE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TSPL ID
SUBJECT: EMBASSY SCIENCE FELLOWS PROGRAM 
 
¶1. (U) Summary. Science and Technology (S&T) has emerged as a 
prominent and positive area of engagement with the government and 
people of Indonesia.  To support this engagement, Embassy Jakarta 
requests assistance identifying candidates for an Embassy Science 
Fellows Program (ESFP) position from January 2009. 
 
¶2. (U) A highly qualified candidate under the ESFP will, among other 
benefits: 1) enhance direct bilateral engagement with Indonesian 
government entities on science and technology; 2) support the 
reinstitution and robust implementation of a Science and Technology 
Framework Agreement; and 3) demonstrate U.S. commitment to 
scientific collaboration with Indonesia.  The Embassy is prepared to 
provide office space, appropriate housing, and local travel costs. 
End Summary. 
 
¶3. (U) Background.  Scientific and technological cooperation has 
emerged as a prominent and positive area of engagement with the 
government and people of Indonesia.  Recognizing the benefit to the 
overall U.S.-Indonesia bilateral relationship, Post has identified 
S&T as a long-term priority.  Post has initiated a number of 
short-term scientific diplomacy efforts and is working to build upon 
this progress by developing a more comprehensive engagement 
strategy, starting with the proposed re-institution of the 
U.S.-Indonesia Science and Technology Framework Agreement.  To help 
implement our science and technology engagement strategy, Post seeks 
assistance identifying an individual with a science background for a 
short term posting (not to exceed 90 days) from January 2009.  A 
Science Fellow will provide valuable expertise in shaping our 
engagement strategy and identifying opportunities to advance 
scientific collaboration with Indonesia. 
 
------------------------------------- 
PROPOSED ACTIVITIES UNDER THE PROGRAM 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (U) The science advisor will work directly with the Indonesian 
Institute of Sciences (LIPI) and the Indonesian Academy of Sciences 
(AIPI) as well as reach out to other relevant government ministries 
to evaluate current research capabilities and assess the priorities 
of Indonesian scientific institutions.  This work will support 
long-term planning for U.S.-Indonesian engagement on science and 
technology.  Additionally, the advisor will track progress on the 
U.S.-Indonesia S&T Framework Agreement and seek to identify 
opportunities for its application with Indonesian counterparts.  As 
time allows, the advisor may also assist on the the World Oceans 
Conference, the proposed Okeanos Explorer visit, and other ESTH 
activities relevant to the Fellow's background.  Candidates are 
invited from all scientific disciplines.  A background in marine 
research, health, or forestry would be helpful since the government 
of Indonesia has expressed particular interest in collaboration in 
these areas.  Candidates should be familiar with general U.S. 
science and technology policy and priorities. 
 
--------------------------------- 
BENEFITS OF PARTICIPATION IN ESFP 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  Post sees several potential benefits to recruiting a candidate 
under the ESFP. 
 
-- Strengthening U.S.-Indonesian relations:  Cooperation between 
U.S. and Indonesian scientific and technical agencies has gained 
momentum.  Recruiting a Science Fellow to work directly with AIPI 
and LIPI will be well received by our Indonesian counterparts and 
will support OES' emphasis on creating genuine partnerships with 
scientists in the Muslim world. 
 
-- Sustaining long-term S&T cooperation:  A Science Fellow will play 
an instrumental role in shaping U.S.-Indonesian scientific 
cooperation by working to re-institute the S&T Framework Agreement, 
reaching out to the Indonesian and U.S. scientific communities to 
spur interest in collaborative research activities, and facilitating 
partnerships between U.S. and Indonesian institutions. 
 
-- Continuing a precedent:  Further participation in this program 
builds upon the success of the previous Science Fellows (from NOAA 
during summer 2008) and demonstrates a sustained interest in 
engagement with the Indonesian scientific community. 
 
--------- 
LOGISTICS 
--------- 
 
¶6. (U) Embassy Jakarta is prepared to provide logistical support for 
a Science Fellow under the ESFP guidelines.  Post will provide 
office space on the embassy compound with appropriate computer, 
email and internet access. We will provide appropriate housing in 
one of our several TDY apartments.  The Fellow would also have 
access to the Embassy Health Unit (pending appropriate medical 
clearances), FPO and CLO.  Embassy Jakarta's preferred timeline is a 
January 2009 arrival and April 2009 departure due to housing 
constraints.  A secret clearance is desirable, but not required. 
 
¶7. Post POC for this request is Randall Beisecker, ESTH Officer, 
BeiseckerR@state.gov, tel+622134359227, and fax+622134359977. 
 
HUME