08KHARTOUM891
EL FASHER CULTURAL CENTER AMBITIOUS, UNDERFUNDED
Sun Jun 15 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHKH #0891/01 1671212
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 151212Z JUN 08
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1057UNCLAS KHARTOUM 000891 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/SPG, S/CRS, SE WILLIAMSON 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/SUDAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SCUL SOCI SU
SUBJECT: EL FASHER CULTURAL CENTER AMBITIOUS, UNDERFUNDED 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY. Situated on the outskirts of the bustling central 
market, the El Fasher Cultural Center includes a theater, music room 
and public library.  The Center, managed under the watchful eye of 
General Manager Ibrahim Abbakr has eight departments - art and 
painting, folklore, music and bands, drama, children and youth, 
poetry and writing, the library, and a general activities 
department, which includes handicrafts and languages.  Although a 
part of the Ministry of Culture, Abbakr told FieldOff that his 
center has no budget for programs, only for staff salaries.  The 
center offers language, music and other types of classes for a small 
fee in order to raise funds, and occasionally organizes handicraft 
sales.  The Center also is affiliated with El Fasher's own movie 
cinema, which is in need of revitalization.  However, Abbakr noted 
that such activities generally break even without turning much of a 
profit.  Despite financial challenges, Abbakr continues to develop 
projects that he hopes will one day help to bring lasting peace to 
Darfur.  END SUMMARY. 
 
-------------- 
Radio Station 
-------------- 
 
¶2.  Abbakr passionately described his highest priority project - a 
radio station dedicated to cultural programming.  In the past, the 
Cultural Center was allowed to broadcast cultural programs on the El 
Fasher radio station.  However, he complained, the El Fasher station 
will only allocate limited time for these programs, and has a short 
broadcast range (approx 40 km).  Therefore, the center would like to 
establish its own radio station devoted to programming that promotes 
cultural understanding, reconciliation and peace building efforts. 
 
 
¶3.  Abbakr described how a folklore hour, done in different local 
languages and celebrating the various Darfur tribal cultures, could 
help promote cultural appreciation and diversity.  He mused that the 
station could even have children's programming, teaching about 
tolerance, non-violent conflict resolution and possibly even healthy 
habits.  Abbakr said that a detailed study, including technical and 
personnel requirements for establishment of the station, had been 
completed, and that he had selected a location for the station. 
However the center would likely need most, if not all, of the 
technical equipment - transmitter, etc. - some of which would likely 
be difficult to get due to existing sanctions. 
 
----------------- 
Cinema Renovation 
----------------- 
 
¶4.  Another project that Abbakr hoped to complete was renovation of 
El Fasher's only cinema.  Previously an open air cinema that showed 
Bollywood and American films, the cinema has been closed since the 
conflict in Darfur began, and has fallen into disrepair.  Without 
the cinema, there is no regular entertainment in El Fasher, and 
nothing to keep the youth engaged and out of trouble, Abbakr 
lamented.  The cultural center is currently overseeing renovations 
to the building and repairs to damaged walls.  Abbakr has also 
spoken to a film company in Khartoum about sub-leasing or renting 
films for use in the El Fasher cinema.  However the film projection 
equipment needs to be replaced, and the theater needs new seating. 
 
-------------------------- 
Public Library and Theater 
-------------------------- 
 
¶5.  The Cultural Center houses a small public library collection. 
Most of the Arabic books are very old, Abbakr explained, as the 
library was looted after the Darfur conflict began.  There is a 
small English-language book section, donated by the British Council 
when it closed up El Fasher operations, and a children's section. 
The library includes several large rooms which are available for 
events, and appears well trafficked (on the day of Fieldoff's visit, 
there were two groups of Master's students from the University of El 
Fasher, as well as a handful of researchers, in the main library 
area).  FieldFSNs report that the library is a popular recreation 
spot.  Abbakr said that a local businessman rents the theater in the 
cultural center complex and shows movies on a tattered screen at 
night. 
 
¶6.  The library could benefit from a more modern selection of books, 
including academic and reference tools, as well as children's books 
(there is plenty of space for donations).  Abbakr would also like to 
procure a projector, and would be "very happy" to screen selections 
from the Embassy's public diplomacy collection in a multi-media 
room, or in the theater.  He is also seeking computer donations, in 
order to create an internet caf (Note: There are no internet cafs 
in El Fasher, and the vast majority of citizens do not have 
computers or internet access in their homes. End note).  Abbakr 
would like to offer internet services for free, possibly on a 
reservation basis, but speculated that the center would probably 
have to charge a small fee to cover electricity and service provider 
fees.  In the theater area, Abbakr would like to build a roof or 
protective covering over the open air seating area, in order to 
facilitate use of the space during the warm late morning and 
afternoon hours. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶7.  Both the Cultural Center and its manager are impressive.  Abbakr 
believes in the power of art and culture in transforming the 
conflict in Darfur and healing its wounds.  The meager offerings 
currently available at the center clearly attract a following that 
is hungry for knowledge, entertainment and some distraction from the 
grinding conflict in Darfur.  With little else to do in El Fasher 
for enjoyment (besides sporting events), the center presents some 
interesting possibilities and a prime venue for US-sponsored events. 
 In fact, the Field Office plans to hold the first Independence Day 
representational reception in El Fasher on July 4, 2008, at the 
Cultural Center, incorporating some of the music and dance groups it 
sponsors. 
 
¶8.  In the short term, English and Arabic book donations will help 
to build goodwill and increase the value of the library.  The Field 
Office will give the center almanacs and other reference books 
supplied by the Embassy in a small ceremony the week before the 4th 
of July reception.  These books will be displayed during the event, 
to highlight the Cultural Center's growing book collection.  A 
projector to show US Embassy DVD materials also would be a 
high-value contribution, and could be used to screen public 
diplomacy materials both for entertainment and educational purposes. 
 Both initiatives are low cost and quick impact, and would help to 
raise the center's profile while offering more cultural and 
entertainment options to the public. 
 
¶9.  Support for cinema renovations could be another relatively low 
cost project with potentially high returns.  The cinema would 
generate income which could fund other cultural projects, and would 
provide badly needed entertainment.  Most important, the cinema 
would provide an alternative activity for youth, who are most 
susceptible to recruitment by armed movements and criminal gangs. 
 
¶10.  In the longer term, it may be worthwhile to consider 
opportunities to assist the Cultural Center with radio broadcasting 
and internet availability.  Radio is by far the most effective means 
of communication in Darfur, and most people either own a radio, or 
can crowd around one with neighbors (a common scene).  Educational, 
entertaining and even peace-building programming could reenergize 
public awareness and create meaningful dialogue about peace and 
reconciliation initiatives.  Access to the internet would allow 
women, youth, educators, civil society representatives and political 
activists to interact with a wider range of news sources, and with 
counterparts around the world.  The Darfur conflict has been largely 
fueled by feelings of marginalization and isolation, which could be 
mitigated by having better access to the internet. 
 
FERNANDEZ