08MADRID1134
SYRIAN PRESIDENTIAL ADVISOR SHAABAN DENOUNCES U.S.
Fri Oct 31 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Madrid
VZCZCXRO0032
RR RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHIK RUEHLZ RUEHROV
DE RUEHMD #1134/01 3051206
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 311206Z OCT 08
FM AMEMBASSY MADRID
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5497
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE
RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVE
RUEHLA/AMCONSUL BARCELONA 3626
RHMFIUU/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MADRID 001134 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/WE, NEA/ELA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINR SP SY
SUBJECT: SYRIAN PRESIDENTIAL ADVISOR SHAABAN DENOUNCES U.S. 
ATTACKS TO SPANISH POLICY MAKERS 
 
MADRID 00001134  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. SUMMARY. Syrian Presidential Advisor and former Emigration 
Minister Bouthaina Shaaban addressed a receptive audience of 
approximately 200 policy makers, diplomats, academics, and 
students of Arab politics and culture at the 
Spanish-government sponsored "Casa Arabe" cultural exchange 
institute the evening of October 28. Describing the U.S. as, 
"a slave to its failed policies," Shaaban claimed that the 
attack on Syrian territory was a clear violation of all 
international agreements and human rights principles.  Asked 
about the Syrian response to the attacks, Shaaban said she 
couldn't explain why the Government of Syria chose to close a 
school and cultural center. She centered her 90-minute 
presentation on the theme that Syria consistently supported 
peace and stability, despite stereotyping by Western nations 
and misinformation. Asked about whether the disputed She'baa 
Farms area was Syrian or Lebanese territory, Shaaban said, 
"Syria has always agreed it is Lebanese territory, the 
problem is that the Israelis are occupying the land." 
Spanish reaction to the attack has been measured. The Spanish 
MFA released an official communique October 27 expressing its 
concern for the October 26 military operation in Syrian 
territory.  Spain hoped the events will be clarified soon and 
called for continued dialogue as the only way to solve the 
problems of the region.  During a press gaggle on October 28 
in Peru, Foreign Minister Moratinos said that he had 
expressed his concern to the Syrian authorities, asked for 
clarification about the incident, and supported full respect 
for Syrian territory.   END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.   Syrian Presidential Advisor and former Emigration 
Minister Bouthaina Shaaban addressed a receptive audience of 
approximately 200 policy makers, diplomats, academics, and 
students of Arab politics and culture at the 
Spanish-government sponsored "Casa Arabe" cultural exchange 
institute the evening of October 28.   Secretary General of 
the Spanish Presidency and key Zapatero advisor, Bernardino 
Leon, introduced Shaaban as one of Syrian President 
al-Assad's most influential counselors.  He gave a glowing 
tribute to Shaaban's contributions promoting Middle East 
peace, mentioning that she had mentored him when he first 
started attending MEPP negotiations early in his career. 
Citing Shaaban's courage to, "speak freely and tell the 
truth," Bernardino Leon told the audience that Syria was a 
key player in regional dynamics and that attempts to isolate 
it had failed, proving the effectiveness of Spain's vision of 
consensus and accord through dialogue. 
 
¶3.  Shaaban first noted that despite intense interest 
regarding the October 26 attack on Syrian territory, she 
would save her remarks on the incident until the end (note: 
Shaaban's visit and Casa Arabe presentation were planned well 
in advance; she did not conduct meetings at the MFA).  She 
centered her 90-minute presentation on the theme that Syria 
consistently supported peace and stability, despite 
stereotyping by Western nations and misinformation. She 
emphasized that President al-Assad wanted to sign a peace 
accord, but one that would actually bring peace to people. 
Syria also sought a return of the Golan to its rightful 
owners, as well as the right of return for refugees and the 
restoration of properties confiscated from Palestinians.  She 
noted that Palestinian refugees resident in Syria continued 
educating their children about their rights, inheritance, and 
true home to maintain their Palestinian identity even if they 
were born in Syria. 
 
¶4.  With a nod to Spain's interest in having Barcelona 
designated as the headquarters of the Union for the 
Mediterranean, Shaaban said Syria supported the Union as it 
had the precursor Barcelona Process. She credited Syria with 
playing an important role facilitating the Arab peace plan 
developed during the Beirut Conference. Asked about whether 
the disputed She'baa Farms area was Syrian or Lebanese 
territory, Shaaban said, "Syria has always agreed it is 
Lebanese territory, the problem is that the Israelis are 
occupying the land."  Recapping her peace 
negotiationexperience, she claimed that the Oslo Accords and 
other agreements were simply stalling tactics to allow 
Israelis to build more settlements, "creating facts on the 
ground," and expelling Palestinians from their lands.  She 
described the Israeli security wall as, "not for security, 
but for cutting apart Palestine and marginalizing its 
people,"  adding, "if there can't be peace and security for 
all, there can't be behind the wall."   Claiming that the 
U.S. spread many lies about Syria, Shaaban emphasized that 
 
MADRID 00001134  002.4 OF 002 
 
 
Syria had supported Iran against the Saddam regime in Iraq 
and also supported Kuwait during the Iraqi invasion. 
Describing 2003, when Syria held a UNSC seat, and 2004-5 as 
particularly difficult times, she attributed Damascus' 
troubles to U.S.-spread lies about Syria's military 
capabilities and intentions. 
 
¶5.  Characterizing the image of an extreme and violent Syria 
in the Western media as wrong, Shaaban argued that the U.S. 
was violent and extreme as evidenced by the war in Iraq, 
which she described as a, "mountain of crimes committed under 
the pretext of bringing freedom to Iraq.  Instead, the women 
and children of Iraq have suffered unimaginably, with over 4 
million people displaced and over 2.5 million of those 
refugees in Syria."  She also said that the relatively small 
number of Iraqi refugees in the U.S. was proof that the U.S. 
administration had a lack of commitment and offered only 
false promises.  According to Shaaban, after the 9/11 
attacks, the U.S. divided the world into "us versus them" and 
spread the false message that Arabs are responsible for 
terrorism.  Shaaban also told the audience that the U.S. used 
Lebanon as a pretext for denigrating Syria.  Shaaban claimed 
that Syria and Lebanon are, "family; we have close, friendly 
relations and we don't interfere in Lebanese internal 
affairs." As an example, she claimed the President al-Assad 
had reached out to March 14 movement members to foster close 
ties."  Note:  The Lebanese Ambassador to Spain did not 
attend the presentation. 
 
¶6.  "The press doesn't reflect what is really happening," 
Shaaban said, and since the U.S. started its War on Terror, 
terrorism had actually become more widespread than ever 
before.  The U.S. fomented extremism and ignored the opinions 
of the "Arab Street", the majority who want the U.S. to 
respect their unique culture and value system.   Describing 
the U.S. as, "a slave to its failed policies," Shaaban 
claimed that the attack on Syrian territory was a clear 
violation of all international agreements and human rights 
principles and that despite some attempts to justify it as 
"small", that the death of even one person was the same as 
killing a society.  Claiming that the U.S. had killed 
innocent villagers (implying women and children), Shaaban 
said that her only explanation was that President Bush wanted 
to show he still had the power to strike out despite his lame 
duck status.  Asked about the Syrian response to the attacks, 
Shaaban said she couldn't explain why the Government of Syria 
chose to close a school and cultural center. 
 
¶7.  "Democracy is a means, but not an end; it is only an 
instrument, not the only answer," Shaaban continued, arguing 
that a democracy should not use aggression to promote its 
interests.  She said that Syria looked forward to increased 
engagement with Spain as the U.S. role in global affairs had 
been diminished, adding that the U.S. had lost its 
credibility and now the rest of the world must re-energize 
their involvement. 
 
¶8.  The format of the program did not provide an opportunity 
to counter any of Shaaban's statements.  Spanish reaction to 
the attack has been measured. The Spanish MFA released an 
official communique October 27 expressing its concern for the 
October 26 military operation in Syrian territory.  Spain 
hoped the events will be clarified soon and called for 
continued dialogue as the only way to solve the problems of 
the region.  During a press gaggle on October 28 in Peru, 
Foreign Minister Moratinos said that he had expressed his 
concern to the Syrian authorities, asked for clarification 
about the incident, and supported full respect for Syrian 
territory.  Newspaper El Pais, a left-of-center daily, opined 
that despite Syrian outrage over the "hazy" attack, it was 
unlikely that there would be any long-term impact on 
US-Syrian relations.  Another publication, El Mundo, 
described the attack as the bloody work of American cowboys 
and that in the "official silence of Washington," the focus 
was on the loss of innocent life. Conservative paper ABC 
described the attack as exemplifying a "Bush doctrine" that 
the U.S. will use military force to defend its interest apart 
from a declaration of war.  ABC also speculated that as 
General Odierno increased pressure on the insurgency, more 
attacks in Syria were possible. 
 
AGUIRRE