08MOSCOW1508
EXTRANCHECK: PRE-LICENSE CHECK: KHRUNICHEV
Thu May 29 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Moscow
VZCZCXYZ0007
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMO #1508/01 1501243
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 291243Z MAY 08
FM AMEMBASSY MOSCOW
TO RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC PRIORITY
INFO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8283
RHMFIUU/US CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS MOSCOW 001508 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USDOC FOR 532/OEA/MHAMES/JAY HATFIELD 
USDOC FOR 3150/USFCS/OIO/CEENIS/MCOSTA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BEXP ETRD ETTC RS
SUBJECT: EXTRANCHECK: PRE-LICENSE CHECK: KHRUNICHEV 
STATE RESEARCHAD PROD. SPACE CENTER, MOSCOW, RUSSIA, 
LINCENSE NO. D395924 
 
REFTEL: USDOC 02822 
 
¶1. Unauthorized disclosure of the information provided 
below is prohibited by Section 12C of the Export 
Administration Act. 
 
¶2. Reftel requested a pre-license check to determine 
the legitimacy and reliability of the end-user, 
Khrunichev State Research and Production Space Center, 
Moscow, Russia. The company is listed on BIS license 
application D395924 as the ultimate consignee of 
Radiation Tolerant Field Programmable Gate Arrays. 
These items are controlled for national security, 
nuclear non-proliferation reasons under ECCN 3A001. 
The licensee is Actel Corporation, 2061 Stierlin 
Court, Mountain View, CA  94043. 
 
¶3. Please note that Khrunichev State Research and 
Production Space Center is not/not the end-user of 
commodity in reftel.  Khrunichev will put the 
satellite into orbit that has the reftel commodity has 
been integrated into.  The end-user is NPP VNIIEM, All 
Russian Scientific and Research Institute of 
Electromechanics with Plant named after A.G. Iosifian, 
Moscow, Russia. 
 
¶4. On May 29, 2008, Export Control Attach Peter 
Liston and LES Natalya Shipitsina conducted the 
requested pre-license check at the offices of NPP 
VNIIEM, the Russian Federation Federal Space Agency, 
Federal Government Unitary Enterprise, Research and 
Production Enterprise, 4 Khoromny Blind Alley, Moscow, 
Russia. The export control team met with Vasily 
Parshin, Deputy General Director; Ilya Slobodskoy, 
Senior Project Manager for Space Systems; and Nina 
Pestmal, Director, Commercial Space Technologies Ltd. 
 
¶5.  The Khrunichev State Research and Production Space 
Center was created by an RF presidential decree of 7 
June 1993 on the base of the largest producers of 
aerospace and rocket technology: the Khrunichev 
Machine-building Plant and the Salyut Design Bureau. 
The Khrunichev State Research and Production Space 
Center is one of the world' s largest aerospace 
corporations leading the international market of space 
services. 
 
¶6.  NPP VNIIEM was founded on September 1941 for the 
development and production of military electrical 
engineering (communication facilities, power suppliers 
and armament).  In the mid 1960s NPP VNIIEM became a 
parent organization in development and manufacture of 
spacecrafts for hydrometeorology and Earth remote 
sensing.  Since 1963 up to 1998 more than 70 
spacecraft such as three generations of "Meteor": " 
Meteor-Priroda", "Resours-Ol", "Electro" have been 
developed, launched and successfully operated in 
orbit.  The Institute takes part in development and 
implementing of large space programs (orbital stations 
"Salyut", "Almaz", "Mir", "MKS", heavy rockets 
"Proton", "Soyuz" and others).  The electrical 
equipment designed for control and protection systems 
of PWR type nuclear reactors and information-computing 
systems designed for RBMK type nuclear power plants 
have been developed by NPP VNIIEM.  At present NPP 
VNIIEM is a multi-purpose firm and is engaged in 
meteorological research and application projects 
studying weather and climate. 
 
¶7. According to Vasily Parshin, Deputy General 
Director, the commodity in subject reftel, Radiant 
Tolerant Field Programmable Gate Arrays, will become 
part of the KANAPUS satellite project.  KANAPUS is the 
first international joint venture undertaken by NPP 
VNIIEM, and is being produced with Surry Satellite 
Technology Limited (SSTL) for real-time monitoring of 
man-caused emergency conditions and natural disasters. 
 
¶8. NPP VNIIEM employs approximately 2000 scientists 
and research specialists, of those approximately 300 
work primarily on the KANAPUS project.  NPP VNIIEM has 
the technical and commercial sophistication and 
resources consistent with those of which the commodity 
in reftel was designed.  NPP VNIIEM has a legitimate 
need for this technology and a legitimate stated and 
demonstrated end-use for the commodity in subject 
 
 
reftel. 
 
¶9. NPP VNIIEM is under a strict timetable in the 
KANAPUS Satellite Project. 
 
¶10. Recommendations: Post recommends NPP VNIIEM, All 
Russian Scientific and Research Institute of 
Electromechanics with Plant named after A.G. Iosifian, 
Moscow, Russia, as reliable recipients of sensitive 
U.S. origin commodities. It is requested that post be 
notified of final disposition of the application, and 
of any shipments for this organization in order to 
conduct appropriate FCS follow-up and statistical 
reporting. 
(FCS MOSCOW/SBOZEK/PLISTON) 
RUSSELL