08RABAT993
MISSION MOROCCO MOBILIZED FOR RAMADAN OUTREACH
Wed Oct 15 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Rabat
VZCZCXRO6495
PP RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHGI RUEHJS RUEHKUK RUEHLH RUEHPW RUEHROV
RUEHTRO
DE RUEHRB #0993/01 2891838
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 151838Z OCT 08
FM AMEMBASSY RABAT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9236
INFO RUCNISL/ISLAMIC COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUCNMGH/MAGHREB COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 RABAT 000993 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/MAG, NEA/PD, IIP, ECA, DRL/NESCA AND DRL/IRF 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM KISL KIRF KPAO OIIP PGOV PREL SCUL MO
SUBJECT: MISSION MOROCCO MOBILIZED FOR RAMADAN OUTREACH 
ACTIVITIES 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: American and locally employed staff from 
all sections of Embassy Rabat and Consulate General Morocco 
mobilized to make the Mission,s Iftars (Ramadan dinners) and 
extensive outreach programming during the Islamic holy month 
of Ramadan a success.  The Embassy and Consulate General 
hosted eight Iftars, in an effort to establish new ties in 
the Muslim community and strengthen dialogue with previous 
contacts, including USG-funded program participants and 
international visitor alumni.  Events included the Ambassador 
and Mrs. Riley,s Iftars for orphan and at-risk youth, as 
well as DCM, CG, POL and PAS events engaging political, civil 
society, business, religious and youth leaders from around 
the country.  Participation by renowned Moroccan singers, 
television personalities and a former Olympian enhanced the 
programming, with some events garnering national print and 
broadcast coverage.  End summary. 
 
-------------- 
YOUTH OUTREACH 
-------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Ambassador and Mrs. Riley organized a week of 
Iftars aimed at reaching out to orphaned and at-risk youth in 
Rabat and surrounding communities.  Volunteers from all 
sections of the embassy participated in Iftars at the Temara 
Youth Center, Sale Orphanage, Tazi Palace and Akkari 
Orphanage.  Programs included guest presenters, music and 
distribution of U.S. private and government donated clothing 
and books.  The events, which reached over 450 youths, 
highlighted Embassy Rabat,s engagement with the local 
community and spirit of volunteerism. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) On September 15, Ambassador and Mrs. Riley hosted 
an Iftar at the Temara Youth Center.  Approximately 17 youth 
attended, as well as a number of the center,s staff, 
Governor of Skhirat-Temara Haoudi Abdelhak, and 20 local 
officials and parliamentarians.  Ambassador and Mrs. Riley 
handed out soccer uniforms and clothing donated by American 
companies and American candy to the youth center 
participants.  The Governor also donated soccer uniforms. 
Highlights of the night included performances by traditional 
Moroccan musicians, dancing, a &beat-boxing8 performance by 
one of the center,s youth and a guest appearance by rising 
Moroccan star and singer Nabila Maan. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) On September 18, approximately 150 boys and girls 
attended an Iftar dinner at Sale Orphanage, hosted by 
Ambassador and Mrs. Riley.  Arabic and English language books 
from PAS, as well as soccer uniforms, were donated to the 
orphans. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The following evening, September 19, Ambassador and 
Mrs. Riley hosted an Iftar at the historic Tazi Palace in 
Rabat for approximately 150 girls from the Al Mouassat and 
Ichraq orphanages.  Arabic and English language books from 
PAS, as well as soccer uniforms, were donated to the orphans. 
 Nationally renowned Moroccan television personality and chef 
Choumicha - referred to as the &Martha Stewart of Morocco8 
- attended the event.  Pro-palace French language daily 
newspaper Le Matin (circulation: 22,800) and semi-private 
Moroccan television station 2M (estimated viewership: 21 
million) reported on the event.  2M interviewed Ambassador 
Riley, who said that hosting Iftars for orphans has become a 
tradition for him and that it was a pleasure to share the 
sacred month of Ramadan with the children.  This highlighted 
American respect for Islam with a large Moroccan audience. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Rounding out the week, Ambassador and Mrs. Riley 
hosted an Iftar for 140 girls at the Akkari orphanage, with 
former Moroccan female Olympic runner Nezha Bidouane 
participating and encouraging the girls to pursue their 
dreams. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) On September 25, DCM Jackson hosted an Iftar 
uniting talented Moroccan students, youth leaders and young 
professionals )- many of them USG English language and 
exchange program alumni -- in a social setting, allowing for 
an exchange of ideas and stories related to cross-cultural 
exchange.  A performance of traditional Andalucian songs by 
young Tetouan musicians, including a guest performance by an 
American embassy intern, was well received as a display of 
respect for Moroccan culture and American-Moroccan 
collaboration.  Each attendee received the IIP-produced 
Ramadan calendar.  The up and coming invitees will likely 
become Morocco,s future community leaders and academics, and 
the opportunity for informal dialogue and expression of 
multicultural respect helped promote favorable attitudes 
toward the United States, with an anticipated multiplier 
effect as the invitees share their experiences with their 
 
RABAT 00000993  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
communities. 
 
--------------------------- 
STRENGTHENING RELATIONSHIPS 
--------------------------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) On September 22, CG Millard hosted Consulate 
General Casablanca,s annual post-Iftar music program.  The 
guests were leading local politicians and business leaders, 
including Minister of Social Affairs Nouzha Skalli, Deputy 
Governor of Greater Casablanca Mouad Jamaai, Governor of Ain 
Chock Fouzia Amnassar, Head of the U.S.-Morocco Business 
Council Abdelmalek Kettani, and the local heads of Price 
Waterhouse Coopers and Citibank.  The DCM, as well as POL, 
ECON, PAS and RAO section heads were present, as were several 
U.S. ConGen Casablanca employees.  The performers, who 
included some of Morocco,s leading musicians, offered up a 
variety of local entertainment, including medieval Muslim 
chants, Amazigh Berber music, old Moroccan Sephardic tunes 
and Andalucian lute music.  The musical performers were 
enthusiastically received by the spectators, with members of 
the audience singing along to some of the most popular tunes. 
 Exhibitions of contemporary art and calligraphy, contributed 
by five local artists, were mounted on the patio to accompany 
the Ramadan theme.  The event succeeded in furthering the 
Mission,s efforts toward promoting U.S.-Moroccan partnership 
and enhancing democracy and governance, as well as 
strengthening relations with the Casablanca business 
community. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) The Political Section in Rabat hosted a September 
25 Iftar for female parliamentarians and local politicians. 
The event focused on both the development of the Mission,s 
political contacts and the Mission Strategic Plan goal of 
enhancing democracy and governance.  The event reemphasized 
the mission,s support for female leaders in Morocco and 
complemented cross-sectional U.S. election-related 
programming with MEPI and PAS.  Several of the invitees 
previously participated in a PAS-organized U.S. elections DVC 
in September with U.S. political pundits and the majority of 
attendees will be taking part in a USG-funded trip to the 
United States to observe the November elections and learn 
about democracy in the United States.  Attendees from PAS, 
USAID and a local NGO also contributed to the dialogue. 
Participants expressed excitement about their imminent travel 
to the United States and voiced overwhelming support for 
Obama,s candidacy, reflecting a broader Moroccan trend in 
relation to the U.S. elections.  They also shared their 
anticipation that a greater number of female candidates will 
be included on party lists in the 2009 Moroccan municipal 
elections. 
 
----------------------------------- 
CIVIL SOCIETY AND COMMUNITY LEADERS 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶10.  (SBU) On September 25, CG Millard hosted the 
consulate,s annual Iftar for leaders of NGOs and civil 
society.  Aziz Dada, Governor and Minister of the National 
Initiative for Human Development (INDH), the lead agency of 
the Moroccan government responsible for development, 
attended.  Among the other guests were members of Rotary 
International, NGO representatives and recipients of MEPI and 
DoD funds aimed at reaching out to underprivileged children 
and democracy education.  Participants traveled far and wide 
to attend the event, highlighting the scope and reach of the 
Consulate General,s contacts.  In particular, Najat Anwar, 
the president of an organization fighting child sexual 
exploitation, flew from Agadir to participate.  Many guests 
expressed their appreciation for the chance to meet with USG 
representatives and to network with their counterparts. 
 
¶11.  (SBU) PAS-Rabat hosted a September 19 Iftar for select 
International Visitor Leadership Program alumni and key 
Moroccan and American religious leaders.  The International 
Visitor alumni described their work in Morocco and shared 
anecdotes about their respective IVLP programs in the U.S., 
allowing participants to network, learn about each other,s 
experience and gain a more in-depth understanding of social, 
cultural and religious life in America.  Invited IIP speaker, 
Imam Yahya Blankinship addressed the group and provided an 
educational opportunity for Moroccan guests to learn about 
Islam in America.  Both Imam Blankinship and the IVLP alumni 
emphasized the importance of educational and cultural 
exchanges in dispelling negative stereotypes, promoting 
cultural understanding and reinforcing shared values and 
commonalities.  Each attendee received the IIP-produced 
Ramadan calendar.  The event furthered efforts to maintain 
and strengthen relations with former IVLP alumni. 
 
RABAT 00000993  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
¶12.  (SBU) Comment:  All of the mission,s Ramadan outreach 
activities advanced the mission,s public diplomacy strategy 
to improve public attitudes toward the U.S. and advance 
international understanding, as well as promote democracy and 
governance and U.S-Moroccan partnership.  In addition, they 
provided an opportunity for cultural exchange and networking 
between Moroccan youth, community, academic, governmental, 
business, media and religious leaders and succeeded in 
strengthening key contacts across the various sectors of 
Moroccan society.  End comment. 
 
 
***************************************** 
Visit Embassy Rabat's Classified Website; 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/rabat 
***************************************** 
 
Riley