08STATE74376
SAUDI-PROPOSED UNGA SPECIAL SESSION ON RELIGION
Thu Jul 10 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0016
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #4376 1922256
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 102246Z JUL 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 0000UNCLAS STATE 074376 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL UNGA USUN KIRF KISL SP SA
SUBJECT: SAUDI-PROPOSED UNGA SPECIAL SESSION ON RELIGION 
 
REF: USUN 555 
 
¶1. (U) Action request: In response to reftel request by the 
SYG for U.S. views on a possible UNGA Special Session on the 
political and religious components of interfaith dialogue, 
USUN should seek to signal encouragement of interfaith 
dialogue and seek details of the make-up, agenda items, and 
focus of the Saudi-proposed Special Session on religion. USUN 
should communicate that while the United States strongly 
supports interfaith dialogue, we believe such a dialogue 
should be broadly inclusive, apolitical, and focused on 
common values shared by faiths. The United States would not 
support a special session that seeks to exclude any religious 
or national groups, seeks to air political grievances, or 
seeks to enact measures against free speech under the guise 
of limiting religious defamation. USUN should urge the SYG to 
postpone making a final decision until after the July 16-18 
Interfaith Dialogue Conference in Spain and further 
consultation with the United States and other Member States. 
USUN should draw on the talking points and questions in 
paragraphs 2 and 3 below. 
 
¶2. (U) Talking Points: 
 
-- The United States welcomes interfaith dialogue and 
generally supports Saudi efforts to acknowledge shared values 
between Islam and other religions throughout the world. 
 
-- For such a dialogue to be effective it would need to focus 
on common values shared by faiths and not become a forum for 
political grievances. 
 
-- We will be watching closely the July 16-18 Interfaith 
Dialogue Conference in Spain, which is also part of the Saudi 
effort to promote interfaith dialogue. This conference will 
provide us with further context for assessing the value of 
the Saudi proposal for an UNGA Special Session. 
 
-- The U.S. has concerns, however, about the extent to which 
an UNGA Special Session on the "political and religious 
components of interfaith dialogue" would be constructive at 
this time. 
 
-- Our memory of the Durban Conference is vivid, and we are 
concerned that without careful planning and consideration a 
UN-hosted interfaith dialogue conference could degenerate 
into a similar dynamic, embarrassing the United Nations and 
individual member states and doing nothing to further mutual 
respect, tolerance, and understanding. 
 
-- For any event to have a positive result, it should be 
fully inclusive of all faiths. The U.S. is concerned that 
some may attempt to exclude from the event members of certain 
religions, including subgroups and offshoots. 
 
-- We are concerned, additionally, that the meeting could be 
used as a platform for promoting the concept of "Defamation 
of Religions," which the U.S. strongly opposes because of its 
implications for restrictions on freedom of religion and 
expression, as well as for the individual versus collective 
rights of members of one religious group. 
 
 
¶3. (U) Questions for use with the SYG or Secretariat staff: 
 
-- Would the format of this event be an UNGA Special Session 
in which all UN Member States and UN Observers would be able 
to participate, or would there be a different format in which 
others, such as representatives of religious groups and NGOs, 
would also speak? 
 
-- If the latter, would all faiths be included, including 
those the Saudi government views as polytheistic (e.g., those 
other than Islam, Judaism, and Christianity)? Further, within 
each religion, would all religious groups be welcome, 
including subgroups and offshoots (e.g. Bahais, Ahmadiyyas, 
converts to religions irrespective of their original and new 
faiths)? 
 
-- Also, if the format is other than an UNGA Special Session, 
would the event be sponsored by the UN? What UN resources 
would be expended on it? Would the Saudis be willing to 
follow the format of the 2004 Secretary-General Seminars on 
"Unlearning Intolerance" that focused on anti-Semitism and 
Islamophobia and were open to the public? 
 
-- How would staffing for this work? UN personnel? 
 
-- Also, if this is not an UNGA Special Session, who would 
make the decision on whom to invite? Are there any thoughts 
at this time about whom to invite? Will national delegations 
be invited or simply religious leaders from a range of states 
that do not necessarily speak on behalf of their governments? 
 
-- What are the views of other member states? Is there 
sufficient member state support for convening a Special 
Session? 
 
-- Will the conference address the role of textbooks and 
other media in promoting or retarding the goal of tolerance? 
 
-- What mechanisms and procedures could be used to ensure 
that the discussion does not advocate for limitations on 
freedom of speech and the press in the name of "defending 
religion"? 
 
-- Are the Saudis open to holding the event after UNGA? Would 
the Saudis be prepared to allow NGOs or other governments to 
participate in organizing and planning of the conference? 
RICE