08TUNIS71
TUNIS 2008 ANNUAL OVERSEAS SECURITY ADVISORY
Thu Jan 24 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tunis
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTU #0071/01 0241158
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 241158Z JAN 08
FM AMEMBASSY TUNIS
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 4337UNCLAS TUNIS 000071 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FO DS/OSAC AND DS/IP/NEA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AMGT APER ASEC TS
SUBJECT: TUNIS 2008 ANNUAL OVERSEAS SECURITY ADVISORY 
COUNCIL (OSAC) CRIME AND SAFETY REPORT 
 
REF: 07 STATE 168473 
 
¶1. OVERALL CRIME AND SAFETY SITUATION: 
 
CRIME: The Department of State rates Tunisia a medium threat 
country for crime.  The most common criminals are 
pickpockets, purse-snatchers and snatch-and-run cell-phone 
thieves who primarily work in the high-traffic tourist areas 
such as the Tunis medina and the central market, as well as 
other large Tunisian cities.  Beach resorts present a mix of 
snatch-and-grab, vehicle break-ins, and scam attempts due to 
the large number of tourists who vacation in Tunisia 
especially during the summertime.  Target selection tends to 
focus on persons who appear unfamiliar with their 
surroundings or those who are dressed in expensive clothing 
or jewelry and otherwise draw attention to themselves. 
 
Thieves, usually single males, will often target western 
women walking alone and then rob their victim (day or night) 
once the opportunity (no bystanders or passing vehicles) 
presents itself.  Young men on motor scooters will pass women 
on the street and, while one drives the scooter, the other 
snatches a handbag or cell phone from the victim as they 
speed by.  Sometimes, the victim is thrown to the ground 
causing serious injury if she does not release her bag. 
Although vehicle break-ins occur frequently, vehicle theft 
and carjackings are rare. 
 
Burglaries are occurring with more regularity, but do not 
exclusively focus on the expatriate community. Privately, 
many Tunisians acknowledge that crime is on the increase as 
the growing middle class offers criminals more opportunity 
for theft.  Since most burglaries are crimes of opportunity, 
a well-secured home is often reason enough for the thieves to 
move on.  With this in mind, middle class Tunisian families 
have taken measures to improve their residential security by 
installing grillwork over their windows and doors. 
Residential break-ins occur often during the day when homes 
are unoccupied, although occupied break-ins are not unheard 
of.  It is best to keep doors locked, even when the residence 
is occupied.  It can be assumed that burglars are prepared 
for confrontation, but are generally not predisposed to it. 
 
Although criminals are prepared to be confrontational, most 
generally avoid gratuitous violence.  For the most part, 
crimes of stealth are usually committed by a thief who is 
unarmed or armed with non-lethal weapons.  However, it has 
also been noted that criminals will rifle through a woman's 
purse on a crowded bus or train, undeterred by onlookers.  In 
this regard, visitors are advised to guard their possessions 
carefully when riding public transportation. It is also 
becoming more common for victims to notice their bag or 
jacket was sliced and valuable contents stealthily removed 
after walking through or standing in a crowded area. 
 
Violent crime remains relatively rare in affluent areas where 
most expatriates reside.  It is illegal to possess a firearm 
without government approval and the government will authorize 
approval to carry a firearm only in the most grievous and 
extreme circumstances.  Even then, a heavy burden is placed 
upon the citizen to justify the request. 
 
If you are victimized, immediately proceed to the nearest 
hotel or shopkeeper who can direct you, or will call for you, 
the nearest police officer.  Police are generally omnipresent 
at the beach resorts during the summer tourist season and do 
have some success in capturing these criminals when given a 
good description of the perpetrator. 
 
SAFETY: The most significant safety threat a visitor to 
Tunisia faces is the indigenous style of driving.  Among 
their many traits, local drivers rarely look before changing 
lanes, commonly run through red lights and are generally 
oblivious to other vehicles on the road.  Traffic police man 
intersections throughout Tunis and other major cities. 
Police are known to pull vehicles over for speeding, reckless 
driving or to check papers. 
 
Due to the local driving style in Tunisia, short-term 
visitors are discouraged from driving themselves.  Visitors 
and residents alike should always wear seatbelts and are 
strongly encouraged to bring an approved car seat for infants 
and young children.  Infant and child seats are difficult to 
locate and expensive to purchase in Tunisia. 
 
If you do drive in Tunisia, practice good defensive driving 
skills.  Ensure sufficient braking distance between your 
vehicle and those in front of you.  Remain conscious of 
individuals that may materialize in the median or shoulder 
and cross the street disregarding the approaching traffic. 
When stopped at a light, beware of pedestrians crossing 
 
between the waiting cars.  Scooter drivers often ride near 
the right shoulder and may not be easily visible, especially 
when cars travel at higher speed or at night. 
 
Vehicle accidents often attract a crowd of onlookers but 
these crowds seldom become violent or angry.  Individuals 
involved in traffic accidents are not required to file a 
police report unless there are injuries as a result of the 
collision.  In that case, all injured persons must be 
transported to the nearest medical facility and must file an 
accident report as soon as possible.  Most public hospitals 
have police on-site to facilitate the reporting process.  For 
routine accidents, both parties must complete and sign a 
"constat amiable," which is forwarded to their respective 
insurance agencies for resolution. 
 
Drivers should be aware that if they are involved in a motor 
vehicle accident which results in death or serious injury of 
another person, the police may take them into protective 
custody until they are absolved of responsibility.  This can 
mean spending a period varying from one day to two months in 
detention.  As with any arrest or detention overseas, 
Americans taken into custody should immediately request that 
the police inform the Embassy of their whereabouts. 
 
Alternatives to driving include taxis, which are generally 
cheap, safe and reliable.  The government of Tunisia 
regulates taxis and requires that drivers use meters.  Do not 
enter a taxi with other fares and do not allow your taxi 
driver to pick up other individuals.  If you feel that a taxi 
driver is taking advantage of you, write down his taxi number 
and inform the police.  Because tourism is so vital to 
Tunisia's economy, the police have been known to track down 
and arrest dishonest drivers. 
 
Trains are generally safe.  Travelers should refrain from 
boarding any train that is overcrowded to avoid pickpockets 
(see Crime above).  Visitors are discouraged from using 
public buses as they are not well maintained and women have 
reported being groped, especially during peak periods when 
they are overcrowded.  Private and charter buses are 
generally better maintained and usually limit the number of 
passengers. 
 
¶2. POLITICAL VIOLENCE: Tunisia is a moderate, Muslim country 
that has enjoyed peace and political stability since gaining 
its independence from France in 1956.  Despite the heightened 
tensions in the region since the September 11 terrorist 
attacks and the war in Iraq, the Government of Tunisia 
continues to promote moderation and encourage engagement in 
the Middle East peace process. 
 
Anti-American rhetoric in Tunisia has largely been confined 
to media criticism of U.S. regional policies and individual 
expressions of frustration.  The Embassy is unaware of any 
acts of violence perpetrated against American interests, 
public or private, as a result of the war on terrorism or 
related to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.  However, a 
synagogue in the island of Djerba was the target of a 
terrorist attack on April 11, 2002 for which al-Qaida claimed 
responsibility.  Twenty civilians were killed. 
 
More recently, in December 2006 and January 2007, the 
Government of Tunisia announced that Tunisian security forces 
engaged and disrupted a terrorist group, killing or capturing 
many individuals who reportedly planned to carry out acts of 
violence in Tunisia.  According to official government 
reports, the U.S. Embassy in Tunis was among the group,s 
intended targets.  In December 2007, thirty individuals were 
given varying sentences for their involvement in these 
events.  In light of this, the U.S. Embassy in Tunis reminds 
all Americans to maintain a high level of vigilance in regard 
to their personal security and to remain aware of local 
developments.  Suspicious incidents should immediately 
reported to local police and the U.S. Embassy. 
 
Tunisian President Ben Ali continues to place a high priority 
on fighting terrorism and maintaining law and order. 
Tunisia's dependence on tourism as a source of convertible 
currency has contributed, in part, to the continuedQxpansion 
of the internal security services.  Police are highly visible 
and ensure that the country's image remains one of tranquil 
stability.  The focus on security and a growing economy have 
helped Tunisia avoid many of the problems faced by other 
nations in the region.  One of the few outbreaks of political 
violence in the country's history took place in 1991 when 
members of the local Islamic party committed acts of violence 
after it had been banned by the government.  The government 
ultimately arrested and prosecuted nearly 250 of its members. 
 
Small demonstrations occur occasionally on university 
 
campuses and typically protest fee increases, salary levels 
for professors, and administrative policies.  Other 
politically motivated demonstrations are rarely allowed but 
do break out occasionally on university campuses.  These 
activities are not considered a threat to Tunisia's stability 
and have not targeted American interests.  The police handle 
most protests and demonstrations peacefully and without 
incident; however, police will not hesitate to use force to 
break up a protest or demonstration in order to quell the 
disturbance. 
 
¶3. POST-SPECIFIC CONCERNS:  U.S. businesses or American 
citizens living in or visiting Tunisia should be aware that 
English is not widely spoken in Tunisia.  Individuals without 
the ability to communicate in French or Arabic will find 
conducting personal or professional business difficult. 
Women face no specific dress restrictions but conservative 
clothing helps avoid attracting undue attention and 
harassment.  Reports of verbal and occasionally physical 
harassment of women are reported.  However disagreeable, the 
U.S. Embassy recommends against responding physically to 
incidents of harassment due to the risk of sustaining further 
harm should the situation escalate.  Injuries or physical 
violence have generally not been associated with harassment 
in Tunisia and most incidents end quickly if the perpetrator 
is ignored or reported immediately to a nearby police officer. 
 
When driving, ensure that doors are locked and windows rolled 
up to avoid being victimized by opportunists at intersections 
and stoplights.  U.S. Embassy reporting indicates that this 
type of street crime is more prevalent in the downtown, 
crowded sections of Tunis; less prevalent in the more 
affluent neighborhoods and the northern suburbs of Tunis. 
 
During the winter months, extended downpours have been known 
to overwhelm Tunis,s storm drains and flood streets.  The 
city will effectively shut down due to washed-out roads as 
bypasses become overburdened with diverted traffic. 
 
The threat of kidnapping is not a significant issue in 
Tunisia's major cities.  Travelers to sparsely populated 
areas near the Algerian border in the Sahara should exercise 
extreme vigilance since kidnapping in that region cannot be 
ruled out.  Should a kidnapping occur, the U.S. Embassy 
expects the police would respond appropriately. 
 
Use and possession of illegal drugs and drug trafficking are 
serious offenses in Tunisia.  Persons arrested for these 
crimes can expect long jail sentences and heavy fines. 
Homosexuality is illegal in Tunisia and can be punished by 
imprisonment.  Possession of pornography can also lead to 
imprisonment. 
 
There are no known private security firms that have trained 
personnel who can provide executive protection services to 
visiting businessmen and businesswomen.  Additionally, the 
Tunisian Ministry of Interior does not allow its police 
officers to act in this capacity while off-duty. 
 
The U.S. Embassy is unaware of any private security or law 
firms who are licensed to conduct private investigations in 
Tunisia.  Should American businesses require such services, 
the U.S. Embassy strongly recommends contacting the Regional 
Security Officer for advice on how to proceed.  Depending on 
the nature of the request, either the Regional Security 
Officer or Commercial Attach will facilitate introductions 
to appropriate Tunisian Government officials or provide a 
reference list of law firms who have reputably represented 
American business firms in Tunisian. 
 
Federal Express, DHL, and other multi-national express 
delivery services can provide service to Tunisian addresses 
through a link with the Tunisian "Rapid Poste" System.  The 
system works fairly well, but Tunisian customs routinely 
opens express mail envelopes and packages for inspection, 
even when clearly labeled "documents."  While the U.S. 
Embassy knows of no cases of theft or loss of material 
related to express mail delivery, American business 
representatives should be cognizant of the possibility of 
review and/or loss of corporate proprietary information when 
using these services as well as delays in delivery. 
 
Travel in the desert areas of southern Tunisia requires 
research and planning.  Many roads are unimproved and even 
well-traveled routes are subject to blowing sands that can 
create hazards for vehicles.  Persons driving off the major 
paved roads are encouraged to ensure that their vehicles are 
appropriate for off-road driving conditions and are equipped 
with appropriate spare equipment and supplies including water 
and food.  The Tunisian National Guard encourages persons 
traveling into the desert to register their travel 
 
beforehand.  For details and how and where to register, 
please visit the U.S. Embassy desert travel page at 
http://tunis.usembassy.gov/desert travel.html. 
 
¶4. POLICE RESPONSE: The Tunisian police are relatively well 
trained and professional.  Many senior officials have 
received advanced training in Western Europe or the United 
States.  Acutely aware of the need to maintain its image 
abroad and protect Tunisia's tourism industry, the police are 
generally responsive to visitors in need of assistance, and 
they ensure that their presence is particularly high in 
tourist and other areas frequented by foreigners.  Police 
checkpoints are set up after dark in many areas.  Some 
Tunisians and foreigners, including American citizens, have 
said the police occasionally solicit small gratuities from 
them.  However, the American citizens affected did not 
believe that they had been singled out or targeted. 
 
By law, Tunisian police officers can, and do, conduct random 
traffic stops.  Drivers are required to show their Tunisian 
identity card or residence permit and vehicle registration. 
For this reason, visitors should always have a copy of their 
passport on their person.  Visitors who are briefly detained 
by the police are encouraged to remain cooperative and 
professional, traits that the police appreciate and that may 
assist in expediting a quick resolution to an arbitrary 
police stop.  Further, insulting the police is illegal and 
people have been imprisoned for it. 
 
The national police provide security in major urban areas, 
while the paramilitary National Guard (equivalent to the 
State Police in the U.S.) is responsible for other areas, 
including the nation's roadways.  Police and National Guard 
personnel are generally responsive to the needs of visitors 
but speak very limited English, if any at all. 
 
Crimes should be reported immediately to the nearest police 
officer.  Speak with the hotel desk clerk or concierge when 
you need police assistance.  When in public, most 
storeowners, shopkeepers or taxi drivers can direct you to a 
nearby police officer or summon one for you. 
 
NATIONWIDE EMERGENCY NUMBERS: 
Police (Police secours): 197 
Fire Department: 198 
Ambulance (SAMU): 190 
 
¶5. MEDICAL EMERGENCIES: Medical care in Tunisia is adequate 
with a number of new, private "polyclinics" available that 
function as simple hospitals and can provide a variety of 
procedures.  Specialized care or treatment may not be 
available.  Facilities that can handle complex trauma cases 
are virtually non-existent.  While most private clinics have 
some physicians that are fluent in English, French is used by 
the medical establishment and all of the ancillary staff in 
every clinic communicates in Arabic and/or French.  Public 
hospitals are over crowded, under equipped and under staffed. 
 Nursing care in all clinics, private and public is very 
underdeveloped and in some cases poor or non-existent. 
 
Well-equipped ambulances may not be available outside of 
urban areas.  Even in urban areas, emergency response times 
can be much longer than in the U.S.  Doctors and hospitals 
expect immediate cash payment for health care services 
although some hospitals may accept credit cards. 
Over-the-counter medications are available; however, 
travelers should bring with them a full supply of medications 
that are needed on a regular basis.  The U.S. Embassy has a 
list of doctors who can be contacted for emergency 
prescriptions. 
 
Information on vaccinations and other health precautions, 
such as safe food and water precautions and insect bite 
protection, may be obtained from the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention's hotline for international travelers 
at 1-877-FYI-TRIP (1-877-394-8747); fax 1-888-CDC-FAXX 
(1-888-232-3299), or via the CDC's internet site at 
http://www.cdc.gov/travel.  For information about outbreaks 
of infectious diseases abroad consult the World Health 
Organization's (WHO) website at http://www.who.int/en. 
Further health information for travelers is available at 
http://www.who.int/ith. 
 
Medical Resources in Tunisia ) The U.S. Embassy assumes no 
responsibility or liability for the professional ability or 
reputation of, of the quality of services provided by the 
medical professionals, medical facilities or medical services 
whose names appear on the following lists.  Names are listed 
in no particular order. 
 
Private Ambulance Services 
 
 
Allo Docteur- Allo Ambulances, Tunis:  71-780-000 / 
71-781-000 / 71-780-884 / 71-841-979 
Ambulance Echifa, Tunis ) 71-585-999 / 98-243-552 
Amen La Marsa Ambulance, La Marsa: 71-749-000 
Apollo Ambulances, Tunis:  71-843-434 / 98-358-916 
 
Private Medical Clinics "Polyclinics" 
 
TUNIS METRO AREA: 
La Soukra Clinic - 71-758-888 / 71-758-666 
Polyclinic El Amen de La Marsa - 71-749-000 
Clinic El Manar - 71-800-211 / 71-783-343 
Centre d'Assistance Medicale Urgente, Montfleury - 71-341-807 
 
NABEUL: Clinic Ibn Rochd - 72-286-668 
SOUSSE: Clinic des Oliviers - 73-242-711 
SFAX: Clinic Annafis - 74-215-000 
BIZERTE: Clinic Raouebi - 72-440-200 
DJERBA: Clinic Chifa - 75-500-411 
GAFSA: Clinic Ennakhil - 76-210-750 
 
Other Medical Resources: 
CAMUR: Centre d/Assistane Medicale Urgente et Reanimation 
(Poison control), Tunis ) 71-335-500 
 
¶6. TIPS ON HOW TO AVOID BEING A VICTIM: 
 
Common sense and sound personal security practices, including 
a keen awareness of surroundings, are the best ways to ensure 
an incident-free visit.  Treat the cities in Tunis as you 
would any major city in the United States.  For example, 
travelers should be wary of unsolicited offers of assistance 
and refuse offers that sound too good to be true.  Presenting 
a positive, confident attitude is one of the best ways to 
avoid crime. 
 
¶7.  FOR FURTHER INFORMATION: 
 
US Embassy Tunis, 1053 Les Berges du Lac, Tunis, Tunisie 
 
If dialing from abroad, country code for Tunisia is 216. 
 
U.S. Embassy Tunis, Tunisia:  71-107-000 
 
Regional Security Office: 71-107-341 or TunisRSO(at 
symbol)state.gov 
Consular Section: via Embassy Switchboard: 71-107-000 or 
ConsularTunis (at symbol)state.gov 
Economic and Commercial Officer: via Embassy switchboard: 
71-107-000 or TunisCommercial(at symbol)state.gov 
 
¶8.  OSAC COUNTRY COUNCIL: 
 
Tunisia does not currently have an OSAC Country Council but 
security questions and requests for more info may be directed 
to the Regional Security Office at the contact number and 
email listed above or via the following email address: 
 
OSACT(at symbol)state.gov 
GODEC