08WARSAW1289
LETTER OF CONGRATULATIONS FROM PRIME MINISTER TUSK
Mon Nov 10 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Warsaw
R 100625Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY WARSAW
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 7296UNCLAS WARSAW 001289 
 
 
DEPT FOR S/ES-CR, S/ES-O, H, AND EUR/CE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPDC PREL OVIP PL
SUBJECT: LETTER OF CONGRATULATIONS FROM PRIME MINISTER TUSK 
FOR PRESIDENT-ELECT OBAMA 
 
REF: STATE 118192 
 
¶1. Post has been informed that the following letter of 
congratulations from Polish Prime Minister Tusk has been 
delivered by the Polish Embassy in Washington to 
President-elect Obama.  A scanned copy of the letter is 
posted on the Prime Minister's website (www.premier.gov.pl). 
 
¶2. Begin English-language text as posted on the Prime 
Minister's website: 
 
Warsaw, 5th November 2008 
 
I would like to wholeheartedly congratulate you on the 
occasion of the election to the post of the President of the 
United States.  I am convinced that this is a good choice for 
America, for Poland and for the future of our entire world. 
 
Poland and the United States are linked with close ties of 
friendship and brotherhood, whose roots are embedded deeply 
in the past.  The recent years saw a particularly intensive 
development of relations between our states based, among 
other things, on common cooperation in Iraq and in 
Afghanistan.  Also this year we managed to markedly 
strengthen the foundation of cooperation between our 
countries and map out a new framework for extending thereof 
in the future.  I do hope that thanks to the full commitment 
of both sides in the implementation of the hitherto defined 
plans, the relations between our states will undergo further 
consolidation.  The hope seems to be all the more justified 
since citizens of the United States elected a candidate 
representing the region inhabited by more than one million 
Americans of Polish origin, thus being dear to all Poles. 
 
The democratic world needs a strong United States, open to 
cooperation with those who want peace and security. 
Trans-Atlantic relations are of special importance for those 
matters, which is why I count on the revitalization and 
strengthening of the Trans-Atlantic cooperation. 
 
Congratulating you sincerely once again and wishing success 
in your work, I would like, on my own behalf and on behalf of 
the government of the Republic of Poland, to invite you to 
pay a visit in our country. 
 
End text. 
 
ASHE