09ABUJA174
2008 END USE MONITORING REPORT
Fri Jan 30 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Abuja
VZCZCXYZ0002
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHUJA #0174/01 0301103
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 301103Z JAN 09
FM AMEMBASSY ABUJA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5146
INFO RUEHOS/AMCONSUL LAGOS 0726UNCLAS ABUJA 000174 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL/RM/MS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID IZ
SUBJECT: 2008 END USE MONITORING REPORT 
 
REF: 08 STATE 00127211 
 
¶A.  Inventory Management 
 
EUM Program Coordinator - Michael Makalou Makaloum@state.gov 
 
Inventory System - Excel sheet maintained within the department of 
state server is used to record and track distribution of all 
resources and a barcode is attached to all property. 
 
Staff Member Responsibilities - Project Assistant/Chauffeur - 
travels to project sites, inspects use/safety of property and 
conducts end use monitoring. Previously Program Management Assistant 
conducted EUM, but staff job function changes occurred. No other USG 
Agency assists with EUM. 
 
Other USG Agency Assistance - In the past year no other USG agencies 
conducted EUM review of INL provided resources. ICITAP/OPDAT 
complies with EUM requirements at post. 
 
¶B.  Counterpart Agencies 
 
Recipients - Nigeria Police Force - Special Fraud Unit (SFU lagos), 
Nigeria Police Force - INTERPOL Office Lagos, National Drug Law 
Enforcement Agency (NDLEA) Lagos, Kano, Port Harcourt, Jos and 
Abuja. Economic and Financial Crimes commission (EFCC) Abuja. 
National Agency against trafficking in persons and other related 
offences (NAPTIP) Abuja. All agencies cooperated during the current 
year end use monitoring. 
 
Receipt - Handwritten receipts are used to document the provision of 
the items; information contained in the receipts states INL will be 
conducting end use monitoring unannounced to check the use of the 
equipments. 
 
¶C.  On-site Inspections 
 
The number of scheduled on-site inspections performed- None 
 
The number of unscheduled on-site inspections performed - All 
locations were inspected a minimum of two times within the year. 
 
The number of counterpart sites and cities visited - 3 cities. Jos, 
Kano and Lagos 
 
The date and location of on-site inspections performed - 12/10 - 
12/13, 2008 Lagos, 06/24-06/25, 2008 and 10/16-18, 2008 Jos, 
12/03-04, 2008 Kano. 
 
The number of donated items subject to inspections - 95% 
 
The percentage (%) of donated items personally inspected. - 95% 
 
¶D.  Secondary Methods of Monitoring Resource Status 
 
Comparison of Records - Not applicable in Nigeria. 
 
Discussions - are used to monitor the scanner at the Port Harcourt 
airport due to travel restrictions to the Port Harcourt region. 
 
Percentage of Use - 90% 
 
¶4. STATUS-COMMODITIES- 
 
¶A. Type of Commodity and Project - Scanners - Four body scanners 
were donated to Nigerian National Drug Law Enforcement agency 
(NDLEA) in 2008.  All scanners are operational. 
 
Vehicles - Four Toyota hilux, Two Toyota Hiace Bus were donated to 
NDLEA in 2001. One Toyota Hilux and one Toyota Condor Van were 
donated to INTERPOL in 2001, One Toyota Hilux and one Toyota Condor 
Van were donated in 2001 to Special Fraud unit of the Nigeria Police 
Force. 
 
Radios - Forty VHF radios donated to NDLEA in 2001 and in 2007 14 
GXT radios were donated to NDLEA. 
 
X-ray machines - Three X-ray machines donated in 2003 to NDLEA. 
 
Itemizers - Two Itemizer donated in 2001 to NDLEA Lagos, Two 
Itemizer donated to NDLEA Abuja International Airport and Kano in 
¶2002. Four itemizers donated in 2008 to NDLEA offices at the Port 
Harcourt International Airport, Kano international Airport, Lagos 
international Airport and Abuja International Airport. 
 
Office Equipment NDLEA - 27 Computers and 37 UPS donated to NDLEA in 
2003 at the NDLEA academy in Jos there are 25 computers and 30 UPS, 
2 computers donated in 2003, 5 UPS donated in 2001 and 1 UPS donated 
in 2008 at the Lagos international airport. In 2002 one donated to 
Abuja International Airport, in 2008 one donated to Abuja 
International Airport. In 2002 one donated to Kano international 
Airport, in 2008 one donated to Kano international airport. In 2008 
one UPS donated to Port Harcourt International Airport. In 2001, 
office equipment donated to INTERPOL included 2 computers, 2 
printers, 4 file cabinet, 1 fax machine,2 UPS and in 2008, 3 
computers, 2 printers, 1 safe, 1 infocus projector, 1 digital camera 
and 2 laptops. 1 finger print machine was donated to INTERPOL in 
¶2001. In 2001, office equipments donated to Special Fraud unit are 2 
UPS, 2 computers, 2 Printers, 1 fax machine. In 2002, One tracker 
software was donated, one computer, one flat bed scanner donated and 
one printer. 
 
In 2003, seven printers were donated to NDLEA at the Jos Academy. 
One PC 16 server at the Academy in 2003. In 2003, 26 workstations 
were donated to the Jos Academy. 
 
In 2004, two laptops were donated to EFCC, three computers, three 
printers, one projector, one plastic card printer and one digital 
camera. 
 
In 2004, four computers were donated to NAPTIP, one projector, one 
photocopier machine, one television, one scanner, Four UPS, one 
digital camera and three laptops 
 
Miscellaneous - In 2003, donated to NDLEA Jos Academy were 20 
bookcases, 9 printer tables, 8 round reading table, 36 wood chairs, 
20 Wood partitions, 30 office chairs.  In 2001, one generator 77kva 
donated to INTERPOL. In 2001, one generator 100KVA donated to 
Special Fraud Unit. 
 
¶B.  Location- Scanners are located at the International Airports at 
Port Harcourt, Abuja, Lagos and Kano. Vehicles are located at the 
NDLEA office in Lagos. Radios are located at the NDLEA office in 
Lagos and NDLEA office at Kano International Airport. X-ray machines 
are located at Kano, Lagos and Abuja. Itemizers are located at Kano, 
Lagos and Abuja. Office equipment are located in NDLEA offices in 
Lagos, INTERPOL office in Lagos, NDLEA academy in Jos, Nigeria 
Police force Special Fraud unit in Lagos, EFCC Office in Abuja, 
NAPTIP office in Abuja. 
 
¶C.  Use- Counter Narcotics - Four Scanners were provided to the 
NDLEA in 2008. They are used for drug detection. 
 
Vehicles - For operations and transporting arrested suspects to the 
NDLEA holding cells. 
 
Radios - Communication between NDLEA head office and the Airport 
command. 
 
Miscellaneous - X-ray machines and itemizers are used for drug 
detection on passengers. Office equipment are used in the offices. 
 
¶D.  Condition - Counter Narcotics - Four Scanners were provided to 
the NDLEA in 2008. One at Kano, one at Abuja, one in Lagos and one 
in Port Harcourt. They are used for drug detection. They are in 
excellent condition. 
 
Vehicles - All operational vehicles are in good condition. 
 
Radios - Fourteen are in good condition, Forty are in poor 
condition. 
 
Miscellaneous - Three X-ray machines were provided to NDLEA in 2003, 
one is located in Lagos, one in Abuja and one in Kano. It is used 
for inspection of luggage and X-ray of suspects believed to have 
ingested drugs. Two of the machines are in excellent condition, one 
is in poor condition. Office equipments are in poor condition SFU 
and INTERPOL, current year donations are in good conditions, NAPTIP 
and EFCC office equipments are in good condition. 
 
¶E.  Unmonitored Commodities - Special Fraud unit and INTERPOL office 
equipments donated prior to 2008 were not monitored as reported in 
2007 EUM; they have been removed due to poor state and irreparable - 
to be removed from inventory. 
 
¶5. STATUS-INVENTORIES- 
 
¶A. Vehicles- 
      Nigerian Police, INTERPOL and SFU 
 
      Vehicles                Inventory 
 
 Toyota Hilux           2 
      Toyota Condor Van      2 
 
Nigerian National Drug Law Enforcement Agency 
 
 Vehicles                Inventory 
 
 Toyota Hilux          4 
 Toyota Hiace Minibus 2 
¶C. Office Equipments - please see attached excel sheets. 
 
¶D. Radios - please see attached sheets. 
 
 
¶6. STATUS-SERVICES- 
 
A Construction Projects-Borehole construction at NDLEA academy 95% 
completed. Partition of two rooms for Scanners at Lagos and Port 
Harcourt 100% completed. Installation of anti-burglary door at Abuja 
International Airport 100% completed. Repair of NDLEA official 
vehicles at international airport Abuja. 
 
 
¶7. PROGRAM IMPACT-Describe the impact of each type of 
commodity/service on the anti-narcotics/anti-crime programs during 
the calendar year.  For example: 
 
¶A. Communications Equipment-Its installation increased effective 
communication amongst NDLEA staff leading to arrest of a suspected 
drug trafficker attempting to smuggle himself into the aircraft, 
posing as an airport staff. 
 
¶B. Construction Projects -The vehicle maintenance has improved the 
operations of the NDLEA office at Abuja International Airport, the 
installation of the anti-burglary door provided expansion for the 
cell at the Abuja International airport. 
Provision of partitioning for the scanners has provided safety for 
the scanner at the airport, thus, reducing unauthorized access to 
the scanners. Provision of borehole at NDLEA academy will make the 
academy more habitable and attractive for use by law enforcement 
agencies for training. 
 
¶D.  Surveillance Equipment-The scanners has led to increased number 
of arrests at the Lagos and Abuja International Airports, at the 
Kano airport as the knowledge of the presence of the scanner has led 
to drug couriers looking for other exit points to traffic the drugs. 
The International Airports are shut down to drug couriers. 
 
¶E.  Laboratory Equipment-The INTERPOL finger print machine is the 
only working Finger printing machine at the INTERPOL office and is 
compatible with INTERPOL Lyon. 
 
¶H.  Vehicles-The 4x4's were used in NDLEA operations to transfer 
suspects to courts and cells in Lagos. 
 
¶8. PROBLEMS & CORRECTIVE ACTION PLANS (CAP's)- 
 
¶A.  Unmonitored Resources- Scanner at Port Harcourt Airport - 
security concerns. 
 
EUM was not conducted at Port Harcourt International airport due to 
the inevitable security issues at the Niger Delta region of Nigeria. 
Discussions were held with Host government partners in that region, 
about the Status of the equipments donated. 
 
NDLEA has not been able to account for 30 radios donated by INL. INL 
reported in EUM 2007 about missing items. 
 
¶B.  Repair and Maintenance of Commodities- 
 
Maintenance of Itemizers continues to be a problem as Post has been 
unable to conclude with GE to send a technician to Nigeria to 
maintain the itemizers and provide training to host government 
partners. 
 
The NAS provides maintenance support for the scanners. 
 
There are numerous vehicle maintenance problems with the NDLEA. The 
NAS refurbished a vehicle for NDLEA under the supervision of NAS 
project assistant/chauffeur. 
 
¶C.  Lack of Use and Misuse of Commodities - 
 
N/A 
 
¶D.  Disposal of commodities- 
 
The INTERPOL and Special Fraud unit have not disposed of the 
commodities, however, they are kept as scrap and parts are being 
used to augment other likely commodities when faulty. NAS advises 
that commodities be removed from inventory to reflect by EUM 2009. 
 
¶E.  Other Problems (as appropriate) not applicable 
 
SANDERS