09ADANA64
TURKEY:  BIMONTHLY SOUTHEAST ECONOMIC NEWSLETTER
Mon Oct 26 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
VZCZCXRO0009
RR RUEHDA
DE RUEHDA #0064/01 2991309
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 261309Z OCT 09
FM AMCONSUL ADANA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4785
INFO RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS 0203
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 1327
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 1097
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 1394UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ADANA 000064 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON ENRG TU SY
SUBJECT: TURKEY:  BIMONTHLY SOUTHEAST ECONOMIC NEWSLETTER 
 
TURKEY'S LARGEST WIND FARM UNDER CONSTRUCTION IN OSMANIYE 
 
Rotor Elektrik, a subsidiary of Zorlu Enerji, is constructing 
Turkey's largest wind farm in the mountainous Gokcedag area of 
Osmaniye province's northeastern Bahce district.  Listed on the 
Istanbul Stock Exchange and one of Turkey's five private power 
companies, Zorlu Enerji is owned by Zorlu Holding, which has 
investments in textiles, appliances and electronics, and real 
estate.  The 180 million Euro project covers an area of 15 
kilometers.  Of the project's 54 2.5MW wind turbines, 
construction on 30 is complete, and 14 are currently operational 
and generating a total of 35 MW of electricity per day.  The 
project manager expects the facility to become fully operational 
in March 2010.   The electricity generated is connected to the 
national grid. 
 
HATAY PROVINCE AIMS TO CAPTURE WIND POWER 
 
Belen Elektrik company, a subsidiary of Ankara-based Guris 
Holding, has begun testing Hatay province's wind power with ten 
3 MW wind turbines.  The project site covers four kilometers in 
the Belen district.  The current total capacity for electricity 
generation is 30 MW, with plans to ramp up to an annual 
production of 95,700,000 kWh/year.  According to the project 
manager, eight wind turbines are in commission, and work to 
resolve technical problems on the remaining two continues. 
 
THE ROAD TO DAMASCUS IS VISA FREE 
 
On October 13, Turkey and Syria reciprocally lifted visa 
requirements, boosting hopes for increased economic activity in 
the service and consumer goods sectors in eastern and 
southeastern Turkey.  Association of Tourism Investors President 
Turgut Gur said removing the visa requirement may translate into 
at least 1,000,000 Syrian tourists entering Turkey in 2010. 
Adana and Mersin Hilton report a significant surge in 
year-on-year business in the week following Turkey's signing of 
the visa protocols, with up to 40 percent of clients coming from 
Syria. 
 
PUBLIC LAND IDENTIFIED FOR NEW AIRPORT IN MERSIN PROVINCE 
 
Mersin Chamber of Commerce and Industry President Serafettin 
Asut announced the nation's airport authority (DHMI) had given 
approval for the construction of the new Cukurova Airport in 
spite of controversial government reports suggesting the swampy 
soil was not suitable for runways.  DHMI dismissed reports, 
pointing to advanced technology to resolve geological hurdles. 
Construction could commence as early 2010 and be completed in 
18-24 months, if project financing for the airport (BOT model) 
goes as planned.  Mersin's business community is optimistic the 
airport will be a boon to the local economy and provincial 
tourism, in particular delicate agricultural products like 
Mersin's strawberries that rely on cold chain.  Adana business 
circles are displeased with this development, as they view the 
new airport as a threat to Adana airport's own expansion plans 
and waste of resources. The often bitter arguments aired in 
public will likely continue. 
 
 
TOURISM ASSOCIATION SETS SIGHTS ON TURKEY'S EAST 
 
Turkey's Association of Tourism Investors (ATI) has thrown its 
support behind the GOT's "democratic opening" initiative, with a 
view to unlocking the business potential of the country's 
eastern region teeming with rich historical and religious sites. 
 Given last year's 12 percent increase in tourism to eastern 
Turkey, investors are giving priority to the east and readying 
delegations of business people to survey potential hotel sites 
and other infrastructure needs.  Hotel chains like Hilton are 
also expanding in the east, with a new Hilton Garden Inn 
Diyarbakir set to open its doors in early 2010.  ATI President 
Turgut Gur said his organization recently held its annual 
meeting in Mardin, a city where villas are being converted into 
boutique hotels. 
 
BUSINESS IS BRISK AT MERSIN INTERNATIONAL PORT 
 
Mersin International Port reports a 7 percent year-on-year 
increase in its business volume at the end of August 2009. 
According to the Mersin Chamber of Shipping, a surge in imported 
goods, domestic shipping activities, and a 48 percent increase 
in cement exports are behind the upsurge in port business. 
 
TURKEY'S LARGEST RAILWAY LOGISTICS CENTER PLANNED IN TARSUS 
 
Turkish State Railways (TCDD) 6th Region Manager Hasan T. 
Koprulu announced 17.9 million TL (USD 1.3 million) in land 
expropriations were underway in the planned construction of 
Turkey's largest loading facility and logistics center in Mersin 
province's Tarsus district.  The logistics center will be fed by 
 
ADANA 00000064  002 OF 002 
 
 
connections to area organized industrial centers and integrated 
with other modes of transport.  Container loading/unloading, 
storage areas, customs and duty paid facilities will be 
included.  Employment generated by the construction will help 
invigorate the local economy. 
 
MERSIN TECHNOPARK SEEKS AMERICAN PARTNERSHIP 
 
Established in 2006, the Mersin Technopark (MT) is a product of 
collaboration between Mersin province, city, state university, 
chamber of commerce, and other business organizations.  The MT, 
described by its manager as a work in progress, provides 
technological and entrepreneurial support to companies and is 
seeking to expand its scope with international collaboration. 
Currently, 23 start-up companies are doing business at the MT in 
the software, automotive, food processing, alternative energy 
and healthcare sectors.  IBM and the United Nations Development 
Program have collaborated with MT and other local partners to 
contribute to its key mission:  to expand economic 
opportunities, increase access to educational resources and find 
sustainable solutions to environmental issues.  In late 2008, a 
visiting Chinese delegation signed a goodwill agreement with the 
MT for expanded ties, and a group of Turkish entrepreneurs 
reciprocated with a trip to China.  MT management desires 
American partnerships as well. 
 
TRUCKING COMPANIES IN HATAY FEELING ECONOMIC PINCH 
 
Shrinking demand, an excessive number of trucking companies, and 
the low cost of sending freight by sea or rail have affected the 
bottom line of ground transportation businesses.  One such 
company owner, Suleyman Ustun, said his company has been badly 
affected by the global crisis, with a 50 percent decrease in his 
2009 business.  Ustun said the lifting of the visa regime 
between Turkey and Syria would not affect the trucking sector, 
but welcomed the recent reduction of some costs such as the 160 
USD border-crossing fee levied on drivers every six months. 
DARNELL