09ADDISABABA1824
STAFFDEL PERKINS
Thu Jul 30 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Addis Ababa
VZCZCXYZ0026
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDS #1824/01 2111145
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 301145Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY ADDIS ABABA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5692
INFO RUEHNR/AMEMBASSY NAIROBI 3996
RUEHFT/AMCONSUL FRANKFURT 4229UNCLAS ADDIS ABABA 001824 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OREP AMGT ASEC AFIN AF OTRA ET
SUBJECT: STAFFDEL PERKINS 
 
REF: STATE 76939 
 
 ¶1. Embassy Addis Ababa welcomes Mr. Alexander Perkins, 
Majority Trade Counsel, and Ms. Angela Ellard, Minority Trade 
Counsel to Ethiopia August 6-9, 2009.  For the latest travel 
advisories consult the Department of State website at 
http://travel.state.gov.  The purpose of travel is to hold 
AGOA-related meetings in Ethiopia.  Hotel reservations have 
been made at the Sheraton: Taitu Street, Addis Ababa, 
Ethiopia, Telephone 251-11-517-1717, Fax 251-00-517-2727, 
Confirmation numbers: Perkins 726853478, Ellard 736853478. 
The daily rate is $254.26 including tax and service but no 
breakfast.  One night will be charged if there is a 
cancellation. 
 
¶2.  Please be advised that effective immediately, all 
visitors must clearly state the purpose of their visit and 
the areas to be visited, as well as to check in with post 
upon arrival or the appropriate designated Embassy contact. 
Visitors who alter their travel plans or focus of their visit 
without informing the Embassy, particularly travel to 
unauthorized, unsafe or "off limit" areas, or send reports on 
Ethiopia operations without clearing such messages with the 
Embassy will be denied future clearances.  The sponsoring 
office of the visitor could also face future restrictions on 
country clearance requests for their travelers to Ethiopia. 
This policy is being implemented to ensure that all visitors 
follow strictly appropriate safety and security measures, 
especially avoiding travel to unsafe areas, and also as a 
result of visitors disregarding Embassy clearance procedures 
and conditions under which Chief of Mission authority is 
granted. 
 
¶3.  Control officer: Kary Hintz-Tate, Economic Officer; cell 
phone: 251(0)91 151-1685, office telephone number: 251(0)11 
517-4112; Email hintz-tatek@state.gov.  The mission duty 
officer can be reached at 251(0)11 517-4000, cell phone 
251(0)91 121-3437 or after hours at 251(0)11 517-4313. The 
Embassy pouch address is 2030 Addis Ababa Place, Washington, 
DC 20521-2030.  The Embassy operating hours are Monday to 
Thursday from 7:45 a.m. to 5:30 p.m.  On Fridays, from 7:45 
a.m. to 11:45 a.m. 
 
¶4. Entry Requirements: Post strongly recommends that 
Business/Tourist visas be obtained at the closest Ethiopian 
embassy to the traveler's point of origin.  If that is not 
possible, for persons traveling on an ordinary U.S. passport, 
a business visa valid for five days only if he/she has a 
relevant document can be obtained only at Bole International 
Airport for USD 20.00.  A Tourist visa can be given for one 
month only.  A person traveling on a diplomatic passport can 
obtain an entry visa free of charge. Passengers should be 
aware that, if they elect to obtain an entry visa at the 
airport, they may be delayed by as much as one or two hours. 
Be sure to have exact change in U.S. dollars to pay for the 
visa, as change for larger bills is virtually impossible to 
find at the visa counter and efforts to obtain change from 
airport banks may result in even longer delays. 
 
¶5.  If a traveler is coming from or has recently visited 
countries where yellow fever, cholera or influenza is 
endemic, immunization records documenting yellow fever and/or 
cholera vaccination may be required to enter the country. 
Travelers coming directly from the U.S. or Europe are 
generally not asked for such documentation. Recommended 
vaccinations include: tetanus, hepatitis A, hepatitis B, 
typhoid, meningitis, poliomyelitis and, for high-risk groups, 
rabies. 
 
¶6.  Visitors should confirm onward flight reservations at 
least 72 (seventy-two) hours prior to departure to reduce the 
possibility of cancellation.  Please note that many airlines 
operating in Ethiopia cancel reservations that have not been 
confirmed and will often refuse to reinstate them at the time 
of scheduled departure. 
 
¶7.  Money: Credit cards are not accepted at most hotels, 
except for the Sheraton and the Hilton and are not accepted 
at any local restaurants, shops or other facilities. 
Foreigners are required to pay for car rentals in hard 
currency.  There are very few ATMs in Ethiopia.  Guests and 
visitors at the Sheraton Addis Hotel can obtain up to USD 
500.00 per day using a Visa credit card that has a cash 
advance facility.  Cash for per diem expenses will be 
provided to Mr. Perkins and Ms. Ellard upon their arrival in 
Addis Ababa. 
 
¶8.  Currency regulations: Currency declarations are required 
on entry to Ethiopia, and travelers may be asked by customs 
officials to show the amount of currency they have.  It is 
illegal to buy or sell foreign currency except at banks, or 
licensed hotels.  It is also against the law to pay for 
purchases with foreign currency.  If you wish to pay your 
hotel bill in cash, you must exchange the hard currency at a 
legal exchange point and present the receipt to the hotel at 
time of payment. 
 
¶9.  Health: Medical facilities in Ethiopia generally do not 
meet international standards.  Very basic care is available 
at some private hospitals in Addis Ababa (and through the 
Embassy Health Unit for authorized users).  Because of its 
altitude (7,000-8,000 feet above sea level), travel to Addis 
Ababa is not recommended for those with pulmonary/heart 
conditions.  This includes individuals suffering from 
bronchial asthma, angina pectoris, previous myocardial 
infarction, emphysema, congestive heart failure or sleep 
apnea.  Individuals with sickle cell anemia should carefully 
consider the altitude of this post before traveling here. 
Dehydration is a common problem and travelers should ensure 
that they drink plenty of clean, bottled water, which is 
widely available in shops or restaurants (NOTE: Do not accept 
a bottle that is unsealed.).  Many pharmacies in Addis Ababa 
are reasonably well stocked, but medications are not always 
standard and may not even be genuine.  Travelers should bring 
sufficient supplies of any medications they might need while 
in country.  Post policy is to stabilize those requiring 
acute care and to evacuate them immediately.  All travelers 
are advised to closely adhere to the following guidelines: 
 
¶A.  Short-term (TDY) assignments carry an added risk because 
of the lack of time for acclimatization. Dehydration and 
stress from exercise or illness compound the basic risks of 
high altitude.  For more information, contact your health 
unit or the medical clearances section of the Office of 
Medical Services. 
 
¶B.  Bring sufficient supplies of all chronic and emergency 
medications. 
 
¶C.  Only personnel covered under the State Department's 
medical program, and with a valid medical clearance for Addis 
Ababa, are eligible for medevac at USG cost.  All other 
visitors are required to have in their possession 
documentation of currently valid medical evacuation insurance 
sufficient to ensure evacuation by chartered air ambulance, 
or ensure that their agency will cover the cost. 
 
¶D.  Malaria prophylaxis is not needed in Addis Ababa, but is 
needed should travel be extended to lowland malarial areas 
outside Addis Ababa.  Medical facilities are not generally 
adequate to care for complications due to malaria 
Chloroquine-resistant malaria is present at lower elevations 
of Ethiopia.  In these areas, malaria prophylaxis containing 
mefloquine, doxycycline or atovaquone with proguanil, 
together with exposure prevention techniques (use of mosquito 
repellent, long-sleeve shirts and long trousers, mosquito 
nets, etc.) are essential. 
 
¶10. Weather: Addis Ababa experiences two rainy seasons light 
rains from February through April, and heavy rains from June 
through September.  The average daytime temperature in Addis 
Ababa is between 75 and 80 degrees Fahrenheit.  Nighttime 
temperatures can range from the upper 30's to the low 60's 
depending upon the time of year.  Business dress in Addis 
Ababa tends to be fairly formal, with jackets and ties for 
men and skirts or pant-suits standard for women. Travelers 
should bring a medium weight sweater or jacket for evenings, 
when the temperature drops as soon as the sun sets. Because 
of the altitude, the sun in Addis Ababa is quite intense, and 
travelers should carry and use a strong sun block. 
 
¶11.  Electronic equipment: Items for personal use (short-wave 
radio, laptop computer, still camera, video camera) can be 
brought into Ethiopia.  Generally such items must be declared 
on arrival, when a customs officer will list these items in 
the traveler's passport. Customs officials may then check on 
departure to insure that these items are being taken out of 
the country again.  CD players, commercial quality camera 
equipment, video or DVD players or other work-related 
electronic equipment or tools may be difficult to bring into 
the country and may be impounded by customs officials at the 
airport.  Travelers who intend to bring such equipment into 
Ethiopia should provide the Embassy or USAID complete details 
(e.g., type of equipment, number being imported, make(s), 
model(s) and serial number(s)) at least 24 hours prior to 
their arrival so that appropriate arrangements can be made 
for bringing it into Ethiopia. 
 
¶12.  Security: The Department of State urges U.S. citizens to 
consider deferring travel to northern Tigray (bordering 
Eritrea) and regions bordering Somalia due to security 
concerns.  In the northern part of the country, the 
Ethiopian-Eritrean conflict could rekindle without warning 
and significantly affect the border region between both 
countries.  Transportation to this area has been disrupted on 
occasion, limiting the U.S. government's ability to assist 
its citizens.  Travel to the Ogaden Region has also been 
severely restricted due to recent attacks and all official 
USG employees must obtain special permission before traveling 
to this region.  Other areas of Ethiopia, particularly in 
border areas, are subject to periodic instability, and 
visitors planning to travel outside of Addis Ababa should 
consult the Consular Information Sheet and check with the 
Regional Security Officer for the most up-to-date security 
information before beginning travel. 
 
¶13. Crime: Pick-pocketing and other petty crimes are 
prevalent in urban areas.  There are occasional reports of 
thieves snatching jewelry.  Visitors should exercise normal 
caution and not carry large sums of money or wear excessive 
jewelry on their persons. Visitors should carry wallets and 
other valuables where they will not be susceptible to 
pickpockets.  Walking in Addis Ababa after dusk is not safe. 
Night driving is strongly discouraged outside of major urban 
areas.  Armed banditry can occur on roads outside major towns 
or cities and may be accompanied by violence. 
 
¶14. The loss or theft of a U.S. passport should be reported 
immediately to the U.S. Embassy located on Entoto Road and to 
the local police.  It is advisable  to leave passports, plane 
tickets and valuables in a hotel safe.  Visitors, however, 
will be asked to show passports or other official 
identification when entering the U.S. Embassy compound. 
 
¶15. Photography:  Ethiopians are very sensitive about 
photography. It is strictly prohibited to photograph military 
installations, police or military personnel, industrial 
facilities, government buildings, and infrastructure 
facilities (roads, bridges, ports, airfields, etc.). 
Confiscation of film or camera or even arrest may result. 
Tourist photography, on the other hand, is encouraged.  A 
good rule of thumb: If there is any doubt about whether the 
photograph should be taken, don't take it. 
MALAC