09AITTAIPEI337
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS, U.S.-CHINA
Wed Mar 25 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0007
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0337/01 0840842
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 250842Z MAR 09
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1207
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 9050
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0491UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000337 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS, U.S.-CHINA 
NAVAL CONFRONTATION 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused March 
25 news coverage on Taiwan's economic prospects; on the 
controversies surrounding the anti-Taiwan remarks by a former 
Toronto-based Government Information Office official; and on the 
ongoing investigation into former President Chen Shui-bian and his 
family's legal cases.  In terms of editorials and commentaries, an 
editorial in the mass-circulation "Apple Daily" discussed China's 
plan to build its own aircraft carriers.  The article said the move 
has little significance for Taiwan, as without the United States' 
support, Taiwan's military is no match for its Chinese counterpart 
in any way.  An editorial in the pro-independence, English-language 
"Taipei Times" criticized recent remarks by U.S. Representative Eni 
Faleomavaega, which the paper believes "would attempt to weaken 
application of the Taiwan Relations Act" and "hearten Beijing."  A 
column in the conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China 
Post" continued to discuss the recent naval confrontation between 
the United States and China in the South China Sea and follow-on 
developments.  The article said "China is backing down in its 
confrontation with the United States while strengthening its 
position vis-a-vis the smaller countries of the region."  End 
summary. 
 
¶2. U.S.-China-Taiwan Relations 
 
A) "China's Aircraft Carriers Have Little Significance to Taiwan" 
 
The mass-circulation "Apple Daily" [circulation: 520,000] 
editorialized (3/25): 
 
"... Building aircraft carriers is an inevitable [development] for 
China during its rising process.  Taiwan is not the one among 
China's neighboring countries that is most concerned [about such a 
development], because even though [Chinese] aircraft carriers will 
likely conduct an upside-down combat [tactics] by reversing 
[Taiwan's] eastern coast into the frontline, making the island 
vulnerable on all sides and leaving it with no rearguard, China 
actually does not need aircraft carriers in order to invade Taiwan. 
India will be the first country that will perceive the threat posed 
by [Chinese] aircraft carriers, following by Japan and the United 
States.  It is generally estimated [and agreed] among experts that 
the purpose for China to build a blue-water navy is to control the 
lifeline of resources from the Indian Ocean to the Pacific. 
Whichever country gains control over the Indian Ocean will be able 
to control the sea routes for oil and precious metal. ... 
 
"China's plan to build its own aircraft carriers does not indicate 
that it wants to wage war, but the move will certainly be able to 
deter [other nations], inspire awe and fulfill China's domestic 
psychological needs. ...  For Taiwan's security, China's building 
aircraft carriers carries little significance.  Given the 
muddle-headedness of the Taiwan military, it is no match for [the 
Chinese military] in any way without the United States' support.  It 
really does not matter whether [Taiwan's soldiers] are killed by 
knives or by cannons." 
 
B) "Faleomavaega:  No Friend of Taiwan" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] editorialized (3/25): 
 
"On Thursday, US Representative Eni Faleomavaega was again a wrench 
in the US' efforts to support Taiwan - this time ahead of the 30th 
anniversary of the most important piece of US legislation concerning 
Taiwan, the Taiwan Relations Act (TRA). ...  It was not the first 
time his actions have belied his professed stance on Taiwan and the 
spirit of the TRA.  The resolution amended last week was proposed by 
18 representatives voicing staunch support for the content of the 
TRA and for Taiwan, but Faleomavaega took issue with the strength of 
the wording, making changes that would attempt to weaken application 
of the TRA. ...  Last March, Faleomavaega even said that the US 
should not support Taiwan's referendums on bidding for UN membership 
because of the US' 'position on one country, two systems.' This 
revealed shocking ignorance of the US stance on Taiwan from someone 
who is in a position to frustrate House efforts such as the TRA 
anniversary resolution. More disturbingly, it sounded like the 
rambling of an official from Beijing." 
 
¶3. U.S.-China Naval Confrontation 
 
Columnist Frank Ching wrote in the conservative, pro-unification, 
English-language "China Post" [circulation: 30,000] (3/25): 
 
"With the first meeting between U.S. President Barack Obama and 
Chinese President Hu Jintao scheduled to take place in London next 
week, China has backed down, temporarily at least, in its dispute 
with the United States on whether American navy ships require 
Chinese permission before conducting activities in the South China 
Sea. ...  From the variety of Chinese ships deployed -- a naval 
NAVAL CONFRONTATION 
 
ship, a fisheries patrol vessel, an oceanographic administration 
patrol vessel and two trawlers -- it seems that the operation was 
coordinated at high levels of the government. ... 
 
"Not surprisingly, some countries in Southeast Asia feel that China 
is flexing its muscles. However, the fact that China is dispatching 
fisheries patrol bats rather than its navy indicates that Beijing 
is attempting to appear less threatening.  Nonetheless, it would not 
escape the notice of Southeast Asian countries that China is backing 
down in its confrontation with the United States while strengthening 
its position vis-a-vis the smaller countries of the region." 
 
YOUNG