09BAGHDAD2701
PROGRESS IN THE CULTURAL COOPERATION OF THE STRATEGIC
Wed Oct 07 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXYZ0003
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHGB #2701/01 2801205
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 071205Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4983UNCLAS BAGHDAD 002701 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SCUL KPAO OEXC PGOV PREL IZ
SUBJECT: PROGRESS IN THE CULTURAL COOPERATION OF THE STRATEGIC 
FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT 
 
1.Summary: In support of Section IV (Cultural, Educational and 
Scientific Cooperation) of the Strategic Framework Agreement (SFA), 
the Public Affairs Section (PAS) has been working to meet key 
objectives.  The following paragraphs highlight recent progress 
including the International Visitor Leader Program (IVLP), a pilot 
Fulbright program for Iraqi scholars, youth and academic exchanges, 
new student advising and English language teaching programs, and the 
Iraq Education Initiative.  End summary. 
 
¶2. IVLP: Mission Baghdad has the largest IVLP in the world.  One 
hundred forty-five Iraqis participated in the IVLP and twenty-two 
Iraqis participated in the Voluntary Visitors (VolVis) program in 
FY09.  It is projected that up to 170 Iraqis will participate in the 
IVLP in FY10.  The IVLP and the Volvis are excellent avenues to 
strengthen the development of Iraq's future leaders, especially in 
the themes most important to our Mission Strategic Plan (MSP) and 
the SFA. 
¶3. Fulbright Student Program and Humphrey: The June 10, 2009 GoI 
announcement that it would match the USG's contribution to the 
Fulbright Student program dollar for dollar (a $2.5 million 
contribution from the GoI for the 2010 Fulbright program) has 
doubled the size of the program from 35 to 70 Iraqi grantees, making 
it the largest Fulbright program in the region.  We also anticipate 
sending nine Iraqis as Humphrey fellows in 2010. 
 
¶4. Fulbright Scholar Program: ECA and PAS Baghdad are setting up the 
first summer Fulbright Scholar program in NEA.  We anticipate that 
25 Iraqi Scholars will go to five U.S. universities for the ten-week 
program in summer 2010.  This will be an excellent way to establish 
linkages between U.S. and Iraqi scholars and institutions while 
preventing Iraqi brain drain, an important concern for the GoI and 
the USG. 
 
¶5. Other Exchanges: PAS Baghdad manages the Iraq Youth Leaders 
Exchange Program (IYLEP) that sends over 200 Iraqi high school and 
university students to the U.S. during the summer to work on 
leadership development, conflict resolution and teambuilding.  This 
program provides opportunities for interaction with Americans of all 
ages and backgrounds through camp attendance, family home stays and 
community service.  Iraqis also participate in the regional MEPI 
Student Leaders and Tomorrow's Leaders programs, and the Women2Women 
leadership program.  Each year, a group of young Iraqi athletes 
travels to the U.S. for sports-related training.   Four Iraqi 
schools will partner with American schools through the Global 
Connections and Exchange program to improve the application of 
information technology and online resource development.  As part of 
the Iraq Cultural Heritage Project (ICHP), twelve Iraqi 
archaeologists and conservators are benefiting from a six-month 
workshop at the Chicago Field Museum to enhance their artifact 
conservation techniques.  Moreover, the USG has provided funding 
support for the Future of Babylon Project where experts from the 
World Monuments Fund and the Iraq State Board of Antiquities and 
Heritage are collaborating to develop a site management and 
conservation plan for the ancient site of Babylon. 
 
¶6. Iraqi Education Initiative (IEI):  On July 25, 2009, Iraqi Prime 
Minister Al-Maliki announced the launch of the IEI during his trip 
to Washington.  This historical initiative, if fully implemented, 
would send up to 50,000 Iraqi students over the next 5 years for 
higher education in four Anglophone countries: the U.S., the U.K., 
Australia and Canada.  It is expected that up the majority of these 
students would study in the U.S.  The first group of Iraqi students 
Qstudents would study in the U.S.  The first group of Iraqi students 
is expected to arrive in the U.S. in early 2010.  The short and long 
term benefits of this initiative to the bilateral relationship are 
tremendous. 
 
¶7. English Language Programs: In addition to launching the ACCESS 
program in Iraq and to continuing the successful English online 
training for Iraqi teachers, PAS Baghdad is expanding English 
teaching programs in FY10 with two new pilot programs.  A nationwide 
"Train the Trainers" program will provide Iraqi teachers, students 
and supervisors modern and effective methods to teach ESL.  The 
pilot program at Baghdad University will focus on EST training for 
secondary and post secondary English teachers at both the College of 
Education and the Women's College of Education. 
 
¶8. Educational Advising: PAS Baghdad has awarded a grant to train 
about 200 Iraqi student advisors.  Training sessions occurred in 
Erbil (Sep. 27 - Oct. 1), will soon take place in Baghdad (Oct. 
10-13) and possibly in other cities as determined with GoI 
officials.  The advisors come from academic communities throughout 
Iraq (university professors and administrators), are GoI officials 
and members of NGOs.  They all share an interest in providing 
well-qualified Iraqi students with the guidance and tools necessary 
to embark on successful study programs in the U.S.  PAS Baghdad is 
also engaging with University Presidents and senior education 
officials in order to initiate enduring and meaningful university 
linkages between Iraqi and U.S. universities. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Comment: We continue to urge the GoI to appoint an Iraqi 
co-chair for the Joint Coordination Committee (JCC) on Cultural, 
Educational and Scientific Cooperation.  Meanwhile, PAS Baghdad will 
continue to carry out programs under Section IV of the SFA and 
 
provide periodic activity updates to the Department.  End comment. 
 
 
HILL