09BRASILIA278
OPPORTUNITIES FOR LAW ENFORCEMENT PARTNERSHIPS IN BRAZIL
Tue Mar 10 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Brasilia
VZCZCXRO5239
RR RUEHRG
DE RUEHBR #0278/01 0691441
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 101441Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3733
INFO RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULO 3669
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO 7381
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE 9190
RUEHLP/AMEMBASSY LA PAZ 6841UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BRASILIA 000278 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR INL A/S JOHNSON, WHA A/S SHANNON 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: SNAR BR ASEC KCRM
SUBJECT:  OPPORTUNITIES FOR LAW ENFORCEMENT PARTNERSHIPS IN BRAZIL 
¶1. SUMMARY.   Public security is Brazil's top social concern, making 
Brazil an increasingly eager partner for the United States on law 
enforcement matters.  The year ahead will present even more 
 
significant law enforcement challenges and opportunities for South 
America's dominant country.  The flow of illicit drugs through 
Brazil from neighboring source countries continues to increase, 
making Brazil a major transit country and the second largest 
consumer of cocaine in the world.  Organized crime essentially 
controls the urban shanty towns (favelas) of Brazil's major cities, 
home to millions of Brazil's urban poor.  Urban gangs operating from 
difficult-to-police shanty towns corrupt Brazilian judicial and 
penal systems, undermine the nation's social services, are involved 
in the growing drug traffic from Bolivia, and are increasingly 
networked with international organized crime.  Mission Brazil has 
competent and willing law enforcement partners within Brazilian 
federal, state, and municipal governments.  We are already seizing 
the opportunity to partner with diverse Brazilian law enforcement 
entities in fighting the growing transnational threats arising in 
Brazil.  The Mission-wide Projeto PONTES aimed at enhancing law 
enforcement cooperation has been received enthusiastically by both 
federal law enforcement officials and state and municipal officials 
from the governors and mayors down, demonstrating the potential for 
cooperation on these issues. INL and NAS Brasilia are cornerstones 
for this emerging law enforcement partnership, but NAS Brasilia will 
require a large increase in funding to take full of advantage of the 
opportunities being created.  End summary.  END SUMMARY 
 
 
EMERGING BRAZIL 
¶2.  Brazil, already the dominant country of South America, is 
transitioning from a regional leader to a global power.  Given its 
support of democratic institutions and support of free market 
policies, Brazil has the potential to be the best and most stable of 
the "BRICs."  However, public security matters are an increasing 
threat.  As we pursue partnerships across a wide range of mutual 
interests, there is no issue of greater concern for U.S. national 
interests than public security and law enforcement. 
ILLICIT DRUG FLOW TO BRAZIL AND BEYOND 
¶3.  Brazil is a major transit country for illicit drugs from 
neighboring source countries destined for Europe and, to a lesser 
extent, the U.S.  Brazil is also the second largest consumer of 
cocaine in the world, after the U.S.  Due to the vastness of 
Brazil's borders and the lack of resources, Brazilian law 
enforcement is reliant on intelligence-driven joint operations, 
often in partnership with neighboring countries, in an attempt to 
control the smuggling of drugs into and through Brazil.  With U.S. 
assistance, the Departamento de Policia Federal (DPF) has focused 
greater attention on shipping points, such as air and sea ports, but 
much more could be done.  Brazil shares a 2,130 mile border with 
Bolivia that is extremely difficult to police.  The flow of cocaine 
across this border has increased drastically over the past three 
years.  With the Government of Bolivia's recent expulsion of the 
DEA, Bolivian narcotics production will increase, as will drug 
traffic into Brazil.  Recent information suggests that some of these 
narcotics are destined for the United States. 
¶4.  DEA-trained and NAS-funded Special Investigative Units (SIU) and 
Airport Interdiction Teams have made large drug seizures in Brazil 
and have dismantled three international narco-trafficking 
organizations that were responsible for cocaine and heroin flow to 
the United States.  With additional resources, these programs could 
become even more successful.  Additional SIUs could be established 
throughout Brazil, with a priority placed on border areas and the 
growing Northeast.  International flights from Brazil increased 
dramatically in the last year.  Direct commercial routes to Africa, 
Europe, and the United States (including on American carriers Delta, 
United, and American) were established from Brazil's north and 
northeastern cities of Recife, Salvador, Fortaleza, and Manaus and 
will be established to Brasilia in the coming year. Drug trafficking 
trends are changing with the increased flights.  Additional Airport 
Interdiction teams should be set up in at least twelve additional 
Brazilian airports. 
ORGANIZED CRIME IN BRAZIL'S MAJOR CITIES 
¶5.  Urban gangs, notably Sao Paulo's First Command of the Capital 
(PCC), Rio de Janeiro's Red Command (CV), and the Friends of Friends 
gang are increasingly involved in narcotics and weapons trafficking. 
 They are present at key border points and cities such as Santa 
Cruz, Bolivia.  They have links to international drug organizations 
in Bolivia and Paraguay, possibly including links to Colombian and 
Mexican traffickers known to be operating in Bolivia.  The DPF have 
recently warned the Portuguese federal police that there may be a 
PCC cell operating in Portugal. 
¶6.  The PCC operates openly inside Brazilian prisons and is capable 
of generating major waves of violence in Brazilian society.  The 
PCC's various criminal activities include the 2005 theft of 160 
million dollars from the Central Bank in Fortaleza, extensive prison 
riots, and a powerful wave of violence that peaked in the streets of 
Sao Paulo when a high echelon PCC commander and drug trafficker was 
arrested and placed in solitary confinement.  The first targets of 
the street violence were off-duty police officers who were 
 
BRASILIA 00000278  002 OF 003 
 
¶1. SUMMARY.   Public security is Brazil's top social concern, making 
Brazil an increasingly eager partner for the United States on law 
enforcement matters.  The year ahead will present even more 
significant law enforcement challenges and opportunities for South 
America's dominant country.  The flow of illicit drugs through 
Brazil from neighboring source countries continues to increase, 
making Brazil a major transit country and the second largest 
consumer of cocaine in the world.  Organized crime essentially 
controls the urban shanty towns (favelas) of Brazil's major cities, 
home to millions of Brazil's urban poor.  Urban gangs operating from 
difficult-to-police shanty towns corrupt Brazilian judicial and 
penal systems, undermine the nation's social services, are involved 
in the growing drug traffic from Bolivia, and are increasingly 
networked with international organized crime.  Mission Brazil has 
competent and willing law enforcement partners within Brazilian 
federal, state, and municipal governments.  We are already seizing 
the opportunity to partner with diverse Brazilian law enforcement 
entities in fighting the growing transnational threats arising in 
Brazil.  The Mission-wide Projeto PONTES aimed at enhancing law 
enforcement cooperation has been received enthusiastically by both 
federal law enforcement officials and state and municipal officials 
from the governors and mayors down, demonstrating the potential for 
cooperation on these issues. INL and NAS Brasilia are cornerstones 
for this emerging law enforcement partnership, but NAS Brasilia will 
require a large increase in funding to take full of advantage of the 
opportunities being created.  End summary.  END SUMMARY 
 
assassinated very openly on public transportation. 
¶7.  Sao Paulo and Rio de Janeiro are the two most populous cities of 
South America and Belo Horizonte is a growing metropolis.  The 
Northeast of Brazil is a huge, populous area with a per capita gross 
domestic product lower than Bolivia's.  Thirty-five million people 
live in poverty in the region, including in its major cities of 
Recife, Fortaleza, and Salvador.  (Brasilia has a much smaller 
population.  However, Brazil's planned capital is an important and 
symbolic city to the Brazilian psyche.)  All of these cities, to 
varying degrees, are plagued by violent, often drug-related, crime. 
LAW ENFORCEMENT PARTNERSHIPS 
¶8.  NAS, DEA and all the members of Mission Brazil's Law Enforcement 
Working Group have historically, and successfully, partnered with 
Brazil's Federal Police (DPF) and other Brazilian federal 
institutions on narcotics and law enforcement issues.  While the 
federal authorities will remain the key and most reliable law 
enforcement partners for the USG, we have been expanding our law 
enforcement partnerships to include state and municipal governments 
where appropriate, particularly in the aforementioned major cities 
of Brazil.  State and city police, public security officials, 
judges, and prosecutors have all shown great interest in USG law 
enforcement partnerships and training opportunities. 
¶9.  Most recently, the RLA-programmed, NAS-funded, Projeto PONTES 
got off to a very successful start in Brasilia, Rio, Sao Paulo, and 
Recife.  PONTES is a series of seminars on law enforcement topics 
chosen by Embassy Brasilia's LEWG that will be offered to federal, 
state, municipal, and military law enforcement officers, 
prosecutors, judges, and public security officials in four major 
cities (Rio, Sao Paulo, Recife, and Brasilia.)  The first of these 
seminars, on Combating Cyber Crime, was attended by approximately 
700 Brazilian officials.  Future seminars will address Child 
Pornography/Crimes Against Children, Witness and Court Security, 
Gangs, and Using DNA Evidence.  Projeto PONTES has been received 
enthusiastically by both federal law enforcement officials and state 
and municipal officials from the governors and mayors down. 
THE ROAD AHEAD 
¶10.  The success of the first PONTES seminar is a good indication of 
the willingness of multi-jurisdictional Brazilian law enforcement 
entities to partner with the United States in addressing issues of 
public security.  With additional resources, Mission Brazil could 
continue to create a broader net of law enforcement partnerships to 
help Brazil confront its growing transnational criminal threats. 
These might include increased partnerships in port and airport 
security, additional SIU units focused in Brazil's borders with 
narcotic producing countries, increased multi-jurisdictional 
partnerships in Brazil's major cities to address urban organized 
crime, and increased law enforcement training at all levels. 
¶11.  INL and NAS Brasilia are cornerstones for this important 
emerging law enforcement partnership.  The GOB signed a Narcotics 
Control and Law Enforcement Letter of Agreement (LOA) with the U.S. 
in August 2008.  The LOA established seven distinct joint law 
enforcement projects (Law Enforcement Training, Special 
Investigation Units, Airport Interdiction, Canine Program, Urban 
Crime Control, Drug Prevention, and Money Laundering.)  With the LOA 
signed, NAS Brasilia has established all seven programs and has 
plans to obligate all "pipeline", FY 2006, and FY 2007 funds in a 
span of two years.  However, current planning will decrease NAS 
Brasilia's budget to between $200,000 and $300,000 annually for FY 
2008, 2009, and 2010.  NAS Brasilia will require a large increase in 
funding to take full of advantage of the opportunities created by 
the emerging U.S. / Brazil law enforcement and public security 
partnership.  Mission Brazil has requested $6 million for NAS in the 
 
BRASILIA 00000278  003 OF 003 
 
¶1. SUMMARY.   Public security is Brazil's top social concern, making 
Brazil an increasingly eager partner for the United States on law 
enforcement matters.  The year ahead will present even more 
significant law enforcement challenges and opportunities for South 
America's dominant country.  The flow of illicit drugs through 
Brazil from neighboring source countries continues to increase, 
making Brazil a major transit country and the second largest 
consumer of cocaine in the world.  Organized crime essentially 
controls the urban shanty towns (favelas) of Brazil's major cities, 
home to millions of Brazil's urban poor.  Urban gangs operating from 
difficult-to-police shanty towns corrupt Brazilian judicial and 
penal systems, undermine the nation's social services, are involved 
in the growing drug traffic from Bolivia, and are increasingly 
networked with international organized crime.  Mission Brazil has 
competent and willing law enforcement partners within Brazilian 
federal, state, and municipal governments.  We are already seizing 
the opportunity to partner with diverse Brazilian law enforcement 
entities in fighting the growing transnational threats arising in 
Brazil.  The Mission-wide Projeto PONTES aimed at enhancing law 
enforcement cooperation has been received enthusiastically by both 
federal law enforcement officials and state and municipal officials 
from the governors and mayors down, demonstrating the potential for 
cooperation on these issues. INL and NAS Brasilia are cornerstones 
for this emerging law enforcement partnership, but NAS Brasilia will 
require a large increase in funding to take full of advantage of the 
opportunities being created.  End summary.  END SUMMARY 
 
2011 Mission Strategic Plan (MSP) and believes that we will require 
a similar annual amount as we move forward in building and 
maintaining effective law enforcement and public security 
partnerships with Brazil. 
KUBISKE