09JERUSALEM1804
FRAUD SUMMARY -- JERUSALEM
Tue Oct 13 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Jerusalem
VZCZCXRO8357
PP RUEHROV
DE RUEHJM #1804/01 2860937
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 130937Z OCT 09
FM AMCONSUL JERUSALEM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6275
RUEHPNH/NVC PORTSMOUTH NH
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE
RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0005
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME 4631
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RHMCSUU/FBI WASHINGTON DC
RUEAHLC/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHDC
RUEPWJF/HQ BICE WASHINGTON DC
RUEPINS/HQ BICE INTEL WASHINGTON DC
RUEPICA/USCIS WASHINGTON DC
RUEPICB/USCIS FDNS WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 JERUSALEM 001804 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR CA/FPP AND NEA/IPA 
DEPT ALSO PASS TO KCC 
DHS FOR USCIS FDNS AND ICE FDLPOSTS FOR FRAUD PREVENTION MANAGERS 
ATHENS/ROME FOR DHS/ICE, DHS/CBP, AND DHS/CIS ATTACHES 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
 
TAGS: KFRD CVIS CPAS CMGT ASEC ECON KWBG IS XF
 
SUBJECT: FRAUD SUMMARY -- JERUSALEM 
 
REF:  (A) 08 Jerusalem 1954; (B) Tel Aviv 763; (C) 08 State 74840; 
(D) Jerusalem 592; (E) Jerusalem 1090 
 
Â¶1.  Semiannual fraud report for Consulate General Jerusalem follows, 
formatted per instructions in ref C. 
 
(A) COUNTRY CONDITIONS:  Jerusalem's consular district includes 
Jerusalem, the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. 
 
JERUSALEM:  Jerusalem's diverse population includes Palestinian 
residents of East Jerusalem (Jerusalem ID holders), secular 
Israelis, and a disproportionate percentage of ultra-orthodox Jewish 
Israelis compared to "Green Line" Israel.  Poverty rates are higher 
in Jerusalem than in the rest of Israel, and Palestinian residents 
are twice as likely to live in poverty as Israeli residents.  High 
birth rates and large families among Palestinians and ultra-orthodox 
Israelis underlie the poverty rate.  The quality of life in 
mostly-Israeli West Jerusalem differs markedly from 
mostly-Palestinian East Jerusalem, where limited access to municipal 
services, increasing social and economic isolation from the West 
Bank, home demolitions and higher unemployment foment frustration 
and anger. 
 
Israel proclaimed Jerusalem as its capital in 1950 (although that 
step has not been recognized by the United States), and 
approximately half of the workforce is employed in the public 
sector.  Tourism is another primary economic driver with more than 
1,000,000 tourists visiting Jerusalem annually.  The unemployment 
rate in Jerusalem is comparable to the rest of "Green Line" Israel 
(roughly nine percent), though the average wage is lower in 
Jerusalem.  A relatively low percentage of Jerusalem's working-age 
population participates in the work force (10 percent less than Tel 
Aviv, for example).  This is largely due to the high number of 
Jewish ultra-orthodox families, in which the men pursue religious 
studies full time and the women are rarely employed outside the 
home.  For these families, government welfare is the primary source 
of income.  The population of Jerusalem had been shrinking by a few 
thousand residents annually due to migration to other cities in 
Israel, but in the past year the population increased slightly. 
Jerusalem residents enjoy easy access to the Consulate General. 
 
WEST BANK:  West Bank living conditions are difficult compared to 
Jerusalem, with unemployment estimated at around 20 percent and 
roughly half of the population living below the poverty line.  Most 
fraud at post involves West Bank Palestinians, for whom challenging 
economic conditions, violence, restrictions on freedom of movement, 
and other negative effects of the Israeli occupation provide a 
motive for emigration.  The West Bank also hosts Israeli 
settlements, with an estimated population of over 275,000 Israelis. 
Violence between settlers and Palestinians in the West Bank occurs 
on a regular basis.  A significant number of these settlers are dual 
Israeli-American citizens. 
 
Access to consular services is limited for Palestinian West Bank 
residents, who must obtain a permit from Israeli authorities to 
enter Jerusalem.  Applying for a permit is time-consuming and 
permits are often denied.  Even an approved permit does not 
guarantee passage through checkpoints, where delays and difficulties 
are common.  Crossings from the West Bank to Israel and/or Jerusalem 
can be closed for extended periods, even to permit holders, due to 
Jewish holidays or other events.  Some West Bank residents seeking 
consular services enter Jerusalem illegally. 
 
GAZA:  Living conditions in the Gaza Strip, one of the most densely 
populated areas in the world, are extremely difficult. Hamas, a USG 
designated terrorist organization, seized power in a violent coup in 
2007 and maintains effective control of the territory.  Conditions 
progressively deteriorated, and in December 2008 after a significant 
increase in rocket and mortar attacks on Israeli communities in the 
north-west Negev which originated from Gaza, Israel launched a major 
bombing campaign, followed by a military incursion, that left 
thousands homeless and severely damaged infrastructure. Israeli 
restrictions on the import from Israel of all but basic humanitarian 
supplies have limited reconstruction and prevent normal economic 
activity.  Exports are almost entirely prohibited.  Most Gazans live 
 
JERUSALEM 00001804  002 OF 005 
 
 
below the poverty line and subsist on handouts from international 
aid agencies.  The incentive for Gazans to relocate is high. 
Israeli policy restricts virtually all travel in and out of Gaza, so 
almost no Gazans have access to consular services. 
 
(B) NIV Fraud: 
 
ISRAELIS: NIV fraud among Israelis is mainly committed by young 
adults under 30, often fresh out of the army, who travel to the 
United States to sell Dead Sea products in malls or to work 
illegally in Las Vegas (as well as elsewhere).  Fake army enlistment 
letters, employment letters or other documents are sometimes 
submitted to establish ties.  Post also sees occasional abuse of 
H1B, E and O visas. 
 
PALESTINIANS: Among Palestinians, the majority of fraud is carried 
out by men under the age of 45 and women under the age of 30, in 
part because unemployment rates are high in this demographic. 
Palestinian students (F1) and tourists (B1/B2 applicants) regularly 
submit fake bank documents and fraudulent high school test 
certificates.  Young single applicants submit fraudulent civil 
documents such as marriage certificates and birth certificates in an 
attempt to document false family ties.  Most fake documents are 
easily identifiable; many are poor-quality mockups created with a 
scanner and PC.  Referrals from post to the Palestinian police led 
to the arrest of a number of document vendors, and the Fraud 
Prevention Unit (FPU) continues to work with Palestinian police and 
prosecutors to stop the production of false documents. 
 
In the past, post aggressively pursued fraud involving fake bank and 
civil documents.  Post now only investigates applicants with 
sophisticated document packages that suggest the involvement of a 
document vendor, or have exact hits in CLASS that raise security 
concerns. Prioritizing has allowed post to focus on the most 
egregious NIV cases and complicated IV cases. 
 
(C) IV FRAUD:  Jerusalem handles all IVs for Israel, Jerusalem, the 
West Bank and Gaza.  Most cases in which post confirmed fraud 
involved sham marriages and sham divorces, but post regularly sees 
abuse of employment and diversity visas.  From March 2009 until 
September 2009, fraud was confirmed in 30 percent of the referred 
cases brought to resolution.  Continued success in countering fraud 
results directly from dedicating more resources to investigations, 
including the 2008 hiring of a Locally Engaged Staff Investigator 
(LESI).  Since security restrictions limit West Bank travel by 
official Americans, the addition of an LESI to conduct field 
investigations and expand contacts has made a tremendous impact. 
Seventy-five percent of IV cases in this period with confirmed fraud 
involved Palestinians. 
 
MARRIAGE FRAUD:  The most common fraud trend is Palestinian men who 
secure a tourist visa, and then abuse the Sharia'a courts to quickly 
divorce and then remarry their wives (sometimes the same day).  They 
then travel to the United States and marry an American, hiding the 
remarriage.  They then adjust to LPR status and then eventually 
naturalize. 
 
Post usually encounters and discovers this fraud at three common 
points: during review and investigation of IR2 stepchild cases (when 
the American wife is the petitioner); during NIV interviews of the 
Palestinian spouse (who often identifies herself as married on her 
NIV application); and during IR1 and IR2 applications benefiting the 
spouse and child after the now-petitioning husband's naturalization 
and divorce from his American wife. 
 
Post has been extremely successful in countering this fraud as 
result of developing a cooperative relationship with the Sharia'a 
courts in the West Bank.  Over the past year, post has sent for 
revocation all but one IR2 stepchild case after confirming that the 
father engaged in a bigamous marriage in the United States (and in 
the one remaining case, this fraud was evident but not confirmable). 
 Post has referred several cases to ICE through VO/L/A, in which the 
man has already naturalized, for consideration of denaturalization 
proceedings.  These cases remain pending. 
 
 
JERUSALEM 00001804  003 OF 005 
 
 
The best place to prevent this fraud is through 214(b) refusals on 
the NIV line.  However, many of these applicants appear otherwise 
well connected to their homes and families (as they have not yet 
engaged in the sham divorce when they seek an NIV) and thus are able 
to qualify for a tourist visa. 
 
The next best place to counter this fraud is at the time the man 
seeks adjustment through his marriage to the American citizen.  Post 
requests the Department encourage USCIS to seek post's assistance in 
verifying the validity of Sharia'a divorce certificates in any case 
that matches this pattern.  USCIS or other agencies can contact post 
with the subject's name, date of birth and local identification 
number at jerusalemfpu@state.gov.  Most West Bank and Jerusalem 
verifications can be completed within two weeks, to include Sharia'a 
court verification and Ministry of Interior family status 
registration. 
 
(D) DIVERSITY VISA FRAUD:  DV fraud at post typically involves fake 
educational certificates or questionable derivatives such as 
children not declared in the initial lottery entry.  Most DV 
applicants are African refugees or Israeli immigrants from Eastern 
Europe.  The rate of fraud is relatively low, with a handful of 
fraudulent cases out of the 350 or so processed each year. 
 
(E) ACS AND U.S. PASSPORT FRAUD: 
 
CRBA FRAUD:  Jerusalem is among the highest passport and CRBA 
issuing posts in the world.  The incentive for CRBA fraud is high, 
given the thousands of dollars at stake for families applying for 
cash benefits from the IRS, such as the earned income tax credit and 
child tax credit.  As evidence of the US physical presence required 
to transmit citizenship, CRBA applicants regularly submit 
questionable letters from U.S. Jewish religious schools (yeshivas) 
and rabbis.  To date, post has not identified a pattern of fraud 
originating from any specific yeshiva or rabbi.  In all CRBA cases, 
evidence of U.S. physical presence is reviewed thoroughly and 
corroborating evidence is required when yeshiva documents are the 
only proof provided. 
 
FALSE INFO ON CRBA APPLICATIONS TO CONCEAL PRIOR MARRIAGE FRAUD: 
Among Palestinian-Americans, there is an emerging trend of 
falsifying information in CRBA applications to hide prior, 
successful adjustment-through-marriage fraud that eventually 
resulted in naturalization. Such prior fraud is not readily apparent 
in routine passport applications because information on prior 
marriages and divorces is not part of the application. Post has not 
devoted significant resources to tracking this trend because ICE has 
indicated that the agency lacks resources to pursue 
denaturalization, except in cases involving criminal or terrorist 
activity. 
 
ACS ASSISTANCE: The FPU has acted as a liaison for the ACS  unit to 
Palestinian security and Ministry of Interior officials on numerous 
occasions.  In one case, FPU assisted with the emergency passport 
application of an abused American citizen who had previously 
petitioned for an IV for her husband.  The husband, who had been 
arrested for physically and sexually assaulting his American citizen 
wife, and was subsequently released from prison, had possession of 
her U.S. passport and was threatening her.  With the help of FPU and 
its contacts, the American was able to travel to Jerusalem to obtain 
a new passport and flee from her husband. 
 
(F) ADOPTION FRAUD:  None 
 
(G) USE OF DNA TESTING:  Post did not undertake any DNA testing 
since the last report.  DNA testing cannot be conducted in Israel 
without a Family Court order. 
 
(H) ASYLUM AND OTHER DHS BENEFIT FRAUD:  A significant portion of 
asylum follow-to-join cases show indications of fraud, such as the 
asylee claiming extended imprisonment, torture, etc., but family 
members profess no knowledge of any abuse, imprisonment or extended 
absences of the asylee.  Post identified one case where the asylum 
seeker in the United States was an active member of a USG-designated 
terrorist group in the West Bank.  Post receives a handful of 
 
JERUSALEM 00001804  004 OF 005 
 
 
requests each month from DHS offices requesting document 
verification.  Fraud is confirmed in a significant percentage of 
these cases.  Additional requests from USCIS are welcome. 
 
(I) ALIEN SMUGGLING, TRAFFICKING, ORGANIZED CRIME, TERRORIST 
TRAVEL: 
 
ALIEN SMUGGLING AND TRAFFICKING:  Post has not encountered any 
sophisticated trafficking rings.  Some families have effectively 
trafficked their entire extended family to the United States through 
marriage fraud over a period of decades.  Document vendors providing 
fake marriage and divorce certificates facilitate this trend. 
 
TERRORIST TRAVEL:  Marriage fraud and asylum fraud, because of their 
prevalence and the permanent status they confer, remain a 
significant vulnerability for terrorist travel to the United States. 
 Post regularly interviews both immigrant and non-immigrant visa 
applicants who are members of USG-designated terrorist 
organizations.  Post is often able to identify these ties despite 
clean police records and a lack of matching CLASS hits.  Other 
vulnerabilities are 1) the lack of access to bio-data of individuals 
arrested in the West Bank, and 2) inconsistencies in the length of 
time arrest information remains available through police records. 
 
Press reports indicate a high volume of individuals arrested in the 
West Bank for terrorist activity and affiliation with terrorist 
groups.  Due to the volume of such arrests, post has inadequate 
resources to track down sufficient bio-data to watchlist many 
individuals.  Occasionally, individuals are identified after the 
fact.  One example is an asylee in the United States who was later 
identified as an active member of Al Aqsa Martyrs Brigade with a 
long list of criminal offenses in the West Bank.  FPU uses contacts 
on multiple levels to assist in collecting bio-data for the Visa 
VIPER panel. 
 
Post occasionally has applicants who confess to terrorist or 
criminal activity, but produce clean police certificates.  Israeli 
police records are purged after seven to 10 years, and while 
security-related offenses are reportedly not purged, even these may 
be expunged upon request.  In one case, an individual who was 
sentenced to 20 years in an Israeli prison for planting a bomb at an 
Israeli bus station in 1979 produced a clean Israeli police 
certificate. 
 
The FPU is following up on cases of visa fraud involving the 
falsification of documents by travel agencies.  In particular, a 
travel agency in Ramallah was closed by the Palestinian police after 
FPU informed them the agency was producing fake appointment letters 
(stating that individuals had appointments at the Consulate 
General). 
 
(J) DS CRIMINAL FRAUD INVESTIGATIONS:  DS has an open investigation 
into a U.S.-based lawyer representing a significant portion of 
post's applicants engaged in marriage fraud. 
 
(K) HOST COUNTRY PASSPORT, IDENTITY DOCUMENTS AND CIVIL REGISTRY: 
 
The Palestinian Authority began issuing new passports with enhanced 
security features and five-year validity (vice three) on March 29, 
2009 (see reftel D).  The previous, three-year Palestinian passports 
are still in use and remain valid until they expire. 
Passport-issuing facilities in Gaza and an unknown number of blank 
passports were taken over by Hamas, a USG-designated terrorist 
organization, on June 2, 2008. In Ref A, post recommended that the 
Department not recognize passports issued in Gaza after that date as 
valid travel documents and update the reciprocity schedule 
accordingly. 
 
(L) COOPERATION WITH HOST GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES:  Post receives 
significant cooperation from Palestinian Authority officials, 
particularly civil police, prosecutors, Ministry of Education and 
Ministry of Interior officials.  One of the key ingredients to 
post's success in catching marriage fraud is the cooperation post 
receives from Sharia'a Court officials.  Police and prosecutor 
contacts are also extremely helpful and are pursuing cases against a 
 
JERUSALEM 00001804  005 OF 005 
 
 
number of document vendors facilitating illegitimate travel to the 
United States.  There is no contact with any government officials in 
Gaza, and post has limited ability to verify the validity of most 
documents from Gaza. 
 
(M) AREAS OF PARTICULAR CONCERN:  NO CONSEQUENCES FOR MARRIAGE 
FRAUD:  Post has been informed by USCIS and ICE that despite the 
confirmation of marriage fraud, resource constraints often prevent 
denaturalization or deportation unless the perpetrator is involved 
in separate criminal or terrorist activities. 
 
RESOURCES:  The FPU works closely with and has received excellent 
cooperation from the Fraud Prevention Units in both Amman and Tel 
Aviv, and has been able to verify a number of fraudulent documents 
issued in Israel, Jordan and the West Bank as a result. 
 
The FPU also receives a number of credible "poison pen" letters, 
often leading to the successful denial of NIV applications and 
revocation of IV applications.  For example, in one case a local 
resident informed post that her husband had traveled to the United 
States on a B1/B2 visa, and had married an American in order to 
adjust status, but had never divorced her.  FPU was able to confirm 
these facts and provide the information to USCIS and ICE for 
consideration of revocation of her husband's status in the United 
States. 
 
The consular section constantly generates leads related to passport 
and visa fraud, potential terrorist travel to the United States and 
other countries, wanted individuals, document vendors and smuggling, 
and other illegal activities.  These issues deserve more attention 
than post can currently give them, due to stretched resources. 
Along with the establishment of an Assistant Regional Security 
Officer-Investigator (ARSO-I) in Jerusalem, post has need of a 
second LES investigator to manage the significant investigation 
workload.   Funding for this position will be requested in the 
annual MRV budget cable. 
 
(N) STAFFING AND TRAINING:  FPU assisted the U.S. Department of 
Treasury in training Palestinian prosecutors and police on 
countering money laundering and other economic crimes.  FPU also 
arranged a briefing for consular officers with a well-respected 
professor of religious studies on the cloistered and complicated 
ultra-orthodox Jewish community, to better understand their travel 
patterns and financial resources.  FPU is also working with the 
Public Affairs Section to develop an outreach program that will 
educate the public to avoid visa and document facilitators.  FPU 
needs an additional locally engaged staff employee to handle the 
growing fraud workload.