09KABUL2039
SOLANA VISIT HIGHLIGHTS EU INTEREST IN ELECTION
Fri Jul 24 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO5386
PP RUEHDBU RUEHPW RUEHSL
DE RUEHBUL #2039/01 2050847
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 240847Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0362
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KABUL 002039 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KDEM AF
SUBJECT: SOLANA VISIT HIGHLIGHTS EU INTEREST IN ELECTION 
ISSUES 
 
REF: A. KABUL 1925 
     ¶B. KABUL 0309 
     ¶C. 08 KABUL 2173 
 
¶1.  Summary:  With four weeks left in the Afghan presidential 
campaign period, the international community's efforts to 
demonstrate impartiality in and support for elections are 
underscored by high-level visits and meetings with multiple 
presidential candidates.  On July 22, EU Special 
Representative Ambassador Ettore Sequi briefed EU Ambassadors 
and Ambassador Carney on key issues discussed earlier in the 
day by EU High Representative for the Common Foreign and 
Security Policy Javier Solana with Afghan leaders President 
Karzai and Minister of Foreign Affairs Dr. Rangin Spanta. 
Solana's highlights included the human rights case of Parwez 
Kambakhsh, election security and the role of Pakistan.  Media 
reporting centered on Solana's engagement with presidential 
candidates Dr. Abdullah Abdullah, Ashraf Ghani and Mirwais 
Yaseni, the most prominent candidates, and his message that 
the EU supports free, fair and transparent elections in 
Afghanistan.  End Summary. 
 
------------------ 
Election Security 
------------------ 
 
¶2.   EUSR Solana had an in-depth discussion on elections with 
FM Spanta focusing on the security challenges facing the 
process.  Solana expressed concern that over 1200 of 
Independent Election Commission's (IEC) 6966 proposed polling 
centers - located almost exclusively in Pashtun areas - are 
unlikely to open for security reasons and will likely be 
co-located to higher populated areas (ref A).  Spanta 
stressed the dangers of Pashtun disenfranchisement from the 
electoral process and the election results; he argued that 
ISAF troops should help ensure security in the affected 
districts.  (Note: Since this meeting ISAF has directed 
Regional Commands to urgently and decisively partner with 
ANSF to complete security assessments on the 1242 polling 
centers in insecure regions.  End Note) 
 
 
¶3.  According to Sequi, Spanta in a line we have now heard 
frequently from Pashtun politicians, fervently argued that 
Afghan government officials agree that the failure of 
Pashtuns to vote would result in disaster.  In a separate 
meeting, Karzai confirmed this point, seconding Spanta's call 
for ISAF support.  Karzai told Solana that election 
credibility has two parts: the Afghan effort and the 
international effort.  He explained that the latter means 
ISAF and PRTs must "act," particularly in the southeast and 
southwest.  ISAF, in coordination with Afghan National 
Security Forces, is conducting shaping operations in select 
closed districts.  However, ISAF and the international 
community continue to walk a fine line between ensuring the 
election retains its Afghan led focus and providing necessary 
support.  (Comment: The 1242 polling centers are in sparsely 
populated regions and make up less than 10% of the Pashtun 
vote and less than 4% of the total Afghan vote, but the 
optics are important. End Comment) 
 
 
-------------------- 
Focusing on Pakistan 
-------------------- 
 
¶4. Karzai also raised the topic of Pakistan with Solana, 
insisting that Pakistan is central to the Afghanistan 
situation.  He noted that although he is "happy" with 
President Zardari it is evident that Zardari is not in 
control of the country.  Karzai told Solana that Taliban are 
appearing outside their usual areas of operation. 
 
¶5.  Spanta also ventured into a discussion of regional 
issues, centering on Pakistan.  Spanta believed there is a 
need to ask Pakistan for assistance to ensure a good 
electoral process in Afghanistan.  He contended to Solana 
that "good" and "bad" Taliban exist, with the latter 
Pakistani and the former, those protected by Pakistan's ISI. 
 
------------- 
Human Rights 
------------- 
 
¶6.  Solana raised the situation of Parwez Kambakhsh, the 
journalism student serving a 20-year prison sentence for 
disseminating an article discussing women's rights and Islam 
(ref B).  Karzai continued to backtrack from previous 
promises, including to U.S. CODELS, to pardon Kambakhsh (ref 
C).  He said he recognized the importance of the problem and 
that a resolution be found, but that the elections must take 
place first or "major problems would result." 
 
KABUL 00002039  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
-------------- 
Media Focus 
-------------- 
 
¶7.  Local media reports on Solana's visit focused on his 
meetings with leading presidential candidates Abdullah, Ghani 
and Yaseni in addition to Karzai.  Solana told media that his 
engagement with candidates was aimed at familiarizing himself 
with their policies and that he had met only four candidates 
- not the full 41 - due to his limited time in Afghanistan. 
Solana also highlighted the EU's election observation 
mission, noting this as important support mechanism for 
ensuring that the election is free and fair. 
EIKENBERRY