09OTTAWA836
AMBASSADOR JACOBSON'S VISIT TO WINNIPEG, OCTOBER 18-20
Tue Nov 03 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ottawa
INFO  LOG-00   EEB-00   AF-00    AID-00   AMAD-00  A-00     ACQ-00   
      CIAE-00  COME-00  INL-00   DODE-00  DOEE-00  DOTE-00  DS-00    
      EAP-00   FAAE-00  UTED-00  VCI-00   OBO-00   H-00     TEDE-00  
      INR-00   LAB-01   MOFM-00  MOF-00   VCIE-00  NSAE-00  ISN-00   
      NSCE-00  OES-00   NIMA-00  EPAU-00  PA-00    PER-00   PM-00    
      GIWI-00  MA-00    ISNE-00  IRM-00   TRSE-00  NCTC-00  FMP-00   
      CBP-00   R-00     EPAE-00  PMB-00   DSCC-00  PRM-00   DRL-00   
      G-00     NFAT-00  SAS-00   FA-00    SWCI-00  PESU-00  SEEE-00  
      SANA-00    /001W
   
R 031500Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY OTTAWA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 0026
INFO AMCONSUL CALGARY 
AMCONSUL HALIFAX 
AMCONSUL MONTREAL 
AMCONSUL TORONTO 
AMEMBASSY OTTAWA
AMCONSUL QUEBEC 
AMCONSUL VANCOUVERUNCLAS OTTAWA 000836 
 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON MARR PREL PGOV SENV CA
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR JACOBSON'S VISIT TO WINNIPEG, OCTOBER 18-20 
 
¶1.  Summary.  Ambassador Jacobson's October 18-20 trip to Manitoba 
capitalized on Manitoba Premier Doer's preparation as Canadian 
Ambassador to the U.S. and the swearing-in of a new Premier, Greg 
Selinger.  The headline read "New kids roll up their sleeves," and 
the atmosphere of good will, good intentions, and hard work 
prevailed through the trip. 
 
¶2. Manitoba, occasionally the victim of an inferiority complex as 
the neighbor to richer Ontario, enjoyed its time in the spotlight 
as the home to the new Canadian Ambassador to the U.S.  The 
Ambassador's visit ensured the spotlight shone even more brightly 
on Winnipeg as the new Premier took office.  His meetings and 
social events introduced him to a range of Manitoba issues: trade, 
First Nations, human rights, border issues, water conflicts, and 
culture. End Summary 
 
 
Meeting with Ambassador-Designate Gary Doer 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. Hours before then-Premier Gary Doer departed for Washington to 
take up his new post as Canadian Ambassador to the U.S., he met 
with Ambassador Jacobson on a Via Rail train traveling from 
Saskatoon to Winnipeg.   In fact, he delayed his departure because 
of his eagerness to meet Ambassador Jacobson in Manitoba - boding 
well for the spirit of U.S.-Canadian cooperation here. The Via Rail 
meeting, which included spouses, was an important 
getting-acquainted session for two new ambassadors.  In a setting 
which allowed Premier Doer to act as an informal tour guide to his 
province, the session moved smoothly between the personal and the 
political.  Both ambassadors were able to offer advice and insight 
on their respective countries, strategies, and networks, and to 
discuss life in Ottawa and Washington informally. The meeting was 
an excellent (and somewhat cinematic) beginning to the Manitoba leg 
of the trip.   On arrival at the Winnipeg train station, several 
onlookers remarked that it was refreshing to see "our two 
Ambassadors talk together like regular people" without an entourage 
or armed guards.  This atmosphere of practicality, goodwill, and 
open communications set the tone for the rest of the trip. 
 
¶4. In a frenetically busy weekend for the Manitoba government, the 
new premier was selected only the day before Ambassador Jacobson's 
arrival.   Greg Selinger, the Premier-designate, invited Ambassador 
and Mrs. Jacobson to attend his October 19 swearing-in at the 
provincial legislature.  Ambassador Jacobson's presence was 
acknowledged and many in the audience spoke with him; again, the 
willingness to acknowledge historical events and to celebrate 
milestones with Canadians sat very well with the press and the 
public, as did Ambassador Jacobson's open admiration for the 
peaceful transfer of power. 
 
¶5. Ambassador Jacobson met with Premier Selinger for breakfast on 
October 20, the Premier's first morning in office.  Noting that 
they could "start literally on Day One," the Ambassador stated that 
he had no specific agenda in his Canadian tour and saw the trip as 
an opportunity to learn - whether the chance came from the cooks at 
The Chocolate Shop, the porters on the train, or the Premier 
himself. 
 
¶6. On both Buy America and Country of Origin Labeling, the 
Ambassador stressed the preference for an amicable resolution over 
years of rancor and litigation.  He noted the U.S.-Canada 
relationship is the largest trade relationship in the history of 
the world, saying the measure of the relationship is "whether we 
want to address issues straight on and find common ground."  The 
countries' common interests also arose during the brief discussion 
on Devils Lake - in which the Ambassador described himself as 
familiar with the essential problem but not its complex technical 
aspects - and our sharing of water and air in the Great Lakes and 
other areas.  Former Premier Doer's environmental credentials and 
his support for a North American-wide cap and trade program were 
stressed.  As in other provincial meetings, the Ambassador 
described the twin issues of the environment and energy as being 
temporarily eclipsed by the health care debate in Congress. 
 
¶7. Premier Selinger raised border issues, somewhat apologetically 
calling them "parochial," and noted delays at the Pembina-Emerson 
crossing. Ambassador Jacobson described the need for a balance of 
security and efficiency on both sides, and suggested that 
infrastructure improvements - which both Canada and the U.S. have 
undertaken to some pre-WWII structures - will mitigate delays.  The 
Montreal preclearance facility, a $300 million upgrade, exemplifies 
this approach. 
 
¶8. The meeting was cordial and relaxed, with broad agreement to 
address the "little issues" that sometimes sting the warm bilateral 
relationship. 
 
 
Canadian Museum for Human Rights 
--------------------------------------------- ---------------- 
 
¶9. Ambassador Jacobson met with several Board members of the 
Canadian Museum for Human Rights (CMHR) on October 19.  He was 
briefed on the Museum's origins and purpose:  to have a profound 
impact on the world through education on human rights issues, and 
secondarily as an economic development project for the "regularly 
insulted" City of Winnipeg.  The driving desire is to offer 
visitors a powerful experience, equivalent to the Holocaust Museum 
in DC. CMHR, championed by former Premier Doer and the official 
opposition, is currently under construction based on plans by 
Newseum and Holocaust Museum architect Ralph Applebaum.  Expected 
completion date is mid-2012. The project is experiencing serious 
cost overruns and the Board seeks an additional $45 million 
infusion. 
 
¶10. Gail Asper, CEO, pitched the CMHR as an international 
destination; foreign ambassadors posted to Canada have been 
contacted, and former U.S. Ambassador Cellucci held a networking 
event at his residence for CMHR.   She suggested that Ambassador 
Jacobson's public support, particularly on a joint program with 
Ambassador Doer, would be extremely helpful.   Based on the fact 
that Canadian arts and culture funding is significantly lower in 
the Western provinces than in the Eastern, Asper asked that the 
Ambassador promote CMHR when he meets Eastern premiers.  She ended 
by making a strong plea for a Presidential endorsement and 
appearance at a Museum event. 
 
 
Assembly of Manitoba Chiefs 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶11. Ambassador Jacobson met Assembly of Manitoba Chiefs' Grand 
Chief, Ron Evans, at an October 19 lunch meeting.  Chief Evans, who 
represents 120-130,000 First Nations people in Manitoba, stated 
that aboriginal communities' biggest challenge is strengthening the 
family unit, which is stressed by alcoholism, unemployment, and 
8000 children currently in care.  Lack of opportunity makes women 
and children, in particular, vulnerable to illness, crime and 
exploitation.  Linked to this challenge is problematic access to 
health care and education; Chief Evans seeks support for programs 
to train First Nations youth in health care professions, following 
up on a University of Winnipeg partnership.  Small and isolated 
First Nations communities face a critical shortage of doctors and 
poor transportation to hospitals. 
 
¶12. Chief Evans seeks information on cooperative programs with the 
U.S., such as education exchanges with neighboring states.  He and 
Ambassador Jacobson discussed the possibility of a binational 
discussion of First Nations issues, focused on Manitoba, North 
Dakota and Minnesota, to share best practices in both countries. 
He invited the Ambassador to visit the northern reserves to gain 
first-hand experience of conditions there; he has followed this up 
with a formal invitation offering to facilitate the Ambassador's 
visit to a remote Indian Reserve and to participate in the planning 
of a conference of First Nations leaders from the U.S. and Canada. 
 
 
Other meetings in Winnipeg 
-------------------------- 
 
¶13. Ambassador Jacobson toured the 1st Canadian Air Division 
facilities and museum at NORAD Canada Region Headquarters.   He met 
Americans serving there, was briefed on the joint Canada-U.S. 
mission, and toured the Combined Air Operations Center.  Prior to 
his airport departure he met U.S. Customs and Border protection 
personnel at Winnipeg's preclearance facility. 
 
¶14. In a courtesy call on Winnipeg Mayor Sam Katz, the Ambassador 
discussed city infrastructure issues and the revitalization of 
downtown.  Mayor Katz, owner of the Winnipeg Goldeyes baseball team 
in the Northern League, invited the Ambassador to a game next 
spring.  The Ambassador also called on Lieutenant Governor Philip 
Lee following the new Premier's swearing-in. 
 
¶15. Ambassador Jacobson discussed trade and business issues in a 
reception hosted by the Business Council of Manitoba.  Winnipeg 
Chamber of Commerce and Manitoba Chamber of Commerce, in addition 
to Canad Inns, Great West Life Assurance, and Tundra Oil and Gas 
were some of the 20 CEOs represented. 
 
¶16. In a tightly packed day, Ambassador Jacobson also visited the 
Winnipeg Art Gallery to view the Karsh photography exhibit on loan 
from the Art Institute of Chicago and its world class collection of 
Inuit art.  The latter is curated by a recent Voluntary Visitors 
program participant.  Oct. 19 ended with attendance at a Manitoba 
Theatre Centre performance of the drama "Five O'Clock Bells." 
 
 
Media 
----- 
 
¶17. In addition to informal photo opportunities on arrival at the 
Via Rail station and at the Premier's swearing-in, the Ambassador 
was interviewed by Mary Agnes Welch of the Winnipeg Free Press and 
participated in a brief media scrum after his meeting with Premier 
Selinger.  Though the Free Press reporter pre-billed the interview 
as a "getting to know you" session, the topics covered were the 
usual suspects: Devils Lake, border irritants, Buy America, Country 
of Origin Labeling.  The unexceptional and rather flat article, 
titled "We can work it out," summarized the U.S. position on key 
issues and gave an overview of the Ambassador's Winnipeg visit. 
 
¶18. On Oct. 21, the WFP ran a photo of the Ambassador with Premier 
Selinger accompanying a story about the new Premier's first day in 
office. 
 
 
Comment 
------------- 
 
¶19.  Ambassador Jacobson's visit elicited strong interest 
throughout Manitoba, and the Consulate was besieged with offers and 
invitations.  The fact that Ambassador-Designate Doer delayed his 
departure to Washington to meet Ambassador Jacobson, that Premier 
Selinger met him during his first five minutes in office, even that 
the Winnipeg Art Gallery opened its doors on a day off, speak 
volumes about this interest.  The usual "irritants," including 
Devils Lake, border delays, Buy America and COOL, were largely 
swept aside by a wave of goodwill.  On several occasions the 
Ambassador was asked to use his good offices and ties to President 
Obama to promote issues of provincial or federal interest, such as 
publicizing the Canadian Human Rights Museum, or to nudge state 
leaders to a more amenable position on water issues. 
 
¶20. Suggestions for future visits to the province include a visit 
to a remote First Nations community, perhaps combined with a trip 
to Churchill to gain a firsthand impression of environmental issues 
in the far North; a visit with Premier Selinger to the symbolic 
International Peace Garden which straddles the U.S.- Canadian 
border; a site visit to Devils Lake and the Pembina Dike, perhaps 
with Canadian Ambassador to the U.S. Gary Doer.  END COMMENT 
 
 
JACOBSON