09PHNOMPENH19

Mon Jan 12 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Phnom Penh
R 120648Z JAN 09
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 0277UNCLAS PHNOM PENH 000019 
 
 
DEPT FOR DS/OSAC, DS/IP/EAP, DS/IP/ITA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC APER AMGT CB
SUBJ: PHNOM PENH'S 2008 ANNUAL OVERSEAS SECURITY ADVISORY COUNCIL 
(OSAC) CRIME AND SAFETY REPORT 
 
REF: 08 STATE 132056 
 
¶1.  The following responses are keyed to the questions posed in 
reftel. 
 
¶I.  Overall Crime and Safety situation: Criminal activity in 
Cambodia remained high in 2008.  The chances of being a victim at 
night were much greater than during the day. However, daytime 
robberies are common if a person fails to take basic security 
precautions.  Corruption within the Cambodian National Police (CNP) 
has led to the increase in the number of criminals roaming the 
streets of the major cities and towns.  This has been a factor in an 
upward trend in the number of armed robberies and shootings in Phnom 
Penh and the provinces.  The majority of the crimes committed in 
Cambodia are for financial gain.  Youth gangs comprised of wealthy, 
teen-aged males, continue to operate in Phnom Penh.  These gangs can 
be violent and typically attack each other over turf battles and 
perceived insults.  Innocent civilians have been injured or killed 
after getting caught in the middle of these battles.  The 
ineffectiveness and corruption in the CNP leads to vigilante 
justice. And on occasion, suspected criminals have been beaten to 
death by mobs.  A government effort to control access to firearms 
has met with limited success.  While military weapons are no longer 
sold openly in the city, they are still available to criminal 
elements. 
 
¶A.  Crime Threats: Violent crimes, especially strong-arm and armed 
robberies, continue to occur.  Westerners continue to fall victim to 
these crimes.  There was an increase in the past year of the number 
of reports the RSO received from Embassy personnel, NGOs and 
expatriates of snatch thefts and attempted snatch thefts and 
residential break-ins.  Americans who follow sound personal security 
procedures, to include employing 24-hour residential guards, are 
victimized less often than the general population.  Persons riding 
on the back of moto-taxis are at the greatest risk of falling 
victim.  Thefts of motorbikes, auto parts and other petty thievery 
continue at previous high levels.  Counterfeit United States 
currency is a constant problem.  There has been an increase in the 
number of reported acts of random gunfire within Phnom Penh.  The 
government issued a sub-decree stating that military and off-duty 
police were not allowed to use their issued weapons for the purpose 
of moon-lighting as security guards.  The affect of the sub-decree 
remains to be seen. 
 
¶B.  Safety: The road infrastructure in the city continues to 
improve.  However, Americans are highly discouraged from traveling 
outside the city during hours of darkness.  In many regions of the 
country, the paved roads are deteriorating as a result of flooding 
during the rainy season.  The roads outside the city lack lighting, 
painted dividing lines and proper guard rails.  Furthermore, local 
vehicles are likely to be driven without operational headlights and 
ever present livestock create hazardous driving conditions. 
 
II.  Political Violence: 
 
¶A.  Historical Perspective: The government continues to function and 
provide an outward appearance of stability.  Demonstrations are less 
common and are, for the most part, peaceful and controlled by 
government forces.  Exceptions are labor, land and religious 
demonstrations that can become violent.  The police lack the proper 
training to effectively control demonstrations and can be heavy 
handed in their response.  Cambodia's national elections held in 
July 2008 were conducted in a peaceful and orderly manner.  There 
was little obvious evidence of anti-American sentiment among the 
Cambodian people but this could change as events develop elsewhere 
in the world.  Violence in Cambodia is common and it is often 
difficult to differentiate politically motivated violence from 
simple personal disputes.  Military weapons are sometimes used to 
settle personal disputes, injuring or killing innocent persons. 
 
¶B.  Regional Terrorism and Organized Crime: In September of 2002, 
the American Embassy closed for approximately one month after 
specific terrorist threat information became known.  In November 
2006, the government arrested six alleged domestic terrorists that 
planned to conduct an attack during the annual Water Festival.  In 
July 2007, the government arrested and ultimately convicted and 
imprisoned individuals that unsuccessfully attempted to detonate 
three improvised explosive devices at the Vietnam-Cambodia 
Friendship Monument in Phnom Penh.  The Water Festival and 
Vietnam-Cambodia Friendship Monument incidents were not anti-Western 
in nature, but meant to embarrass the ruling political party. 
 
¶C.  International or Transnational Terrorism: Concern still exists 
over the potential for Muslim extremist-related terrorist activity 
in Cambodia.  There were no anti-American terrorist attacks reported 
in Cambodia during the year. 
 
¶D.  Civil Unrest: In January 2003, the police lost control of Phnom 
Penh for several hours as anti-Thai mobs sacked and burned the Thai 
embassy and then rampaged through the city burning Thai businesses. 
This was all in response to an alleged comment made by a Thai 
actress.  2008 saw an increase in forced evictions.  In some 
instances the government ordered the homes destroyed and increased 
the likelihood of additional civil unrest. The border claim dispute 
between Cambodia and Thailand in Preah Vihear Province continues to 
be a potential source for civil unrest. 
 
III. Post-Specific concerns: 
 
¶A.  Crime: Robbery, burglary and theft remain a significant problem 
in Phnom Penh.  Organized crime continues to take advantage of 
government corruption and police incompetence. 
 
¶B.  Traffic: Traffic accidents are a significant threat.  The 
traffic situation in Phnom Penh deteriorated in 2008.  Poor driver 
training, excessive speed and negligence are prime contributors to 
the increase in traffic accidents we witnessed in 2008.  Vehicle 
travel to the provinces can be dangerous, especially at night. 
Livestock will typically sleep on the road and motor vehicles are 
operated without headlights or reflective devices.  Visitors 
operating a vehicle must have a Cambodian driver's license and local 
third-party insurance.  In some cases, drivers involved in a traffic 
accident have been robbed or assaulted by the mob that invariably 
gathers at the scene of an accident - but this has been rare. 
 
¶C.  Health and Environment: During monsoon season, May through 
October, heavy rains can cause sporadic flooding in parts of the 
country and along the city streets in Phnom Penh.  During this 
season many roads and bridges are often impassable.  Cambodia has 
reported a number of Avian Influenza cases, but they have been 
contained to the countryside.  Cambodian farmers typically live in 
close contact with domestic and wild birds.  The threat of HIV/AIDS 
is omnipresent, especially among commercial sex workers. 
 
¶D.  Drugs: The CNP (with U.S. Embassy assistance) in 2007 dismantled 
a major drug lab that was manufacturing precursor chemicals that 
could be used to produce methamphetamine type stimulants (MTS). 
Marijuana, heroin, and MTS are available in the major cities and 
tourist areas. 
 
IV. Police Response: The typical police officer in 
Cambodia is poorly paid, poorly trained, and lacks discipline and 
the necessary resources and equipment to operate effectively. 
Foreign victims of crime receive no investigative support. 
Reporting a crime to the police is of no value and will only lead to 
an additional expense for the victim because he or she will be asked 
to pay a fee to have a report written.  Corruption continues to be a 
major problem here with police personnel often committing serious 
crimes themselves.  Self-discipline is often lacking. 
 
¶A.  Police Harassment: Foreigners and Cambodians are continually 
stopped by the police for real and alleged minor traffic violations 
and asked for a bribe.  Even so, American citizens should report 
crimes committed against them, when possible, to the local police 
station, and especially to the Embassy's Consular Section. 
Foreigners should politely decline to pay for a police report. 
 
¶B.  Local police emergency numbers: Country Code:  855 
(If calling from overseas, drop the 0 after the country code) Phnom 
Penh municipal central command post, 012-999-999; Siem Reap 
012-180-8886 or 011-288-893; Sihanoukville 012-884-828 or 
016-884-828 (These are cell phone numbers, which may not be answered 
and result in a meaningful police response.) 
 
¶V. Medical Emergencies: Post currently has an operational health 
unit staffed by a Foreign Service Health Practitioner.  The SOS 
International Medical Clinic is located on the corner of Streets 51 
and 228.  An American doctor operates the clinic.  Ambulance 
services in Phnom Penh are minimal, and well below US standards. 
Dial 119 to access the local EMS system.  Most ambulance services 
are operated by private hospitals.  Travelers are strongly 
recommended to carry adequate medical evacuation insurance.  The 
cost of a private medevac flight to Bangkok can be catastrophic. 
 
¶A.  Contact information for local hospitals: Country Code  855 (If 
calling from overseas, drop the 0 after the country code). 
 
SOS International Clinic:  023-216-911, 023-215-911, 023-216-959 
 
Access Medical Services:  012-813-358 
 
Australian Medical Clinic:  023-881-020, 012-810-600, 012-812-064 
 
Community & Family medical Clinic:  012-803-610 
 
Calmette Hospital:  023-426-948 
 
European Dental Clinic:  023-211-363, 023-362-656, 018-812-055 
 
European Medical clinic:  023-362-656 
 
Naga Medical Center:  011-811-175 
 
American Medical Centre:  012-891-613, 023-991-863 
 
¶B.  Air Ambulance Service: N/A 
 
 
VI. Travel Precautions; How to avoid becoming a victim:  Individuals 
are advised to only carry what they are willing to lose, and to take 
the path of least resistance when confronted with an armed robber. 
 
A)  Pickpockets: Transportation centers, market areas, special 
events, river front area and crowded buses traveling to the 
provinces are prime areas for pickpockets.  Avoid carrying wallets 
or passports in back pockets.  If at all possible, purses should not 
be carried.  If a purse or bag is carried, keep it closed and in 
front of the wearer. 
 
B)  Robbers: Do not walk the streets at night. Avoid transport by 
moto-taxis.  It is preferable to lease a private driver for the 
length of your stay in Cambodia.  There are few, if any, formal 
rental agencies. You may arrange for car rental through your hotel 
or a local travel office.  Metered taxi services featuring English 
speaking dispatchers are becoming more prevalent.  Avoid taking 
taxis that are already occupied.  Avoid driving alone after dark. 
Keep car windows and doors closed and locked.  Avoid dimly lit 
areas.  Socialize at reputable restaurants and bars.  Carry only as 
much cash as you are willing to lose.  Credit cards are rarely used 
in Cambodia, except at major international hotels and restaurants, 
and it is best not to carry them with you.  Avoid wearing expensive 
looking jewelry.  Wear and carry only those items you are prepared 
to lose.  Do not resist if you are the victim of a robbery. 
Criminals will typically use force, to include deadly force, when 
confronted with a victim that attempts to resist.  Westerners have 
reported being threatened or cut with knives despite complying with 
the robbers. 
 
C)  Auto theft: Always remove keys when you exit the vehicle.  Avoid 
driving after dark.  Keep car windows closed and doors locked. 
Vehicle break-ins are a frequent occurrence in Phnom Penh. 
Criminals will steal mirrors, spare tires, lights, trim and 
accessories off of expensive vehicles to be sold for a profit.  This 
requires the victim to travel to an auto repair shop to buy back or 
replace the stolen items. 
 
D)  Residential Security: Install metal grills on all doors and 
windows.  Keep all doors and windows closed and locked.  Ensure the 
residence has adequate lighting around the perimeter.  Know how to 
use alarm systems.  Hire twenty-four hour guard protection from a 
reputable company. 
 
E)  Beggars: Avoid giving money to beggars and children.  The 
children are typically forced to beg by their parents to support a 
drug habit.  Word spreads fast and you may soon find yourself 
surrounded and under siege by other people wanting money.  Many are 
pickpockets working in groups. 
 
F)  Travel Advisory:  The Embassy issued a warden message in July 
2008, regarding tensions on the Thai-Cambodian border (Preah Vihear 
Province in Cambodia and Sisaket Province in Thailand) recommending 
that American citizens defer travel to the area until the situation 
has been resolved.  Thai and Cambodian troops have exchanged gunfire 
resulting in reported injuries and fatalities on both sides.  The 
situation remains unresolved. 
 
G)  Off Limits Areas: The entire city of Phnom Penh is dangerous 
after hours.  Late night movement around the city should be avoided. 
 The "Heart of Darkness" club is off limits to Mission personnel. 
 
H)  Other: Report any incidents to the Embassy's Consular Section. 
Always provide personal information, including travel plans, to the 
Consular Officer.  Keep a low profile. 
 
I)  Local Security Firms: There are several private security 
services operating in Phnom Penh.  None are associated with the U.S. 
Embassy Guard Force. 
 
VII. Embassy Contact Numbers (If calling from overseas, drop the 0 
after the country code). 
 
Embassy:  855-023-728-000 
Post One:  855-023-728-111 
Consular:  855-023-728-197 
Regional Security Officer:  855-023-728-169 
Embassy after-hours Duty Officer:  855-012-814-800 
 
VIII.  OSAC Country Council: Post OSAC Country Council meets 
quarterly.  The points of contact are as follows (If calling from 
overseas, drop the 0 after the country code): 
 
Wade L. Boston 
RSO 
(P)855-023-728-169 
(F)855-023-728-600 
bostonwl(at)state.gov 
 
Jared M. Thurman 
ARSO 
(P)855-023-728-207 
 
 
(F)855-023-728-600 
thurmanjm(at)state.gov 
 
Mr. Bretton (Brett) Sciaroni 
Sciaroni and Associates 
(P)855-023-210-225 
(F)855-023-213-089 
brett(at)sa-cambodia.com 
 
Michael Stephen 
Mekong Bank 
(P) 855-023-430-980 
(F) 855-023-430-431 
stass(at)pacific.net.sg 
 
James Swander 
Devco Capital 
(P) 855-023-883-488 
(F) 855-23-426-752 
jim.swander(at)devcocaptial.com 
 
¶2.  For further clarification please contact RSO Wade Boston or ARSO 
Jared Thurman 
 
 
CAMPBELL