09STATE126174
OSCE/PERMANENT COUNCIL:  RESPONSE TO OSCE/ODIHR
Wed Dec 09 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO1801
OO RUEHAST RUEHDBU RUEHFL RUEHLA RUEHMRE RUEHPOD RUEHROV RUEHSK RUEHSL
RUEHSR
DE RUEHC #6174 3432106
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O R 092105Z DEC 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUEHVEN/USMISSION USOSCE IMMEDIATE 6285
INFO ORG FOR SECURITY CO OP IN EUR COLLECTIVE
RUEHBUL/AMEMBASSY KABUL 4984UNCLAS STATE 126174 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OSCE PGOV PHUM PREL KDEM AF
SUBJECT: OSCE/PERMANENT COUNCIL:  RESPONSE TO OSCE/ODIHR 
FINAL REPORT ON ELECTIONS IN AFGHANISTAN 
 
(U) Post is authorized to present the following statement at 
the Permanent Council meeting in Vienna on December 10. 
 
Begin text: 
 
Madam Chair, 
 
The United States warmly welcomes Ambassador Lenarcic back to 
the Permanent Council and thanks him for presenting this 
final report by the ODIHR Election Support Team for 
Afghanistan.  The report,s detailed analysis and thoughtful 
recommendations make plain why ODIHR truly represents the 
well-deserved label of the  gold standard, in election 
observation. 
 
We would like to congratulate ODIHR on fully completing its 
mandate as stipulated in PC Decision 891, well within 
existing resources, and notwithstanding the sometimes 
dangerous situations in which EST team members found 
themselves.  The United States once again condemns the 
cowardice of the Taliban, who claimed responsibility for the 
October 28 terrorist attack on the UN housing area in Kabul. 
We again express our condolences to the families of the five 
UN staff members killed in the attack.  We are likewise 
thankful that the remaining members of the EST escaped injury 
and that the EST was willing to continue its task should a 
second round have been necessary in the presidential 
election. 
 
The United States joins with ODIHR in its sober assessment of 
the impact of fraud, corruption and violence -- or the threat 
of violence -- undoubtedly had on the electorate in 
Afghanistan.  Yet we cannot understate the courage of more 
than five million Afghan citizens, who despite these 
inhibiting factors and other seemingly insurmountable 
obstacles, turned out to cast their votes in the first ever 
Afghan-led elections.  Similarly, we would like to express 
our heartfelt appreciation to the thousands of Afghan and 
international observers and security officials who, sometimes 
at great personal risk, supported the electoral process and 
made this election as well as the ODIHR,s candid report 
possible. 
 
The United States concurs with the report's findings that 
deep and sustained reform is required in Afghanistan to 
enhance the government,s ability and credibility in 
conducting future elections.  We remain committed to 
partnering with the Afghan people and their government on our 
shared objectives of strengthening good governance, tackling 
corruption, increasing economic opportunities, and improving 
security for all Afghans.  We note the calls by the EST for 
reform of the Independent Election Commission (IEC) and the 
Electoral Complaints Commission (ECC).  We also take note of 
the report's call for a review of the electoral calendar, 
consideration of an electoral system that encourages the 
creation of political parties alongside independent 
candidates, and the need for a robust, comprehensive voter 
register.  We will study the comprehensive recommendations 
set forth in the ODIHR report and will work with our Afghan 
and international partners on their implementation.  We value 
highly the effective partnership ODIHR has built over the 
past few years with the IEC and ECC and we look forward to 
further opportunities ahead to build upon it. 
 
We once again wish to thank you, Ambassador Lenarcic, for 
your tireless efforts to support respect for human rights and 
fundamental freedoms, democracy and the rule of law 
throughout the OSCE and in our partner nations.  The OSCE's 
work with the government and people of Afghanistan stands as 
a testament to the enduring commitment by our region, 
including neighboring states, to helping Afghanistan on its 
way toward a secure, prosperous and democratic future. 
 
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CLINTON