09USUNNEWYORK982
UNGA: UN PASSES 18TH ANNUAL RESOLUTION AGAINST THE
Tue Nov 03 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
USUN New York
VZCZCXYZ0012
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUCNDT #0982/01 3071446
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 031446Z NOV 09
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7502
INFO RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA PRIORITY 0016
RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA PRIORITY 1203
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS PRIORITY 0402
RUEHLP/AMEMBASSY LA PAZ NOV 0104
RUEHMU/AMEMBASSY MANAGUA PRIORITY 0007
RUEHSJ/AMEMBASSY SAN JOSE PRIORITY 0236
RUEHUB/USINT HAVANA PRIORITY 0289
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA PRIORITY 3920
RUEHUNV/USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA PRIORITY 0819UNCLAS USUN NEW YORK 000982 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL AORC ECON UNGA CA
SUBJECT: UNGA: UN PASSES 18TH ANNUAL RESOLUTION AGAINST THE 
CUBAN EMBARGO 
 
REF: A. STATE 110442 
     ¶B. 08 USUN 997 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY:  In plenary session on October 28, the UN 
General Assembly (UNGA) passed its 18th annual resolution 
condemning the United States economic and commercial embargo 
on Cuba. The Foreign Minister of Cuba delivered a hostile, 
cold-war style intervention, blaming the United States for 
preventing children from receiving proper medical care, 
referring to the embargo as genocide, and noting that the 
U.S. administration has not yet lived up to its commitment to 
change its foreign policy stance. Ambassador Rice delivered 
remarks for the United States, rejecting the genocide charge 
as an egregious misuse of the term that diminished the real 
suffering of genocide victims.  She urged the Cuban 
leadership to extend freedoms to its people and pointed out 
efforts made to assist the Cuban people under the new 
administration. A host of countries including Libya, Mexico, 
and India commended the U.S. for its easing of restrictions. 
The final vote count was nearly identical to the previous 
year:  187 for, 3 against, and 2 abstentions. Only Israel and 
Palau joined the United States in voting against the 
resolution.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (U) SPEAKERS LIST:  The following countries 19 countries 
delivered interventions:  Sudan, Egypt, Saint Kitts and 
Nevis, Mexico, China, India, Vietnam, Indonesia, Brazil, 
Algeria, South Africa, Zambia, Venezuela, the Democratic 
People's Republic of Korea, Gambia, Brazil, the Russian 
Federation, Iran, and Cuba. Sixteen countries delivered an 
explanation of vote:  the United States, Congo, Nicaragua, 
Sweden, Uruguay, Laos, Bolivia, Ghana, the Solomon Islands, 
Syria, Libya, Norway, Uganda, Benin, Belarus, and Tanzania. 
Cuba delivered the only right of reply. 
 
¶3. (U) RESOLUTION PASSES IN A TIME-HONORED LANDSLIDE:  With 
192 votes cast, 187 countries voted for the draft resolution 
A/64/L.4.  Three countries voted against the resolution:  the 
United States, Israel, and Palau. Two countries abstained: 
the Marshall Islands and Micronesia.  The vote on the similar 
resolution in 2008 was nearly identical, with El Salvador and 
Iraq voting for the resolution this year, whereas last year 
the two countries were absent (Reftel A). A similar 
resolution has passed for the last 18 years with vote counts 
similar to the one observed in 2009. The announcement that 
the resolution had been adopted was met by considerable 
applause, many countries congratulating Cuba's delegation in 
person even as the session continued. 
 
¶4. (U) ADOPTED RESOLUTION URGES STATES TO REPEAL EMBARGO 
LAWS:  The text of draft resolution A/64/L.4 reaffirms "the 
sovereign equality of States, non-intervention, and 
non-interference" and recalls "the need to eliminate 
unilateral application of economic and trade measures by one 
State against another." The resolution expressed concern that 
further measures "aimed at strengthening and extending the 
economic, commercial and financial embargo against Cuba 
continue to be promulgated." It urges states "that have and 
continue to apply such laws and measures to take the 
necessary steps to repeal or invalidate them" and requests 
that the Secretary-General prepare a report on the 
implementation of the resolution. 
 
¶5. (U) CUBAN FOREIGN MINISTER CALLS THE EMBARGO GENOCIDE: 
Minister for Foreign Affairs Bruno Rodriguez opened his 
speech by sharing examples of children, severely ill from 
heart defects and cancer, allegedly unable to get the medical 
care they needed, with the claim that the U.S. embargo 
prevents key medicines and supplies from entering Cuba. 
Rodriguez registered his dissatisfaction with the new 
administration, noting that "Since the election of President 
Obama, there has not been any change in the implementation of 
the economic, commercial, and financial blockade against 
Cuba." He contended that U.S. efforts to "dismantle the most 
brutal restrictions" are "positive, but they are extremely 
limited and insufficient." He called the embargo "a mass, 
flagrant and systematic violation of human rights" and said 
that it meets the 1948 Geneva Convention definition of 
genocide. The FM complained about restrictions placed on 
humanitarian aid, the application of the embargo on foreign 
companies attempting to sell goods in Cuba, the inability of 
U.S. businesses and tourists to enter the country, and 
restrictions placed on access to information and 
 
 
telecommunications networks. 
 
¶6. (U) COUNTRIES RALLY TO CONDEMN EMBARGO:  Dozens of 
countries spoke forcefully against the ill-effects of the 
embargo, several imploring the United States to move forward 
in its new direction and lift the embargo. Egypt, speaking on 
behalf of the non-aligned movement, claimed that the embargo 
causes a "huge material loss and economic and financial 
damage that has negatively impacted the welfare and well 
being of the people of Cuba."  Sudan, speaking on behalf of 
the G77 and China, urged the U.S. to "fully adhere to the 
principles of mutual respect and non-interference in the 
internal affairs of a sisterly country." Nicaragua said that 
the embargo is a flagrant violation of human rights and 
assured delegates that Cuba will "continue to enlighten us 
with its wisdom." Bolivia commented on President Obama's 
recent selection for a Nobel Peace Prize and suggested that a 
new period of cooperation to include ending the embargo would 
be fitting with the award.  At the close of the session, 
President of the General Assembly Ali Treki embraced the 
resolution, noting his "hope that the appeals addressed here 
will be heard and implemented by all of us." 
 
¶7. (U) CONSIDERABLE PRAISE FOR RECENT MEASURES TAKEN BY U.S.: 
 Many countries, despite voting in favor of the resolution, 
commended the United States for easing certain restrictions. 
India remarked that it is "encouraged by the steps announced 
by the current U.S. administration earlier this year to 
reduce restrictions on travel and remittances to Cuba by 
Cuban-Americans and on U.S. telecommunications services." 
Mexico commented on recent U.S. steps, remarking that "these 
measures contribute to improve the prevailing ambience." 
Tanzania noted that the family reunification program "is a 
positive trend and a bit of the beginning of the end."  Libya 
added that the measures are "a reason for optimism."  Norway, 
Benin and Ghana were among others signaling optimism over 
steps taken by the U.S. and the direction of the country's 
leadership. 
 
¶8. (U) AMBASSADOR RICE DELIVERS REMARKS FOR U.S. DELEGATION: 
 Ambassador Rice delivered the U.S. explanation of vote, 
reminding the audience that the Obama Administration has 
taken clear steps aimed at supporting the desire of Cubans to 
"freely determine their country's future" and noted the 
restrictions lifted to facilitate the flow of humanitarian 
items, remittances, family visits, extend the flow of 
telecommunications services, and permit and re-establish 
direct mail service.  Ambassador Rice addressed the Cuban 
allegations of genocide, noting that this is a distortion 
which "diminishes the real suffering of victims of genocide 
elsewhere in the world."  She rebutted claims by Cuba that 
the U.S. is responsible for suffering among the Cubans, 
instead pointing out that the "U.S. is a major source of 
humanitarian assistance to the Cuban people."  Ambassador 
Rice urged Cuba to release prisoners of conscience, ratify 
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 
reduce charges on remittances, and allow greater freedom of 
speech.  Finally she promised that the U.S. would continue to 
find ways to expand opportunities for Cubans and to work with 
the Cuban government on "issues of mutual concern and 
national security." Full text of the remarks can be found at 
http://www.usun.state.gov/briefing/statements /2009/131014.htm. 
 
¶9. (U) CUBA REPLIES TO SWEDEN, NORWAY, AND U.S. 
INTERVENTIONS:  Cuba replied to comments made by Sweden (on 
behalf of the E.U.), Norway, and the U.S., directing most 
comments to Ambassador Rice, pointing out that it "respects 
her opinions" and "recognizes that her career is different 
than the neo-conservatives such as Bolton," and therefore 
regretted that she is following the same line of reasoning as 
her predecessors.  Cuba contended that its country is in fact 
"closer to Lincoln's democracy than the plutocracy of the 
rich" and called on the U.S. to release the five Cuban 
"anti-terrorists" held in U.S. prisons.  Cuba again defended 
the legal grounds for using the word genocide (citing the 
Geneva Conventions).  Despite all its rhetoric to the 
contrary, Cuba admitted that with respect to the United 
States, "there have been some steps in the right direction," 
but added "they do not signify any progress in lifting the 
blockade."  Cuba cited Ambassador Rice's recent speech at NYU 
in which she embraced cooperation and the consideration of 
new ideas and claimed to be "surprised that Ambassador Rice 
had to say the opposite this morning." 
 
 
Rice