09VLADIVOSTOK87
MOSCOW POURS OVER 4 BILLION DOLLARS INTO A NEARLY DESERTED
Tue Aug 18 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Vladivostok
VZCZCXRO4887
RR RUEHCHI RUEHFK RUEHHM RUEHKSO RUEHNAG RUEHPB
DE RUEHVK #0087/01 2300624
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 180624Z AUG 09
FM AMCONSUL VLADIVOSTOK
INFO RUEHVK/AMCONSUL VLADIVOSTOK 1293
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 0503
RUEHZU/ASIAN PACIFIC ECONOMIC COOPERATION COLLECTIVE
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1188UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 VLADIVOSTOK 000087 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: POL ECON
SUBJECT: MOSCOW POURS OVER 4 BILLION DOLLARS INTO A NEARLY DESERTED 
ISLAND 
 
VLADIVOSTO 00000087  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1.  Summary.  In preparation for the 2012 APEC Summit on Russkiy 
Island off Vladivostok, Moscow is spending over 4 billion 
dollars developing the island.  As Consulate Staff verified 
during a site visit, workers have begun constructing a one 
billion dollar bridge from Vladivostok to Russkiy Island that 
will be one of the longest suspension bridges in the world. 
Builders are clearing an approximately 3-mile long site for what 
we understand will be conference centers, hotels, and a 
university campus.  The Russian Government hopes to strengthen 
its ties with the Asia-Pacific Region and promote investment in 
the Russian Far East. Although the pristine island will be a 
beautiful site for the 2012 APEC conference, analysts fear that 
Russkiy Island will attract little interest after the 2012 APEC 
Summit. 
 
Project Part of Kremlin Plan For Asia Integration 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶2.  Supporters of Russkiy Island development hope to promote the 
economic revitalization of the Russian Far East and to reinforce 
Russia's importance in the Asia-Pacific region.  In the words of 
Mark Urnov, the head of the Moscow-based think-tank Expertise, 
Russia's Far East is "one of Russia's most troubled regions.  It 
is not heavily populated and is surrounded by fast-developing 
China.  If Russia does not develop the Far East soon, it could 
lose it."  Prime Minister Vladimir Putin argues that Russia must 
encourage economic growth in the region by developing local 
industries and infrastructure.  In his words, these steps "will 
encourage new investment and contracts, kick-start the 
development of the region and thus strengthen its competiveness 
and expand its ties with the Asia-Pacific region."  In 2007, Mr. 
Putin argued that Russkiy Island is the perfect locale for these 
ambitious projects, emphasizing that the island's proximity to 
the ocean makes it a "very interesting recreation area" and the 
perfect place for an international conference. 
 
¶3.  Mr. Putin's claims are not without foundation. Russkiy 
Island features ideal fishing sites, a pristine natural 
environment, curative herbs, clean air, and beautiful beaches. 
The natural beauty of the island will undoubtedly impress 
officials at the 2012 APEC Conference. 
 
Construction May Harm Environment on Island 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  The pristine natural beauty of Russkiy Island is also a 
cause for concern.  Already, as hooligans have drunken parties 
on the island's beaches and leave their trash, the island is 
becoming less attractive.  Construction on a massive scale only 
exacerbates this problem.  Natalya A. Andreyeva, a doctor in 
Vladivostok, advocates preservation of Russkiy Island's natural 
beauty by transforming the island into a national park. 
 
 
Doubts about the Island's Post-APEC Future 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  Analysts fear that without sound infrastructure, this area 
will attract little interest after APEC.  Russkiy Island has 
been nearly isolated for decades and lacks amenities that 
tourists take for granted. 
 
¶6.  High airfare and competition from other tourist sites could 
also make Russkiy Island an unlikely tourist destination. 
Although the island may attract travelers from East Asia, 
Vladivostok's distance from Moscow makes Russkiy Island an 
unlikely vacation destination for residents of European Russia 
or Eastern Europe.  It takes over one week to reach Vladivostok 
from Moscow by train and budget flights from Moscow to Russia's 
Far East are non-existent.  Turkey and Egypt are more economical 
and convenient tourist destinations. In light of their decision 
to scale down developmental projects on Russkiy Island, Russian 
authorities have not ignored these impediments to Mr. Putin's 
dream of transforming Russkiy Island into a resort.  Officials 
originally planned to build 5-star hotels and an opera and 
ballet house on Russkiy Island.  After failing to secure foreign 
investment, they scrapped these plans because, according to 
Valentin Anikeyev, Primorye Architect and Professor at the Far 
Eastern Technical University, "the construction of an opera and 
ballet house on the island would cost too much." 
 
Unexploded Ordinance May Impede Construction 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  Russkiy Island's history further impedes development on the 
island.  During Soviet times, Russkiy Island was a secret 
military facility.  Now the island is littered with outdated 
artillery, cannons, and grenades.  After exploring the bays of 
Russkiy Island over several years, professional diver and former 
captain Genrikh Kostin claimed that missiles, torpedoes, and 
mines are "in immediate proximity to the Russkiy Island."  In 
 
VLADIVOSTO 00000087  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
2007, he argued that the excavators, large welding systems, and 
high voltages necessary for a massive construction project could 
cause a non-neutralized missile to detonate. 
 
¶8.  Comment.  With its pristine beauty, Russkiy Island will be 
an ideal site for the 2012 APEC conference. Within the next 
three years, the development of the island will bring 
much-needed jobs to Primorye. However, in the long run, unsound 
infrastructure on Russkiy Island and high airfare will prevent 
the island from becoming a popular tourist destination.  Russian 
officials acted wisely in scaling back on development of Russkiy 
Island. 
MILLER