10ADANA1
SE TURKEY SECURITY INCIDENTS: DECEMBER 28, 2009 - JANUARY 3,
Fri Jan 08 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
VZCZCXRO3505
RR RUEHDA
DE RUEHDA #0001/01 0081415
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 081415Z JAN 10
FM AMCONSUL ADANA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4828
INFO RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 1370
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 1134
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 1437UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 ADANA 000001 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR DS/IP/EUR, DS/IP/ITA, INR AND EUR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PTER PINR CASC TU
SUBJECT: SE TURKEY SECURITY INCIDENTS: DECEMBER 28, 2009 - JANUARY 3, 
2010 
 
¶1.  (U)  The following security incidents for the period of 
December 28, 2009 - January 3, 2010 were compiled by the 
security assistant at Consulate Adana from RSO sources, to 
include Turkish security contacts, government officials and 
media.  The RSO uses the information to determine the security 
situation and trends of violence and crime throughout Turkey. 
The RSO shares the information with the country team and visas 
viper coordinator. 
 
¶2.  (U) Military operations against the Kurdistan Workers' Party 
(PKK) as reported by the Turkish General Staff: 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
-------- 
¶A.  Weapons, ammunition, and equipment seized: 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
-------- 
 
12.31.09 through 01.01.10: 180 kilograms of TNT; 92 kilograms of 
plastic explosive material; 2,408 kilograms of 
ammonium/potassium nitrate; 54 kilograms of unknown plastic 
explosives; 48 landmines; and 98 other types of explosives. 74 
IED attacks were carried out by PKK members in the same period. 
 
Van - 01.01.10: 2 Kalashnikov rifles, 10 magazines, and 5 
pistols. 
 
Sirnak - 12.31.09: 14 kilograms of TNT, 25 grams of A-4 plastic 
explosive, 9 meters of explosion fuse, and 1 cell phone. 
 
Batman - 12.30.09: Food and logistical equipment. 
 
Batman - 12.29.09: 300 kilograms of food and an IED made of 1 
kilogram of C-4 plastic explosive. 
 
Van - 12.29.09: 4 rounds of RPG-7 ammunition. 
 
Hakkari - 12.27.09: Security forces found and destroyed 3 
anti-tank mines. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
¶B.  PKK members captured or surrendered: 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
December 2009: Security forces captured 32 PKK members: 2 dead, 
5 alive and 25 surrendered. 
 
12.28.09 through 01.03.10: Security forces captured 9 PKK 
members: 2 alive and 7 surrendered. 
 
¶3.  (U) Media reports related to PKK and pro-Kurdish 
organizations: 
 
------------------------------------- 
¶A.  Anti-PKK operations: 
------------------------------------- 
 
Turkish Armed Forces (TAF) anti-PKK operations in SE Turkey 
continued in Hakkari, Sirnak. Siirt, Mardin, Van, Batman, 
Diyarbakir, Batman and Gaziantep. 
 
Tunceli - 01.03.10: Operation launched against PKK groups that 
have reportedly not yet retreated to winter shelters. 
 
¶N. Iraq - 12.31.09: TAF artillery teams bombed Zap region; no 
injuries reported. 
 
Hakkari - 12.28.09: Pro-PKK web site ANF reported Turkish war 
helicopters had been spotted near the Iranian border. 
 
----------------- 
¶B.  Arrests: 
----------------- 
 
Adana - 01.03.10: Security forces arrested 12 minors in December 
on the charge of "joining in illegal demonstration on behalf of 
the PKK," and the Adana governor criticized the children's 
parents for allowing such behavior. 
 
Van - 01.01.10 and 01.03.10: Security forces detained 10 people 
on the suspicion of terrorism. 
 
Van - 01.01.10: Security forces arrested 2 people on the charges 
of "assisting and harboring the PKK." 
 
Sirnak - 01.03.10: Security forces detained 18 people in an 
anti-PKK operation and seized 2 rifles, 4 pistols, recording 
devices, Molotov cocktails, fireworks, explosive materials, and 
500 grams of hashish. 
 
ADANA 00000001  002 OF 005 
 
 
 
Hakkari - 12.31.09: Security forces arrested 9 people, including 
1 wanted terrorist, on the charge of "making propaganda for the 
PKK." 
 
Sirnak - 12.31.09: Security forces detained 30 people on the 
suspicion of terrorism. 
 
Van - 12.31.09: Security forces arrested 7 people on the charges 
of "making propaganda for the PKK," and "damaging public 
property." 
 
Hakkari - 12.31.09: Security forces arrested 9 people on the 
charges of "membership in the PKK," and "making propaganda for 
the PKK." 
 
Diyarbakir - 12.30.09: The trial of 31 members of the Turkish 
Hezbollah (TH) organization concluded with 16 sentenced to life 
in prison.  Seven were released and the remaining received 
lesser sentences. The TH members were accused of 198 violent 
crimes 1990 and 1999 that resulted in 165 dead and 84 wounded. 
The offenders were apprehended in 2000. 
 
Mardin - 12.30.09: Security forces arrested 2 people on the 
charge of "making propaganda for the PKK." 
 
Mus and Bitlis - 12.30.09: Security forces detained 4 people on 
the suspicion of terrorism. 
 
Sanliurfa - 12.30.09: Security forces arrested 5 people on the 
charges of "membership in the PKK," and "making propaganda for 
the PKK." 
 
Sirnak - 12.30.09: 11 people, including incumbent mayors, were 
sentenced for a cumulative 11 years in prison on the charges of 
"instigating hatred and animosity" and "making propaganda for 
the PKK." 
 
Batman - 12.30.09: Security forces detained 1 person on the 
suspicion of terrorism. 
 
Sanliurfa - 12.30.09: 53 people, who joined in an illegal march 
to protest Abdullah Ocalan's prison conditions, are under 
investigation on the charge of "violating restrictions on 
marches and demonstrations." 
 
Sanliurfa - 12.30.09: Former DTP Chairman Ahmet Turk's niece was 
sentenced to 10 years in prison on the charge of "making 
propaganda for the PKK." 
 
Hakkari - 12.20.09: Security forces detained a total number of 
17 demonstrators during illegal street clashes in Yuksekova and 
Hakkari. 
 
Mersin - 12.30.09: Security forces arrested 8 people on the 
charge of "membership in the PKK." 
 
Diyarbakir - 12.30.09: Security forces arrested 5 people on the 
charge of "joining in illegal actions on behalf of the PKK." 
 
Bingol - 12.30.09: Security forces detained 1 person on the 
suspicion of terrorism. 
 
Diyarbakir - 12.30.09: Security forces detained 4 employees of 
the pro-Kurdish Free People Magazine and confiscated copies of 
the publication. 
 
Diyarbakir - 12.30.09: An employee of the pro-Kurdish Dicle News 
Agency was sentenced to 10 months in prison on the charge of 
"making propaganda for the PKK." 
 
Hakkari - 12.30.09: Security forces detained 6 people on the 
suspicion of terrorism. 
 
Sanliurfa - 12.30.09: Security forces arrested DTP Chairman of 
Viransehir on the charge of "being member of a terror 
organization." 
 
Batman - 12.28.09: Security forces arrested 12 people on the 
charge of "making propaganda for the PKK." 
 
Mersin, Sanliurfa, Diyarbakir and Van - 12.28.09: Police 
captured 11 people who were preparing to carry out 
assassinations on behalf of the PKK. It was reported that the 
PKK's team, including 2 members in the Adana region, were 
targeting top-level GOT administrators in the region. 
 
Van - 12.28.09: Security forces arrested 12 people on the charge 
of "making propaganda for the PKK." 
 
ADANA 00000001  003 OF 005 
 
 
 
Diyarbakir - 12.28.09: Security forces detained 5 people on the 
suspicion of terrorism. 
 
Sanliurfa - 12.28.09: Security forces arrested 1 person on the 
charge of "making propaganda for the PKK." 
 
Diyarbakir - 12.28.09: Security forces detained 7 people, 
including BDP (Peace and Democracy Party) members, on the 
suspicion of terrorism. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
¶C.  Other media stories about the PKK: 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
Turkish media reported that in 2009, security forces captured 
105 PKK members of whom 61 were killed and 156 surrendered. In 
2008, 670 were killed, 273 were captured and 174 surrendered. In 
2007, 315 were killed, 229 were captured and 109 surrendered. 
 
Pro-PKK web site ANF reported that in 2009, TAF carried out 273 
operations, including 49 air-strikes and 168 howitzer and mortar 
attacks. 128 Turkish troops and 94 PKK members were killed in 24 
clashes and 7 guerilla actions. 
 
Diyarbakir - 01.03.10: The pro-PKK "Aydin Erdem Revenge Brigade" 
attacked two banks with Molotov cocktails. 
 
N.Iraq - 01.02.10: 41 new recruits joined the PKK. 
 
Sanliurfa - 01.02.10: Opening ceremony of the BDP turned into a 
pro-PKK demonstration.  Approximately 500 people joined in the 
ceremony and chanted slogans in favor of PKK leader Abdullah 
Ocalan. 
 
Diyarbakir - 01.02.10: Approximately 400 people gathered to 
protest recent anti-KCK operations. Demonstrators chanted 
pro-PKK and Ocalan slogans and made a press statement. 
 
Sirnak - 12.31.09 - 01.03.10: PKK supporters blocked the 
Cizre-Sirnak highway to traffic and clashed with security 
forces; no injuries reported. 
 
Mersin - 12.31.09: Security forces arrested 2 people in an 
anti-organized-crime operation. 
 
Diyarbakir - 12.30.09: Many members of pro-Kurdish "Free Citizen 
Union" gathered to protest anti-KCK operations. Police 
intervened with tear gas, pressurized water and batons, and 
demonstrators responded with Molotov cocktails, stones and 
firecrackers.  Approximately 20 people blocked 
Diyarbakir-Hakkari highway and ignited trash barrels. 
Demonstrators stoned an Iranian passenger bus, wounding 2 
people. 
 
Malatya - 12.30.09: Security forces found 1,870 Kalashnikov 
rounds and 200 G-3 infantry rifle rounds. 
 
Mardin - 12.30.09: Police intervened in a pro-PKK demonstration 
with tear gas, batons and pressurized water. Demonstrators 
responded with Molotov cocktails and stones. 
 
Hakkari - 12.30.09 - 01.02.10: PKK sympathizers blocked the 
Yuksekova-Van Highway to traffic. Police intervened with tear 
gas and pressurized water while PKK supporters responded with 
stones and Molotov cocktails. 
 
Mardin - 12.30.09: Shopkeepers shuttered their establishments to 
protest the recent anti-KCK operation. 
 
Adana - 12.30.09: Pro-PKK web site ANF said the Governorship of 
Adana has cancelled social service medical privileges for 17,000 
on the suspicion of terrorism. 
 
Van - 12.30.09: Many people gathered to protest anti-KCK 
operations. Demonstrators chanted pro-PKK and Ocalan slogans. 
Protestors blocked the NATO road in Ova Parish. Security forces 
intervened with tear gas and pressurized water. PKK supporters 
responded with stones. The clash continued for almost 1 hour. 
 
Hakkari - 12.30.09: Approximately 3000 people joined in the 
opening ceremony of BDP.  Demonstrators chanted pro-PKK and 
Ocalan slogans. 2 Turkish war jets made low altitude fly-bys 
during the opening ceremony, an action that was protested by the 
crowd. 
 
Batman, Sanliurfa, Mardin, Hakkari, Mersin, Van and Diyarbakir - 
12.30.09: Thousands of people gathered to protest recent 
anti-KCK operations. Demonstrators chanted pro-PKK and Ocalan 
 
ADANA 00000001  004 OF 005 
 
 
slogans. . No clashes or arrests occurred. 
 
Hakkari - 12.28.09: Approximately 3000 people gathered for the 
opening ceremony of the BDP.  Clashes erupted between PKK 
supporters and security forces after the opening ceremony. 
Approximately 1000 demonstrators who wanted to hold an illegal 
march threw stones and Molotov cocktails and police intervened 
with tear gas, pressurized water and batons.  Demonstrators 
stoned banks and official buildings.  Security forces detained 
at least 8 people. 
 
Malatya - 12.28.09: PKK supporters set fire to some 15 vehicles 
to protest the recent anti-KCK operations. 
 
Batman - 12.28.09 - 01.03.10: Thousands of people, including the 
Batman mayor, gathered in mass meetings organized by the BDP to 
protest the recent anti-KCK operations across Turkey. 
Demonstrators chanted pro-PKK and Ocalan slogans. No clashes or 
arrests were reported. 
 
Van - 12.28.09: Approximately 10,000 people gathered in front of 
the BDP building to protest anti-KCK operations. 
 
Sirnak - 12.28.09: Security forces clashed with PKK supporters. 
Police intervened with tear gas and pressurized water; at least 
3 people were detained. 
 
Hakkari - 12.28.09 and 01.02.10: Security forces clashed with 
PKK sympathizers and detained 22 people. Fifteen people, 
including 4 police officers, were wounded. 
 
¶4.  (U) Media reports on significant crime or security incidents: 
 
Kahramanmaras - 01.02.10: The Marxist Leninist Communist Party 
claimed responsibility for the  concussion bomb placed near the 
BBP (Great Unity Party) headquarters on December 18, 2009. 
 
Adiyaman - 01.02.10: Security forces detained 10 people in an 
anti-organized-crime operation. On the same day, unidentified 
people attacked an ATM with stones. 
 
Batman - 01.02.10: Security forces detained 2 people in an 
anti-smuggling operation. 
 
Hakkari - 01.02.10: Security forces seized 3 historical 
artifacts and detained 1 person. 
 
Van - 01.02.10: Iranian troops shot an Iranian smuggler who was 
trying to enter into Turkey illegally. 
 
Diyarbakir - 01.01.10: Unidentified people in snow masks 
attempted to attack AK Party's Provincial Building with Molotov 
cocktails. 
 
Diyarbakir - 2009: Security forces detained 59 people and 
arrested 42 of them in anti-weapons-trafficking operations. 73 
pistols, 3 Kalashnikovs, 109 magazines, and 1,277 rounds of 
ammunition were seized.  In separate operations against other 
types of crime, security forces detained 208 people and arrested 
18 of them.  Security forces detained approximately 1,500 people 
in over 500 anti-organized crime operations and arrested 449 of 
them. 
 
Hakkari - 12.31.09: Iranian security forces detained 10 Turkish 
citizens on charges of smuggling oil across the border. 
 
Kilis and Mardin - 12.31.09: Security forces detained 2 people 
in anti-organized-crime operations. 
 
Sanliurfa - 12.30.09: 9 people, including 7 police officers, 
were wounded in a fire fight which broke out among people 
standing in line. 
 
Malatya - 12.30.09: As part of the Ergenekon investigation, 
Special. Sgt. Veysel Sahin's testimony  claims the retired 
colonel who is suspected of links to the killings of three 
Christians in Malatya in 2007 was also implicated in the 
Semdinli affair of 2005 (when two noncommissioned officers and a 
PKK informant were caught  planting a bomb at the Umut Bookstore 
in the southeastern town of Semdinli). 
 
Malatya - 12.30.09: 2 students were injured in a clash at Inonu 
University. Security forces detained many students. The incident 
is under investigation. 
 
Adana - 12.28.09: 2 simultaneous concussion bombs exploded. The 
first bomb was placed by the MHP headquarters close to military 
residences, and exploded at 20:55. The second bomb was placed 
near the GOT-operated Ziraat Bank.  No causalities reported. 
 
ADANA 00000001  005 OF 005 
 
 
According to Adana's police chief, nobody has claimed 
responsibility and there are no suspects. 
 
¶5. (U) Illegal immigrant arrests: 
 
12.27.09 through 01.02.10: Security forces captured and deported 
853 illegal immigrants from: Kirklareli, Erzurum, Nigde, 
Tekirdag, Van, Aydin, Hatay, Aksaray, Hakkari, Sirnak, Bitlis, 
Edirne, the Aegean Coast and the borders of Iran, Iraq, Syria 
and Greece. 8 Turks assisting them were also detained in the 
operations. 
 
¶6. (U) Counter-narcotic operations: 
 
The Turkish National Police report the following anti-narcotics 
operations: 13 tons of drugs confiscated in 1,100 operations in 
¶2007. In 2008, 15 tons of drugs were seized in 1407 operations. 
Police confiscated 8.5 tons of drugs in the first 6 months of 
¶2009. 
 
Diyarbakir - 2009: Security forces seized 7 tons of hashish in 
249 separate operations and detained 462 people; of those,  331 
were later arrested and 131 people are still under 
investigation. 
 
Gaziantep - 01.03.10: Security forces confiscated 53 kilograms 
of hashish and detained 4 people. 
 
Siirt - 01.02.10: Security forces seized 15 kilograms of hashish 
and arrested 2 people. 
 
Diyarbakir - 12.31.09: Security forces seized 112 kilograms of 
hashish and arrested 4 people. 
 
Hatay - 12.30.09: Security forces seized 2 kilograms of hashish 
and detained 2 people. 
 
Gaziantep - 12.30.09: Security forces detained 13 people. 
 
Diyarbakir - 12.30.09: Security forces seized 385 kilograms of 
hashish belonging to the PKK and arrested 1 person on the charge 
of "assisting and harboring the PKK." 
 
Istanbul - 12.30.09: Security forces detained 6 people from SE 
Turkey. 
 
Izmir - 12.28.09: Security forces confiscated 118 kilograms of 
hashish and detained 1 person. Reportedly, the hashish was 
brought from Diyarbakir. 
 
Kahramanmaras - 12.28.09: Security forces seized 48 kilograms of 
hashish and detained 7 people. 
DARNELL