10CASABLANCA8
MOROCCO - 2010 INVESTMENT CLIMATE
Thu Jan 14 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Casablanca
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHCL #0008/01 0140925
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 140925Z JAN 10
FM AMCONSUL CASABLANCA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8593
INFO RUCNMGH/MAGHREB COLLECTIVE
RUEHNK/AMEMBASSY NOUAKCHOTT 2377
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT 0026
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDCUNCLAS CASABLANCA 000008 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/IFD/OIA AND NEA/MAG 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO USTR 
USDOC FOR MAC/ANESA 
TREASURY FOR OASIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV ETRD EFIN ELAB OPIC KTDB PGOV MO
SUBJECT: MOROCCO - 2010 INVESTMENT CLIMATE 
STATEMENT 
 
REF: 09 STATE 124006 
 
The 2010 Investment Climate Statement for Morocco 
follows. 
 
A.1. Openness to Foreign Investment 
 
Morocco actively encourages foreign investment and 
has sought to facilitate it through sound macro- 
economic policies, trade liberalization, and 
structural reforms.  The U.S. Free Trade Agreement 
(FTA) and the Association Agreement with the EU 
have led Morocco to reduce its tariffs on imports 
from the U.S. and EU.  Morocco has also signed a 
quadrilateral FTA with Tunisia, Egypt and Jordan, 
and a bilateral FTA with Turkey.  Additionally, it 
is seeking trade and investment accords with other 
African, Asian and Latin American countries. 
 
The U.S.-Morocco FTA has nearly doubled exports and 
tripled inward investment since 2006.  Nonetheless, 
challenges remain.  According to the World Bank's 
2009 "Doing Business in Morocco" report, the 
country's excessive bureaucratic red tape continues 
to be a major constraint on the competitiveness of 
the economy and deters investors.  To facilitate 
foreign investment, the government has created a 
number of Regional Investment Centers to minimize 
and accelerate administrative procedures. 
Investments in excess o 200 million MAD (USD 26 
million) are, in additio, referred to a special 
ministerial committee chired by the Prime 
Minister.  In 2009, the Commision approved 56 
projects totaling more than USD .8 billion. 
 
Morcco's 1995 Investment Charter aplies to both 
foreign and Moroccan investors, wit foreign 
exchange provisions favoring foreign inestors. 
Foreign investment is permitted in nearl every 
sector.  The world's largest phosphate prducer, 
Morocco's Office Cherifien des Phosphates (OCP), 
has opened its phosphate hub to foreign investors 
to set up new fertilizer and chemical plants, a 
move seen by analysts as a step towards 
liberalizing the phosphate sector.  OCP's chairman 
told the press that OCP is planning an initial 
public offering.  Additionally, although foreigners 
are prohibited from owning agricultural land, the 
law does allow for long-term leases of up to 99 
years and permits agricultural land to be purchased 
for non-agricultural purposes.  To attract foreign 
investment in its agricultural sector, Morocco 
recently set aside about 50,000 HA of communal land 
readily available for leasing to French, Spanish 
and Middle Eastern investors.  Agricultural foreign 
investments are targeted mostly at citrus and 
olives, with some small investments in grapes and 
berries. 
 
Year      Index                        Ranking 
2009    TI Corruption Index          89 out of 180 
2010    Heritage Economic Freedom   101 out of 183 
2010    World Bank Doing Business   128 out of 183 
2010    MCC Gov Effectiveness      77th Percentile 
2010    MCC Rule of Law            60th Percentile 
2010    MCC Control of Corruption  73rd Percentile 
2010    MCC Fiscal Policy          36th Percentile 
2010    MCC Trade Policy           96th Percentile 
2010    MCC Regulatory Quality     57th Percentile 
2010    MCC Business Start Up      79th Percentile 
2010    MCC Land Rights Access     61st Percentile 
2010    MCC Natural Resource Mgmt  64th Percentile 
 
A.2. Conversion and Transfer Policies 
 
The Moroccan dirham is convertible for all current- 
account and selected-capital account transactions. 
Particularly, capital-account repatriation 
transactions are convertible if the original 
investment is registered with the foreign exchange 
office.  Morocco's foreign exchange law enables 
expatriate employees to repatriate their entire 
salaries. 
 
 
Foreign exchange is readily available through 
commercial banks for the following activities 
without prior government approval:  Remittances by 
foreign residents; repatriation of dividends and 
capital by foreign investors; and payment for 
foreign technical assistance, royalties and 
licenses. 
 
The current exchange-rate regime is a tightly 
managed float against a euro-dominated basket of 
currencies.  The Moroccan dirham thus tends to move 
in line with the Euro.  It strengthened through 
much of 2009 against the dollar, but gave up some 
of those gains at the end of the year, and entered 
2010 at about 7.90 MAD to the dollar. 
 
A.3. Expropriation and Compensation 
 
Mission Morocco is not aware of any recent, 
confirmed instances of private property being 
expropriated for other than public purposes, or 
being expropriated in a manner that is 
discriminatory or not in accordance with 
established principles of international law. 
 
A.4. Dispute Settlement 
 
In general, investor rights are backed by an 
impartial procedure for dispute settlement that is 
transparent.  In 2009, however, a few U.S. 
Companies had investment disputes with the 
Government of Morocco.  In most cases, through U.S. 
advocacy, these minor disputes were resolved with 
the relevant government agencies. 
 
While Morocco's commercial and appeals courts have 
generally improved the dispute settlement climate, 
Moroccan and foreign companies continue to complain 
about the inefficiency and the lack of transparency 
in the judicial system.  Among King Mohammed VI's 
six priority areas identified in a major annual 
address in August 2009 were improving the business 
environment and the fairness and efficiency of the 
judicial system.  The king's emphasis is well 
placed, as recent UN and World Bank studies 
highlight Morocco's shortcomings in this area, 
indicating that bankruptcy protection and 
liquidation procedures are inefficient and that the 
courts are slow and often fail to enforce legal 
rulings. 
 
In an effort to promote foreign investment, the 
Moroccan legislature has adopted laws to protect 
both foreign investors and their Moroccan 
counterparts.  Morocco is a member of the 
International Center for the Settlement of 
Investment Disputes (ICSID) and a party to the 1958 
Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of 
Foreign Arbitral Awards (with reservations) and the 
1965 Convention on the Settlement of Investment 
Disputes between States and Nationals of Other 
states.  New legislation extending the scope of 
arbitration and mediation and giving them added 
legal standing took place in July 2007, partly as a 
result of FTA required reforms.  Arbitration, in 
particular, finds increasing use in Morocco today. 
Moreover, USAID, in collaboration with IFC, 
assisted the Government in establishing a national 
commission on Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) 
with a mandate to regulate mediation training 
centers and develop mediator certification systems. 
The goal of this program is to increase the use of 
mediation in the prevention phase of bankruptcy 
proceedings and in the resolution of business 
disputes outside of the courts. 
 
A.5. Performance Requirements/Incentives 
 
At present, there are no general foreign investor 
performance requirements.  However, in the event 
that government incentives are provided, 
requirements may be imposed, and if so, would be 
 
spelled out in the specific investment contract. 
 
Morocco provides a range of investment incentives, 
particularly in the off-shoring sector where it has 
developed a successful fiscal incentive scheme to 
attract off-shoring clientele to its facilities. 
The incentives include a corporate tax holiday 
during the first five years of business and a 17.5 
percent rate thereafter; telecommunications costs 
that are set at 35 percent below the market price; 
and training grants of up to USD 7,000 for each 
Moroccan employee during the first three years of 
employment. 
 
American citizens can enter Morocco for a period of 
three months without a visa.  A Moroccan residence 
permit is required for a period of more than three 
months. 
 
A.6. Right to Private Ownership and Establishment 
 
Private ownership is permitted in all but a few 
sectors reserved for the state, such as phosphate 
mining.  Economic analysts, however, speculate that 
as Morocco's phosphate processing increasingly 
becomes open to foreign investment, so will its 
mining sector.  Apart from a few exceptions, 
private entities may freely establish, acquire and 
dispose of interests in business enterprises. 
 
In 2009 a number of firms including the national 
port operator (Marsa Maroc) were placed on the 
short list of companies to be privatized in the 
near future. 
 
A.7. Protection of Property Rights 
 
The U.S.-Morocco FTA contains strong intellectual 
property protections, which were incorporated in 
Moroccan intellectual property legislation in 2006. 
Pursuant to the FTA obligations, Morocco enacted 
legislation that increased protection of 
trademarks, copyrights and patents.  While the 
protection of Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) is 
improving as a result of these provisions, 
counterfeit DVDs and CDs remain widely available 
throughout Morocco and weaknesses remain in 
country's mechanisms for detection and sanctioning 
of internet-based IPR violations.  Morocco's 
Customs Office, Copyright Office (BMDA), and the 
Office of Industrial and Commercial Property 
(OMPIC) have initiated campaigns to target 
Morocco's largest counterfeit manufacturers and 
importers, with mixed success.  Consumer product 
companies tell us that counterfeiters have become 
increasingly sophisticated in their production and 
distribution of counterfeit goods. 
 
Secured interests in property are recognized and 
enforced through the "Administration de la 
Conservation Fonciere." 
 
A.8. Transparency of the Regulatory System 
 
Despite government efforts to increase the system's 
transparency, Morocco's administration is opaque 
and difficult to navigate.  Routine permits, 
especially those required by local government 
agencies, can be difficult to obtain.  Morocco has 
sought to increase the transparency of its public 
tenders, but moves to decentralize the procurement 
process have had the opposite effect in recent 
years. 
 
In 2006 a new charter for the central bank created 
an independent board of directors and prohibited 
the Ministry of Finance and Economy from borrowing 
from the central bank except in exceptional 
circumstances. 
 
A.9. Efficient Capital Markets and Portfolio 
Investment 
 
Morocco's banking system is one of the most 
liberalized in North Africa.  Nonetheless, it is 
highly concentrated, with the six largest banks 
accounting for 85 percent of banking sector assets. 
The IMF/World Bank's updated Financial System 
Stability Assessment concluded that the system was 
"stable, adequately capitalized, profitable and 
resilient to shocks."  It noted the progress 
Morocco has made in deepening financial 
intermediation (39 percent of the population has a 
bank account, up from  36 percent in 2007) and in 
reducing the overall level of non-performing assets 
(down from 11 percent in 2006 to 6 percent at the 
end of 2008). 
 
A new Moroccan banking law was passed in 2006, 
strengthening the supervisory power of the central 
bank and improving risk management practices. 
Morocco is moving towards complete adoption of 
Basel II capital adequacy and risk management 
guidelines in order to improve financial stability, 
while also adopting International Accounting 
Standards (IAS), both intended to enhance 
transparency. 
 
Credit is allocated on market terms, and foreign 
investors are able to obtain credit on the local 
market.  There are some cross-shareholding 
arrangements, but they are not tailored to exclude 
foreign investment.  The Mission has not heard of 
any efforts by the private sector or industry to 
restrict foreign participation in standard-setting 
organizations.  The government has actively sought 
out the participation of foreign investors for 
discussions on improving the business climate in 
Morocco. 
 
Some foreign banks are critical of what they view 
as a lack of proportionate participation in the 
Moroccan Bankers' Association.  Moroccan banks are 
largely in compliance with the Basel I standards 
and have become Basel II compliant, as required by 
the Moroccan central bank.  Banks are supervised on 
a consolidated basis and must provide statements 
audited by certified public accountants.  In 2009, 
ten banks submitted consolidated financial 
statements based on Basel II standards. 
 
The Casablanca Stock Exchange (CSE), founded in 
1929 and re-launched as a private institution in 
1993, is one of the few regional exchanges with no 
restrictions on foreign participation.  An average 
of 30 percent of its total capitalization is in 
foreign hands.  The Exchange prospered during the 
early 1990s but suffered a bear market from late 
1998 through 2002, with a decline in listings to 
approximately 50 companies and a reduction of 
market capitalization to approximately USD 8.3 
billion.  An ensuing bull market lasted nearly five 
years, but the market weakened in 2008.  With the 
global credit crisis and its spillover on the real 
economy dampening foreign investment inflows and 
demand for exports, the CSE declined further in 
¶2009.  The volume of shares traded on the CSE was 
disappointing, falling by more than 39 percent 
compared with the same period in 2008.  Market 
capitalization also dropped by 13 percent over the 
same period. 
 
Analysts note that the market is buoyed by 
continuing restrictions on the ability of Moroccans 
to invest abroad.  Gradual easing of these limits 
is widening Moroccan investors' options, however, 
and while there has been discussion of full 
currency liberalization in the medium term, those 
plans will likely be delayed as a result of the 
international financial crisis. 
 
A.10. Competition from State-Owned Enterprises 
 
Morocco maintains partial or full state ownership 
in several sectors, from phosphate mining to 
transportation to telecommunications.  While the 
 
leaders of Morocco's state-owned enterprises (SOE) 
are appointed by the King, most report to a Board 
of Directors chaired by a Minister or royal or 
prime ministerial appointee, and publish annual 
reports. 
 
SOEs compete with private firms under the same 
terms and conditions. 
 
A.11. Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) 
 
CSR has gained strength in tandem with Morocco's 
economic expansion and stability.  The country's 
businesses are slowly embracing responsibility for 
the impact of their activities on the environment, 
communities, employees and consumers.  As an 
example, the General Federation of Moroccan 
Businesses (CGEM) recently awarded the country's 
first "social labels" to 13 companies based on a 
systematic analysis of the effects of their 
activities.  While there is no legislation 
mandating specific levels of CSR, foreign and some 
local enterprises follow generally accepted 
principles such as the OECD CSR guidelines for 
multinational companies.  NGOs are also taking an 
increasingly active role in monitoring 
corporations' CSR performance. 
 
A.12. Political Violence 
 
Morocco is a monarchy with a Constitution, 
government, parliament and judiciary, in which 
ultimate power and authority rest with the throne. 
A democratic reform process is underway and the 
country is broadly regarded as politically stable. 
The U.S. Government maintains excellent relations 
with Morocco and has designated Morocco a Major 
non-NATO Ally.  A series of terrorist bombings in 
Casablanca in March and April 2007, the first major 
incidents since the Casablanca bombings of 2003, 
highlighted the fact that Morocco continues to face 
a terrorist threat.  U.S. facilities were targeted 
in 2007.  Counterterrorism cooperation is good. 
The Moroccan Government aggressively investigates 
terrorist suspects and has dismantled a number of 
terrorist cells over the past year. 
 
Demonstrations occur frequently in Morocco and 
usually center on domestic issues.  During periods 
of heightened regional tension, large 
demonstrations may take place in major cities. 
Although these demonstrations have been peaceful, 
well organized, and well controlled by the police, 
some have been anti-American with isolated 
incidents of violence. 
 
The sparsely settled Western Sahara was the site of 
armed conflict between the Moroccan Government and 
the Polisario Front, which demands independence.  A 
cease-fire has been in effect since 1991, but the 
territory remains disputed between Morocco, 
Algeria, and the Polisario.  Negotiations to reach 
a settlement resumed in 2007 under UN auspices, but 
the dispute hampers development in the territory, 
as well as economic and political integration in 
the North Africa region. 
 
A.13. Corruption 
 
Morocco has a wide body of laws and regulations to 
combat corruption, but it remains a problem, in 
part due to the low salaries in the public sector. 
Prime Minister Abbas El Fassi has made the fight 
against corruption one of his key priorities.  A 
new anti-corruption agency was set up in 2007 but 
only became operational in January 2009.  Headed by 
a respected senior Moroccan official who has been 
active in anti-corruption efforts since the 
founding of "Transparency Maroc," the agency was 
created to "moralize" Moroccan public life and to 
propose specific steps the government can take to 
address the issue. 
 
 
In spite of legislative improvements and a slight 
rebound over 2006, Morocco's 89th place ranking in 
Transparency International's 2010 corruption index 
is well below its 2002 level, when it was in 52nd 
place.  According to the Index, real estate is the 
sector most affected by corruption, and the 
judiciary is the most corrupt public institution. 
Government officials have criticized the Index, 
which reflects public perceptions concerning 
corruption, for not emphasizing recent anti- 
corruption efforts.  These include enhancing the 
transparency of public tenders and implementation 
of a requirement that senior government officials 
declare their assets at the start and end of their 
government service. 
 
Since 2003 Morocco has taken a series of steps to 
counter terrorist finance, strengthen controls 
against money laundering, and conform to 
international accounting and banking standards. 
Comprehensive anti-money laundering legislation was 
passed in 2007, and an independent Financial 
Intelligence Unit became operational in 2009.  The 
robust legislation draws largely from 
recommendations made by the Organization for 
Economic Cooperation and Development's (OECD's) 
Financial Action Task Force (FATF). 
 
¶B. Bilateral Investment Agreements 
 
The U.S.-Morocco FTA was signed in June 2004 and 
came into effect in January 2006, ending tariffs on 
over 98 percent of the bilateral trade in consumer 
and industrial goods and subsuming previous 
bilateral investment agreements.  For more details 
on the U.S.-Morocco FTA please visit 
www.moroccousafta.com 
 
¶C. OPIC and other Investment Insurance Programs 
 
Morocco's agreement with the Overseas Private 
Investment Corporation was most recently updated in 
March 1995.  Morocco is also a member of the 
Kuwait-based Arab Investment Guarantee Organization 
(OAGI) and the Multilateral Investment Guarantee 
Agency (MIGA).  For more details please see 
www.opic.gov 
 
¶D. Labor 
 
Once strong and politically influential, the 
Moroccan trade union movement is now fragmented and 
no longer possesses the political clout it carried 
50 years ago when it helped lead the country to 
independence.  Nevertheless, 5 of the 24 trade 
union federations retain the potential to influence 
political life.  Although unions claim high 
membership rates, Morocco has about 600,000 
unionized workers, less than six percent of the 
11.26 million work force. 
 
Moroccan labor law and practice draw from French 
models.  The labor code was reformed in 2004, 
reducing the maximum workweek from 48 to 44 hours. 
Labor codes concerning unions and the right to 
strike do not cover domestic workers.  Investors 
continue to view labor regulations as a significant 
constraint.  They complain that procedures 
regarding lay-offs remain complicated and onerous, 
and they impose a significant financial burden on 
companies.  Rules regarding foreign personnel are 
also vague and can lead to conflicting 
interpretations and arbitrary decisions. 
 
Morocco has ratified the International Labor 
Organization (ILO) convention covering the right to 
organize and bargain collectively, and any group of 
eight workers can organize.  Article 14 of the 
Constitution gives workers the right to strike, but 
no detailed law defines it.  For a union to engage 
in collective bargaining it must have at least 35 
percent of the enterprise's workforce as registered 
members.  The Ministry of Interior occasionally 
 
intervenes, especially if the Government believes 
strategic interests are threatened.  There are 
mandatory procedures governing the settlement of 
disputes, though the Government settles them on a 
case-by-case basis. 
 
The official national unemployment figure at the 
end of the third quarter in 2009 was 9.0 percent 
with the more meaningful urban unemployment figure 
at 15.9 percent.  This represented a slight 
improvement over the same period in 2008.  The 
minimum wage is currently 2,010 MAD per month, 
approximately USD 240. 
 
¶E. Foreign Trade Zones/Free Ports 
 
The industrial free trade zone in Tangier has 
brought foreign investment and employment to the 
northern region of Morocco.  The companies located 
in the zone may import goods duty free and are 
exempt from other taxes.  Moroccan labor laws still 
apply, but few, if any, firms are unionized.  There 
is also an offshore banking law covering Tangier. 
 
Foreign Direct Investment Statistics 
 
The Moroccan foreign exchange office maintains 
balance of payments statistics that include annual 
foreign exchange inflows for private foreign 
investment.  These statistics differentiate between 
foreign direct investment (purchases of companies 
or increases in capital), portfolio investment, and 
short-term financing for current account 
expenditures, e.g. lending to a subsidiary for 
purchases of equipment.  There are no official 
statistics on the stock of foreign investment in 
Morocco, but new foreign investment peaked at about 
USD 4.6 billion in 2007, declining to about 3.6 
billion 2008.  The following tables are based on 
balance of payments statistics. 
 
Foreign Direct Investment in Morocco 
(Millions of USD) 
 
Year             Total FDI           Percent of GDP 
1998                384.6                  1.1 
1999                945.6                  2.7 
2000                245.8                  0.8 
2001               2732.2                  8.0 
2002                534.2                  1.3 
2003               2430.2                  4.9 
2004               1070.5                  1.9 
2005               3007.6                  5.1 
2006               2962.5                  4.5 
2007               4629.2                  6.2 
2008               3608.1                  4.1 
 
 
Foreign Direct Investment Inflows by Country of 
Origin 
(Millions of USD) 
 
Country        2004   2005   2006    2007    2008 
 
United States  50.5   25.5    98.1    188.2   108.1 
France        535.6  2234.6  982.5   1740.7  1360.7 
Spain          53.8   162.4  817.2    744.9   337.6 
Germany        53.6   96.3   106.8    200.8   169.3 
UK             51.3   50.9   105.8    314.2   156.7 
Netherlands    14.2   29.3    25.8     61.5    24.3 
Benelux        39.1   48.0   296.0    160.7   133.9 
Saudi Arabia   39.9   40.8    37.5     77.6    65.9 
Switzerland    76.3   85.4   102.9    161.6   214.3 
UAE            37.3   81.9    87.9    464.6   608.5 
Kuwait          2.0   25.1   115.0    192.1    14.9 
Italy          30.0   23.6    38.0    105.4    99.0 
Portugal        2.3    6.8     5.7     6.8      5.8 
Others         84.6   97.0   143.0   210.0    309.1 
Total        1070.5 3007.6  2962.5  4629.1   3608.1 
 
N.B            2004   2005   2006    2007    2008 
 
Exchange       8.86   8.88   8.80    8.20    7.75 
 
  Rate (MAD/USD) 
 
GDP           56.40   58.90  65.40   75.10   88.88 
  (Billions of USD) 
 
 
Foreign direct Investment Inflows by Sector 
(Millions of USD) 
 
Sector       2004     2005     2006    2007   2008 
Industry    202.7    308.0   1019.6   404.2  230.2 
Tourism     161.5    346.9    889.6  1515.0  732.2 
Real Estate 230.2    272.8    467.8   925.7 1180.9 
Banking     172.1      5.0    166.3   222.4  639.9 
Insurance    18.7    128.9    166.2     2.6   25.9 
Commerce     69.1     49.7    118.9    41.9   23.2 
Holding       3.5     23.6     16.8   103.4  285.1 
Energy and Mining 
             37.9     42.5     11.4   343.7  202.4 
Transport     4.9     36.2      6.4   333.8   22.7 
Public Works 11.9     18.0      3.9    64.9   32.6 
Telecommunications 
             81.0   1725.2      3.1   376.5   29.7 
Agriculture   3.3      0.1      2.8     4.0    3.5 
Fishing       1.5      0.1      0.0     0.5    2.8 
Studies       7.9      0.1      0.0     0.0    0.0 
Other Services 
             53.9     46.9     76.8   275.1  192.7 
Other        10.4      3.5     12.8    15.6    4.4 
Total      1070.5   3007.6   2962.5  4629.1 3608.2 
 
 
Major Foreign Investors 
 
U.S. 
 
Industries Marocaines Modernes 
     Parent company: Procter and Gamble 
     Sector: Soaps and toiletries 
     Number of employees: 500 
 
Coca-Cola Export Corporation 
     Parent company: The Coca-Cola Export Corp. 
     Number of employees: 3,200 
 
J.R.A. Morocco S.A. 
     Parent company: Jordache Enterprises Inc. 
     Sector: Clothing/Manufacture of jeans 
     Number of employees: 1,000 
 
Delphi Automotive (former division of GM) 
     Sector: Auto part manufacturer 
     Number of employees: 4,890 
 
Kraft Foods 
     Sector: Food Products 
     Number of employees: 60 
 
Minco Aviation Electronics 
     Sector: Aviation/Hi Tech 
     Number of employees: 66 
USD 8 million to expand existing production 
facility 
 
Kerzner International 
     Parent company: Colony Capital 
     Sector: Tourism - Mazagan Beach Resort 
     Number of employees: 1,300 
 
Emerging Capital Partners and Truffle Capital 
     Sector: Mining 
 
International Paper 
     Sector: Packing 
     Number of employees: 1,500 
 
Fruit of the Loom 
     Sector: Textile 
     Number of employees: 2,300 
     USD 140 Million to build new textile plant 
 
Dell Computers 
     Sector: Computers/Hi Tech 
 
     Number of employees: 1,700 
 
DHL 
     Sector: Packing/Transportation 
     Number of employees: 300 
     USD 40 million investment 
 
Pfizer 
     Sector: Pharmaceutical 
     Number of employees: 179 
     USD 110 million investment to upgrade and 
expand facilities 
 
Brinks 
     Sector: Security 
     Number of employees: 1500 
 
Other 
 
Jorf Lasfar Energy Company 
     Parent company: TACA Energy (operated by CMS 
Energy) 
     Sector: Independent power project 
     Number of Employees: 500 
     USD 1.2 billion project 
 
ST Microelectronics 
     Parent company: S.G.S. Thomson (France) 
     Sector: Electronic components and 
semiconductor manufacturing 
     Number of employees: 1,600 
 
Pechiney - MMA 
     Parent company: Pechiney (France) 
     Sector: Aluminum cookware manufacturing 
     Number of employees: 1,280 
 
Bymaro S.A. 
     Parent company: Bouygues S.A. (France) 
     Sector: Civil engineering 
     Number of employees: 1,000 
 
Renault Maroc 
     Parent company: Renault S.A. (France) 
     Sector: Motor vehicle assembly 
     Number of employees: 800 
 
C.G.E. Maroc 
     Parent company: C.G.E. (France) 
     Sector: Electric cable and transformer 
     manufacturing 
     Number of employees: 675 
 
Polymedic 
     Parent company: Hoechst AG (Germany) 
     Sector: Pharmaceutical manufacturing 
     Number of employees: 350 
 
MILLARD