10RABAT47
USG DOE/NNSA BILATERAL NUCLEAR EMERGENCY
Fri Jan 22 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Rabat
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHRB #0047/01 0221711
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 221711Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY RABAT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1079
INFO RHEBAAA/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHUNV/USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA
RUEHCL/AMCONSUL CASABLANCA 0053UNCLAS RABAT 000047 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR ISN/WMDT LOWE, LEWIS, 
STATE FOR ISN/NESS BURKART, FLADEBOE, KENAGY 
STATE FOR NEA/MAG JONES, PATTERSON 
VIENNA FOR DOE THOMAS, NRC - ASTWOOD 
DOE FOR NNSA/NA- 1 D'AGOSTINO, BARKER 
DOE FOR NNSA/NA-40 KROL, PAVETTO 
DOE FOR NNSA/NA-46 MCCLELLAND, HEINRICH, BUNTMAN, 
HOLLERAN, RIVERA, ZAGAYTOVA 
NRC FOR DOANE 
DHS FOR DNDO WHITROCK 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG TRGY TPHY SENV TNGD KNNP MO SP
SUBJECT: USG DOE/NNSA BILATERAL NUCLEAR EMERGENCY 
MANAGEMENT COOPERATION WITH MOROCCO 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY: U.S Department of Energy (DOE) National 
Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA), Office of 
International Emergency Management and Cooperation 
(IEMC) personnel conducted bilateral nuclear 
emergency management discussions and training with 
Government of Morocco (GOM) officials January 12-15, 
¶2010.  The discussions and training included a team 
of nine DOE/NNSA personnel presenting training and 
information on: A) Nuclear Emergency Exercises; B) 
International Radiological Assistance Training; C) 
International Radiation Medical Assistance Training; 
D) Assisting Morocco with the Preparation and 
Conduct of a Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear 
Terrorism (GICNT) Exercise; E) Atmospheric Plume 
Modeling; F) Emergency Preparedness and Response 
Equipment Demonstration and Training; and G) 
Emergency Operations Center Design.  More than 80 
Government of Morocco (GOM) representatives from the 
National Center for Nuclear Energy, Science and 
Technologies (CNESTEN), Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
(MFA), Civil Protection, National Police, Royal 
Gendarmerie, Ministry of Energy, and National 
Defense Administration participated in the training. 
The discussions focused on next steps regarding 
DOE/NNSA and GOM nuclear emergency management 
cooperation.  END SUMMARY. 
 
---------- 
BACKGROUND 
---------- 
 
¶2.  At the June 2009, GICNT meeting in The Hague, 
Netherlands, Morocco proposed hosting a GICNT 
exercise in late 2010 or early 2011 and requested 
assistance from DOE/NNSA and the Government of Spain 
(GOS).  The GICNT co-chairs (U.S and Russia) 
endorsed the exercise and assistance to be provided 
by DOE/NNSA and GOS.  During preliminary discussions 
between DOE/NNSA and GOM officials, GOM asked for 
additional assistance, collaboration and cooperation 
in nuclear emergency preparedness and response.  To 
foster this expanded collaboration and cooperation, 
DOE/NNSA and CNESTEN signed a Statement of Intent 
(SOI) regarding Nuclear and Radiological Emergency 
Management and Incident Response capabilities on 
September 15, 2009.  The SOI provides for 
collaboration and exchange of experiences in 
training, exercises, development of national 
capabilities and GICNT. 
 
------------------- 
OPENING THE SEMINAR 
------------------- 
 
¶3.  Opening the seminar, Dr. Khalid El Mediouri, 
Director General of CNESTEN, stressed the importance 
of an effective nuclear emergency preparedness and 
response program and his appreciation of the USG and 
DOE/NNSA assistance and support.  Dr. El Mediouri 
also expressed appreciation for Spanish involvement 
in providing assistance for the GOM-hosted GICNT 
exercise. 
 
¶4.  Mr. Abdelkrim El Yaagoubi, head of Civil 
Protection Inspectorate Division, stressed the 
importance of all countries having programs in place 
to counter terrorism and to address any type of 
emergency including natural disasters, nuclear, 
radiological, chemical, biological, and 
technological events.  Mr. El Yaagoubi also 
expressed his appreciation for USG and (GOS) 
assistance.  Mr. Carlos Torres Vidal, of the Spanish 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International 
Cooperation, provided remarks on the importance of 
nuclear emergency preparedness and response and 
cooperation under the GICNT.  Mr. Vincent 
McClelland, IEMC Director, provided an overview of 
DOE/NNSA's nuclear emergency program.  The opening 
session concluded with Mr.Mohamed Salami, Chief of 
 
Civil Protection's Planning and Prevention Division, 
providing an overview of the GOM emergency programs. 
 
------------------------ 
JANUARY 12-15 ACTIVITIES 
------------------------ 
 
----------------------------- 
¶A. Nuclear Emergency Exercise 
----------------------------- 
 
¶5.  DOE/NNSA provided a two-day training session on 
exercise development, control and evaluation, 
entitled: Exercise Builder.  Exercise Builder is a 
computer based program employing a step-by-step 
process for development, control, evaluation, and 
sharing lessons learned in the exercise development 
cycle.  The Exercise Builder training session was 
attended by 26 representatives of the various GOM 
organizations. 
 
----------------------------------- 
¶B. Radiological Assistance Training 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  DOE/NNSA provided an overview of its 
international nuclear/radiological first responder 
training program, entitled "International 
Radiological Assistance Program Training for 
Emergency Response (I-RAPTER)."  I-RAPTER, which is 
based on the DOE/NNSA's training program for state 
and local emergency response personnel, provides 
first responders with the basic knowledge of 
necessary actions when confronted by a situation 
involving nuclear/radiological material.  The I- 
RAPTER overview was attended by 15 representatives 
of the various GOM organizations. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
¶C. Radiation Medical Assistance Training 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  DOE/NNSA provided an overview of its 
international radiation medical response training, 
entitled "International Radiation Medical (I- 
Medical)."  I- Medical, which is based on DOE/NNSA 
international medical training provided in 
cooperation with the World Health Organization (WHO) 
and IAEA, provides medical personnel (doctors, 
nurses, hospital workers and emergency medical 
services) with training in medical care for 
radiation victims and instructs in methods to 
minimize and contain radioactive contamination of 
medical personnel, equipment, and facilities.  The 
I-Medical overview was attended by 15 
representatives of the various GOM organizations. 
 
----------------- 
¶D. GICNT Exercise 
----------------- 
 
¶8.  Fourteen representatives of the various GOM 
organizations met with DOE/NNSA and GOS personnel to 
plan the GOM-hosted GICNT exercise.  The GOS 
representative provided information and data on the 
GOS-hosted GICNT exercise conducted in 2008 and 
DOE/NNSA provided details on NNSA exercises, such as 
EMPIRE 09, as well as exercise assistance that NNSA 
can provide.  The session outcome was very positive, 
resulting in the development of GOM concept and 
objectives, planning format, and exercise timeline. 
The GOM GICNT exercise scenario will involve a 
stolen radioactive source and will be presented in 
three modules over one and a half days plus a one 
day practical demonstration. 
 
----------------------------- 
¶E. Atmospheric Plume Modeling 
----------------------------- 
 
 
¶9.  A two day training session and practical 
demonstration of the International Exchange Program 
(IXP) atmospheric plume modeling for 
nuclear/radiological events was provided.  The IXP 
enables countries to use DOE/NNSA's National 
Atmospheric Release Advisory Center (NARAC) modeling 
capabilities at the Lawrence Livermore National 
Laboratory (LLNL) in the event of a 
nuclear/radiological release.  The IXP can also be 
used to support exercises.  Eight GOM 
representatives attended the training and will have 
access to the IXP system as needed to support GOM 
exercises and incidents. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
¶F. Emergency Preparedness and Response 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶10.  DOE/NNSA provided training to ten GOM 
representatives on various types of radiation 
detection equipment to include: radiation pagers, 
backpacks, idetifiers, and mobile (SPARC) systems. 
The training also provided an overview of various 
types of detection equipment available and effective 
utilization of equipment.  The GOM representatives 
expressed their interested in improving and 
enhancing their radiation detection equipment to 
ensure they have the necessary capabilities to 
effectively respond to any nuclear/radiological 
event.  A two hour demonstration of the equipment 
was provided to all GOM participants on January 15. 
 
----------------------------- 
¶G. Emergency Operation Center 
----------------------------- 
 
¶11.  CNESTEN and Civil Protection requested 
assistance in design and infrastructure development 
to establish an effective emergency center for 
response to any nuclear or radiological event. 
CNESTEN is in the process of enhancing its emergency 
center capabilities and is proposing to network to 
the crisis center being developed by Civil 
Protection.  Discussion involved 10 representatives 
of CNESTEN and Civil Protection and focused on 
developing effective voice, data, and video 
information exchange between the two organizations 
and with the IAEA. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
MEETING WITH MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶12.  DOE/NNSA IEMC Director Vincent McClelland and 
Deputy Director Ann Heinrich met with MFA United 
Nations and International Organizations Directorate 
Head Mr. Azzeddine Farhane.  Mr. Farhane, who is 
also the GOM lead for GICNT, expressed his 
appreciation for the USG and especially DOE/NNSA 
assistance in enhancing the GOM nuclear/radiological 
emergency preparedness and response program and 
support for the GOM hosted GICNT exercise.  Mr. 
Farhane stated that he would brief the GICNT 
exercise planning group on the status of the 
exercise at the upcoming GICNT meeting in Hungary. 
Mr. Farhane expressed his desire to work 
cooperatively with the USG and stated that the SOI 
between DOE/NNSA and CNESTEN and the GICNT provided 
the tools to fully establish greater cooperation. 
McClelland responded that our collaboration to date 
had been very rewarding, that the GOM 
representatives participating in the workshop proved 
very knowledgeable and eager to learn and share 
experiences, and that continued cooperation in the 
specific areas is being discussed and next steps are 
being developed. 
 
------- 
 
RESULTS 
------- 
 
¶13. The results of the training seminar and 
discussions provided detailed information regarding 
roles and responsibilities for nuclear/radiological 
emergencies, including terrorism, within the GOM. 
The sessions also provided information on existing 
GOM capabilities and the desire of the GOM to 
improve its capabilities and to establish enhanced 
cooperation and collaboration with DOE/NNSA in the 
area of nuclear emergency preparedness and response. 
 
---------- 
NEXT STEPS 
---------- 
 
¶14.  The proposed next steps for enhanced 
collaboration between CENESTEN and DOE/NNSA include: 
 
--  A four day I-RAPTER train-the-trainer course 
will be conducted in Morocco either the week of 
March 15 or 22, exact week to be determined. 
 
--  A second GICNT exercise planning meeting will be 
scheduled the week of the I-RAPTER Training. 
 
--  Additional training on the SPARC system will be 
provided in March and a SPARC unit will be provided 
to CNESTEN for training. 
 
--  CNESTEN, Civil Protection and IEMC will discuss 
enhancement to the GOM nuclear/radiological plans 
and procedures. 
 
--  GOM will schedule a two hour briefing of 
proposed enhancements to the GOM 
nuclear/radiological program for senior 
representatives of all organizations involved with 
nuclear and radiological emergency response and 
invite NNSA to provide an overview of DOE/NNA 
programs. 
 
--  DOE/NNSA will invite GOM to an international 
radiological search and consequence management 
workshop in the U.S the week of May 17, 2010. 
 
--  A second four day I-RAPTER and a four day I- 
Medical train-the-trainer course will be conducted 
in Morocco the week of June 6, 2010. 
 
--  A third GICNT exercise planning meeting will be 
scheduled the week of June 6 2010. 
 
--  Follow-up of equipment, emergency center and 
additional training will be discussed during the 
June 6, 2010, meeting. 
 
----------------- 
LONG TERM ACTIONS 
----------------- 
 
¶15.  DOE/NNSA will support GOM's GICNT exercise and 
provide a demonstration of DOE/NNSA emergency 
response equipment.  Other USG organizations will be 
invited to participate in the demonstration. 
Additionally, DOE/NNSA will initiate, in accordance 
with the SOI, exchange of information and 
experiences and planning for a Joint CNESTEN/NNSA 
exercise.  Other enhancements and a detailed work 
plan will be developed in the March through June 
2010 timeframe. 
 
¶16.  DOE/NNSA Participants in the January 12-15, 
2010 Activities: 
 
- Vincent McClelland, IEMC Director 
- Ann Heinrich, IEMC Deputy Director 
- Steven Buntman, IEMC Project Manager 
 
- Richard Maurer, DOE/Nevada Remote Sensing 
Laboratory (RSL) 
- Troy Waterman, DOE/Nevada RSL 
- Kevin Marah, DOE/Nevada RSL 
- Michael Bradley, DOE/Lawrence Livermore National 
Laboratory (LLNL) 
- John Mitchell, DOE/Pacific Northwest National 
Laboratory (PNNL) 
- Mark Breitinger, DOE/Oak Ridge Institute for 
Science and Education (ORISE) 
 
KAPLAN