10STATE17899
TRAVEL WARNING: IRAQ
Fri Feb 26 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO3685
OO RUEHIK
DE RUEHC #7899/01 0570137
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 260133Z FEB 10
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO ALL DIPLOMATIC AND CONSULAR POSTS COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHFSI/DIR FSINFATC IMMEDIATE
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RUEHPH/CDC ATLANTA IMMEDIATE 8142
RUCPDOC/ALL USDOC DISTDIR COLLECTIVE WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RHMCSUU/CDRAMC FT BELVOIR VA//AMCMI-SS// IMMEDIATE
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC//XOXXI// IMMEDIATE
RHMFIUU/HQ AFOSI DOQ ANDREWS AFB MD//IVOA// IMMEDIATE
RHMCSUU/FAA NATIONAL HQ WASHINGTON DC//ACI-400// IMMEDIATE
RHMCSUU/COMNAVAIRSYSCOM PATUXENT RIVER MD//AIR1031B// IMMEDIATE
RHMFIUU/NRC WASHINGTON DC//INFOSEC// IMMEDIATE
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCJ2-JIT// IMMEDIATE
RUCPCIM/CIM NTDB WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RHMCSUU/COGARD INTELCOORDCEN WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HI IMMEDIATE
RHMFISS/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL IMMEDIATE
RUEHTRO/AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI IMMEDIATE 2902
RUEHRY/AMEMBASSY CONAKRY IMMEDIATE 3727
RUEHPU/AMEMBASSY PORT AU PRINCE IMMEDIATE 0981
INFO RUESBKC/ATO ASIA IMMEDIATE 2027UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 STATE 017899 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CASC PTER ASEC IZ
SUBJECT: TRAVEL WARNING: IRAQ 
 
STATE 00017899  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶1. The Department of State continues to warn U.S. 
citizens of the risks inherent in travel to Iraq and 
recommends against all but essential travel within the 
country given the fluid security situation.  Numerous 
insurgent groups remain active throughout Iraq.  Although 
Iraqi Security Forces (ISF)-led operations against these 
groups continue, attacks against the ISF and U.S. forces 
persist in many areas of the country.  Turkish government 
forces have carried out operations against elements of 
the Kongra-Gel terrorist group (KGK, formerly Kurdistan 
Worker's Party or PKK) located along Iraq's northern 
border.  Civilian air and road travel within Iraq remains 
dangerous.  This Travel Warning replaces the Travel 
Warning dated June 15, 2009, to update the status of U.S. 
military operations in Iraq, territorial control by Iraqi 
authorities, and incidents along Iraqi borders. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Iraq Remains Dangerous and Unpredictable 
---------------------------------------- 
¶2. While some regions within Iraq have experienced fewer 
violent incidents than others in recent years, violence 
and threats against U.S. citizens persist and no region 
should be considered safe from dangerous conditions, 
including explosions, kidnappings, and other terrorist 
and criminal attacks.  Attacks against military and 
civilian targets throughout Iraq continue, including in 
the International (or "Green") Zone and northern Iraq. 
Methods of attack have included roadside improvised 
explosive devices (IEDs), mortars and rockets, human- and 
vehicle-borne IEDs, and shootings.  Kidnappings still 
occur; the most recent confirmed kidnapping of an 
American citizen reported to the U.S. Embassy occurred in 
January 2010 in Baghdad.  While sectarian and terrorist 
violence continues, it occurs at levels lower than in 
previous years.  U.S. Government personnel require 
special permission and a protective security detail at 
all times when traveling outside of secure facilities and 
may be prohibited from traveling to certain areas of Iraq 
based on prevailing security conditions.  Detailed 
security information is available at 
http://iraq.usembassy.gov and at http://www.centcom.mil. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Drawdown of U.S. Military Forces 
-------------------------------- 
¶3. In mid-2009, U.S. military combat forces withdrew from 
all major Iraqi cities, including Baghdad.  Under current 
plans, the United States will reduce the number of U.S. 
military forces in Iraq and end combat operations there 
by August 2010 and complete withdrawal of military forces 
by the end of 2011. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
Transportation to/from and within Iraq 
-------------------------------------- 
¶4. Travelers choosing to utilize commercial carriers to 
enter or depart Iraq should be aware that, although there 
have been no recent attacks on civilian aircraft, the 
potential threat still exists, as does a high risk to 
road travelers as described above.  U.S. Government 
personnel, with limited exceptions, are generally 
required to use U.S. military or other official aircraft 
when entering or departing Iraq.  There have been no 
recent security-related incidents associated with 
civilian airport operations.  Embassy employees, 
including those resident in northern Iraq, may seek 
authorization, and under special limited circumstances, 
obtain permission to use commercial airlines and civilian 
 
STATE 00017899  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
airports when entering or departing Iraq.  Civilians, 
including tourists, business people, and temporary 
residents should recognize the risks associated with air 
travel to Iraq and follow the security policies of their 
agencies, companies and sponsors.  All travelers to Iraq 
should possess an Iraqi visa issued by the national 
government.  Entry permits issued in the northern Kurdish 
region are not valid in other areas of Iraq.  The Embassy 
has received reports of American travelers arriving in 
Iraq with properly issued Federal Iraq visas, but 
nonetheless being denied entry into the country. 
 
------------- 
 Northern Iraq 
------------- 
¶5. The security situation in Sulymaniya, Erbil, and Dohuk 
Governorates in northern Iraq has been more stable 
relative to the rest of Iraq in recent years, but 
violence persists.  U.S. government personnel in northern 
Iraq are required to be accompanied by a protective 
security detail when traveling outside of secure 
facilities.  Even though there have been fewer terrorist 
attacks and lower levels of insurgent violence in 
Sulymaniya, Erbil, and Dohuk than in other parts of Iraq, 
the security situation throughout the country remains 
fluid.  Sectarian violence associated with the status of 
Kirkuk is likely to persist and insurgent groups continue 
to operate across the north.  While many parts of 
northern Iraq have become more stable, some areas, 
including the border areas with Ninewah, Salah-al-Din, 
Diyala and Tamim Governorates, particularly those in and 
around Kirkuk and Mosul, have experienced violence and 
instability.  Additionally, extensive unmarked minefields 
remain along the international border.  The Governments 
of Turkey and Iran continue to carry out military 
operations against insurgent groups in the mountain 
regions.  These operations have included troop movements 
and both aerial and artillery bombardments. 
 
------------------------------- 
International Zone Restrictions 
------------------------------- 
¶6. The U.S. Embassy is located in the International Zone 
(IZ) in Baghdad.  The IZ is a restricted access area.  As 
of June 30, 2009, Iraqi authorities assumed 
responsibility for control of the IZ.  Travelers to the 
IZ should be aware that Iraqi authorities may require 
special identification to enter the IZ or may issue IZ- 
specific access badges. 
 
¶7. The U.S. Government considers the potential threat to 
U.S. Government personnel assigned to Iraq to be 
sufficiently serious so as to require them to live and 
work under strict security guidelines.  All U.S. 
government employees under the authority of the U.S. 
Ambassador must travel in groups of two or more and carry 
a working cell phone or radio when exiting the U.S. 
Embassy compound. 
 
¶8. Information received by the U.S. government indicates 
that some terrorist or extremist groups continue to 
target U.S. citizens for possible kidnappings. 
Individuals residing and traveling within the 
International Zone should continue to exercise good 
personal safety precautions. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
Limited Emergency Support to American Citizens 
--------------------------------------------- - 
¶9. The U.S. Embassy provides limited visa services to the 
general public and provides restricted emergency services 
to U.S. citizens in Iraq.  The ability of the U.S. 
Embassy to provide services to Americans outside of 
 
STATE 00017899  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
Baghdad is particularly restricted given the security 
environment.  The United States does not maintain any 
consulates in Iraq.  American citizens who choose to 
visit or reside in Iraq despite this Travel Warning are 
urged to take responsibility for their own personal 
security and belongings (including their U.S. passports), 
avoid crowds, especially rallies or demonstrations, and 
inform the U.S. Embassy of their presence in Iraq.  All 
Americans in Iraq, including those working on contract 
for the U.S. Government, are urged to register with the 
Embassy at the following website: 
https://travelregistration.state.gov/ibrs.  By 
registering, American citizens make it easier for the 
Embassy to provide updated security information or to 
contact them in emergencies. 
 
------------------- 
Contact Information 
------------------- 
¶10. U.S. citizens may obtain the latest security 
information or other information about Iraq by contacting 
the U.S. Embassy, located in the International Zone, via 
e-mail at BaghdadACS@state.gov, landline at U.S. dial 1- 
240-553-0581 ext. 2998, or by accessing the U.S. 
Embassy's website at http://iraq.usembassy.gov.  The 
after-hours emergency numbers are 011-964-770-443-2594 
(from the U.S.) or 964-0770-443-2594 (within Iraq). As 
cell phone service is unreliable in Iraq, emergency calls 
may also be placed though the Department of State at 1- 
888-407-4747. 
 
¶11. Updated information on travel and security in Iraq 
may be obtained from the Department of State by calling 
1-888-407-4747 toll-free in the United States and Canada 
or, for callers from other areas, a regular toll line at 
1-202-501-4444.  For further information, please consult 
the Country Specific Information for Iraq, as well as the 
Worldwide Caution, both of which are available on the 
Bureau of Consular Affairs Internet website at 
http://travel.state.gov. 
 
 
¶12. Minimize considered. 
CLINTON