06HONGKONG4795
EXTRANCHECK: POST SHIPMENT VERIFICATION:
Wed Dec 20 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Hong Kong
VZCZCXYZ0005
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHHK #4795/01 3540903
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 200903Z DEC 06
FM AMCONSUL HONG KONG
TO RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
INFO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9871
RHMFIUU/HQ BICE WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS HONG KONG 004795 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USDOC FOR 532/OEA/LHINES/DFARROW 
USDOC FOR 3132 FOR FCS/OIO REGIONAL DIRECTOR WILLIAM 
ZARIT 
BICE FOR OFFICE OF STRATEGIC INVESTIGATIONS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BMGT BEXP HK ETRD ETTC
SUBJECT: EXTRANCHECK: POST SHIPMENT VERIFICATION: 
ADVANCED ENERGY-SHENZHEN C/O BALTRANS LOGISTRIC 
 
REF: A) USDOC 05352 
 
1.Unauthorized disclosure of the information provided 
below is prohibited by Section 12C of the Export 
Administration Act. 
 
¶2. As per reftel A request and at the direction of the 
Office of Enforcement Analysis (OEA) of the USDOC 
Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS), Export Control 
Officer Philip Ankel (ECO) conducted a post shipment 
verification (PSV) at Advanced Energy-Shenzhen 
(Advanced Energy) C/O Baltrans Logistic (Baltrans), 59 
Tai Yip Street, Kowloon, Hong Kong.  The items in 
question are power hybrid circuits valued at USD 
84,000, classified under Export Control Classification 
Number (ECCN) 9A004 and controlled for national 
security (NS) reasons. If properly classified, these 
items would most likely require a license for export to 
Hong Kong and mainland China.  The exporter is 
International Rectifier of Leominster, Massachusetts 
(International Rectifier).  Records provided by OEA 
indicate that no license was obtained for this 
shipment.  More information about Advanced Energy is 
available at www.advanced-energy.com and more 
information about International Rectifier is available 
at www.irf.com. 
 
¶3.  The ECO visited Baltrans at the address referenced 
above on December 7, 2006 and met with Mr. Theodore 
Shum, Assistant Manager, Airfreight Operations, Import 
and Mr. Gordon Lam, Operations Manager, Airfreight, 
Import.  Mr. Lam provided background on Baltrans and 
its business, which involves the provision of a range 
of logistics and freight forwarding services.  Baltrans 
is an internationally known freight forwarding and 
logistics company (www.baltrans.com). 
 
¶4.  Mr. Lam stated that with respect to the shipment in 
question, Baltrans acted merely as the warehouse for 
Advanced Energy.  In particular, Federal Express was 
responsible for the export of the item from the United 
States as well as all import formalities into Hong 
Kong.  Federal Express delivered the items to Baltrans 
who, in turn, informed Advanced Energy of the arrival 
of the items.  Advanced Energy, in turn, sent a truck 
to pick up the items for onward shipment to mainland 
China.  According to Mr. Lam, Advanced Energy was 
responsible for all export related formalities from 
Hong Kong.  In fact, Mr. Lam stated that Baltrans does 
not perform export licensing services on behalf of its 
customers (Note:  some freight forwarders in the United 
States complete such formalities on behalf of 
customers). 
 
¶5.  Mr. Lam claimed that Advanced Energy is no longer a 
customer of Baltrans and switched logistics providers 
approximately three months prior to the PSV.  He 
further stated that he is unaware of Advanced Energy's 
current logistics provider.  He indicated that because 
the shipment had occurred some time ago, he was unable 
to access the applicable shipping documents.  He 
averred that the documents had already been sent to 
storage and so would be too difficult to provide to the 
ECO. 
 
¶6.  When asked by the ECO why the shipment had taken 
the route that it had (through Hong Kong to Shenzhen), 
Mr. Lam indicated that he had put the same question to 
Advanced Energy since Baltrans has an office in 
Shenzhen.  According to Mr. Lam, Advanced Energy 
declined to answer Mr. Lam's question. 
 
¶7.  As stated above, if properly classified, these 
items would require a license for export to either Hong 
Kong or mainland China.  The ECO recommends that BIS 
reach out to the exporter to determine why it did not 
obtain a license for this shipment and, further, why it 
listed Hong Kong as the country of ultimate destination 
when it is clear from the applicable documentation 
provided by OEA that the shipment was destined for 
mainland China. 
 
¶8. At the time visited, Advanced Energy did not appear 
to be a suitable recipient of controlled items since 
Advanced Energy does not have a manufacturing or other 
facility in Hong Kong at which such items might be put 
to use. The ECO recommends that this PSV of Advanced 
 
 
Energy be classified as Unfavorable. 
 
Cunningham