06HONGKONG4111
EXTRANCHECK: POST SHIPMENT VERIFICATION:
Tue Oct 17 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Hong Kong
VZCZCXYZ0004
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHHK #4111/01 2900916
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 170916Z OCT 06
FM AMCONSUL HONG KONG
TO RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
INFO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9071UNCLAS HONG KONG 004111 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR US HQ BICE WASH DC 
 
USDOC FOR 532/OEA/LHINES/KGAINES 
USDOC FOR 3132 FOR FCS/OIO REGIONAL DIRECTOR WILLIAM 
ZARIT 
 
BEIJING FOR FCS JEANETTE CHU 
 
BICE FOR OFFICE OF STRATEGIC INVESTIGATIONS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BMGT BEXP HK ETRD ETTC
SUBJECT: EXTRANCHECK: POST SHIPMENT VERIFICATION: 
KASTON OPTRONICS MANUFACTURING LTD. 
 
REF: A) USDOC 05199 B) EXP.LIC. D316278 
 
¶1. Unauthorized disclosure of the information provided 
below is prohibited by Section 12C of the Export 
Administration Act. 
 
¶2. As per reftel A request and at the direction of the 
Office of Enforcement Analysis (OEA) of the USDOC 
Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS), Export Control 
Officer Philip Ankel (ECO) conducted a post shipment 
verification (PSV) at Kaston Optronics Manufacturing 
Ltd., Rua De Foshan, No 51, EDIF, San Kin Yip Centro 
Commercial, Andar, Macao (Kaston). The PSV concerned 
4000 grams of Hafnium Oxide in the form of three gram 
tablets valued at $3,360 that were the subject of 
export license D316278 and which were exported to 
Kaston in November 2004.  Hafnium oxide is classified 
under ECCN 1C231 and is controlled for nuclear 
nonproliferation reasons (NP). 
 
¶3. On October 12, 2006, the ECO visited Kaston at the 
address above and met with Ms. Waiman Fong, VP of 
Administration and Finance at the location referenced 
above.  The Kaston facilities are located on one half 
of the second floor of this older industrial center 
located in the center of Macau. 
 
¶4. Ms. Fong was open and cooperative and provided the 
relevant documentation concerning the Hafnium Oxide on 
request.  At one point, Ms. Fong stressed that she was 
aware of the controlled nature of the item and was 
willing to be open and forthcoming with the ECO because 
Kaston had always operated legally. 
 
¶5.  Ms. Fong stated that Kaston uses Hafnium Oxide to 
coat crystals that are used in various types of lasers 
including those used for stage lighting (for use 
generally in China) and also for medical purposes 
(which are exported primarily to the United States). 
Mr. Fong provided samples of crystals (both in their 
raw form and as coated with the Hafnium Oxide).  More 
details about the company can be found at its web site 
(www.kaston.net). 
 
¶6.  Mr. Fong stated that the production that used the 
Hafnium Oxide was recently moved to the company's 
mainland China production site (in Fujian province). 
She stated that Kaston moved its production facilities 
because of the greater availability of skilled 
engineers at its mainland China production site. 
During a tour of the Macau site, it did not appear that 
any of the machines there were in use and, in fact, 
much of the machinery was partially or fully boxed for 
further shipment while other rooms were empty. 
Employees were only located in the same office as Ms. 
Fong and there were no production employees or 
engineers apparent anywhere at the Macau site. Ms. Fong 
stated that Kaston intended to locate newer production 
facilities at the Macau site in the near future. 
 
¶7. Ms. Fong stated that the purchase of the Hafnium 
oxide in question had been the responsibility of an 
employee no longer with the company.  Ms. Fong was, 
however, able to provide several documents relating to 
the purchase of the item including the purchase order, 
End Use Statement and a "Nuclear Certification" signed 
by Ms. Cynthia Cheang, Secretary to the Managing 
Director.  That certification provided that the Hafnium 
Oxide would not be used in nuclear explosive activities 
or safeguarded or unsafeguarded nuclear activities. 
Mr. Fong also provided a copy of the original BXA-711 
(Statement by Ultimate Consignee and Purchaser) signed 
by Ms. Cheang and Ms. Fong (suggesting that Ms. Fong 
was directly involved in the original purchase). 
 
¶8.  Ms. Fong further stated that approximately one 
kilogram of the original four-kilogram shipment 
remained when the production facilities were moved to 
China.  The remaining Hafnium Oxide was also moved with 
the production facilities to mainland China.  When the 
ECO pointed out that the "Nuclear Certification" 
(signed by Ms. Cheang) provides that BXA (now BIS) 
approval is required for reexport, Ms. Fong suggested 
 
 
that failure to obtain such approval was an oversight. 
 
¶9.  Ms. Fong indicated that Cerac is the only U.S. 
supplier they have used for Hafnium Oxide.  She recalls 
that the ordering (and licensing) process took close to 
one year and that, as a result, Kaston tended to order 
larger amounts for use over a longer period of time.  A 
previous order destined for Kaston's China production 
facility in 2001 had taken close to six months to 
complete.  She stated that Kaston now orders this 
product from Germany as it is of better quality and 
less expensive. 
 
¶10. While Ms. Fong was open, forthcoming and believable 
during the visit, she conceded that Kaston had 
reexported some of the Hafnium Oxide notwithstanding a 
commitment not do so (absent BIS approval).  In 
addition, it did not appear to the ECO that any 
production was underway at the Macau location.  As a 
result, the ECO recommends that this PLC be classified 
as Unfavorable. 
Cunningham