06BEIJING24377
DECEMBER 7 MFA BRIEFING: IRAN NUCLEAR, SIX- PARTY
Thu Dec 07 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO9433
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #4377/01 3411531
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 071531Z DEC 06 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2838
INFO RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 024377 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL ENRG ECON KN IR CH
SUBJECT: DECEMBER 7 MFA BRIEFING: IRAN NUCLEAR, SIX- PARTY 
TALKS, DPRK REFUGEES, DALAI LAMA ON TIBET,  STRATEGIC 
ECONOMIC DIALOGUE, ENERGY MINISTERIAL AND  BRIBERY IN MACAU 
 
 
BEIJING 00024377  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. Key Points at the December 7 MFA Press Conference 
were: 
 
-- China believes diplomacy on the Iran nuclear issue 
needs more time and space. 
 
-- The DPRK nuclear issue will likely be discussed 
during upcoming ASEAN meetings. 
 
-- It is "inappropriate" for UNHCR to call DPRK 
refugees in China "refugee surplus." These people 
enter China illegally, violate Chinese laws and attack 
schools and embassies. 
 
-- China criticizes the Dalai Lama's suggestion that 
there will be instability in Tibet if China does not 
compromise on the Tibet issue before he dies. 
 
-- China urges positive efforts on export controls in 
connection with the Senior Economic Dialogue. 
 
-- The NDRC will host a Five-Nation Energy Ministerial 
December 16. 
 
-- China has no opinion on the Iraq Study Group 
report. 
 
-- The Spokesperson had no information on a bribery 
scandal in Macao, aid to the post-coup government in 
Fiji or a possible visit by the head of Japan's House 
of Representatives. 
 
Give Iran Diplomacy More Time And Space 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. MFA Spokesperson Qin Gang said in the regular 
December 7 press briefing that China believes 
diplomacy on the Iran nuclear issue should be given 
more time and space.  Asked if China is ready for a UN 
Security Council vote on Iran's nuclear program, Qin 
said actions taken by the Security Council should be 
conducive to the goal of a peaceful settlement reached 
through dialogue and consultation. 
 
DPRK Nuclear Issue Will Be Discussed at ASEAN meetings 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶3.  China supports Six-Party Talks and plays an 
important role in the process, Qin said in deflecting 
a reporter's query about whether the DPRK would end 
its nuclear program if United States' nuclear weapons 
were removed from South Korea and nearby countries. 
The parties are now studying how to proceed after the 
heads of delegations from the United States and DPRK 
voiced their positions at recent meetings in Beijing. 
Responding to a question about upcoming ASEAN-related 
meetings in the Philippines, Qin said it would be 
natural for the DPRK nuclear issue to be discussed as 
China, the ROK and Japan will attend the meetings. 
 
¶4. Asked to respond to views in Japan and Australia 
that the East Asian Summit (EAS) needs to have more 
substance than just a simple exchange of ideas, Qin 
said East Asian cooperation is a long-term project 
requiring time and experience.  The EAS is a new 
platform for open and tolerant regional cooperation, 
and China understands that countries have different 
views on the topics and purpose of the Summit. 
 
UNHCR Stance on North Korean Refugees "Inappropriate" 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶5. Qin denounced as "inappropriate" remarks by the 
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) 
labeling North Koran refugees in China as "refugee 
surplus" who will likely be jailed, tortured or killed 
if returned to the DPRK.  Although China deals with 
these North Koreans in accordance with international 
law and humanitarian principles, China hopes others 
can take an objective view toward these people, who 
enter China illegally, violate Chinese laws and attack 
schools and embassies, said Qin. 
 
Dalai Lama Should Not Seek to "Split" China 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. A reporter asked for China's comment about a report 
that the Dalai Lama said there would be major 
instability in Tibet if China does not reach a 
compromise on the Tibet issue before he dies.  Qin 
 
BEIJING 00024377  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
said if the Dalai Lama cares about Tibet he and others 
should cease activities that seek to split the 
motherland.  Tibet has been a part of China since 
ancient times and is recognized by no countries in the 
world as independent from China.  The people of Tibet 
enjoy stability, development and harmony and look 
forward to a better tomorrow, Qin said. 
 
SED and Export Control Policy 
----------------------------- 
 
¶7. China has consistently called for the United States 
to lift restrictions harmful to trade with China, Qin 
said when asked if high technology export control 
policy would be discussed at the upcoming Strategic 
Economic Dialogue.  Positive efforts on the issue not 
only serve the interests of the United States but also 
help bring normal, balanced trade relations between 
the two countries.  The trade relationship between 
China and the United States should be based on respect 
and mutual benefit, so as to realize a win-win result, 
Qin said. 
 
Energy Ministerial; Australian Uranium Sales 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶8. Energy ministers from China, Japan, the ROK, India 
and the United States will meet in China December 16 
at the invitation of the National Development and 
Reform Commission.  The talks aim to reduce energy 
costs, ensure global energy security, raise efficiency 
and find more substitute sources of energy.  They seek 
to promote cooperation and dialogue among these major 
energy consumers. 
 
¶9. Peaceful nuclear cooperation between China and 
Australia is mutually beneficial, said Qin when asked 
to comment on the Australian uranium sales to China. 
As signatories to the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty 
and members of the IAEA, both countries will 
specifically implement and earnestly fulfill their 
obligations. 
 
China Has No Opinion On Iraq Study Group Report 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶10. Whether the report of the Iraqi Study Group is 
welcomed or not is a decision for President Bush, not 
China, Qin said in response to questions about the 
Iraq Study Group Report.  China hopes the Iraq issue 
is settled according to UN resolutions and seeks a 
peaceful Iraq governed by the Iraqi people. 
 
Number Three Official in Macau Sacked for Bribery 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶11. Qin said he had no information about the arrest 
this morning of the Macau Secretary of State for 
Transport and Public Works Ao Man Long on charges of 
bribery.  Macau has a high degree of autonomy under 
the "One Country, Two Systems" arrangement and the 
chief executive has authority to take necessary steps. 
Fiji Coup, Possible Japanese Visit 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶12. Qin deflected questions about whether the Speaker 
of the Japanese House of Representatives will meet 
with President Hu and about whether Fiji would turn to 
China or Taiwan for aid if the United States or 
Australia withdraw aid following the recent military 
coup. 
Randt