06NDJAMENA1419
CHAD GOVERNMENT SETS UP IDP FUND
Thu Dec 14 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ndjamena
VZCZCXRO4761
RR RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHNJ #1419/01 3480651
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 140651Z DEC 06
FM AMEMBASSY NDJAMENA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4690
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 0890UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 NDJAMENA 001419 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE, SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL PREF PHUM CD SU
SUBJECT: CHAD GOVERNMENT SETS UP IDP FUND 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  Concerned that escalating violence 
in eastern Chad has reduced the capacity, if not the 
commitment, of the international humanitarian community 
to respond to the needs of newly internally displaced 
persons (IDPs), the Government of Chad (GOC) seeks 
foreign donor contributions for a USD 17 million 
emergency fund to be managed by the GOC Ministry of 
Solidarity and Microfinance and implemented by Chadian 
NGO's. The GOC announced its own contribution of USD 9 
million to the fund.  Ambassador Wall reviewed ongoing 
USG refugee/IDP funding with Minister of Solidarity and 
Microfinance Miriam Ali Moussa December 12.  Instead of 
a GOC-managed emergency fund, he pointed to the need 
for a coordinated response among international donors 
and the GOC.  Surprised by the GOC action, the UN and 
humanitarian community have sought to reassure the GOC 
that the international community has not, in fact 
abandoned Chadian IDPs and will collaborate closely 
with the GOC on IDP relief.   End Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) The Ministry of Foreign Affairs issued a plea to 
international donors December 8 soliciting 
contributions to a USD 17 million emergency fund for 
persons newly displaced by recent fighting in eastern 
Chad, particularly around Goz Beida and Kou Kou - 
Angarana. The GOC will make a first contribution of 
approximately USD 9 million to the fund.  Donors were 
informed that the Ministry of Solidarity and 
Microcredit headed by Miriam Ali Moussa would manage 
the fund.  Local Chadian NGO's, including the 
Association of Women Jurists, and the Association of 
Traditional Leaders are to implement the assistance. 
Ambassador Wall called on Minister Ali Moussa December 
12 to review existing direct and indirect USG 
assistance to refugees and IDPs in Chad and to assure 
the Minister that the needs of the newly displaced 
would continue to be addressed in coordination with the 
relevant GOC ministries and UN, NGO and other 
humanitarian organizations. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Ali Moussa noted that the departure 
("withdrawal") of humanitarian aid workers due to 
increased violence in the east had reduced aid to pre- 
existing refugee and IDP populations.  She claimed that 
virtually no help was being provided to new IDPs and 
that the diminishing international capacity justified 
the creation of an emergency fund under her ministry's 
management to deal with the critical situation of some 
65,000 newly displaced persons.  Minister Ali Moussa 
agreed that an international presence in eastern Chad 
had a role to play in addressing the current IDP 
situation and insisted that the GOC fully supported its 
deployment. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Ambassador Wall acknowledged that the 
deteriorating security situation in the East was indeed 
a challenge for the USG, the GOC and others engaged in 
addressing the plight of refugees and IDPs in the East. 
However, rather than endorse the GOC's apparent 
initiative to seek donor funding of a GOC-managed 
response, he emphasized the need for consultation and 
coordinated action.  He concluded by assuring the 
minister that, for its part, the USG would work closely 
with the GOC and its donor partners in developing an 
effective response to the humanitarian needs of both 
existing and new IDPs in the East. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Heads of UN agencies and the UNDP Resident 
Representative met with the Prime Minister on December 
12 to discuss the GOC's proposed IDP actions.  UN 
representatives stressed that IDP's had not been 
abandoned.  In fact, according to UNDP ResRep Kingsley 
Amaning, unlike the refugee camps in northern Chad, 
which are operating on "auto-pilot," the UN has left 
almost the majority of its staff in the field in the 
Goz Beida area (where the largest amount of IDP's have 
congregated.)  The UN stressed its desire to work with 
the GOC on IDP's and pledged to collaborate with the 
local NGO's charged with IDP welfare.  The UN is 
completing a study on IDP needs and will be meeting 
with donors in the coming week to announce current 
needs and launch a new appeal. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) The GOC announcement took donors by surprise. 
Perplexed at the accusation that the IDPs have been 
abandoned, donors are also quite skeptical that any of 
the national NGO's named by the Chadian government have 
the capacity to deliver assistance to IDPs in the east. 
 
NDJAMENA 00001419  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
¶7.  (U) Tripoli minimize considered. Wall