08RABAT1196
SEDUCED BY THE UNITED STATES
Wed Dec 24 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Rabat
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHRB #1196/01 3591448
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 241448Z DEC 08
FM AMEMBASSY RABAT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9492
INFO RUCNMGH/MAGHREB COLLECTIVEUNCLAS RABAT 001196 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR NEA/MAG, NEA/MEPI, NEA/PD AND ECA 
TUNIS ALSO FOR MEPI REGIONAL OFFICE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KMPI OEXC XF MO
SUBJECT: SEDUCED BY THE UNITED STATES 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: Describing a sea change in their opinions 
about the United States, on December 19 eight Moroccan women 
political leaders talked about how they were "seduced" by the 
U.S. political system and our top leadership during their 
election visit to the U.S.  Several women who held negative 
opinions of the U.S. prior to the trip expressed a hope that 
their children would be able to study there one day.  They 
looked forward to the opportunity to mobilize women and 
younger voters in the upcoming elections, in which 12 percent 
of the seats will be reserved for women, and called for 
technical campaign assistance for the many female candidates 
who will be running for office for the first time.  The 
Embassy will continue to engage these leaders with a view to 
supporting increased women's involvement in Moroccan 
politics.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Eight women political leaders from diverse parties 
gathered at Villa America, the Ambassador's residence, on 
December 19 to report on their visit to the U.S. under the 
Middle East Partnership Initiative-(MEPI-)sponsored Election 
Exchange.  The Election Exchange program, funded by MEPI and 
 
implemented in conjunction with American University, brought 
44 women from the Maghreb and broader Middle East to the U.S. 
to observe the electoral process.  Each participant attended 
a workshop on the American political process in Washington, 
D.C., as well as local campaign events in two states, and 
then observed the presidential election.  Participants met 
with local and national leaders, including both President 
Bush and Secretary Rice, and representatives of 
non-governmental organizations. 
 
--------------- 
We Were Seduced 
--------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) &We were all seduced," said Hakima El Haite, a 
campaign strategist and member of the Popular Movement (MP) 
party, referring to the warm reception they received from 
President Bush.  "Even those women whose families and 
countries have been destroyed by war were seduced.  We have 
begun to love the United States,8 she elaborated.  Most of 
the other women agreed.  In their first reunion since their 
return from the U.S., the women, who were all either elected 
officials or planned to run in the upcoming national 
elections, underlined the ways in which the program radically 
changed their opinion of the U.S., and asked for assistance 
in promoting women's political participation in Morocco. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Illustrating the effectiveness of this exchange 
program, many of the women admitted that they had &atrocious 
prejudices8 about the U.S. Government and the American 
people prior to the trip.  Hakima El Haite noted her deep 
skepticism that an African-American could ever become 
President.  When President-elect Obama won, she &realized 
that democracy in America is real and that Blacks, Muslims 
(and) women, can all make a difference.8  Underlining just 
how much the exchange altered their views, several women who 
held negative opinions of the U.S. prior to the trip 
expressed a hope that their children would be able to study 
there.  &If they go, they will learn that competence and 
merit, rather than gender or religion, matter,8 they said. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Echoing her counterparts, Ghizlane Maamouri a 
member of the Party of Progress and Socialism (PPS), 
recounted her amazement that she &never felt like a 
foreigner8 while in the U.S., an experience not replicated 
in any of her travels in Europe or the Middle East.  Some of 
the other women expressed surprise at how comfortable they 
felt wearing a veil in the United States, noting that &in 
Europe that is not the case.8  The trip eliminated the 
women's preconceptions that the United States is a racist 
place, they said, and allowed &us to change our prejudiced 
ideas.8 
 
---------------------------------- 
Looking Forward to Local Elections 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Enthusiastically praising the electoral exchange, 
the women said they were inspired by the efforts of American 
candidates to mobilize women and younger voters, and 
expressed a desire to replicate that mobilization in Morocco. 
 Although Morocco has recently reserved 12 percent of seats 
for women in the upcoming municipal elections, the political 
parties are still resistant to allowing women to participate, 
or giving them meaningful leadership opportunities, they 
said.  They suggested that a hotline, which could provide 
advice on fund raising, campaign management or voter 
mobilization, would help female candidates overcome the 
technical hurdles of running for office and compensate for 
lack of support from the parties.  Zahra Chagaf, an MP and a 
member of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, emphasized the 
need for women candidates to better use the media, engage 
women and younger voters, and put an end to Morocco's 
&political abstinence.8 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Comment: After the session, the women asked for a 
side meeting with Pol FSN to underscore their interest in 
continuing practical cooperation.  The positive impressions 
gained by these women are an additional achievement beyond 
the political exposure and training they received from this 
MEPI project.  The Embassy looks forward to continuing our 
relationship with these women leaders through the 2009 
elections and beyond.  End Comment. 
 
 
***************************************** 
Visit Embassy Rabat's Classified Website; 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/rabat 
***************************************** 
 
Riley