08RABAT1198
MOROCCO: REP. HASTINGS AGREES WITH MFA SECRETARY
Wed Dec 24 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Rabat
VZCZCXRO4826
PP RUEHAST RUEHFL RUEHLA RUEHMRE RUEHPOD RUEHROV RUEHSK RUEHSR
DE RUEHRB #1198/01 3591717
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 241717Z DEC 08
FM AMEMBASSY RABAT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9495
INFO RUCNOSC/ORG FOR SECURITY CO OP IN EUR COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 RABAT 001198 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR NEA MAG, EUR/RPM AND H 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL OREP ETRD OSCE MO
SUBJECT: MOROCCO: REP. HASTINGS AGREES WITH MFA SECRETARY 
GENERAL ON VALUE OF GOM-OSCE TIES 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  Chairman of the Commission on Security 
and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) Representative Alcee 
Hastings encouraged Moroccan Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
(MFA) Secretary General Youssef Amrani to enhance Moroccan 
participation in the Organization for Security and 
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and its Parliamentary Assembly 
as a Mediterranean Partner.  In the December 1 meeting, 
Amrani underlined the GOM's commitment to active partnership 
with the OSCE and praised Rep. Hastings' intent to invite 
Moroccan parliamentarians to the U.S. for a CSCE hearing. 
They also discussed migration, port security, and 
peacekeeping operations.  Amrani confirmed GOM plans to 
participate in Operation Active Endeavor.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------------------- 
Morocco/USG/OSCE - Good Relationships 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Amrani emphasized the strong relationship that 
Morocco has shared with the United States for centuries, 
highlighting the risk it took with the U.S. in signing the 
Free Trade Agreement (FTA), and pointed out that Morocco 
agreed to host the next Forum of the Future meeting in 2009. 
He noted Morocco has strongly supported the OSCE, including 
by hosting the 2005 OSCE Mediterranean Partners Conference on 
Migration (which included Israelis), participating in the 
November 2007 OSCE Ministerial Council in Madrid, and 
inviting the OSCE Parliamentary Assembly to participate as 
observers during the 2007 local elections.  Morocco is 
committed to democracy and transparency.  The GOM also looked 
to expand its relationship with Euro-Atlantic institutions. 
Morocco also works with NATO in the Mediterranean Dialogue. 
He highlighted planned Moroccan participation in Operation 
Active Endeavor. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Rep. Hastings, accompanied by Ambassador Riley, 
expressed his appreciation for Morocco's faithful support of 
the OSCE as a Mediterranean Partner and acknowledged its 
dependable participation.  He regretted, however, the 
weaknesses of the current system that did not allow the 
Mediterranean Partners adequate time to engage the OSCE on 
issues of substance.  Hastings said he planned to invite 
Morocco to send two or three parliamentarians to the U.S. to 
meet with other OSCE PA leadership as well as other Med 
Partner parliamentarians.  Amrani welcomed the invitation, 
noting it 1) was similar to what Morocco already did with the 
EU as a partner with advanced status 2) could be used as a 
model for other countries in the region and possibly via the 
Mediterranean Union Plan, and 3) could be used to strengthen 
relations among countries in the region as a locus for 
dialogue between parliamentarians.  Rep. Hastings appreciated 
Morocco's peacekeeping efforts, particularly its 
participation in the Haiti mission, and urged this effort 
continue. 
 
----------------------------- 
Migration/Trade/Port Security 
----------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Rep. Hastings highlighted the Handbook on 
Establishing Effective Labor Migration Policies that was a 
bi-product of the 2005 OSCE Migration Conference and asked 
Amrani about migration issues.  Amrani said Morocco was 
willing to work with others to find a solution to the 
challenges of illegal migration.  He noted that the OSCE 
Handbook was very helpful to Morocco in addressing the issue 
of cyclical migration, as people transferred back and forth 
between Morocco and Europe for work. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Rep. Hastings praised the U.S.-Morocco FTA and its 
results.  He understood out that Morocco was developing 
larger container port areas to support increased 
transportation needs.  He raised port security and encouraged 
Morocco to send emissaries to the ports in Rotterdam and 
Singapore to get security enhancement ideas.  Amrani 
reassured Rep. Hastings that Morocco already considered 
security as it planned the new ports and pointed out that 
Morocco was developing adequate security measures under its 
NATO Dialogue. 
 
¶6.  (U) Congressman Hastings did not have an opportunity to 
clear this cable before his departure. 
 
 
***************************************** 
Visit Embassy Rabat's Classified Website; 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/rabat 
***************************************** 
 
 
RABAT 00001198  002 OF 002 
 
 
Riley