09RABAT201
MOROCCO: 2008 HUMAN RIGHTS REPORT SPARKS
Thu Mar 12 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Rabat
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHRB #0201/01 0712228
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 122228Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY RABAT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9783
INFO RUCNMGH/MAGHREB COLLECTIVEUNCLAS RABAT 000201 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR DRL, DRL/SEA, DRL/NESCA, G/TIP AND NEA/MAG 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV PREL KPAO WI MO
SUBJECT: MOROCCO: 2008 HUMAN RIGHTS REPORT SPARKS 
DEBATE 
 
REF: A. RABAT 0172 
     ¶B. RABAT 0065 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  (SBU) The Moroccan and Western Sahara chapters of 
the 2008 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices 
sparked high interest and comments ranging from 
favorable to deeply critical.  The embassy rollout 
included multiple television and radio interviews by 
the Charge d'Affaires (CDA) and Embassy staff.  The 
Foreign Ministry indicated that it did not agree with 
many parts of the report, but that when taken together 
with an embassy press release noting some of the 
progress made here, it was generally satisfied.  Human 
rights activists were also satisfied with the reports' 
quality, although some criticized the report's lack of 
"academic rigor."  Public and media reaction was 
mixed, featuring as much criticism of the United 
States' own human rights record as discussion of 
Morocco's.  Sharply critical statements by the 
Minister of Justice and a Palace-affiliated newspaper 
may be a message to Moroccan civil society not to see 
the report as a signal to open broader criticism of 
the Government.  Such public undermining could 
jeopardize our dialogue on the issue.  Post recommends 
the Department leverage the debate currently raging 
over the reports in Morocco to push for additional 
progress in discussions with Moroccan officials in 
Washington.  End summary. 
 
------------------- 
Government Reaction 
------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) CDA Jackson and Acting Deputy Chief of 
Mission (A/DCM) Karp delivered French and English 
copies of the 2008 Morocco and Western Sahara Country 
Reports on Human Rights Practices to Minister of 
Foreign Affairs Taieb Fassi Fihri, his Chief of Staff 
Nassir Bourita, Director General for Arab and Islamic 
Affairs Mohamed Azaroual, and Americas Director Fouad 
Yazorgh at 6:00 pm on February 25 (Ref A).  They 
expressed satisfaction with our productive dialogue on 
the issue and appreciation for our balancing the 
criticism in the report with statements recognizing 
the real progress Morocco had made.  Abdelmounaim El 
Farouq, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) Director 
of Humanitarian and Social Affairs (and the working- 
level point person on human rights issues) told PolOff 
that the report was "fair" and expressed gratitude for 
the collaborative relationship between the Government 
and the Embassy.  Other working level officials at the 
MFA expressed some displeasure at what they termed an 
"over focus" on police brutality cases. 
 
-------------------- 
A Very Public Launch 
-------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Post organized substantial press engagement 
to roll-out the Country Reports on Human Rights 
Practices, including multiple television and radio 
interviews by the CDA and PolOff, and a print media 
and television round-table with the CDA on the morning 
after the reports' release.  The Moroccan press widely 
reported the Charge's key messages, which were 
balanced between praise for Morocco's efforts to 
improve its human rights record (such as conducting a 
transparent election in 2007), and reminders that 
Morocco still had substantial work to do in addressing 
impunity, freedom of expression and trafficking in 
persons. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The print press widely interpreted the 
reports as harshly critical of Morocco's record over 
the past year, highlighting reports of police abuse, 
claims of torture and poor conditions in prisons, as 
well as corruption and impunity from prosecution, as 
indications that Morocco's human rights record left a 
lot to be desired.  As one noted independent weekly 
commented, "When it comes to the worst, yes we can!" 
Interestingly, the local press focused much less (than 
expected) on the Western Sahara report's evaluation 
that Morocco's record in Western Sahara had improved 
markedly. 
 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Moroccan editorials on the reports have 
tended to stress that the USG's recent poor human 
rights record, suggesting Abu Ghraib, Guantanamo and 
the Binyam rendition case, for example, disqualifies 
the U.S. from the right to judge the actions of 
others.  Minister of Justice Abdelwahad Radi reflected 
this sentiment when he told the press, "Frankly, the 
Americans exaggerate; we should not forget that the 
United States is greatly criticized when it comes to 
human rights."  Of particular note was an editorial 
that appeared in pro-palace daily Le Matin on March 5, 
which, in addition to calling into question the USG's 
moral authority, also alleged (without providing 
evidence) that the report was not substantiated by 
facts.  (See block quote below.) 
 
¶6.  (SBU) The piece was unusual in that in broke with 
Le Matin's normally reserved tone.  It is possible 
that its tone and substance came from the Palace as a 
message to Moroccan civil society not to see the 
report as carte blanche to criticize authorities.  If 
generated by the Palace, the editorial undermines the 
spirit and intent of the formal bilateral human rights 
dialogue process (Ref B) and ignores the balanced and 
nuanced public statement that the Charge and other 
mission staff painstakingly crafted around the launch. 
In a subsequent conversations however, the MFA's 
Bourita told A/DCM that the GOM remained satisfied 
with the reports' balance and had no issue with its 
content.  He said, "Le Matin is just a newspaper." 
 
¶7.  (U) Block quotes: 
 
"Human Rights: The Umpteenth Report" editorial in pro- 
palace French-language daily Le Matin on March 5: 
 
"A report, whatever its source or objective, is only a 
report.  The one that the State Department has just, 
once again, published on human rights in Morocco, sins 
through an excessive approximation that no reasonable 
man would stand for.  And it is not by accident that 
the Minister of Justice, Abdelwahad Radi, expressed 
his strong reservations about its partial and 
erroneous content.  The voice coming from abroad, 
stamped with the State Department seal or by European 
organizations, constantly finds favorable echoes in 
our country.  Our proposal is not to disavow 
completely the content of this 'umpteenth' report of 
the U.S. State Department, which, to draw its 
conclusions, bases itself on a demarche, [which is at 
the very least], doubtful.  Nobody in Morocco, and 
even less the officials concerned, can stand for such 
a report riddled with errors and [marked] by 
amateurism.  Our country does not host a prison the 
style of Guantanamo, Abu Ghraib, or Bagram.  ...  From 
2001 to the arrival of Barack Obama at the White 
House, America had transfigured itself under the reign 
of George W. Bush and his consorts, Dick Cheney and 
Donald Rumsfeld, at the lead." 
 
Quote Continued: "Human Rights in Morocco are a 
subject undergoing rapid progress, a more positive 
than negative subject.  Just like democracy, human 
rights are never completed; they are consubstantial to 
men and decision makers' political will.  When human 
rights reach and cross a significant line, they never 
or rarely regress.  In our country, human rights are 
neither better nor less good than in European or 
American democracies.  Human rights proselytes in 
Morocco consider that Moroccan justice is corrupted 
and that it remains under influence!  Trivial: which 
Government in the world has a 'perfectly perfect' 
justice, i.e. totally and according to Hegel, the words 
'absolutely,' independent,' business, mafia, 
environment, embezzlement (including Madoff) give us 
cause for setbacks.  They are not an exception to the 
rule, but the rule without exception.  We will in no 
way approve, and even less tolerate, that a report, 
even produced by the U.S. State Department, may indict 
the foundations of our human rights policy and 
denigrate our national and international pride. 
 
"American paradox," editorial by independent French- 
language daily Le Soir on February 27: 
 
"What interest to accord to the most recent State 
Department report on the situation of human rights in 
 
the world in general, and in Morocco in particular" 
Some years ago, this document was feared by all the 
totalitarian regimes [who] waited for its publication 
with much apprehension.  This was before September 11. 
Today, can the America of Abu Ghraib and Guantanamo 
still permit itself to evaluate whether the Arab and 
Islamic world respects human rights or not?  The 
America that kidnapped Mustapha Hamdi, after 23 years 
of loyal service at the U.S. Consulate in Casablanca, 
when he arrived at JFK Airport in New York in April 
2006, while he was chosen to go from the beginning for 
a training class of 10 days in Washington, this 
America, does it have the legitimacy to scold Morocco 
for the violent acts carried out by its security 
services or to titillate on the subject of the non- 
independence of its justice?  Curious thing.  The same 
report does not touch upon the case of Mohamed Binyam. 
The U.S. State Department has perhaps 'omitted' to 
mention the most abominable abuses done to this Briton 
of Ethiopian origin during 18 months spent at the 
Direction du Surveillance Territoriale (DST - Moroccan 
domestic intelligence agency) in Temara [in 
Morocco].  The Department of our 'friend' Hillary 
Clinton does not say that it is CIA agents who 
delegated to their Moroccan counterparts the dirty job 
of cutting the genitals of this poor young man with a 
razor.  One cannot commit all these atrocities and 
come later to talk about human rights.  George Bush, 
Dick Cheney, Donald Rumsfeld, Richard Peale [sic] and 
all these 'children of Satan' have ended up creating a 
rupture of trust, even a break, that has been achieved 
today, between America and the currents of opinion 
that have been quite recently favorable to it in the 
Islamic world.  Will Obama's America be able to 
quickly turn this ignoble page of its history?" 
 
------------------- 
The Public at Large 
------------------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Pro-independence human rights activist 
contacts in Western Sahara expressed a 
disappointment in seeing the situation in Western 
Sahara described as improved, but agreed that the 
number and type of abuses in the territory in 2008 
undeniably decreased.  They argued that harassment of 
Sahrawi activists in Morocco proper increased, a fact 
which was noted in both the Morocco report and the 
embassy's public statements.  Embassy contacts in the 
political Berber movement were pleased with the 
Morocco report's expanded treatment of their issues. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) PolOff addressed a diverse group of 
approximately 50 graduate research students at the 
Moroccan Center for Strategic Studies (MCSS - a 
private, non-profit think tank) on March 2 as part of 
the Embassy's report release outreach.  The group in 
general echoed broader media sentiments by asking what 
authority the United States Government (USG) had to 
criticize other nations.  Others strongly criticized 
the report for not taking local values and cultural 
frameworks into account, particularly in relation to 
criticism of the King and Islam's role in society. 
 
¶10.  (SBU) Across the board, the students said that 
the report lacked academic rigor, a logical framework 
or research criteria, and encouraged the USG to apply 
exacting standards of proof and research. 
Interestingly, one speaker took PolOff to task for not 
also implicating Moroccan society in a slowdown of 
reform momentum saying, "We, as individuals, are 
responsible for taking and paying bribes and 
undermining the rule of law as well."  The group 
agreed to undertake a class project to produce their 
own human rights reports on Morocco, Western Sahara 
and the United States in 2009 and send them to the 
Embassy. 
 
---------- 
Next Steps 
---------- 
 
¶11.  (SBU) Post recommends that the Department use the 
following points in human rights in discussions with 
GOM officials: 
 
-- Morocco remains a regional reform leader, as 
recognized in our 2008 Human Rights Report, but we are 
 
concerned that reports of abuses in Western Sahara in 
2009 have increased significantly in 2009. 
 
-- Impunity remains a serious issue.  As discussed in 
the dialogue between our Embassy in Rabat and your 
Government, we will be required to name abusers in the 
2009 report if action is not taken. 
 
-- Morocco needs to distinguish between human 
trafficking and smuggling. 
 
-- Prison conditions do not meet international norms. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶12.  (SBU) Both the reports and Post's robust public 
engagement around their launch sparked a vigorous 
debate on the state and status of human rights in 
Morocco that continued for almost 10 days.  It is a 
sign of the increasing importance of the issue here 
that even the harshest criticism noted that Morocco 
still has progress to make and despite its best 
efforts, can still regress.  We recommend that the 
Department leverage the momentum here by raising the 
above points at senior levels with Moroccan officials 
during their visits to Washington and in meetings 
elsewhere.  Despite continued MFA expressions of 
satisfaction, if government mouthpieces continue to 
criticize and undermine the reports and the embassy's 
discussions with the GOM (Ref B), we may be obliged to 
rethink our formal human rights dialogue to provoke a 
reconsideration of tone and intent.  End Comment. 
 
Jackson