06KUWAIT216
SPECIAL MEDIA REACTION: MOURNING THE AMIR SHIFTS TO THE
Tue Jan 24 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kuwait
VZCZCXRO9676
OO RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHKUK RUEHMOS
DE RUEHKU #0216/01 0240707
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 240707Z JAN 06
FM AMEMBASSY KUWAIT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2624
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RHWSMRC/USCINCCENT MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA// IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KUWAIT 000216 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/ARPI, NEA/PA, NEA/AIA, INR/NESA, R/MR, I/GNEA, B/BXN, 
B/BRN, NEA/PPD, NEA/IPA FOR ALTERMAN 
USAID/ANE/MEA 
LONDON FOR TSOU 
PARIS FOR ZEYA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KPAO PREL KDEM IZ KMDR KU
 
SUBJECT: SPECIAL MEDIA REACTION: MOURNING THE AMIR SHIFTS TO THE 
SUCCESSION STRUGGLE 
 
 
Selected Headlines 
------------------ 
 
¶1. Sunday, January 22, 2006 
 
-- Al-Qabas front page "Two parallel lines: Activating article 3 and 
opening door for settlement"; "Council of Ministers keeps its 
sessions open"; "Speaker Al-Khrafi: Matters are in wise hands"; 
"Royal family meeting Al-Shaab Palace cancelled"; "Informed Sources: 
Medical report is ready"; "Amir sent a letter to National Assembly 
Speaker to set a date for oath-taking special session" 
 
-- Al-Qabas p. 4 "National Assembly's Bureau discussed request to 
hold oath-taking session" 
 
-- Al-Qabas p. 5 "Council of Ministers decides to use article 3 of 
the Succession Law" 
 
-- Al-Qabas p. 7 "Women's Forum tomorrow to eulogize Jaber 
Al-Ahmad" 
 
-- Al-Qabas p. 23 "Adel Al-Qassar: Royal family icons should rise 
above disputes and differences" 
 
-- Al-Qabas back page "Dr. Ahmad Al-Rubei: Homeland is bigger than 
individuals" 
 
-- Al-Rai Al-Aam front page "Fahd Al-Saad regretted not being able 
to set a date for Speaker Al-Khrafi to meet with the Amir"; "Window 
of hope on possibility of avoiding tough constitutional and 
political scenarios deadlocked" 
 
-- Al-Rai Al-Aam p. 2 "Al-Tabtabaei: National Assembly cannot ignore 
Amir's letter" 
 
-- Al-Rai Al-Aam p. 3 "Council of Ministers decided to activate 
article 3 of the succession law" 
 
-- Al-Rai Al-Aam p. 29 "Al-Rai Al-Aam cartoon: All Kuwaitis are 
constitutional experts these days" 
 
-- Al-Watan front page "Council of Ministers commences 'settlement' 
procedures"; "Government will ask for "urgent special session" 
within 48 hours"; "Sharar: Cohesion and solidarity in favor of 
Kuwait's interest" 
 
-- Al-Watan p. 3 "American Congressional delegation: Shaykh Jaber 
boosted relations between Kuwait and America" 
 
-- Al-Watan p. 50 "Dr. Ismail Al-Shatti: Potentials of Success of 
Continuation of Al-Sabah Family Rule" 
 
-- Al-Seyassah front page "Final word for the National Assembly and 
decision is on Wednesday"; "Amir refused to receive Speaker 
Al-Khrafi and experts affirmed non-constitutionality of request to 
hold oath-taking session"; "Al-Khrafi: Kuwait in safe hands and 
wisdom will ultimately prevail"; "Speaker Al-Khrafi: National 
Assembly's Bureau authorized me to meet the Amir and 'request to 
hold oath-taking session' was referred to constitutional experts" 
 
Block Quotes 
------------ 
 
¶2. Friday, January 20, 2006 
 
-- Al-Qabas progressive daily newspaper's staff wrote on the front 
page under the title "The difficult decision for the big man of 
Kuwait": "Here is Kuwait today before the moment of truth. This is 
an occasion to turn to His Highness the Amir Shaykh Saad Al-Abdullah 
Al-Salim Al-Sabah, the man who has constantly dedicated his efforts 
and work to Kuwait for close to half a century and was a hero in the 
battle to rescue its legitimacy. He is also a hero of its liberation 
from Saddam's destructive invasion alongside Jaber Al-Ahmed.  This 
is an occasion for us to call him to continue his work for Kuwait 
and make another sacrifice. He will not shy away from presenting 
Kuwait with another sacrifice in order to spare her problems or 
maybe even crises. His ceding of power to he who is able from the 
ruling family will be looked upon by the people of Kuwait as another 
initiative added to his great record of initiatives for the good of 
Kuwait and its people. By doing so, he will maintain his national 
value....  He has a very high place in the Kuwaiti people's hearts 
and will gain even more favor if he was to allow for someone to take 
 
KUWAIT 00000216  002 OF 003 
 
 
over who is able to serve Kuwait in the future." 
 
-- Baraa Hamoud Al-Roumi wrote in the moderate daily newspaper 
Al-Rai Al-Aam under the title "Let's continue on the path of success 
and superiority": "The path of success begun by Shaykh Jaber is a 
long and hard path but to maintain what we have achieved will be 
harder than getting to it especially with the dangers looming in the 
future of the country. I hope of all loyal Kuwaitis to hold 
steadfastly to that which benefits Kuwait and to fight corruption in 
all its types and shapes. I urge you to stand together and cooperate 
for the sake of our country and our Arab nation." 
 
¶3. Saturday, January 21, 2006 
 
-- Editor-in-chief of the moderate daily newspaper Al-Rai Al-Aam 
Jasim Boodai wrote under the title "Why Sabah Al-Ahmed?": "Kuwait 
has rarely known such a dynamic, calm, and cautious personality. He 
was raised alongside the departed Amir and experienced everything 
with and was also with His Highness Shaykh Saad Al-Abdullah 
throughout all the stages of international relations and has 
benefited from both of them. In short, he was a man with a pivotal 
role in the rule of Kuwait. He is a school of Arab diplomacy to whom 
all seeking knowledge flock. He lived through the domestic politics 
of Kuwait with great ability. Sabah Al-Ahmed is a man who was and 
will remain the voice of Kuwait and its image. His wisdom is needed 
now more than any other time to close the files forced open by 
circumstances. Your vision is required now more than any other time 
in order to turn over a new leaf.  Your strength is needed now more 
than any other time to promote the Kuwait experience to the entire 
region; the experience of promise and contract between the ruled and 
the ruler. Why Sabah Al-Ahmed? Because, he is strong and 
trustworthy; strong with Kuwait and is to be trusted with it." 
 
-- Suliman Al-Fahd wrote in the progressive daily newspaper Al-Qabas 
under the title "The displacement celebration": "I will not repeat 
what has been said and understood about Shaykh Saad's unmatched love 
for his people and his country. As the people of Kuwait have become 
accustomed to being surrounded by love and appreciation and being 
overwhelmed with loyalty and allegiance, I think it is Shaykh Saad's 
right and the people's duty to turn the day of displacement into a 
national holiday.  A holiday during which we find all the slogans of 
national unity and the steadfastness of the ruling family as his 
displacement is inline with the sacrifices he has made for the 
country and its people.  Yes, the displacement should be done within 
a framework that respects the heritage of love that flourishes 
within the hearts of Kuwaitis towards this popularly loved Shaykh." 
 
-- Abdul Latif Al-Daiej also wrote in the progressive daily 
newspaper Al-Qabas under the title "We started with 
consultation...we should end with it": "Today Kuwait is experiencing 
what can be called its darkest days. In addition to losing the 
leader of its rise, civilization, and economy it is suffering 
political instability resulting from his absence. And this was the 
state that remained politically stable and nationally united even 
when all of its territory was lost and its organizations fell during 
Saddam's invasion. It was not easy for Kuwait's leadership and 
people to remain standing during the invasion and it is not 
easy...today to lose all of that.  We do not want to give advice to 
anyone and we certainly do not want to point out the mistakes of one 
party or another, but this is our country and this is our fate. 
Kuwait was established from beginning to end on democratic 
principles and consultation; today it faces a crisis of such 
magnitude the exit can only be through adherence to the constitution 
and the principles of rule.  We are confident of the Shaykhs' 
wisdom, hence we are not going to offer advice, and we shall save 
our agreements and disagreements until the matter is settled." 
 
-- Nabil Al-Fadl wrote in the moderate daily newspaper Al-Watan 
under the title "They should have respected him": "Who do we 
believe? What we see and know of His Highness Shaykh Saad's 
deteriorating health? Or, do we believe the wishes that say he is 
able to take over and run the country starting with naming a Crown 
Prince and a Prime Minister to being the Commander-in-Chief of the 
armed forces?  Who do we believe? The Council of Minister, which de 
facto has the power constitutionally under these circumstances?  Or, 
do we believe those who allege that His Highness's health is good 
enough to allow him carry out his constitutional duties?  What is 
amazing is that His Highness Shaykh Salim Al-Ali jumps in the middle 
of this turmoil and he is the one that has spent the last 
half-century having nothing to do with the government....  That is 
why we ask with amazement where is the wisdom in having a few member 
of the family destabilize the family pledge of allegiance and 
 
KUWAIT 00000216  003 OF 003 
 
 
disturbing the smooth transfer of power within considering Shaykh 
Saad's health condition? They should have respected Kuwait and its 
people and did not want Shaykh Saad to become the Amir after his 
God's will to deteriorate his health, his strength and his mind. 
They should have respected the ruling family. They should have 
respected Shaykh Saad himself as they pushed him through rough roads 
littered with disagreements with the rest of the family, the 
constitution, and logical thinking. What evil advice are they 
listening to? And, do they not see its negative effects on the stock 
market and the people? What black intentions are they hiding behind 
their irrational and illogical demands? May God protect Kuwait from 
the evil deeds of its sons and their greed.  As for that which is 
outside, our friends are protecting us from that." 
 
-- Al-Anbaa moderate daily newspaper's staff wrote on the front page 
under the title "Yes 'Bu Fahd' Kuwait first": "Kuwait first 
Kuwait first 
Kuwait first 
That is what His Highness Shaykh Saad Al-Abdullah swore to and it is 
the same ideal that rejuvenated itself in the conscience of the 
Kuwait people and shined through the decision of its wise ones when 
they came to act on it and not only speak it.  Because Kuwait is 
first, we should act based on wisdom and not emotions.  Now is the 
time for Kuwait to be first through action not words.  You have 
called on us to take the oath of 'Kuwait first' Bu Fahd and here we 
are today acting on it." 
 
********************************************* 
Visit Embassy Kuwait's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/kuwait 
 
You can also access this site through the 
State Department's Classified SIPRNET website 
********************************************* 
 
LEBARON