04ADANA37
SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY, MARCH 19, 2004
Wed Mar 24 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ADANA 000037 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU IZ ADANA
SUBJECT: SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY, MARCH 19, 2004 
 
 
This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary for March 19, 
¶2004.  Please note that Turkish press reports often contain 
errors or exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch for 
the accuracy of the reports summarized here. 
 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
 
Zaman / In Ova district, Seyhan, Adana, a group of people 
organized an unapproved Newroz celebration, burning tires, and 
throwing stones at police cars.  Cemil Aktas was wounded during 
the clash. 
 
 
Ulkede Gundem, Evrensel / Celalettin Birtane, Diyarbakir DEHAP 
Head, invited all of Diyarbakir to Newroz celebrations.  Birtane 
also announced that there would be free bus services from the 
city center to the Newroz celebration area on March 21, Newroz 
Day. 
 
 
Bolge / CHP's Adana candidate Bulent Ozulku would take the lead 
in the local elections, AKP's Durak would come second and ANAYOL 
candidate Umit Ozgumus would be last. 
 
 
This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary for March 19, 
¶2004.  Please note that Turkish press reports often contain 
errors or exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch for 
the accuracy of the reports summarized here. 
 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
 
Zaman / In Ova district, Seyhan, Adana, a group of people 
organized an unapproved Newroz celebration, burning tires, and 
throwing stones at police cars.  Cemil Aktas was wounded during 
the clash. 
 
 
Ulkede Gundem, Evrensel / Celalettin Birtane, Diyarbakir DEHAP 
Head, invited all of Diyarbakir to Newroz celebrations.  Birtane 
also announced that there would be free bus services from the 
city center to the Newroz celebration area on March 21, Newroz 
Day. 
 
 
Bolge / CHP's Adana candidate Bulent Ozulku would take the lead 
in the local elections, AKP's Durak would come second and ANAYOL 
candidate Umit Ozgumus would be last. 
 
 
This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary for March 19, 
¶2004.  Please note that Turkish press reports often contain 
errors or exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch for 
the accuracy of the reports summarized here. 
 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
 
Zaman / In Ova district, Seyhan, Adana, a group of people 
organized an unapproved Newroz celebration, burning tires, and 
throwing stones at police cars.  Cemil Aktas was wounded during 
the clash. 
 
 
Ulkede Gundem, Evrensel / Celalettin Birtane, Diyarbakir DEHAP 
Head, invited all of Diyarbakir to Newroz celebrations.  Birtane 
also announced that there would be free bus services from the 
city center to the Newroz celebration area on March 21, Newroz 
Day. 
 
 
Bolge / CHP's Adana candidate Bulent Ozulku would take the lead 
in the local elections, AKP's Durak would come second and ANAYOL 
candidate Umit Ozgumus would be last. 
 
 
CULTURE and TOURISM 
 
 
Hurriyet / Erkan Mumcu, Minister of Culture, announced that the 
Zeugma antiquities will come back to Gaziantep after being 
displayed at Topkapi Palace in Istanbul.  "That's where they 
belong," Mumcu stated. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REID