04ADANA139
SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY, OCTOBER 15, 2004
Mon Oct 18 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ADANA 000139 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM IZ TU ADANA
SUBJECT: SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY, OCTOBER 15, 2004 
 
 
This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary for October 15, 
Â¶2004.  Please note that Turkish press reports often contain 
errors or exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch for 
the accuracy of the reports summarized here. 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
MILLIYET/SABAH/RADIKAL/TURKIYE/EVRENSEL/TERCU MAN/YENI SAFAK: 
Former DEP Deputy Leyla Zana, during her visit to Brussels as 
the guest of the European Parliament (EP), objected to the 
European Commission's Report calling the Kurds a minority.  Zana 
said, "Kurds are not a minority but a member of the majority. 
This definition has hurt us a lot." Zana said Kurdish and 
Turkish people needed a new constitution, which would consider 
them as equal people. Zana added that the armed persons in the 
mountains should be reintegrated into society, and that 
applications such as the Compensation Law hurt the honor of the 
Kurdish people. She added that the EU was a bridge between Turks 
and Kurds, and that Turkey should be accepted as a member of the 
European Union. 
 
CUMHURIYET: As a result of an explosion of a remote-controlled 
mine planted by PKK/Kongra-Gel militants on a road in Yuksekova, 
Hakkari province, two soldiers were wounded and some military 
vehicles were damaged. 
 
CUMHURIYET/TURKIYE: The Elazig Governorate announced that as a 
result of GOT forces' operations in Istanbul, Tunceli, and 
Elazig provinces, nine persons allegedly trying to plan bomb 
attacks in Elazig and other major towns were detained. GOT 
forces seized 7 kilograms of C-4 explosive, and 20 electrical 
percussion caps in places indicated by the detainees. 
 
TURKIYE/BOLGE/EKSPRES: Attorney Ismet Altug has been elected as 
the President of the Adana Bar Association at the election held 
on October 10, 2004. 
 
ULKEDE OZGUR GUNDEM: Based on information provided by a Heze 
Parastina Gel (HPG-People Protection Forces) member, who 
surrendered to the GOT forces a few days ago, the Nusaybin and 
Midyat Jandarma Commands, Mardin province, launched a joint 
operation in the rural Doganli, Goruntepe, Cali, and Habise 
regions. A number of HPG shelters in the region were discovered 
by GOT forces. 
 
ULKEDE OZGUR GUNDEM: Twenty-seven "Human Shield Initiative" 
members from Adana and Mersin set up tents in the Kato Mountain, 
Hakkari province, aiming to stop likely military operations in 
the region. Thirty persons from the Mardin "Human Shield 
Initiative" will go to Cudi Mountain for the same purpose. 
 
 
REID