04AMMAN6794
COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR VISIT OF
Sun Aug 15 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Amman
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

150609Z Aug 04UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 006794 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OTRA EFIN JO IZ
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR VISIT OF 
STATE/TREASURY/CEA TEAM TO AMMAN 
 
REF: STATE 175411 
 
¶1.  Embassy Amman grants country clearance for and warmly 
welcomes the visit of CEA William Block, EB/IFD/OMA Daniel 
Peters, and four officials from the Department of Treasury to 
travel to Amman August 15-20 for consultations with Iraqi 
officials. 
 
¶2.  Your control officer for this visit will be James Flowers 
(962-6-590-6559; Mobile 962-79-522-0808;  FAX 
962-6-592-7653).  The Embassy's after-hours telephone number 
is 962-6-590-6500.  Embassy will provide expeditor services 
and transportation from and to the airport for all delegation 
members. 
 
¶3.  Valid visas are required for entry into Jordan.  Visas 
may be obtained at Queen Alia airport; however, Embassy 
suggests visitors obtain their visas prior to arrival, as 
there can be long lines for visa issuance at the airport. 
Money can be exchanged at Queen Alia airport. 
 
¶4.  Each visitor, regardless of length of stay, must have 
fiscal data to pay for direct costs of the visit. Each 
agency, organization or visiting delegation will be charged 
for the actual costs attributed to the visit.  Direct charge 
costs include, but are not limited to: American and LES 
overtime (for such services as airport expediting, cashier 
accommodation exchange, control room staffing, 
representational event support), travel and per diem costs 
incurred by post personnel in support of visitor's field 
travel, rental of vehicles and other equipment, long distance 
telephone calls, office supplies, gasoline and other vehicle 
maintenance costs, departure tax and other airport fees. 
 
¶5. Threat assessment: 
 
Since late 1999, there has been a series of serious, 
confirmed terrorist threats and disrupted terrorist plots 
targeting U.S. interests in Jordan.  In April 2004, Jordanian 
authorities disrupted a plan to attack U.S. Embassy and 
Jordanian leadership sites with explosive-laden vehicles. 
Anti-western sentiment, though less pronounced since the end 
of the Gulf War, has been sparked on occasion by incidents 
within the region, particularly those related to 
Israeli/Palestinian issues and to a lesser extent Iraq. 
Warden messages disseminated in January and March 2004, 
alerted Americans to potential terrorist targeting of U.S. 
interests in Jordan, including hotels. 
 
Recent incidents in Jordan remind us of the ability of 
transnational terrorist groups, as well as less sophisticated 
local elements, to target Americans and Western interests in 
Jordan.  In September 2003 13 individuals were arrested for 
plotting attacks against U.S. and Jordanian targets, 
including the U.S. Embassy in Amman.  In May 2003, three 
individuals connected to the Zarqawi network were arrested 
for planning attacks against foreigners and tourist 
locations.  The October 28, 2002 assassination of a U.S. 
diplomat in Amman outside his residence was ultimately linked 
to al-Qaeda.  Jordanian authorities arrested the assassins in 
December 2002.  In October 2002, Americans in Jordan were 
informed of a potential kidnapping plot by al-Qaeda. In 
December 1999, a group affiliated with al-Qaeda was arrested 
in Jordan.  This group was in the late planning stages of 
attacks against western hotels and tourist sites. The most 
recent published terrorist alerts have stated that extremist 
groups continue to plan terrorist attacks against U.S. 
interests worldwide. 
 
Crime is generally not a serious problem for travelers in 
Jordan, although petty theft is somewhat common in the 
downtown Amman Hashimiyah Square area and near the Roman 
amphitheater.  In the narrow streets of the old city and at 
some of the more popular tourist sites, crowded conditions 
invite pickpockets/purse snatchers and other petty criminals. 
 Travelers should be more guarded in these areas and not 
present easy opportunities to criminals. 
 
¶6. Travel guidelines: 
 
American citizens and official visitors traveling in Jordan 
should exercise caution, be alert and stay informed of 
regional and local events that could quickly impact the 
security environment in the country.  Travelers should avoid 
large crowds and demonstrations and take measures to avoid 
areas where they are most likely to occur (city centers, 
universities, refugee camps), particularly during periods of 
increased tension.  It is also recommended to maintain a low 
profile and not establish predictable patterns of movement, 
even if only visiting for a short period. Recent worldwide 
announcements continue to alert American travelers that 
terrorists do not distinguish between official and civilian 
targets.  Therefore facilities where Americans or foreigners 
are likely to congregate such as hotels, nightspots, and 
restaurants should be considered as potential targets. 
Travelers should remain in a higher state of alert when 
attendance at such locations is necessary.  Taxis are the 
only form of public transportation that is recommended. 
 
As Jordan is an Islamic country, cultural sensitivities 
should be observed.  Female travelers should dress 
conservatively and not travel alone, particularly in areas 
not as accustomed to western visitors. Incidents of sexual 
harassment, assault and unwelcome advances of a sexual nature 
against western visitors and residents, although not 
frequent, have been reported.  These incidents, while 
troubling, have not been pervasive. 
 
¶7. Other: 
 
For further information, see the State Department's Consular 
Information Sheet for Jordan at 
http://travel.state.gov/jordan.html and link from that site 
to the most recent Public Announcement on Travel in the 
Middle East and South Asia and the most recent Worldwide 
Caution. 
HALE