04ANKARA6593
TURKEY REQUESTS US SUPPORT IN SUBMITTING ITS
Fri Nov 26 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

261237Z Nov 04UNCLAS ANKARA 006593 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY REQUESTS US SUPPORT IN SUBMITTING ITS 
CANDIDACY FOR UNSC SEAT 
 
 
¶1.  (U) On November 10, 2004, we received a letter from the 
Turkish MFA General Director for Multilateral Affairs Duray 
Polat to Ambassador Edelman requesting U.S. support for 
Turkey's candidacy for a non-permanent seat on the United 
Nations Security Council for the 2009-2010 term, the 
elections for which will be held during the 63rd session of 
the General Assembly in 2008. 
 
¶2.  (U) Following is the text of the letter: 
 
Your Excellency, 
 
     I have the honour (sic) to present my compliments to 
Your Excellency and enclose a brochure on Turkey's 
candidature for a non-permanent seat at the United Nations 
Security Council for the term 2009-2010, at the elections to 
be held during the 63rd session of the UN General Assembly in 
¶2008. 
 
     The Turkish Government attaches utmost importance to 
this candidature which is based on Turkey's unwavering 
commitment to the purposes and principles enshrined in the 
Charter of the United Nations. 
 
     Turkey has actively contributed to the efforts to 
preserve peace and stability at the regional and global 
levels and has supported the UN activities in social, 
economic and humanitarian fields.  With regard to peace and 
security, Turkey has provided troops, civilian police 
officers and observers to international peacekeeping missions 
in Asia, Africa, Latin America, the Balkans, the Caucasus and 
the Middle East. 
 
     Although a founding member of the United Nations, Turkey 
has not been represented in the Security Council since 1961, 
when it had split a term with another country.  Turkey 
believes that as a member of the Security Council, she will 
be better equipped to bring its further contribution to 
international peace and security as well as to cooperation 
and development. 
 
     The Turkish Government would very much appreciate the 
valuable support of the Government of the United States of 
America for Turkey's candidature to the Security Council for 
the term 2009-2010. 
 
     Please accept, Your Excellency, the assurances of my 
highest consideration. 
 
¶3.  (U) The letter was accompanied by a brochure in support 
of its candidature.  We are sending by U.S. mail to EUR/SE 
copies of the brochure. 
EDELMAN