04BRASILIA2919
JUVENILE DETENTION IN BRAZIL:  A LOOK AT
Mon Nov 29 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Brasilia
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRASILIA 002919 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV BR SOCI PHUM
SUBJECT: JUVENILE DETENTION IN BRAZIL:  A LOOK AT 
BRASILIA'S CAJE FACILITY 
 
¶1.  (U) SUMMARY:  On November 24, Poloffs called on Iolete 
Carvalho, the Director of Brasilia's juvenile detention 
facility, CAJE.  CAJE houses 375 youths who range from 12- 
20 years of age.  Director Carvalho answered Poloffs' 
questions and gave a thorough tour of the physical plant. 
Despite numerous unflattering press reports and scathing 
criticism by Federal District Representative Erika Kokay, 
Poloffs found the facilities, as presented, to be 
acceptable.  Carvalho appeared, however, reluctant to 
discuss the problematic elements of running CAJE such as 
the violence so prevalent in Brazilian detention 
facilities.  END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------ 
NOT QUITE HEAVEN. 
------------------ 
 
¶2.  (U) Director Carvalho eagerly presented Poloffs with 
statistics and facts related to her institution.  Like most 
detention centers in Brazil, CAJE is overcrowded, housing 
375 youths (26 of whom were females) even though its 
official capacity is 196.  The facility keeps a mere 15 
guards on staff, none of whom carry weapons more lethal 
than a police baton.  Detainees serve a maximum of three 
years, with the average stay lasting around 2.5 years.  The 
most common offense, according to  Carvalho, is violent 
robbery. 
 
¶3.  (U) A key source of criticism of CAJE has been Federal 
District Representative Erika Kokay (PT).  Following a 
request for more information on CAJE, Rep. Kokay's office 
sent Poloffs an acerbic dossier faulting CAJE for, inter 
alia, an inadequate physical plant, gross understaffing, 
rampant violence, and unsatisfactory treatment of mentally 
ill internees.  Most recently, alleges the Representative, 
a mentally ill detainee slipped through the bureaucratic 
cracks and committed suicide in September 2004 by hanging 
himself.  The compilation of press clippings, 
correspondences, and studies presented to Poloffs also 
details a rash of five internee deaths (some violent), all 
of which occurred in late 2003-early 2004.  These deaths 
took place before  Carvalho's tenure began in March of 
¶2004. 
 
----------------- 
NOR THE INFERNO. 
----------------- 
 
¶4.  (U) In contrast with the overcrowding, understaffing, 
and danger, Poloffs observed a well-functioning facility 
that, at least during the visit, appeared to be orderly and 
decent.  The detainees, explained the Director, divide 
their days between classes, sports, and professional 
development.  Professional development activities witnessed 
included auto mechanics, computer technology, and the 
culinary arts.  Poloffs also observed classes and physical 
activity, both of which appeared to proceed satisfactorily. 
Between scheduled activities, the youths are allotted free 
time in their respective wings.  Carvalho estimated that 
detainees spend approximately nine hours a day engaged in 
activities outside their cells. 
 
¶5.  (U) Health facilities seemed adequate and included 
several beds and an in-house dentist.  CAJE, noted Carvalho 
employs two doctors who work normal hours along with a 
cadre of nurses who provide 24 hour on-call medical 
support.  The Director also pointed out that CAJE provides 
a staff of 22 social workers and 15 psychologists to 
address mental health issues. 
 
¶6.  (U) Internees receive visits from parents and other 
loved ones once a week.  CAJE, according to the Director, 
not only encourages, but claims to mandate such visits to 
ensure that the detainees will have stable relationships to 
support their post-CAJE lives.  Those wishing to make phone 
calls must first interface with staffers, who dial and 
cross-check numbers with available lists of family members 
before handing over the receiver. 
 
------------------------- 
BUT PERHAPS IN PURGATORY 
------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (U) CAJE Director Carvalho, who has occupied her 
current position for only eight months, seemed unwilling to 
discuss the institution's dangerous reputation.  She was, 
though, clearly eager to refute the unsavory image put 
forth by Rep. Kokay and fomented in the media, a process 
which took place before her tenure.  Indeed, the facility 
presented to Poloffs seemed unexpectedly acceptable, 
especially given the dismal reputation of Sao Paulo's FEBEM 
system of juvenile detention (see 2003 Human Rights Report 
for Brazil). 
 
¶8.  (U) COMMENT:  CAJE, like any Brazilian governmental 
appendage, must contend with scant resources and the 
caprice of political currents.  While harsh criticism of 
CAJE is partially the product of a proliferate media and 
the efforts of Rep. Kokay, the claims of understaffing and 
overcrowding certainly merit attention and remedy.  Given 
that the violence documented by Rep. Kokay and her staff 
occurred before Director Carvalho's taking office, it could 
be the case that CAJE has moved on to more decent and 
stable footing.  Whether or not CAJE can continue to 
reflect this assessment remains to be seen.  END COMMENT.