04DUBLIN780
SAID THE TIGER TO THE DRAGON: READOUT OF
Fri May 21 00:00:00 +0200 2004
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Dublin
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 DUBLIN 000780 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/20/2014 
TAGS: PREL EUN
SUBJECT: SAID THE TIGER TO THE DRAGON: READOUT OF 
IRELAND-CHINA BILATERAL MEETINGS 
 
 
Classified By: DCM Jane B. Fort for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
SUMMARY 
 
¶1.  (C)  Visiting Ireland May 11-12, Chinese Premier Wen 
Jiabao met Irish President Mary McAleese, Dail (Parliament) 
Speaker Rory O'Hanlon, and Chairman of the Senate Rory Kiely 
before extended, substantive discussions with the Taoiseach 
(Prime Minister) Bertie Ahern.  Wen then visited Iona 
Technologies in Dublin, the Shannon Free Trade Zone, and the 
University of Limerick.  The Irish were left with the 
impression that Wen and his entourage were modern, pragmatic 
and eager-to-learn how the Chinese dragon could emulate the 
economic wonders of the Irish "Celtic tiger." However, while 
ready to take on board Irish economic and education ideas, 
the Chinese were not ready to embrace the modern political 
practices that were the sine qua non of Ireland's success. 
End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (C)  Poloff spoke May 18 with Cliona Manahan Leslie, 
Director of the DFA's Asia and Oceana branch, who had just 
several completed days of meetings in Ireland and in Brussels 
covering China's visits.  She described a businesslike and 
open atmosphere for dialogue encouraged by the Chinese who 
clearly came "to learn how Ireland succeeded."  Manahan 
Leslie, an experienced (and enthusiastic) China watcher, was 
left with "real hope for the future" regarding Chinese 
development and relations with the EU. 
 
¶3.  (U)  Meetings on May 17 included one with President Mary 
McAleese, which was cordial and pro forma.  A meeting with 
Dail Chair O'Hanlon resulted in the call for more development 
of Irish-Chinese relations through enhanced exchanges with 
the Chinese National Peoples' Congress and other agencies. 
 
LOOKING TO LEARN FROM THE CELTIC TIGER 
 
¶4.  (C)  The extended exchanges with the Taoiseach were 
substantive and wide ranging, according to Manahan Leslie. 
She recalled Wen saying he had come to Ireland "to learn how 
Ireland's economy grew so fast." While open to a free 
exchange of ideas, the Chinese were not ready to admit the 
need for political liberalization, she added. 
 
¶5.  (C)  China has problems with sustainable development and 
they know it.  Their economy "is growing too fast, there are 
too few controls on construction, and gas consumption is too 
high," Wen is reported to have said. 
 
¶6.  (C)  The Chinese were told that the Irish economy took 
off in the 1990's because economic support structures were in 
place, such as liberalized banking rules, a good educational 
system, and low taxes relative to the rest of the EU.  These 
in turn led to significant foreign direct investment from 
both sides of the Atlantic. 
 
¶7.  (C)  According to Manahan Leslie, Wen admitted that China 
would "have to come more to Ireland (to learn) and to "do 
more at home to improve conditions" for sustainable 
investment.  This includes getting young people out of the 
country to travel and be educated abroad.  (Note:  Ireland 
already hosts 40,000 to 50,000 Chinese, mainly students on 
work-study visas in Dublin and other cities.  There are also 
many migrant workers and professionals, according to local 
press reports.  The Irish Chinese Information Center, which 
advises newly arrived students, reports that students come to 
Ireland to learn English because the education system here is 
substantially cheaper than in the U.S. or U.K., other prime 
destinations.  End note.) 
 
¶8.  (C)  And what about democracy and the rule of law?  "The 
Chinese didn't want to discuss those,"  Manahan Leslie 
admitted, although the Irish did "cover all the expected 
topics," such as human rights. 
 
NO PRESS PLEASE, WE'RE CHINESE 
 
¶9. (C)  The Irish, presumably at the behest of the Chinese, 
abruptly canceled a scheduled press conference in the late 
afternoon after the May 11 meetings.  The public reason given 
was that the meetings had run well over time so there was no 
time for the press.  Manahan Leslie added to Poloff that 
Dublin was the Chinese's last stop and everyone was tired. 
However, Poloff pointed out that if the Chinese were eager to 
present a new face to the West to attract investment, a press 
conference would have been a prime opportunity.  Thus 
pressed, Manahan Leslie admitted that the Chinese still "just 
don't care about or respect the press."  She added that 
Chinese openness to modernization would have to "translate 
into activity" on press fronts for China to maintain its 
forward progress.  She based her long-term hopes for China's 
future on developments such as the planned EU-China 
professional exchanges, including meetings of 
Parliamentarians. 
 
COMMENT 
 
¶10. (C)  We caught up with Manahan Leslie shortly after Wen's 
entourage left Europe.  She was clearly enthusiastic over the 
visit.  Wen's tone and the bearing of the Chinese delegation 
impressed her deeply.  An outspoken China watcher for many 
years, she found this Premier and his entourage more 
professional and ready to face the future than previous ones. 
 Nevertheless, the Irish note that the Chinese dragon still 
ignores the elephant in the room, that is, the need for 
political reform, including press freedom, that is an 
essential part of the formula for sustainable development. 
KENNY