04MADRID861
SPAIN COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR FAA ROBERT A. NESTER
Fri Mar 12 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Madrid
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MADRID 000861 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FAA FOR ROBERT NESTER AND TINA HIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR OTRA SP
SUBJECT: SPAIN COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR FAA ROBERT A. NESTER 
 
REF: FAA 101929Z 
 
¶1.  Embassy welcomes and grants country clearance to Robert 
¶A. Nester, Aircrew Program Manager, American Trans Air (ATA), 
Indianapolis Flight Standards District Office, to travel to 
various places in Spain March 23-26 to perform surveillance 
activities related to assigned work program consisting of 
enroute inspections and check airman observations on L-1001 
Aircraft, operated internationally by ATA. 
 
¶2.  Embassy understands that no assistance is necessary. 
 
¶3.  THREAT ASSESSMENT: 
 
In general, Spain is safe.  However, Madrid, Barcelona and 
other large cities in Spain -- including resort/convention 
areas such as Benidorm -- attract a large number of criminals 
and pickpockets and frequent incidents of crime of 
opportunity against the unwary do occur.  Carry only 
essential items including a photocopy of your passport's 
photo page.  Visitors can protect themselves against crime by 
being street-smart, alert and aware of their surroundings. 
In the event you are victimized by crime, or experience any 
security-related incident, please contact the Embassy's 
Regional Security Office at 91-587-2550 or after hours at 
91-587-2355.  Official visitors to the Embassy in Madrid or 
the Consulate General in Barcelona are encouraged to receive 
a security briefing from the RSO office at their earliest 
convenience.  Additional information regarding safety and 
security in Spain is available on the U.S. Department of 
State's website (http://www.state.gov) and the U.S. Embassy's 
website (www.embusa.es). 
 
Travelers are encouraged to review the most recent Worldwide 
Caution issued by the Department of State.  As the Department 
of State continues to develop information on any potential 
security threats to Americans overseas, it shares credible 
threat information through its Consular Information Program 
documents, available on the Internet at 
http://travel/state.gov.  In addition to information on the 
Internet, U.S. travelers can hear recorded information by 
calling the Department of State in Washington, D.C. at 
202-647-5225 from their touch-tone telephone, or receive 
information by automated telefax by dialing 202-647-3000 from 
their fax machine. 
ARGYROS