04MADRID4112
SPAIN COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR THOMAS ZARZECKI
Fri Oct 22 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Madrid
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

221336Z Oct 04UNCLAS MADRID 004112 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OTRA PREL MARR PARM SP
SUBJECT: SPAIN COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR THOMAS ZARZECKI 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 219202 
 
     ¶B. MADRID 2800 
     ¶C. STATE 149124 
     ¶D. CASSAYRE-RILEY E-MAILS 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Embassy welcomes and grants country clearance to 
Thomas Zarzecki, Department of State to travel to Madrid, 
October 24-26 to meet with Spanish officials to discuss 
conventional weapons procurement issues (per reftels B,C and 
D). 
 
¶2.  (U)  Control Officer at Embassy Madrid is Political 
Officer Brian Brown.  He can be reached at work 
(34-91-587-2393) on his mobile (34-639-322-663) or e-mail: 
brownbb@state.gov. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  As requested in reftel, hotel reservations have 
been made at Hotel Melia Los Galgos located at Claudio 
Coello, 139, 28006 Madrid.  The hotel can be reached via 
telephone (34-91-562-6600) or fax (34-91-562-7519). 
 
¶4.  (U)  Visitors are reminded that bearers of diplomatic and 
official passports coming to Spain on official business need 
to obtain a Spanish visa prior to arrival in Spain. 
 
¶5.  (U)  THREAT ASSESSMENT: 
 
In general, Spain is safe.  However, Madrid, Barcelona and 
other large cities in Spain -- including resort/convention 
areas such as Benidorm -- attract a large number of criminals 
and pickpockets and frequent incidents of crime of 
opportunity against the unwary do occur.  Carry only 
essential items including a photocopy of your passport's 
photo page.  Visitors can protect themselves against crime by 
being street-smart, alert and aware of their surroundings. In 
the event you are victimized by crime, or experience any 
security-related incident, please contact the Embassy's 
Regional Security Office at 91-587-2550 or after hours at 
91-587-2355.  Official visitors to the Embassy in Madrid or 
the Consulate General in Barcelona are encouraged to receive 
a security briefing from the RSO office at their earliest 
convenience.  Additional information regarding safety and 
security in Spain is available on the U.S. Department of 
State's website (http://www.state.gov) and the U.S. Embassy's 
website (www.embusa.es). 
 
Travelers are encouraged to review the most recent Worldwide 
Caution issued by the Department of State.  As the Department 
of State continues to develop information on any potential 
security threats to Americans overseas, it shares credible 
threat information through its Consular Information Program 
documents, available on the Internet at 
http://travel/state.gov.  In addition to information on the 
Internet, U.S. travelers can hear recorded information by 
calling the Department of State in Washington, D.C. at 
202-647-5225 from their touch-tone telephone, or receive 
information by automated telefax by dialing 202-647-3000 from 
their fax machine. 
ARGYROS