04MADRID1617
COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR PARTICIPANTS IN
Fri May 07 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Madrid
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MADRID 001617 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR CA 
FSINFACTC FOR STEVE MALONEY 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: AMGT AFSI AFIN OTRA CMGT CVIS
SUBJECT:  COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR PARTICIPANTS IN 
NEA/SA/AF SENIOR CONSULAR LEADERSHIP DEVELOPMENT 
CONFERENCE (PC-108) MAY 10-13, 2004. 
 
 
1.Embassy Madrid welcomes Assistant Secretary for 
Consular Affairs Amb. Maura Harty, Deputy Assistant 
Secretary for Overseas Citizen Services Dianne Andruch, 
 
SIPDIS 
CA Executive Director Matt Klimov and Andrew Simkin to 
Madrid, Spain for the dates of May 10 - 14, 2004. It is 
post's understanding that all participants hold top- 
secret security clearances. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
¶2. Alcy Frelick will be their control officer, she can 
be reached by email at arfrelick@state.gov, office 
telephone (34) 91 587-2236, or cell phone 696-413-351. 
Control officer for the conference is Chris Randall, 
who can be reached by email at randallcj@state.gov, 
office telephone (34) 91-587-2250, or cell phone 669- 
004-310.  Alcy Frelick will meet and greet Amb. Harty 
and party, Chris Randall will meet Matt Klimov. Embassy 
will provide transportation to and from the airport. 
Hotel Reservations have been made at the Gran Hotel 
Melia Fenix, Calle Hermosilla, 2, Madrid 28001, phone 
(34)91-431-6700. 
 
¶3.  Visitors are reminded that bearers of diplomatic 
and official passports coming to Spain on official 
business need to obtain a Spanish visa prior to their 
arrival. 
 
¶4.  In general, Spain is safe.  However, Madrid and 
other large cities in Spain attract a number of 
criminals and pickpockets and frequent incidents of 
crimes of opportunity against the unwary occur.  Carry 
only essential items, including a photocopy of your 
passport.  Visitors can protect themselves from crime 
by being street-smart, alert, and aware of their 
surroundings.  In the event you are victimized by 
crime, or experience any other security-related 
incident, please contact the Embassy's Regional 
Security Office at (91) 587-2550.  Additional 
information regarding safety and security in Spain is 
available on the U.S. Department of State's website 
(http://www.state.gov). 
 
¶5.  Travelers are encouraged to review the most recent 
Worldwide Caution issued by the Department of State. 
As the Department of State continues to develop 
information on any potential security threats to 
Americans overseas, it shares credible threat 
information through its Consular Information Program 
documents, available on the Internet at 
http://travel/state.gov.  In addition to information on 
the Internet, U.S. travelers can hear recorded 
information by calling the Department of State in 
Washington, D.C. at 202-647-5225 from their touch-tone 
telephone, or receive information by automated telefax 
by dialing 202-647-3000 from their fax machine. 
ARGYROS