04MANAMA1353
INITIATIVE TO FACILITATE BUSINESS TRAVEL
Mon Aug 30 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Manama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MANAMA 001353 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR CA/VO/F/P 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CVIS BEXP ETRD
SUBJECT: INITIATIVE TO FACILITATE BUSINESS TRAVEL 
 
REF: STATE 166108 
 
¶1.  Post's Consular Section accepts walk-in applications and 
issues same day visas.  Applicants generally wait less than 
two hours from the time they walk in to apply for the visa 
to the time they walk out with their visas in hand. 
 
¶2.  Although Post does not have an appointment system, the 
Consular Section realizes the importance of facilitating 
business travel and has taken steps towards further 
expediting the process for these travelers.  In connection 
with the American Chamber of Commerce and the American 
Association of Bahrain (local American business group), the 
Consular Section offers special services and priority 
appointments to business travelers from these groups. 
 
¶3.   Members forward their applications to be reviewed and 
data-entered, which ensures that documentation is complete 
and saves approximately half an hour on the day of the 
interview.  Applicants are given an appointment, and on the 
interview date, they do not wait in the regular application 
line.  The back-up NIV officer interviews and adjudicates 
the case and the applicant may then leave and pick up the 
visa later or may wait 15 minutes for printing.  The whole 
process takes less than half an hour. 
 
¶4.  Post's conoff also attends board meetings and other 
events of the country's main business groups, and 
coordinates with the Economic/Commercial Section on both 
routine and official business travel.  The Consular Section 
regularly schedules block appointments for conference and 
seminar participants and provides VIP appointments during 
non-public hours for Embassy referrals.  The section also 
provides priority processing for government delegations, 
like those attending U.S.-Bahrain Free Trade Agreement 
negotiations and IMF/World Bank sessions. 
 
¶5.  The Consular Section continues to provide the most 
efficient level of service to the business community and 
welcomes further Department initiatives and developments 
aimed at supporting and facilitating business travel. 
 
MONROE