04PANAMA615
TORRIJOS TEAM BEGINNING TO LOOK AHEAD TO NEW
Tue Mar 16 00:00:00 +0100 2004
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Panama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 PANAMA 000615 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS TO USTR FOR AGASH AND JWOLFE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/02/2009 
TAGS: PREL PINR ETRD MASS PM LABOR HUMAN RIGHTSPOLMIL
SUBJECT: TORRIJOS TEAM BEGINNING TO LOOK AHEAD TO NEW 
ADMINISTRATION 
 
 
REF: A. PANAMA 0564 
     ¶B. 03 PANAMA 3173 
     ¶C. 03 PANAMA 2895 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Linda E. Watt for reason 1.5 (d) 
 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
 
¶1. (C)  Still leading in the polls, Revolutionary Democratic 
Party (PRD) presidential candidate Martin Torrijos is 
starting to consider what his administration might look like, 
well aware of our interest in key PRD appointments.  Meeting 
with PolOff, senior advisor and "friend of Martin" Ubaldino 
Real, said he is confident that Torrijos can control his 
party's factions and assured us of continued close 
cooperation if Torrijos wins.  Real added that Torrijos has 
dropped plans to appoint a former uniformed officer to head 
Panama's National Police (PNP), and that he had recently 
journeyed to Taiwan to assure Taipei that Torrijos plans no 
change in diplomatic relations. 
 
 
------------------- 
The Envelope Please 
------------------- 
 
 
¶2. (C) On March 2, PolOff met with Ubaldino Real, chief 
financial officer and senior advisor for Revolutionary 
Democratic Party (PRD) Martin Torrijos' presidential 
campaign.  According to Real, PRD internal polls show 
Torrijos 15% ahead of Solidaridad presidential candidate 
Guillermo Endara.  (Note: This tracks with published polls, 
with the most recent showing Torrijos nearly 18 points ahead 
of second-place Endara,  See ref A.  End note.)  The PRD 
believes it can win (with its Partido Popular ally) 40 
legislative seats, giving it a one-vote majority in the 
78-seat Legislative Assembly.  Real predicted that the PRD 
would win 35 spots and coalition partner Popular Party would 
win 5 spots. 
 
 
¶3.  (C) Real said that, until recently, Torrijos' had been 
unwilling to concentrate on anything but the campaign-- 
partly out of fear of jinxing his chances-- but added that 
the two had begun to "pencil in" names for an estimated 200 
high-level GOP positions (ministers, vice ministers, 
directors, commissioners, ambassadors and consuls general). 
Real (a naturalized AmCit and close personal friend of 
Martin) is considering a standing offer from Torrijos to be 
Minister of the Presidency, a position similar to the 
President's Chief of Staff.  Real was well aware of the GOP 
posts "of particular interest to the United States"-- 
Executive Secretary of the Public Security and National 
Defense Council (Consejo), Minister of Government and Justice 
(MOGJ), and the Directors of Panama's Police (PNP), Air 
Service (SAN), Maritime Service (SMN), Institutional 
Protection Service (SPI), Maritime Authority (AMP) and 
Immigration (among others, such as Foreign Minister, Minister 
of Commerce, and Ambassador to Washington). 
 
 
---------------------- 
Balancing PRD Factions 
---------------------- 
 
 
¶4. (U) Real dismissed speculation that once in power Torrijos 
will have difficulty balancing the PRD's three competing 
factions-- "old guard" (about 40% of the party), "new guard" 
(about 60% of the party) and "friends of Martin." "This is 
Martin's party," and he will make the choices.  (Comment: The 
campaign is heavily skewed in favor of "new guard" and 
"friends of Martin," reflecting the shift in power from 
former President Perez-Balladares.  End Comment.)  Real 
emphasized that unlike with Torrijos' 1999 run or 
Perez-Balladares' 1994-1999 term, the PRD presidential 
candidate has not had to bargain with the various factions 
before turning to the general election.  Nevertheless, Real 
conceded that Torrijos will have to engage in some horse 
trading to placate factions or individuals who might 
otherwise interfere in important policy areas.  PolOff 
expressed the hope that positions "of particular interest to 
the United States" will not be involved in this patronage 
politicking. 
 
 
--------------------- 
Jump on the Bandwagon 
--------------------- 
 
 
¶5. (C) Several members of Panama's Arab community have 
recently expressed interest in donating to the Torrijos 
campaign, Real said, but he has stalled, claiming the 
campaign is flush with money (which is not the case).  Real 
said the campaign is avoiding donations from "suspicious" 
individuals for fear of making "a mistake." 

------------ 
Backpedaling 
------------ 
 
 
¶6. (U) Real commented that Torrijos was unlikely to push hard 
for his proposed institutional reforms to Panama's Public 
Force (PPF) and other public and national security agencies 
(ref B), such as appointing career officers as PPF service 
directors.  In hindsight, Real said, those proposals were 
politically ill-conceived and not fully thought out.  Real 
confirmed that Daniel Delgado, the author of the proposals, 
still leads the campaign's security policy team, but was 
unsure whether Delgado's time and efforts would translate 
into an administration position. 
 
 
----------------------------- 
Don't Sign the FTA Without US 
----------------------------- 
 
 
¶7. (U) Real fully expects a Torrijos administration to 
conclude a US-Panama free trade agreement (FTA) and to be 
involved in the negotiations.  It would be "irresponsible" 
for the Moscoso Administration to sign a bilateral FTA before 
the September 1 inauguration, he said.  Real implied that 
Alejandro "Andy" Ferrer, Jr. would lead the new 
administration's FTA negotiators.  (Note: Also mentioned as a 
possible foreign minister in a Torrijos administration, 
Ferrer negotiated Panama's accession to the World Trade 
Organization (WTO), serving as Panama's Special Ambassador to 
the WTO and as Vice Foreign Minister.  He has a law degree 
from the University of Michigan and is one of the stars in 
Torrijos' progressive pro-business faction.  End note.) 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
Taiwan: Status Quo Will Continue 
-------------------------------- 
 
 
¶8. (C) Just back from a 2-day trip to Taiwan, Real said that 
the Taiwanese had pressured Torrijos for months to send a 
high-level, personal representative to allay their concerns 
and respond to persistent rumors that Torrijos will switch 
diplomatic recognition to China if he wins.  Real was 
instructed to assure Taiwan unequivocally that a Torrijos 
administration would maintain the status quo (ref C). 
 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
 
¶9.  (C) The Torrijos team is well aware of our interest in 
certain high-level PRD appointments, and we anticipate having 
more intensive discussions on that topic after the May 2 
election.  On the FTA and on other important bilateral issues 
(such as security), Embassy is making plans with Department 
to brief transition teams from the victorious party.  From 
the perspective in Panama, we believe it's unlikely that FTA 
talks could be wrapped up before September 1.  Torrijos' 
decision not to carry out his publicly announced plan to 
reform the security services (which was not well received 
among the electorate because it could have centralized too 
much power over the security forces) or to appoint a former 
uniformed officer to head the PNP were welcome moves.  On the 
other hand, the fact that he delivered a less than fully 
cleared speech suggests that those who charge that Torrijos 
allows others to put words in his mouth may have a point. 
 
 
 
 
WATT