04PANAMA813
PANAMA REFUGEE NEWS--UNHCR PERMANENT OFFICE,
Tue Apr 06 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Panama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PANAMA 000813 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
STATE PASS FOR PRM/ENA/BLAKEMAN/IRIS 
WHA/CEN/BRIGHAM 
BOGOTA PASS FOR RAY LYNCH 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREF PHUM PGOV CO PM LABOR HUMAN RIGHTSPOLMIL
SUBJECT: PANAMA REFUGEE NEWS--UNHCR PERMANENT OFFICE, 
REFUGEE CENSUS, STATUS COMMISSION, PROPOSED CENTRALIZATION 
 
REF: 03 PANAMA 3271 
 
 
------ 
SUMMARY 
------- 
1)  (SBU)  On April 1, 2004, officials from the United 
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the 
Government of Panama (GOP) agreed to the establishment of a 
permanent UNHCR office in Panama, capping many months of 
negotiation.  The GOP, UNHCR, and the Government of Colombia 
(GOC) will conduct a joint census of the remaining Colombian 
refugees beginning April 7, 2004.  The GOP is considering 
centralizing the remaining refugees in three Darien province 
towns through a voluntary process.  The GOP's refugee status 
commission will meet May 27, 2004, but UNHCR wants the GOP to 
take a more flexible approach for granting refugees internal 
freedom of movement.  Infrastructure and sustainable 
development projects under discussion will seek funding 
through the Department's Ambassador's fund and/or via UNHCR. 
End Summary. 
 
 
------------------------------------------- 
A PERMANENT HOME FOR THE FORESEEABLE FUTURE 
-------------------------------------------- 
¶2.  (SBU)  On April 1, 2004 the United Nations High 
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) Americas Director Hope 
Hanlon and UNHCR Panama director Gonzalo Vargas Llosa along 
with Minister of Foreign Relations Harmodio Arias signed an 
agreement establishing a permanent UNHCR Panama office.  The 
UNHCR in Panama is now a fully independent and accredited UN 
agency.  The Geneva-based Hanlon noted during an April 1 
meeting with POL Counselor that the agreement placed no 
restrictions on the UNHCR or its operations. 
 
 
----------------------------------- 
REFUGEE CENSUS, PROPOSED RELOCATION 
----------------------------------- 
¶3.  (SBU)  The GOP, the Government of Colombia (GOC) and 
UNHCR will conduct a joint census of the Colombian refugee 
population April 7, 2004.  In addition, the GOP is proposing 
to relocate Colombian refugees to three Darien towns (Jaque, 
Puerto Obaldia, and El Real) to provide better security and 
social services.  The GOC and UNHCR are adamant that 
relocations are voluntary. GOP refugee agency (ONPAR) 
director Harmodio Jimenez confirms all relocations must be 
voluntary.  (NOTE:  In all likelihood, very few refugees will 
want to be relocated.  End Note.)  It is unlikely there will 
be further repatriations of refugees to Colombia as neither 
government has expressed a desire to conduct one. 
 
 
----------------- 
PROPOSED PROJECTS 
----------------- 
¶4.  (SBU)  Infrastructure and sustainable development 
projects will be proposed in the near future.  Department's 
regional refugee coordinator is working with Embassy-Panama, 
UNHCR, and the GOP developing to develop project proposals to 
assist Darien communities with Colombian refugee populations. 
 Some infrastructure projects (such as additions to a health 
center) could receive funding through the Department's 
Ambassador's fund.  Sustainable development projects (such as 
job creation programs) would be supported via UNHCR special 
funding requests.  Links to existing USAID programs will be 
considered to approve project effectiveness. 
 
 
----------------------------------- 
FREE MOVEMENT OF REFUGEES IN PANAMA 
----------------------------------- 
¶5.  (SBU)  After an inconclusive March 2004 meeting of the 
GOP's refugees status commission, another commission hearing 
is scheduled for May 27, 2004.  Panama's Migration Department 
remains a UNHCR concern.  UNHCR believes some Migration 
officials are resisting fair and equitable refugee status 
decisions.  As previously reported, (Ref A), some Migration 
officials still resist UNHCR's presence and believe there are 
significant security issues linked to the Colombian refugees. 
 UNHCR believes it is unlikely that the refugee status 
commission will function effectively during the current 
administration due to Migration's "roadblocks."  UNHCR 
believes the $600 (US) migrant processing fees, paid by all 
migrants, is limiting refugee case applications.  The GOP 
insists the fee is a statutory requirement.  (NOTE:  A person 
with formal refugee status has the freedom to live and work 
anywhere in Panama.  Persons without formal refugee status 
must get police permission for any travel, even to the next 
town.  End Note.) 
 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
¶6.  (SBU)  Embassy Panama is pleased to report a dramatic 
turnaround in UNHCR and GOP relations and refugee affairs 
generally.  During the past six months the GOP has conducted 
repatriations that comply with international norms, hired an 
ONPAR director truly interested in refugee issues, and built 
a close working relationship with UNHCR.  Department support 
for crucial infrastructure and sustainable development 
projects will demonstrate USG's continued interest in refugee 
assistance and the Darien province. 
 
 
MCMULLEN