04PRETORIA4027
HUGE TRANSNET LOSSES FORECAST SELL-OFF OF STATE
Tue Sep 07 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Pretoria
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PRETORIA 004027 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD ECPS EINV ECON SF
SUBJECT:  HUGE TRANSNET LOSSES FORECAST SELL-OFF OF STATE 
ASSETS 
 
REFTEL:   A) PRETORIA 3113 
 
          B) PRETORIA 1396 
          C) PRETORIA 713 
 
(U) Sensitive but unclassified.  Please protect 
accordingly.  Not for Internet distribution. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY.  Transnet's Annual Report revealed a 
bloated, inefficient and undisciplined state-owned 
enterprise (SOE) that suffered a R6.3 billion loss last 
year.  CEO Maria Ramos plans to divest all non-core 
businesses and focus on providing integrated, seamless 
transport and logistics services.  Spoornet, National 
Ports Authority (NPA), South Africa Port Operations 
(SAPO) and Petronet will remain in the Transnet fold. 
All other operations, including SAA, will be housed in an 
investment portfolio for potential future sale or 
disinvestment.  This indicates that, despite perceptions 
to the contrary, and in the face of stiff opposition from 
labor, government has not backtracked on divestiture of 
non-core or non-strategic assets. In addition, Public 
Enterprises Minister Alec Erwin replaced the entire Board 
of Directors at Transnet and most of the Board at SAA. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
-------------------------------- 
RAMOS - A BUREAUCRATIC SUPERHERO 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) Just eight months after taking over as CEO of 
Transnet, Maria Ramos has proposed major changes to 
improve the efficiency and profitability of the behemoth 
state-owned enterprise that manages the country's 
transport services.  As the former Director General for 
National Treasury, Ramos established a reputation for her 
business-like, no-nonsense approach to government.  She 
was instrumental in creating and implementing South 
Africa's sound fiscal policy resulting in lower inflation 
and interest rates and less government debt.  In 
Transnet's 2003-2004 Annual Report, released August 27, 
Ramos paints a picture of a bloated, inefficient state- 
owned enterprise (SOE).  Ramos said that "Transnet has 
shown an increasing inability to respond to the demands 
of its business environment" and she made it clear that a 
significant restructuring of Transnet resources is about 
to occur. 
 
------------------------- 
FORLORN FINANCIAL FIGURES 
------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (U) Transnet reported a net loss of R6.3 billion for 
the year ended March 30, 2004 from a R421 million loss in 
the same period a year ago.  The loss was due mainly to a 
R4.2 billion impairment charge, which includes a R3.5 
billion write-down of aircraft and a R526 million write- 
down of Transnet's investment in the Second National 
Operator (SNO).  The Transnet Group delivered revenue 
growth of only 5.7 percent (from R41.3 billion to R43.6 
billion), well below the average annual growth of 14 
percent achieved over the previous three years, and also 
below the 2003 inflation figure (CPIX) of 6.8 percent. 
Operating profit declined from R5.1 billion last year to 
R187 million this year.  A major factor in Trasnet's 
dismal financial results was South African Airways (SAA) 
hedging loss of R8.7 billion last year.  Over the past 
two years, SAA has reported losses totaling R15 billion. 
The losses result from hedges SAA made on the dollar-to- 
rand exchange rate after it purchased 38 new Airbus 
aircraft in 2002.  The deal was based in U.S. dollars. 
 
----------------------- 
A NEW TRANSNET STRATEGY 
----------------------- 
 
¶4.  (U) To reverse Transnet's slide into financial 
oblivion, Ramos unveiled a new strategy.  She said that 
Transnet's core mission is "to provide an integrated, 
seamless transport and logistics solution."  To 
accomplish this, Ramos announced that she would keep 
Spoornet, the NPA, SAPO, and Petronet at Transnet.  All 
other operations, including SAA, will be housed in an 
investment portfolio for potential future sale or 
disinvestment (Reftel A).  Ramos also said that 
Transnet's corporate office would be drastically trimmed. 
The corporate office employs nearly 700 staff and 
incurred costs of more than R600 million last year. 
Transnet sources say that the corporate office staff will 
be reduced to about seventy people. 
¶5.  (U) Ramos revealed that Transnet's strategy going 
forward is based on the following 4-point plan:  a) 
"redirect the business" to focus on core operations; b) 
"restructure the balance sheet" by eliminating 
outstanding debt and non-core businesses; c) "implement 
and adopt strict corporate governance principles" to 
overcome existing gaps in Trasnet's financial management 
processes; and 4) "adhere to a vigilant risk management 
process" to avoid risk-laden ventures such as SAA's hedge 
book.  To assist in the implementation of this strategy, 
Ramos has earmarked R30 billion for capital investment 
over the next five years. 
 
------------------------- 
TRANSNET'S TOP PERFORMERS 
------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (U) Among the few bright spots in the report were the 
NPA, with an 18 percent improvement in operating profit, 
SAPO, which exceeded its planned operating profit by 9 
percent, and Petronet, which doubled its profit before 
tax to R240 million over last year.  Ramos pointed out 
that these companies "collectively generate acceptable 
profitability levels," further underscoring Ramos' 
strategy to hold on to these operations. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
BOARD OF DIRECTORS REPLACED AT TRANSNET, SAA 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (U) Minister of Public Enterprises Alec Erwin also 
announced the replacement of the entire Board of 
Directors for Transnet and most of the Board at SAA. 
Frederik Phaswana, formerly Chairman and CEO of BP 
Southern Africa, takes over as Chairman of the Transnet 
Board.  Khaya Ngqula leaves his position as President and 
CEO at the Industrial Development Corporation of South 
Africa to become the new CEO at SAA. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) The annual report shows government supports 
Ramos in her plans to reshape Transnet.  It also 
indicates that, despite perceptions to the contrary, and 
in the face of stiff opposition from labor, government 
has not backtracked on divestiture of non-core or non- 
strategic assets.  Public Private Partnerships, including 
concessions, will be a vital element of the new business 
model. 
 
FRAZER