04QUEBEC44
ALGERIAN SEEKING HAVEN IN QUEBEC CHURCH ARRESTED AND
Mon Mar 08 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Quebec
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS QUEBEC 000044 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PREF PHUM CA CVIS KISL SMIG
SUBJECT: ALGERIAN SEEKING HAVEN IN QUEBEC CHURCH ARRESTED AND 
DEPORTED TO U.S. 
 
¶1. (U)  The case of an Algerian asylum-seeker who had been 
living in Montreal for the last six years came to a head this 
weekend.  Mohamed Cherfi, 35, was finally refused asylum by the 
Canadian government and was deported to the United States March 
¶5.  The case has sparked demonstrations and outcry in the press 
over the violation of traditional church sanctity. 
 
¶2.  (U) Cherfi had sought refuge at St-Pierre United Church in 
downtown Quebec City on February 10 at the invitation of pastor 
Reverend Gerald Gore.  Cherfi was arrested by several local 
police on March 5 and was taken to the border the same day and 
handed over to U.S. officials.  According to press reports, he 
is currently detained in Malone, New York awaiting to be 
returned to Algeria, his home country.  Cherfi had reportedly 
transited through the United States on his way to Canada in 
¶1998. 
 
¶3. (U) A solidarity committee and several internet sites have 
been set up in Cherfi's defense and a national day of action is 
planned in Quebec City, Montreal, Ottawa, Toronto, Edmonton and 
Vancouver March 9.  His defenders claim he was targeted for 
removal from Canada because of his political activism in favor 
of "non-status" Algerians and other refugees.  Cherfi and his 
Canadian girlfriend Louise Boivin claim he will be tortured and 
perhaps killed if returned to Algeria. Among those have called 
for the end of deportation procedures and the repatriation of 
Mr. Cherfi to Quebec are Parti Quebecois MNA for Taschereau 
Agnes Maltais (former Minister for Cultural Affairs), local Bloc 
Quebecois MP Christiane Gagnon, Amnesty International and the 
Quebec League of Rights and Liberties.  Quebec Minister for 
Citizen Relations and Immigration Michelle Courchesne has 
reportedly turned further comment and action over to her federal 
counterpart Anne McLellan. 
 
¶4. (SBU)  Comment:  This is the first time we have heard of 
sanctuary in church being "violated" in Quebec in recent 
history.  While it is not a legal protection, it has become a 
accepted that police will not arrest someone inside a place of 
worship.  Minister Courchesne mentioned the case to CG 
Bernadette Allen this weekend when they were both attending a 
non-governmental seminar on racial profiling in Canada.  We 
expect this case will continue generating public interest, 
particularly if Cherfi is returned to Algeria. 
 
¶5. (U) Montreal contributed to this cable. 
 
 
 
KEOGH