04TELAVIV1968
THE SITUATION ON THE GROUND APRIL 1, 2004 -- (1400
Thu Apr 01 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEL AVIV 001968 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR BURNS/SATTERFIELD 
NEA/SA/EX FOR AUSTIN-FERGUSON; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; 
DEPT FOR DS/IP/ITA; DRL FOR A/S CRANER; 
NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN; 
USAID FOR DCHA, DCHA/FPP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG PTER ASEC PHUM CASC KPAL IS GZ
SUBJECT: THE SITUATION ON THE GROUND APRIL 1, 2004 -- (1400 
HOURS LOCAL) -- DIRECT DEPOSIT OF SECURITY FORCE SALARIES 
GOES INTO EFFECT APRIL 1; ONE PALESTINIAN INJURED IN WEST 
BANK ANTI-FENCE DEMO 
 
THIS IS A JOINT MESSAGE FROM EMBASSY TEL AVIV AND CONGEN 
JERUSALEM. 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Direct deposit for all PA security forces is 
scheduled to begin April 1 (see Jerusalem septel).  Civilian 
PA workers are scheduled to have their salaries deposited 
April 3.  At least one Palestinian was injured March 31 when 
the IDF forcefully broke up an anti-barrier demonstration 
near Bayt Liqya village.  Details of the Burns/Hadley meeting 
scheduled to be held in Jericho April 1 was leaked to the 
Palestinian press, which published information on the venue 
and time in the April 1 newspapers.  The situation was 
relatively quiet in Gaza March 31-April 1, with a total of 
seven mortar/missile attacks overnight, but no injuries 
reported.  End Summary. 
 
--------- 
WEST BANK 
--------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Death: Nil. 
 
-- Injury: At least one Palestinian, Mohammad Hamed al Fakih, 
was injured March 31 when the IDF forcefully broke up an 
anti-barrier demonstration near Bayt Liqya village. 
 
-- Shooting: Nil. 
 
-- Stone-Throwing: Palestinians threw stones at an IDF jeep 
patrolling in Shaufat refugee camp March 31, and the IDF 
responded by firing tear gas at the stone-throwers. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) ARRESTS: 
 
-- The IDF March 31 arrested 12 Palestinian militants who had 
hidden in a mental hospital in Bethlehem.  The army and the 
gunmen inside exchanged fire for about two hours before the 
arrest operation was completed. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) SETTLEMENTS: 
 
-- The IDF removed two containers from a settler site known 
as Bat Ayin West-West March 31. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- Direct deposit for all PA security forces is scheduled to 
begin April 1 (see Jerusalem septel).  Civilian PA workers 
are scheduled to have their salaries deposited April 3. 
 
-- Details of the Burns/Hadley meeting scheduled to be held 
in Jericho April 1 were leaked to the Palestinian press, 
which published information on the venue and time in the 
April 1 newspapers. 
 
---- 
GAZA 
---- 
 
¶6. (SBU)  ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injuries: Nil. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets/Hand Grenades: The IDF reported that 
Palestinians fired a single mortar shell at Morag settlement, 
and three shells at IDF outposts near Khan Yunis March 31. 
Also on March 31, one anti-tank missile was fired at an IDF 
outpost near Khan Yunis and another at an IDF outpost south 
of Rafah.  One anti-tank missile was fired at Kfar Darom 
settlement April 1.  No injuries were reported in any of 
these attacks. 
 
-- Shootings: The IDF reported a total of five shooting 
attacks March 31-April 1: two near Khan Yunis, and one each 
near Katif settlement, Netzarim, and Ha Orchan Crossing. 
 
-- Explosions: The IDF found and successfully disabled an IED 
south of Nahal Oz Crossing March 31, according to the IDF. 
¶7.  (SBU) DETENTION/ARRESTS: 
 
-- UNRWA reported that IDF gunboats fired on a Palestinian 
fishing boat off the coast of Dayr al-Balah March 31. 
Soldiers interrogated the five fisherman on board, but 
released them without arrest. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) INCURSIONS/DEMOLITIONS: 
 
-- UNRWA reported that IDF troops occupied a Palestinian home 
near Netzarim the evening of March 31.  The troops restricted 
the family to one room of the house and then used the house 
as a lookout overnight.  The IDF relinquished control of the 
house the morning of April 1. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS/CHECKPOINTS: 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was open for Palestinians. 
 
-- Erez Crossing was closed to Palestinian laborers April 1, 
but open for merchants over 28 years old; 214 merchants 
crossed into Israel April 1.  The IDF also allowed diplomats 
in vehicles and internationals on foot to cross.  UN 
agencies, however, refuse to authorize their non-diplomatic 
staff to cross on foot; staff must therefore wait to cross 
until they can join someone crossing in a diplomatic vehicle. 
 The Erez Industrial Zone was open April 1, with 3,655 
workers entering the Zone. 
 
-- Catch-up for Erez Crossing:  182 merchants age 28 years or 
older entered Israel March 31. 
 
-- Catch-up for Erez Industrial Zone: 1,978 workers entered 
the Zone March 31. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers April 1, 
but open for the import into Gaza of aggregates used in 
construction. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was partially open April 1 for the import 
and export of goods into the Gaza Strip.  Unpacked goods may 
enter, but no Palestinian containers may enter or exit. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open for Palestinian travelers. 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan checkpoint was closed April 1.  Toufah 
checkpoint was open for the exit of residents of al-Mowassi 
April 1 without restriction; Toufah was also open for 
re-entry after prior coordination with Palestinian 
authorities and COGAT. 
 
¶10.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS 
 
-- UNRWA reported that approximately 200 PFLP members 
gathered March 31 at the headquarters of the International 
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), calling on the 
international community to intervene and gain the release of 
Palestinian prisoners being held in Israeli jails.  The 
protesters dispersed peacefully after one hour. 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
KURTZER