04TELAVIV1896
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Mon Mar 29 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 TEL AVIV 001896 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR ISRAELI PALESTINIAN AFFAIRS
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
Mideast 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Saturday evening, Channel 2-TV revealed that State 
Attorney Edna Arbel recommends that PM Sharon and his 
son Gilad be indicted for their involvement in the so- 
called "Greek island affair" -- allegedly receiving 
bribes from the businessman David Appel.  The media 
reported that Sunday Arbel passed on her 
recommendations to A/G Menachem Mazuz's office.  Mazuz 
reportedly believes that Arbel's dossier on Sharon is 
"problematic."  Ministers from every party in the 
coalition were quoted as saying privately that Sharon 
would not be able to remain in power if he is indicted, 
even though the law would not force him to resign. 
 
During the weekend, the media reported that President 
Bush is scheduled to receive Egyptian President Hosni 
Mubarak on April 12, two days before Sharon, and 
Jordan's King Abdullah on April 21. 
 
Sharon's disengagement plan: 
-Ha'aretz (Aluf Benn) cited the draft of a U.S. 
document presented last week to the Israeli delegation 
led by top Sharon aide Dov Weisglass, in which the U.S. 
Administration reportedly refuses to recognize the 
concept of "settlement blocs" in the West Bank in 
exchange from Israeli withdrawal from the Gaza Strip 
and some northern West Bank settlements.  Ha'aretz 
quoted various sources as saying that the U.S. is 
looking into a formula that would not involve an 
Israeli withdrawal to the 1949 armistice lines (the 
"Green Line").  The newspaper also cited the sources as 
saying that the U.S. Administration is not prepared to 
declare that Palestinian refugees are only entitled to 
return to a future Palestinian state.  (Maariv filed a 
similar report on Sunday.)  Ha'aretz further quoted its 
sources as saying that the U.S. Administration has 
presented to Israel three alternatives for a 
"declaration of exchange" (in decreasing preference 
order): an exchange of missives between the two 
governments; a declaration by Bush at the conclusion of 
his talks with Sharon; and a joint Bush-Sharon 
declaration.  Sunday, Jerusalem Post quoted senior 
Israeli diplomatic officials as saying nothing in 
Israel's disengagement plan will preempt the 
possibility of continuing the road map when the 
Palestinians fulfill their commitments under the map; 
namely, dismantling the terrorist infrastructure. 
-Leading media reported that Sunday, at a meeting of 
the Likud cabinet ministers, FM Silvan Shalom 
criticized Sharon's withdrawal plan, telling him that a 
peace agreement should only be reached in agreement 
with the Palestinians, to which Sharon allegedly 
replied: "You said at the UN that there is a moderate 
partner in the PA.  Tell me, is there anyone to talk 
to?" 
-Maariv quoted Sharon associates as saying that Gilad 
Sharon is the key promoter of the idea of disengagement 
from the Palestinians. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that Egypt is leading an initiative 
designed to create a Palestinian leadership that will 
participate actively in negotiations and play a role in 
implementing the Gaza Strip disengagement plan proposed 
by Sharon.  The newspaper reported that that the 
Egyptian plan will enable the immediate operation of 
the Palestinian security apparatus in the Gaza Strip 
due to Egyptian-Palestinian fears of a Hamas escalation 
in the territories and Israel in the wake of the 
assassination last week of Sheikh Ahmed Yassin. 
 
All media reported that the special Knesset committee 
investigating the performance of Israel's intelligence 
agencies in the lead-up to the Iraq war and during the 
invasion found that the intelligence establishment's 
determinations regarding Saddam Hussein's non- 
conventional capabilities and the existence of ground- 
to-ground missiles in Iraq was based largely on 
speculation rather than reliable information.  The 
media cited the committee as warning that the 
intelligence services could once again turn out to be a 
"broken reed."  However, the panel's report does not 
recommend action against any individuals. 
 
During the weekend, the media reported that three 
Palestinians were killed in the West Bank Saturday, 
including a seven-year-old boy caught in crossfire 
between IDF soldiers and Palestinian militants. 
 
Sunday, Ha'aretz reported that Hizbullah financed the 
Ashdod Port bombing and chose the attack's target.  The 
newspaper also reported that in order to counter 
Hizbullah influence, PA Chairman Yasser Arafat is 
funding military activists in the Fatah. 
 
Jerusalem Post and other media reported that Sunday 
Hamas leader Abdel Aziz Rantisi attacked the U.S. for 
vetoing a UN resolution condemning the killing of his 
predecessor, Ahmed Yassin, and described Bush as an 
enemy of God and Islam. 
 
Jerusalem Post and Israel Radio reported that the Arab 
League will hold its summit in Cairo in mid-April, 
following the cancellation of the meeting it was 
scheduled to hold in Tunis in current days.  In an 
unrelated development, Ha'aretz reported that Israeli 
Arab politicians and academics will attend the Arab 
League's first conference devoted to the Arab minority 
in Israel and its connections to the wider Arab world. 
Ha'aretz cited the belief of Arab politicians that the 
conference, to be held in Cairo on April 26 and 27, 
will enhance Israeli Arabs' standing in the world Arab 
community. 
Yediot, Ha'aretz and Maariv reported that U.S. visa 
procedures for Israelis born in Arab countries have 
been eased.  They will now be asked if they have any 
connection with their birthplace.  If it is determined 
that all connections have been cut and the visa 
applicant is considered loyal to "Israel only," their 
application will be more quickly authorized and their 
visas will be issued at the American missions in Tel 
Aviv or Jerusalem.  Yediot writes that the U.S. 
informed the Israeli Embassy in Washington about this 
change during the weekend. 
 
All media reported that Sunday a ministerial committee 
decided to reform the reserve system in the IDF. 
 
During the weekend, all media reported on worldwide 
demonstrations of Muslims to protest Yassin's 
assassination.  Sunday, Jerusalem Post reported that 
Hamas and the armed wing of Fatah, Al Aqsa Martyrs 
Brigades, have separately rejected an appeal by a group 
of prominent Palestinians for a "peaceful" Intifada and 
vowed to step up their attacks against Israel. 
 
Maariv cited a London Sunday Times story that Libyan 
leader Muammar Qadhafi planned to use a Palestinian 
terrorist squad to hijack a Pan Am airliner and blow it 
up above Tel Aviv in 1986. 
 
All media reported that Sunday NASA launched the X-34A 
plane, which can reach the speed of about 8,000 kph 
(Mach 7). 
 
Sunday, Yediot cited the results of a poll taken in the 
U.S. by Public Opinion Strategies pollster Neil 
Newhouse on behalf of the Foreign Ministry: 
-46 percent of Americans approve Yassin's 
assassination; 61 percent approve it when Osama bin 
Laden is mentioned in the same breath; however, 50 
percent of respondents believe that the assassination 
will increase terrorism in the Middle East throughout 
the world. 
-38 percent of Americans believe that the goal of 
Palestinian terrorism is the elimination of Israel; 38 
percent believe that it is more limited: the 
establishment of an independent Palestinian state. 
 
Jerusalem Post cited the results of a poll taken 
between March 14 and 17 (before Yassin's assassination) 
by the Palestinian Center for Policy and Survey 
Research among Palestinians, and published Sunday: 
-Nearly three quarters of respondents welcome Sharon's 
plan to withdraw from the Gaza Strip, and two thirds 
believe it constitutes a victory for the armed struggle 
against Israel. 
-However, 61 percent of Palestinians believe that 
Sharon is not serious about his plan and that he will 
not withdraw, while only one third believes he is 
serious. 
 
 
 
-------- 
Mideast: 
-------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized: 
"The extent to which an indictment seems likely could 
directly impair Sharon's ability to convince the U.S. 
to take specific diplomatic steps critical to our 
national interests." 
 
Senior Middle East affairs analyst Zvi Bar'el wrote in 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: "Anyone who fears 
the expression 'Israel's expulsion' had better get used 
to it.  Yes, Israel will leave Gaza as one being 
expelled." 
 
Liberal columnist Gideon Levy wrote in Ha'aretz: 
"Suddenly, Israelis are worried about the bitter fate 
of a Palestinian child." 
 
Arab affairs commentator Danny Rubinstein wrote in 
Ha'aretz: "The Palestinians had few expectations of the 
summit, and no one is losing sleep over its 
postponement." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
Â¶I.  "Not Above the Law" 
 
Conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized 
(March 29): "Leaks from the police and prosecutors 
regarding high-profile political cases have become 
common and acceptable, as if it were an appropriate way 
to release information.... [But] even Ariel Sharon has 
civil rights.  The public has a right not to have its 
government weakened by leaks that unnecessarily prolong 
a period of instability.... On April 14, Sharon is 
scheduled to meet with U.S. President George W. Bush. 
Though the cloud of this scandal is already over 
Sharon, the extent to which an indictment seems likely 
could directly impair Sharon's ability to convince the 
U.S. to take specific diplomatic steps critical to our 
national interests.  This is no argument to obstruct a 
legitimate legal process, but another example of the 
cost of illegal and unacceptable leaks from our legal 
guardians." 
II.  "Yes, They're Kicking Us Out" 
 
Senior Middle East affairs analyst Zvi Bar'el wrote in 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (March 28): "It 
would be best to look at this withdrawal -- which is 
still only on paper -- directly in the eyes.  Israel is 
only leaving Gaza because it can no longer continue to 
hold it due to the defense burden.  Anyone who fears 
the expression 'Israel's expulsion' had better get used 
to it.  Yes, Israel will leave Gaza as one being 
expelled, without any pomp and ceremonies marking the 
transfer of power.  It's difficult to find in modern 
history the case of an occupying state that does not 
leave as one being expelled from the territory it 
conquered.  It is not a dishonorable club, with members 
including Britain, France, and the United States.  The 
truly important question is what are the memories that 
Israel will leave behind. These memories will play an 
important role when the time for reconciliation comes. 
But thinking about the future is not a characteristic 
of Israeli policy.  If it were, Gaza would long ago 
have become an autonomous district under the control of 
the Palestinian Authority." 
 
III.  "A Sudden Concern For the Palestinian Child" 
 
Liberal columnist Gideon Levy wrote in Ha'aretz (March 
28): "Suddenly, Israelis are worried about the bitter 
fate of a Palestinian child.  To judge by the public 
shock over Husam Bilal Abdu, who was caught wearing an 
explosives belt at the Hawara checkpoint, it would seem 
that nothing of a humane nature is foreign to us, even 
when it pertains to an enemy and his children.  But 
this is an infuriating show of concern.  The fate of a 
Palestinian child only touches us when it suits us, 
when it serves our purposes and when our hands are not 
involved.  The hundreds of children who have been 
killed, the thousands who have been crippled, and the 
hundreds of thousands who live under conditions of 
siege and poverty, and are exposed every day to 
violence and humiliation -- all this has failed to move 
the Israeli public. Just the child with the belt.... 
Whoever is truly concerned over the fate of Palestinian 
children should not only take interest when explosives 
belts are attached to their bodies.  These children 
deserve a different fate.  They deserve not to grow up 
among the rubble of their homes as children and be 
killed as teenagers -- whether from a Palestinian 
explosives belt or from the bullet of an Israeli 
sniper.  Both of these are cruel to exactly the same 
extent." 
IV.  "No Lost Sleep Over the Postponed Summit" 
 
Arab affairs commentator Danny Rubinstein wrote in 
Ha'aretz (March 29): "One factor that has somewhat 
disrupted preparations for this [Arab League] summit 
was the assassination of Sheikh Ahmed Yassin.  Most 
Palestinians derived great pleasure from scenes of the 
demonstrations against Israel and the U.S., some of 
them violent, which took place throughout the Arab 
world after Yassin's death.  Such demonstrations always 
become protests against rulers of the country in which 
they take place, who are asked to break off any 
contact, direct or indirect, with Israel.  The Prime 
Minister's disengagement plan, which confounded the 
Palestinians, is confounding Arab leaders, too.... If 
in the past, Arab summit conferences were a subject 
that sparked excitement and enthusiasm among the 
Palestinian public and its leadership, today's summit 
was conceived as a routine, ho-hum event.  Arafat was 
supposed to give one of his ordinary speeches, and the 
Arab spokesmen had prepared a few mutual verbal barbs. 
The Palestinians had few expectations of the summit, 
and no one is losing sleep over its postponement." 
 
KURTZER