04TELAVIV1395
THE SITUATION ON THE GROUND: MARCH 5, 2004 (1400
Fri Mar 05 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEL AVIV 001395 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR BURNS/SATTERFIELD 
NEA/SA/EX FOR AUSTIN-FERGUSON; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; 
DEPT FOR DS/IP/ITA; DRL FOR A/S CRANER; 
NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN; 
USAID FOR DCHA, DCHA/FPP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG PTER ASEC PHUM CASC KPAL IS GZ
SUBJECT: THE SITUATION ON THE GROUND: MARCH 5, 2004 (1400 
HOURS LOCAL) -- CLOSURE IMPOSED ON THE TERRITORIES DURING 
PURIM HOLIDAY; FOUR WOUNDED IN TWO SHOOTINGS IN GAZA 
 
 
THIS IS A JOINT MESSAGE FROM EMBASSY TEL AVIV AND CONGEN 
JERUSALEM. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: The IDF imposed a total closure on the 
West Bank and the Gaza Strip March 5 for the Purim holiday, 
preventing even Palestinians with permits from entering 
Israel.  The IDF said it would make exceptions only in cases 
of medical emergency.  The closure is expected to last until 
March 9.  In Gaza, a total of four Palestinians were shot and 
wounded March 4 in two separate incidents: one near the 
border fence with Egypt and one on the Karni-Netzarim Road. 
End Summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Death: Nil. 
 
-- Injury: Nil. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) SECURITY DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- The IDF imposed a total closure on the West Bank March 5 
for the Purim holiday, preventing even Palestinians with 
permits from entering Israel.  The IDF said it would make 
exceptions only in cases of medical emergency.  The closure 
is expected to last until March 9. 
 
-- The IDF entered Hebron on March 4 and raided the Hebron 
University, arresting two members of the Islamic bloc of the 
student body.  The pair was later released from custody. 
After leaving the university, the IDF raided a Palestinian 
police station in Hebron. 
 
-- IDF soldiers entered Nablus on March 4 and arrested two PA 
policemen and two PA military intelligence officers before 
withdrawing. 
 
-- IDF forces entered Kfur Haris in search of what they said 
was a would-be suicide bomber, but later withdrew from the 
city without arresting anyone. 
 
-- Israeli troops left a home in the Huwwara village on March 
4 which they had turned into an IDF observation post.  The 
soldiers had reportedly forced the owners of the house to 
live on only the first floor. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) DEMOLITIONS/CONFISCATIONS: 
 
-- The IDF began clearing land for the separation barrier 
near Salfit and Dayr Qadis on March 4.  The land near Salfit 
will be used to construct an "elbow" around the Ariel 
settlement. 
 
-- Settlers in Hebron seized a home belonging to the al-Batsh 
family on March 4, before being evacuated by Israeli police. 
 
---------- 
Gaza Strip 
---------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injuries: UNRWA reported that two Palestinians were shot 
and injured March 4 in Rafah during an exchange of gunfire 
between an IDF force and Palestinian gunmen near the border 
fence with Egypt. 
 
-- Injuries: UNRWA reported that two Palestinians were 
injured during an exchange of gunfire that took place on the 
Karni-Netzarim Road March 4. 
 
-- Catch-up item: Injuries: a Palestinian woman was wounded 
in the knee March 3 when an IDF tank fired into the Brazil 
Quarter of the Rafah refugee camp, according to UNRWA. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: The IDF reported that a total of four 
mortars and one anti-tank missile were fired March 4-5 in the 
vicinity of Khan Yunis.  Three anti-tank missiles were fired 
near Netzarim March 4, according to the IDF. 
 
-- Shootings: The IDF reported one shooting attack near Rafah 
March 4 and one near Morag March 5. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) INCURSIONS/DEMOLITIONS: 
 
-- UNRWA reported that one house was destroyed and 12 more 
were damaged during the March 4 incursion into the Zorub area 
of Rafah.  Water, electricity and phone lines in the area 
were also destroyed, and a mosque was also damaged. 
 
-- UNRWA reported that three tanks and three bulldozers 
demolished eight greenhouses and uprooted 12 dunams of fruit 
trees near Morag March 4. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS/CHECKPOINTS 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was open for Palestinians March 5. 
 
-- Erez Crossing was closed March 5 for all Palestinians, but 
open for internationals to cross into Israel.  The Erez 
Industrial Zone was open March 5, but the number of workers 
who entered the Zone was unavailable. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian workers and for 
the import into Gaza of aggregates used in construction March 
¶5. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was closed for the import and export of 
goods into the Gaza Strip. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open for Palestinian travelers March 5. 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan and Tofah checkpoints were closed March 5. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- UNRWA reported that a demonstration of approximately 100 
people took place March 3 on Nasser Street in Gaza City.  The 
people called on the PA to impose the death penalty on the 
murderers of a girl killed in Gaza three months ago and whose 
body was found near the landfill on the east side of the city. 
 
-- On March 4, approximately 500 women from the Palestinian 
Association of Women's Committees for Social Work organized a 
demonstration in Gaza City protesting the continued 
construction of the West Bank separation barrier, according 
to UNRWA.  The women dispersed peacefully after presenting a 
letter addressed to the UN Secretary General at the UNSCO 
compound. 
 
------ 
Israel 
------ 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Israeli media reported that a 22-year-old Jewish 
man, Eliran Golani, was indicted March 4 in Haifa for 
allegedly planting 12 explosive devices against Arabs in the 
Khalissa Quarter of Haifa.  A total of three people, 
including one child, were lightly injured in his various 
attacks.  The police claimed that Golani was the head of an 
extremist, right-wing group, and had planted bombs under 
cars, in a mosque, and had also intended to target 
Israeli-Arab MKs. 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
KURTZER