04TELAVIV1621
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Tue Mar 16 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 TEL AVIV 001621 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Mideast 
 
¶2.  Campaign Against Terrorism 
 
¶3.  Greater Middle East Initiative 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Jerusalem Post reported that Deputy State Department 
Spokesman J. Adam Ereli condemned the double Ashdod 
bombings in the strongest terms.  Leading media 
reported that the main working assumption among 
security officials is that the two suicide bombers who 
carried out the attack made their way from the Gaza 
Strip into Israel via an underground tunnel.  The media 
reported that IAF helicopters bombed two Gaza City 
workshops before dawn Monday in response to the attack, 
and that the inner security cabinet is likely to 
authorize further military actions.  The media reported 
on various violent incidents in the Gaza Strip Monday, 
including a missile attack on a bus transporting 
settlers' children, and today.  Warning about a further 
security blooper, Maariv reported that fuel trucks from 
Iraq are entering Israel freely at the Arava border 
crossing with Jordan, following American pressure and 
against the objection of Israeli security elements. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that Monday PA Chairman Yasser Arafat 
refused his cabinet's call to use the Palestinian 
security forces against terrorist organizations, 
following Sunday's double Ashdod bombings, for which 
both Fatah and Hamas claimed responsibility. 
 
All media reported (banners in all media, except 
Ha'aretz) that Tuesday a 10 to 12-year-old Palestinian 
boy (depending on the media) carrying a bomb that was 
to be activated by means of a cellular phone, was 
arrested by the security forces at a roadblock near 
Nablus.  Tanzim activists had sent him with the 
intention of blowing him up next to IDF soldiers. 
 
Yediot and Ha'aretz reported that the Knesset has 
received warnings that terrorist organizations are 
planning to send letter bombs to Israeli public 
figures. 
 
Jerusalem Post reported that the State Attorney's 
Office informed the High Court of Justice Monday that 
the state has decided to re-examine the planned route 
of a several-kilometer section of the security fence 
slated to be constructed near the West Bank village of 
Na'alin just north of Modi'in.  The area has been the 
scene of violent Palestinian anti-fence demonstrations 
over the last few days.  In what it says is a move by 
thousands of people, Ha'aretz cited unofficial 
estimates that some 300 Palestinians with Israeli ID 
cards, who had been living east of the so-called 
"Jerusalem envelope" fence, are returning to 
Jerusalem's municipal area every week.  They are 
reportedly driven by the fear of losing social and 
economic benefits as a result of being cut off from the 
city. 
 
Maariv reported that the U.S. Administration is 
checking into, and is likely to take up a proposal from 
the Prime Minister's Office that it invest funds in 
building communities and developing industry in the 
Negev, instead of providing monetary compensation to 
evacuated settlers.  The newspaper quoted a GOI source 
as saying Monday that this is a winning idea, and that 
by adopting it, "the Americans will help Israel move 
from an age of confrontation to an age of impetus and 
prosperity.  A Maariv headline reads: "Bush Will Make 
the Negev Bloom." 
 
All media reported that the government survived a no- 
confidence vote on Sharon's disengagement plan at the 
Knesset, 46-45. 
 
Jerusalem Post quoted senior PA officials as saying 
that at least 140 Palestinians have been arrested in 
the Gaza Strip since the beginning of the Intifada on 
charges of collaborating with Israel. 
 
All media reported that Monday the Knesset paid its 
respects to the victims of Thursday's Madrid bombings, 
as the Spanish Ambassador to Israel, Eudaldo Mirapeix, 
and a EU delegation watched from the gallery.  The 
media quoted Knesset Speaker Reuven Rivlin (Likud) as 
saying: "The enemies of humanity have struck again. 
Exactly two-and-a-half years after the horrific 
spectacle of September 11, innocent civilians have once 
again been massacred, and once again the free world has 
been perceived by its enemies as weak and impotent." 
Jerusalem Post quoted diplomatic sources in Jerusalem 
as saying that the electoral defeat of Spanish PM Jose 
Maria Aznar's Popular Party has deprived Israel of an 
"understanding" European government that was attentive 
to its problems. 
 
Italian FM Franco Frattini, who is due to arrive in 
Israel on a visit tonight, was quoted as saying in an 
interview with Maariv that Israel's security and the 
fight against terrorism constitute matters of primary 
importance in the road map.  Frattini was also quoted 
as saying that Italy will not withdraw its forces from 
Iraq and that there can be no compromise with 
terrorism.  Yediot cited the Italian daily Corriere 
Della Sera as saying that the Mossad warned Italy that 
it is one of Al Qaida's next targets.  Ha'aretz 
reported that Israel's political Right is trying to 
enlist Christian support in Europe -- an equivalent of 
the kind of support it has found among fundamentalists 
in the U.S. 
 
Israel Radio reported that Israel could return 40 
million shekels (around USD 8.89 million) it 
confiscated from Palestinian banks in Ramallah last 
month. 
Ha'aretz quoted Seif al-Islam Qadhafi, the son of 
Libya's leader Muammar Qadhafi, as saying in an 
interview with the London-based Al-Hayat that his 
country armed itself with WMD for the purpose of a war 
with Israel. 
 
Ha'aretz quoted Francis Fukuyama, a former staff member 
of the U.S. State Department and the author of the 1992 
essay "The End of History," as saying Monday at Tel 
Aviv University, among a panel that included Finance 
Minister Binyamin Netanyahu and Labor Party Shimon 
Peres, that the struggle against terrorism is not a 
conflict between civilizations.  Fukuyama claimed at 
the meeting that fanatical Islam -- "the periphery of 
history" -- has a fateful influence on "the center," 
i.e. the West. 
 
------------ 
¶1.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Ben Caspit wrote on page one 
of popular, pluralist Maariv: "It is not inconceivable 
that Ariel Sharon might ultimately have to forget his 
grand plan.... By so doing he will neutralize most of 
the opposition and will crush the rebellion in the 
Likud before its inception." 
 
Senior op-ed writer Akiva Eldar opined in left-leaning, 
independent Ha'aretz: "Sharon's unilateral 
disengagement has long been bilateral.  The 
Palestinians decided 30 years ago to take any shred of 
land that falls into their hands." 
 
Senior columnist and longtime dove Yoel Marcus wrote in 
Ha'aretz: "Sharon has gone too far to assume that he is 
kidding around with his people, America and our 
potential allies in Europe, now waking up to the grim 
reality of mega-terrorism.  Until proven otherwise, 
there is no reason not to take him seriously." 
 
Former minister of foreign affairs and former minister 
of defense Moshe Arens wrote in Ha'aretz: "As summer 
approaches and the American election campaign heats up, 
it is not likely that the U.S. Administration will 
endorse Sharon's plan.... In the meantime, pursue the 
war against terrorism and don't bother the President." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
¶I.  "Lots of Trouble" 
Diplomatic correspondent Ben Caspit wrote on page one 
of popular, pluralist Maariv (March 16): "It is not 
inconceivable that Ariel Sharon might ultimately have 
to forget his grand plan, quash the medium-sized one 
and go for the small version: a partial withdrawal from 
Gaza, keeping the three northern settlements intact, 
the fate of Philadelphi [the corridor at the Gaza-Egypt 
border] unclear.  By so doing he will neutralize most 
of the opposition and will crush the rebellion in the 
Likud before its inception.... Ariel Sharon is in 
trouble.  If he opts for the grand plan he will lose 
his coalition, perhaps even his party, and maybe even 
his seat as prime minister.  Binyamin Netanyahu is in 
trouble.  If he acts against Sharon, he will be 
gambling on his political future and will lose public 
points.  If he doesn't, the same applies.  The two of 
them, Sharon and Netanyahu, are trapped.  They are both 
searching for a dignified way out.  Bibi [Netanyahu] 
has spoken in the past number of days staunchly against 
the disengagement plan.  Sharon has tried to speak in 
its favor, but without success.... The way things look 
now, the wind in Sharon's sails is slowly dying out. 
His principled determination still exists, but life 
looks more complicated than ever before.  The Israelis 
made it clear to the Americans that in any event, no 
steps would be taken on the ground before the summer of 
¶2005.  Sharon won't be going to Washington this month, 
but only next month (maybe).  The Americans are looking 
forward to the Arab League convening at the end of this 
month and to an explicit condemnation of suicide 
bombing attacks, and don't want to ruin that 
achievement." 
 
II.  "Sharon's Disengagement Has Long Been Bilateral" 
 
Senior op-ed writer Akiva Eldar opined in left-leaning, 
independent Ha'aretz (March 16): "Arafat's court does 
not want Sharon's court spoiling its victory 
celebration.  They are keeping one important fact under 
wraps: Sharon's unilateral disengagement has long been 
bilateral.  The Palestinians decided 30 years ago to 
take any shred of land that falls into their hands.... 
That decision, which involves the liberation of all 
Palestinian lands and the annihilation of Israel, is 
known as 'the plan of the stages.'  In 1988, it made 
way for the Algiers Declaration, which recognized 
Security Council Resolution 242 requiring Israeli 
withdrawal only from territory conquered during the Six- 
Day War.  In the Oslo accords, the PLO agreed to 
receive the territories in stages.... The fact that the 
PLO leadership is not wiping away a tear at Israel's 
departure from Gaza in exchange for nothing does not 
keep it from going around the world with downcast 
demeanor.  Why would they miss the opportunity to 
present Israel as the party that buried the road map 
under the outposts of Israeli trespassers in the West 
Bank and the ruins of the homes of innocent 
Palestinians in Gaza?" 
 
III.  "Take Him Seriously" 
 
Senior columnist and longtime dove Yoel Marcus wrote in 
Ha'aretz (March 16): "The first thing on [Sharon's] 
list is to win the consent and support of President 
Bush.  Sharon is obsessive about coordinating every 
step of the way with him.  Next comes working out the 
operation in detail, preferably with the approval of 
the Strip's 7,500 settlers.  From start to finish, the 
pullback should be wrapped up in a year or two.  While 
this is happening, Sharon will drum up political 
support for the move.... But Sharon is the one who will 
choose the timing.... Sharon has gone too far to assume 
that he is kidding around with his people, America and 
our potential allies in Europe, now waking up to the 
grim reality of mega-terrorism.  Until proven 
otherwise, there is no reason not to take him 
seriously." 
 
IV.  "Don't Bother the President Now" 
 
Former minister of foreign affairs and former minister 
of defense Moshe Arens wrote in Ha'aretz (March16): 
"For now, it does not look like the Israeli-Palestinian 
conflict will be one of the prominent issues in the 
[U.S. presidential] election.  So what does ... it have 
to do with Sharon's plans for unilateral disengagement 
in Gaza and the uprooting of Israeli settlements?  Not 
much really, unless the execution of this plan ends up 
in an escalation of violence in the area that blows up 
in Bush's face, highlighting another problem that his 
rival can accuse him of having created.  Bush probably 
prefers to leave the issue well enough alone.  But 
that's not the way the Prime Minister's Office sees 
it.... As summer approaches and the American election 
campaign heats up, it is not likely that the U.S. 
Administration will endorse Sharon's plan.  Everything 
is going to have to be put on hold until after 
November.  And by then, everything may look different - 
- in Israel, in the United States, and maybe even among 
the Palestinians.  In the meantime, pursue the war 
against terrorism and don't bother the President." 
------------------------------- 
¶2.  Campaign Against Terrorism: 
------------------------------- 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Veteran print and TV journalist Dan Margalit wrote in 
popular, pluralist Maariv: "Europe is not prepared yet 
to face the difficult, pan-human reality of non-state- 
based Islamic terror, which seeks to acquire weapons of 
mass destruction." 
 
Conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized: 
"If terrorist groups believe they can alter the outcome 
of Spain's election, why not attempt to alter the 
outcome of America's?" 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
¶I.  "Comfort Now" 
 
Veteran print and TV journalist Dan Margalit wrote in 
popular, pluralist Maariv (March 16): "Europe is not 
prepared yet to face the difficult, pan-human reality 
of non-state-based Islamic terror, which seeks to 
acquire weapons of mass destruction.  It suffers from 
myopia because the politicians there are trying to woo 
the Moslem voters who have flooded many of their 
countries; and because the shifting feelings of 
superiority and inferiority about the U.S. plays a key 
role in undermining the recognition of America's role 
in defending the values of the West; and mainly because 
the peoples and governments on the old continent are 
focused on comfort now, and not on any real sacrifice 
for the sake of a better future later.  Al Qaida, 
Hizbullah and radical Islam do not aspire to achieve a 
compromise.  They want to regain control over Andalusia 
in Spain, and not only to punish it for sending 1,400 
troops to Iraq.  They have succeeded in deceiving the 
voters in Madrid and Barcelona, as if their objectives 
were restricted and all the voters needed to do was to 
oust from power a government that helped Bush against 
an awful tyrant like Saddam Hussein.  Israel was first, 
but is not alone.... If Madrid still refuses to 
understand the significance of the events, the Jewish 
state has no choice." 
 
II.  "Spanish Democracy" 
 
Conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized 
(March 16): "The Al-Qaida manifesto [released after the 
Madrid bombings] spoke menacingly of a 'Winds of Black 
Death' operation against the U.S., which it said was 90 
percent complete.  This may or may not be a bluff. 
What's certain is that if terrorist groups believe they 
can alter the outcome of Spain's election, why not 
attempt to alter the outcome of America's?  In the 
immediate aftermath of Thursday's bombing, the first 
question on everyone's mind was 'Who did it?'  Then the 
question became 'Why?'  If people in democratic nations 
persuade themselves that the answer is the war in Iraq 
-- and, more broadly, the American-led war on terror -- 
they will have handed al-Qaida the very thing it 
seeks." 
 
----------------------------------- 
¶3.  Greater Middle East Initiative: 
----------------------------------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Moderate Israeli Arab Dr. Thabet Abu-Ras, a U.S. 
university graduate, wrote in the weekly Arabic- 
language Assennara: "American democracy might be good 
for the American people but duplicating and 
implementing it in the Middle East is not suitable to 
the nations [of the region]." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"Democracy and the Arab Nations" 
 
Moderate Israeli Arab Dr. Thabet Abu-Ras, a U.S. 
university graduate, wrote in the weekly Arabic- 
language Assennara (March 12): "Arab intellectuals, 
politicians and academics kept silent until the U.S. 
President reminded them of the need to democratize Arab 
and Islamic nations.... This 'peaceful' project [the 
Greater Middle East Initiative] is another component of 
the American globalization system with its ultimate 
goal: economic domination of the region.... Who stood 
against the liberation movements in the Arab world for 
the last fifty years?  It was the successive American 
administrations.... Which democracy is President Bush 
preparing for us [Arabs]?  An American-style 
democracy.... American democracy might be good for the 
American people but duplicating and implementing it in 
the Middle East is not suitable to the nations [of the 
region].... It [the American model of democracy] 
ignores the cultural and educational aspects of the 
Arab and Islamic nations.  There is a debate about the 
credibility and seriousness of the U.S. Administration 
as well.  How would the U.S. administrations welcome 
the results of this democracy if it conflicts with the 
U.S. economic and political interests in the region? 
It has been proved that the Americans are looking for a 
special type of democracy, which brings 'acceptable' 
leaderships to power.... We have the right to be 
suspicious of the intentions of those who bent 
democracies and supported dictatorships in Africa, Asia 
and Latin America.... However, it is the time to 
propose our [the Arabs'] perception on democracy.... 
Our people need freedom, human rights, and democracy, 
but refuse to import the American model." 
 
KURTZER