04THEHAGUE2273
GRANTS COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
Wed Sep 08 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy The Hague
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 THE HAGUE 002273 
 
SIPDIS 
 
LABOR/LABOR REPORTING OFFICERS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB OTRA SW GM NL ILO
SUBJECT: GRANTS COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR U.S. DEPARTMENT OF 
LABOR (USDOL) OFFICIAL. 
 
REF: SECSTATE 191711 
 
 
¶1.  Country Clearance is granted for John M. Linkletter for 
travel to The Netherlands September 11, 2004 and September 15 
thru 20, 2004. 
 
¶2.  Embassy points of contact for the visit are economic 
officers Richard Huff (31-70-310-9270); huffrx@state.gov) and 
Joe Trimble (31-70-310-9274); trimblejf@state.gov). The 
after-hours Embassy switchboard number is (31-70-310-9499). 
 
POST ACCESS: 
 
¶3.  Visitors who need unescorted access into secure areas of 
the Mission must provide proof of at least a secret 
clearance. If level of clearance was not provided in the 
original country clearance request it should be done by 
separate cable.  The cable should include SSN, and the name 
of the agency granting the security clearance.  Cables must 
include the ASEC Tag to ensure distribution to the RSO office. 
 
COMPUTER and ELECTRONICS USAGE: 
 
¶4.  Inter-agency security standards prohibit the introduction 
or use of non-USG owned computer hardware and software at all 
USG diplomatic facilities.  Cell phones, palm pilots, radios 
and other convenience electronics are prohibited in all 
secure areas of the Mission. 
 
¶5.  Travelers who anticipate having special needs in terms of 
either access or computer usage should contact the RSO office 
before arriving at post. 
 
 
SECURITY ADVISORY: 
 
¶6.  Post provides the following threat assessment for The 
Netherlands: On July 9, 2004, the Dutch government 
implemented heightened security measures in response to 
concerns of terrorist activity.  U.S. citizens in the 
Netherlands are encouraged to monitor media reports, and are 
reminded to maintain a high level of vigilance and to take 
appropriate steps to increase their securtiy awareness. 
 
The U.S. Government remains deeply concerned about the 
heightened possibility of terrorist attacks against U.S. 
citizens and interests abroad.  As noted in the Department of 
State's Worldwide Caution of April 29, 2004, terrorists do 
not distinguish between official and civilian targets.  Such 
targets may include facilities where U.S. citizens and other 
foreigners congregate or visit, including residential areas, 
clubs, restaurants, places of worship, schools, hotels and 
public areas.  U.S. citizens should remain in a heightened 
state of personal security awareness when attendance at such 
locations is unavoidable. 
 
Terrorist actions may include, but are not limited to, 
suicide operations, hijackings, bombings or kidnappings. 
These may also involve commercial aircraft and maritime 
interests, and threats to include conventional weapons, such 
as explosive devices. 
 
A concern for visitors is crime.  Most crimes against 
official Americans are limited to pick-pocketing and luggage 
theft.  Theft from automobiles and hotel rooms are not 
unknown.  Recently, theft of laptop computers has increased, 
especially at Schiphol Airport and major train stations.  The 
thieves operate in small groups that target travelers.  They 
are determined and well practiced at distraction theft. 
Several official travelers have been victimized losing 
personal or unclassified government computers, valuable 
software and data.  Travelers are reminded regulations 
require the use of the diplomatic pouch for shipment of 
classified equipment and information. 
 
Streets can be walked in relative safety, but as in any U.S. 
urban area, caution should be exercised after dark in the 
more populated cities of The Hague, Amsterdam, and Rotterdam. 
 Red-light districts and public transportation hubs are 
common locations for incidents of street crime. 
 
For the latest security information, Americans living and 
traveling abroad should regularly monitor the Department's 
Bureau of Consular Affairs Internet web site at 
http://travel.state.gov, where the current Worldwide 
Cautions, Public Announcements, and Travel Warnings can be 
found.  Up-to-date information on security can also be 
obtained by calling 1-888-407-4747 toll free in the U.S., 
line at 1-317-472-2328.  These numbers are available from 
8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Eastern Time, Monday through Friday 
(except U.S. federal holidays). 
 
 
SOBEL