05ANKARA5483
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed Sep 21 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 ANKARA 005483 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 21, 2005 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Gul: Greek Cypriots Take the EU Hostage - Aksam 
EU a `Toy' of the Greek Cypriots - Milliyet 
Lagendijk: Military, Nationalists and the PKK Toughen 
Turkey's EU Drive - Aksam 
Non-Muslim Minorities: Turkey Treats Us Like `Outsiders' - 
Milliyet 
PKK Checkpoints in Talabani-Controlled Areas in Northern 
Iraq - Vatan 
Basrans Revolt, Set to Fire British Tanks - Star 
Merkel Under Pressure to Resign - Vatan 
Merkel Invites Schroeder to Coalition - Sabah 
The Guardian: Merkel's Turkey Policy a `Disgrace' - Star 
Americans Flee Rita after Katrina - Sabah 
Vatican Shelters War Criminal Croat General Gotovina - 
Hurriyet 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
EU Surrenders to the Greek Cypriots - Radikal 
Talat: EU Disregards Turkish Cypriots - Cumhuriyet 
The Waning of Merkel's CDU in Germany - Zaman 
The Independent: The US is Behind Suicide Attacks in Iraq - 
Yeni Safak 
Four Iraqis Wounded in Tuzhurmatu Brought to Turkey for 
Medical Treatment - Zaman 
PKK Kills 11 Troops in One Month - Zaman 
Al-Zawahiri: Taliban Still Strong in Afghanistan - 
Cumhuriyet 
EU to Take Iran's Nuclear Program to UN - Cumhuriyet 
A Second Hurricane Alarm in the US - Yeni Safak 
Nazi `Hunter' Wiesenthal Dies - Cumhuriyet 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
Rice-Gul Discuss the PKK, EU/Turkey, Cyprus:  Foreign 
Minister Abdullah Gul discussed with US Secretary of State 
Condoleezza Rice Iraq, the PKK and Cyprus at a meeting in 
New York yesterday, Turkish diplomatic sources told the semi- 
official "Anatolian Agency" (AA).  Secretary Rice told Gul 
that intervention against the PKK in northern Iraq is a 
matter of `timing, not principle,' saying that the US shared 
the views of Turkey regarding the terrorist organization. 
The US is more prepared to take concrete steps against the 
PKK, diplomatic sources said, adding that both the US and 
Turkey underlined that they have been engaged in a 
`comprehensive partnership.'  Rice assured Gul that the US 
will maintain support to Turkey's EU membership bid.  The 
two sides also discussed steps to be taken to remove 
international sanctions against Turkish Cyprus.  On the 
other hand, FM Gul did not attend the reception hosted by 
the foreign ministers of the EU and NATO in New York, says 
the AA. 
 
Military Vehicles in Iskenderun Port Belong to Iraqi Army: 
The first transfer of weapons to Iraq through Turkey's 
Mediterranean port city of Iskenderun was made in April 18, 
2004, reports "Cumhuriyet."  Among the many vehicles that 
were ferried into Iraq in the last 1.5 years were 1,193 
jeeps, 453 trailers and 42 cranes.  Also, 72 panzers were 
sent to the Iraqi army by an unknown donor.  The Iskenderun 
Port customs officials said the transfers were made after 
approval by Turkish security units.  The Iskenderun Maritime 
Trade Chamber chairman Bulent Kavsak said that the military 
vehicles in the port belonged to the Iraqi army, not to the 
US.  Vehicles come from Ukraine, and they are being 
transferred to the newly structured Iraqi army, Kavsak said. 
He noted that explosives, acid anhydride and dynamite were 
imported by four Turkish companies, which distribute them to 
Ankara, Bursa and Kayseri in Turkey. 
CHP Submits Motion on US Materiel that Passes through 
Iskenderun Port:  The main opposition CHP lawmaker from 
Hatay, Gokhan Durgun, asked in a motion to the parliament if 
the US has been transporting military vehicles, equipment 
and explosives from the Iskenderun Port to Iraq under the 
`disguise of' humanitarian aid, the semi-official "Anatolian 
Agency" (AA) reported Tuesday.  Durgun said that such 
shipment would been illegal given the Turkish parliament's 
March 1, 2003, decision, asking whether the materiel 
transported from Iskenderun was used in the massacre of 
civilians in Iraq. 
 
PKK Sets Up Checkpoint near Suleymaniye:  Turkish papers 
report the "Turkmeneli TV" as saying that PKK members have 
established checkpoints near the town of Sengeser in 
Suleymaniye province in northern Iraq, stopping vehicles and 
checking identifications.  The sign `Democratic Solution 
Party of Kurdistan' and posters of the PKK's imprisoned 
leader Ocalan hang in a PKK camp near Sengeser.  Vehicles 
are checked by the peshmerge loyal to Talabani and later by 
PKK members before they enter the area.  "Turkmeneli TV" 
showed the footage of the PKK checkpoint set up in a region 
controlled by the PUK, say papers. 
 
PKK Extends Cease-Fire until October 3:  The PKK on 
Wednesday extended a one-month suspension of its unilateral 
cease-fire until October 3, the date set for Ankara to begin 
talks on joining the European Union, the Germany-based 
"Mesopotamian News Agency" reported.  The PKK called for a 
one-month long `inaction' on August 20 after Prime Minister 
Erdogan acknowledged in a speech in Diyarbakir the existence 
of a `Kurdish problem' in Turkey.  The Turkish military 
ignored the PKK call and operations against the rebels have 
continued.  `We call on the PM to evaluate the period until 
October 3 for a democratic solution,' a PKK statement said. 
 
Gul Criticizes the EU for Tolerating Nicosia:  On Tuesday, 
the Greek Cypriot administration pulled back its support for 
the EU declaration to counter Turkey's refusal to recognize 
Cyprus, insisting on adding references regarding the 
declaration to the EU framework document that outlined a 
negotiation plan for Turkey, papers report.  By doing so, 
Nicosia wants to make the EU counter-declaration legally 
binding for Turkey.  If no agreement is worked out today, 
the discussions will continue at a special meeting of EU 
foreign ministers on September 26.  Ankara is concerned that 
the discussions may be delayed until October 3 if a 
compromise is not reached on September 26.  Foreign Minister 
Gul criticized the EU for allowing Cyprus to dictate policy 
toward Turkey, adding that the UN is the venue to seek a 
resolution of the Cyprus problem.  `The results of the twin 
referenda last year showed that it is the Greek Cypriots who 
do not want a compromise and solution in Cyprus,' Gul 
stressed.  The FM accused the Greek Cypriots of attempting 
to `by-pass' the UN. 
 
Controversial Armenian Conference to be Held in Istanbul:  A 
controversial conference on Armenians in the decline of the 
Ottoman Empire, previously scheduled to happen on May 25, 
will be held at Istanbul's Bogazici University September 23- 
25, papers report.  It was postponed after receiving 
criticism, the strongest coming from the government 
spokesman Cemil Cicek who defined the gathering as being 
equal to `stabbing' Turkey in the back.  Prominent Turkish 
academics, writers and researchers Serif Mardin, Murat 
Belge, Halil Berktay, Ustun Erguder, Nazan Maksudyan and 
Hrant Dink are among the participants of the conference. 
Several workshops will discuss issues such as `Order before 
the Balkan Wars,' `Breaking Point: 1912-1915,' `Relocation 
and Aftermath,' `Disaster and Stories of Rescue' and 
`Memoirs.'  Two panel discussions will be held on the last 
day of the conference on `Press Freedom' and `Today and the 
Future'. 
 
Turkey Sends 400,000 USD of Humanitarian Aid to Tal Afar: 
Turkey sent ten trucks of humanitarian aid to the northern 
Iraqi city of Tal Afar, the Turkish Foreign Ministry (MFA) 
said on Tuesday.  Food, potable water, medicine, tents and 
medical equipment worth 400,000 USD were sent to Tal Afar in 
cooperation with the MFA, Turkish Cooperation and 
Development Agency (TIKA) and the Turkish Red Crescent 
Society (Kizilay). 
 
Gul to Chair Anti-Terror Board Meeting:  Foreign Minister 
Abdullah Gul will chair the meeting of the `High Board for 
Combating Terrorism' scheduled to take place on Tuesday, 
papers report.  Gul, in New York for the UN General Assembly 
meetings, will return to Turkey on Sunday.  Reports say that 
the structure of the board has been changed in response to a 
proposal from the Turkish General Staff (TGS) to set up a 
special center to coordinate the struggle against terrorism. 
A special channel for communication among intelligence and 
security institutions will be formed in the council.  The 
deputy chief of the TGS, General Isik Kosaner, and the 
interior, justice and defense ministers as well as  Prime 
Ministry U/S Omer Dincer, jandarma commander, the Turkish 
Intelligence Organization (MIT) U/S and the Turkish police 
chief will join the discussions on Tuesday. 
 
Kurdish Representatives Want Federation in Turkey: 
Representatives of the Kurdish party `Hak-Par' and Kurdish 
association `Kurt-Der' paid visits to the EU mission, the 
parliament and the British Embassy in Ankara to voice 
demands for a federation in Turkey, papers report.  A lawyer 
in the group said that a democratic, pluralistic and federal 
system would fit Turkey better, adding that their campaign 
had been based on such demands. 
 
ECHR to Hear Case on Non-Muslim Foundations in Turkey:  The 
European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) on Tuesday took up a 
complaint by two non-Muslim minority foundations saying that 
the Turkish state should give back foundation assets seized 
in the 1990s, "Radikal" reports.  Foundation lawyers claimed 
that Turkey violated the Lausanne Treaty and treated its 
nationals like `aliens.'  Turkey will be cornered if the 
ECHR rules that the provision on non-discrimination was 
violated, says the report. 
 
Pope Will Not be Allowed to Pray at Ayasofya:  A senior 
Turkish official said Tuesday that Pope Benedict XVI will 
not be allowed to pray at Istanbul's Hagia Sofia museum 
(Ayasofya), which was used formerly as a church and then as 
a mosque, stressing that such a move will trigger demands 
from Muslims to do likewise.  Ankara has invited the Pope to 
visit Turkey next year.  Turkish TV reports US State 
Department Spokesman Adam Ereli as saying that a visit by 
the Vatican to Turkey is a matter `that concerns the 
Government of Turkey and the Holy See.'  `I leave it to 
those two parties to talk about their plans or their 
intentions to have visits.  I am not in the position to do 
that,' Ereli said. 
 
International PEN Calls for an End to Publisher Zarakolu's 
Trials:  The "Armenian News Network" (ANN) reported that the 
members of International PEN, the world association of 
writers, protested the decision to take to court one of 
Turkey's most prominent authors, Orhan Pamuk, for 
`insulting' comments against the Turkish state.  His trial 
is due to open in mid-December.  A Turkish human rights 
activist, publisher Ragip Zarakolu, will be brought before 
courts three times in three separate cases.  On September 20 
an Istanbul court will hear arguments against Zarakolu's 
publication of George Jerjian's book `History Will Free All 
of Us/Turkish-Armenian Conciliation.'  The book is said to 
be `insulting' to the memory of Kemal Ataturk by suggesting 
that leading government figures close to Ataturk were 
responsible for the mass deportation of Armenians in 1915. 
The next day, another hearing will be held, this time for 
Zarakolu's publication of a book by Professor Dora Sakayan, 
`An Armenian Doctor in Turkey: Garabed Hatcherian: My Smyrna 
Ordeal of 1922.'  On October 11, Zarakolu will again appear 
in court for an article published in 2003 entitled, `Sana 
Ne' (Of No Interest) that criticized Turkey's policy towards 
the Kurds in Iraq.  International PEN is deeply disappointed 
that, despite further changes to the Penal Code, there 
remains repression of freedom of expression in Turkey.  PEN 
calls on the Turkish authorities to make further 
reviews of articles contained in the Penal Code that breach 
the international standards to which Turkey is committed. 
ANN calls readers to send appeals to PM Erdogan and Justice 
Minister Cemil Cicek, protesting the fact that Zarakolu is 
on trial in direct denial of his rights as guaranteed under 
the United Nations Covenant on Civil and Political 
Rights and the European Convention on Human Rights, to which 
the Turkish government is a signatory. 
 
Turkey to Give Wounded Iraqis Medical Treatment:  On 
Tuesday, four Iraqis wounded in a bomb attack in Tuzhurmatu 
near Kirkuk in northern Iraq were sent to Turkey via the 
southeastern Habur border-crossing to receive medical 
treatment, papers report.  The Iraqis were wounded in a 
blast which killed 11 and injured 24 after Friday prayers in 
Tuzhurmatu on September 16.  Turks keep several ambulances 
at Habur waiting to treat other Iraqis whom may be sent to 
Turkey, say reports. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  German Election 
 
"The Division of Germany" 
Mim Kemal Oke argued in the conservative "Tercuman" (9/21): 
"Merkel's election strategy was based on `Turkey-phobia.' 
It did not work, and even had a backlash for her.  Schroeder 
has managed to attract Turkish votes, which helped him to 
gain some additional votes.  . Generally speaking, the 
election results indicate a real political division in 
Germany.  In the post 9/11 period, neo-con militarist 
policies in the US caused a clear division in America both 
philosophically and culturally.  Similarly, in the aftermath 
of the general elections, Germany faces a division because 
of the culturally racist politics pursued by the Christian 
Democrats.  Just like in the US, Germany now has two blocs: 
Those who are supportive of multi-cultural and democratic 
values and those who are insisting on having a new identity 
shaped by racist and religious concepts.  Germany is now 
going through a new kind of Berlin Wall situation, not a 
physical one but a wall in the minds of its people." 
 
"Elections Brought a Chance" 
Hadi Uluengin commented in the mass appeal "Hurriyet" 
(9/21): "The election results in Germany caused uncertainty 
not only to the country's future but to all of Europe as 
well.  The current political picture of Germany makes it 
more difficult than before to bring clarity to the fate of 
the European Constitution, which has already been rejected 
by France and the Netherlands, in either the short or mid 
term.  The nature of the German coalition unfortunately will 
not change this fact regardless of who comes to power.  In 
the current situation, the EU engine--a combination of 
Germany and France--will not be as strong as it used to be. 
. On the other hand, the current situation gives a chance to 
Turkey in the upcoming negotiations with the EU.  The EU is 
set to start the negotiation process with Turkey on October 
3, as scheduled.  It is very likely that the negotiation 
process will go smoothly without major up and downs until 
the elections in France in 2007.  In any case, Turkey should 
be patient, tolerant and determined during this process, and 
should refrain from acting emotionally at all times." 
 
MCELDOWNEY