05ANKARA3997
TURKMAN GROUP, HACETTEPE UNIVERSITY SEEK U.S.
Fri Jul 08 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

081245Z Jul 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 003997 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PLEASE PASS USAID 
DEPT FOR ECA/A/E/EUR, ECA/A/E/NEA, EUR/PPD, NEA/PD/IRAQ, 
NEA/I, EUR/SE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPAO EAID SCUL IZ TU
SUBJECT: TURKMAN GROUP, HACETTEPE UNIVERSITY SEEK U.S. 
SUPPORT FOR ACADEMIC OUTREACH 
 
REF: ANKARA 3144 
 
¶1. This is an action request for the Department, USAID, and 
Embassy Baghdad--please see para. 9. 
 
¶2. Summary: The Iraqi Turkmen Assembly and Hacettepe 
University are seeking U.S. assistance for a distance 
learning project for students in Kirkuk to take classes from 
Hacettepe.  This is the first step in their plan to bring 
students from Kirkuk to Turkey and the U.S., and eventually 
to build a brick-and-mortar university in Kirkuk.  They have 
asked for up to $3.5 million in U.S. assistance (or direct 
grants of equipment) for the distance learning project. 
Embassy seeks Washington's support for the project.  End 
summary. 
 
¶3. PAO and PolMilOff met June 14 with Iraqi Turkmen Assembly 
(ITA) leaders Umit Akkoyunlu and Vijdan Terzy as well as the 
Dean of Hacettepe University's Engineering School, Selcuk 
Gecim, and Engineering Professor Uner Colak.  They briefed us 
on the ITA and Hacettepe's joint desire to set up a 
partnership with students in Kirkuk, with an eye toward 
eventually bringing students to Hacettepe University--and 
perhaps also the United States--to study.  As a preliminary 
measure, Hacettepe and ITA would like to offer distance 
learning courses (in English) to students in Kirkuk. They 
emphasized that this program would be open to all Kirkukis 
regardless of ethnic or religious background. 
 
¶4. Our interlocutors said their eventual goal was to build a 
brick and mortar university with a medical school and 
teaching hospital in Kirkuk, but they wish to start first 
with the distance learning program, and subsequently bring 
students to Turkey and/or the United States.  Distance 
learning would be offered in Kirkuk (as early as Oct. 2005) 
at minimal cost and Hacettepe University would administer the 
program.  The university officials said they have compiled a 
list of costs for various components (computers, satellite 
Internet connection, course materials) and asked for USG 
assistance.  They added that the GOT has also expressed an 
interest in assisting.  PAO asked that Hacettepe provide us 
their plans so we can follow up with Washington. 
 
¶5. When conditions warrant, Hacettepe would also like to 
invite Iraqi students to Turkey to study (while some of 
Hacettepe's programs are in English--as will be the distance 
learning courses--students would need competence in Turkish 
to participate in this program), but also with a U.S. 
component.  Hacettepe currently has an agreement with the 
State University of New York, under which Turkish students 
attend their first and third years at Hacettepe and their 
second and fourth years at SUNY.  Dean Gecim hoped that 
perhaps Hacettepe could offer a similar program for Iraqi 
students, but added that U.S. assistance would be needed. 
 
¶6. PAO noted that both of these ideas had merit and that the 
USG appreciates both the ITA and Hacettepe's initiative.  But 
he added that he could not commit to funding, particularly 
for bringing students to Turkey.  The USG's main program for 
students was the Fulbright program, but it did not appear 
that this plan would fit into Fulbright.  Nonetheless, the 
Embassy will look into possible U.S. funding sources. 
 
¶7. On June 20, Akkoyunlu, Terzy, and Gecim presented 
PolMilOff with their proposal and funding request for the 
distance learning program.  PolMilOff undertook to forward 
the proposal to Washington for guidance.  Dean Gecim noted 
that Hacettepe would be happy (indeed would prefer) to accept 
in-kind donations (for example, computers) instead of money, 
but would happily accept either.  We note that the proposal 
may not have enough information for Washington to evaluate; 
Gecim noted to us that there is a more fulsome presentation 
in Turkish he can translate and provide to us. 
 
¶8. BEGIN TEXT OF PROPOSAL 
 
20.06.2005 
 
Joint cooperation between Hacettepe University and the 
Turkmen Assembly on establishing Kirkuk University 
 
For the aim of an actual and realistic participation in the 
Rebuilding and Reconstruction of Iraq and in the framework of 
the Protocol reached between Hacettepe University and The 
Turkmen Assembly regarding the joint cooperation on 
student/postgraduate and academic personal exchange 
programme, Both parties decided on the following; 
 
Starting a joint graduate education programme between 
Hacettepe University, the State University of New York (SUNY) 
and Kirkuk University for Iraqi students. The students will 
be accepted through defined criteria and start their first 
year at Hacettepe University including English language 
programmes for beginners. Financial assistance may be very 
beneficial to support students through a scholarship. 
 
- The foundation of a medical school associated with an 
educational and research hospital within Kirkuk University 
campus as the first step of this University.  Education shall 
be in English language. 
 
- Starting a distance education programme transmitted from 
Hacettepe University to Kirkuk University starting with four 
disciplines, plus computer and English language programmes. 
 
The following framework was prepared based on four concurrent 
educational programs to be realized during the first phase. 
Data and video will be broadcasted by a dedicated line 
through the satellite transmission. 
 
A) System Definition 
 
Item and Estimated Cost (all U.S. dollars) 
 
Ankara: two e-classrooms, system room, studio: $1,200,000 
 
Kirkuk: three e-classroom, e-library, computer lab, system 
room: $1,300,000 
 
B) Miscellaneous items 
 
Item and Estimated Cost 
 
Distance education packages (business and management, 
information technologies) (annual lease): $200,000 
 
Data transmission through satellite (annual lease): $200,000 
 
Annual cost for the coursework administered by Hacettepe 
University: $300,000 
 
Security and system support, administration, operation and 
maintenance cost: $300,000 
 
ESTIMATED TOTAL COST: $3,500,000 
 
The Turkmen Assembly 
Chairman 
 
Prof. Dr. Umit Akkoyunlu 
 
END TEXT 
 
¶9. Action Request and Comment: Hacettepe University is a 
prestigious Turkish educational institution.  While we defer 
to our colleagues in Iraq on the bona fides of the Iraqi 
Turkmen Assembly there (reftel), here in Ankara the 
organization has presented us with what could be a feasible, 
reasonable plan to offer educational opportunities to the 
people of Kirkuk.  Additionally, this proposal is a tangible 
effort by the GOT (Hacettepe is a public university) to 
continue its positive outreach to Iraq.  We ask that 
Washington and Baghdad review the proposal in para. 8 
favorably.  One possibility we see would be for USAID to fund 
the equipment needs outlined in para. 8, while ECA might 
consider financial assistance for the Iraqi students who 
would come to the U.S.  End Action Request and Comment. 
 
¶10. REOs Kirkuk and Mosul minimize considered. 
 
MCELDOWNEY