05ANKARA4163
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Jul 18 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

181512Z Jul 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 ANKARA 004163 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, JULY 18, 2005 
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 ANKARA 004163 
 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Azeri Lawmakers Visit Turkish Cyprus - Sabah 
Bombs Won't Stop Brits from Going to Turkey - Vatan 
Jafari Pays Historic Visit to Iran - Milliyet 
Sadr to BBC: Iraqi Resistance is Legitimate - Hurriyet 
11 US Troops Under Investigation for Mistreatment of Iraqis 
- Milliyet 7/17 
Bush Shows Full Support for Rove - Hurriyet 7/17 
France to Deport Radical Imams - Hurriyet 7/17 
10 PKK Terrorists Killed in Southeast Turkey - Sabah 
Peace in Indonesia After 29 Years - Aksam 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Turkey, Russia Target 25 Billion USD Trade - Yeni Safak 
Erdogan to Ask Putin for Support for `TRNC' - Yeni Safak 
7/17 
Bombs Target Turkish Tourism -- Yeni Safak 7/17 
Heavy Toll in Iraq: 117 Killed - Cumhuriyet 
Britain Says It May Withdraw from Iraq - Radikal 
South Korea Considers Iraq Pullout - Zaman 7/16 
Iran Says it Blocked al-Qaeda Attacks Against Iranian Cities 
- Cumhuriyet 
New Law Against Terror in UK - Cumhuriyet 7/17 
British Right, Hooligans Unite Against Muslims - Cumhuriyet 
7/16 
Iraqi Oil Workers Carry Out One-Day Strike - Cumhuriyet 
Ladin Aide Zawahiri Was KGB Operative - Zaman 
Fear of Terror in Germany - Aksam 7/17 
Oriana Fallaci: We Are at War with Islam - Cumhuriyet 7/17 
Israeli Army Preparing to Strike Gaza - Cumhuriyet 
US, Afghan Forces Kill 20 Insurgents - Cumhuriyet 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
Erdogan-Putin Meet in Sochix:  Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan 
met with President Vladimir Putin in Russia's Black Sea 
coastal town of Sochi over the weekend.  The two leaders 
discussed the situation in Iraq, the price of Russian 
natural gas to Turkey, and reiterated their target of 
increasing bilateral trade from 10 to 25 billion USD.  Putin 
said after meeting Erdogan that Russian-Turkish cooperation 
was not limited to the economy, adding that the political 
dialogue between the two countries has been `at a good 
level.'  Erdogan said the two countries can accomplish many 
things together.  Reports say the two leaders also discussed 
the issue of ending the international isolation of the 
Turkish Cypriots, and putting the PKK on Russia's list of 
terrorist organizations.  Erdogan will leave Sochi for 
Mongolia after meeting Putin over breakfast this morning. 
 
Grossman Report Sparked Rovegate Scandal:  A report written 
by the former US Ambassador to Turkey, Marc Grossman, 
sparked the `Rovegate' scandal, Monday's "Hurriyet" reports, 
citing the New York Times.  In his report, Grossman 
reportedly wrote that CIA operative Valerie Plame had 
attended a meeting regarding Iraq's alleged purchase of 
uranium from Niger.  John Bolton, President Bush's candidate 
to head the US mission at the UN, is believed to have leaked 
Plame's name to Karl Rove, according to the report. 
 
Bomb Kills British, Turkish Tourists in Kusadasi:  A bomb 
exploded in a minibus in the western Turkish holiday resort 
of Kusadasi on Saturday, killing five people and injuring 
Â¶13.  One British citizen and one Irish woman were among the 
dead, along with three Turks, and another five Britons were 
among the injured.  British Foreign Secretary Jack Straw 
said `we condemn this repugnant act, which has ruined the 
lives of so many innocent people.'  Prime Minister Erdgoan 
commented that `this is what we have always worried about. 
Our security forces are taking all possible measures, but it 
is impossible to have 100 percent security.'  Police suspect 
that plastic explosives were used in the attack, but say it 
appears unlikely that a suicide bomber was responsible.  A 
Kurdish rebel group affiliated to the PKK, the Kurdistan 
Liberation Hawks (TAK), claimed responsibility for a bomb 
attack in the nearby resort of Cesme on July 10, in which 20 
people were injured, including two foreign tourists. 
Dailies report British Ambassador Peter Westmacott as saying 
that the attacks should not discourage British tourists from 
traveling to Turkey.  A PKK terrorist captured in Izmir told 
the police that the organization had deployed 75 terror 
teams to the Aegean region. 
 
Syria's al-Shara on Turkey, the US, Israel, Iraq:  Syria's 
Foreign Minister Faruk al-Shara told Monday's "Zaman" that 
Damascus would soon take important steps forward, including 
allowing new political parties, guaranteeing freedom of the 
press, and removing emergency rule in Syria.  Shara said 
Syria is determined to become a `full democracy.'  Shara 
also said that the region needed Turkey to play a leading 
role, adding that the development of Turkey-Syrian ties 
would enhance the influence of Turkey in its region.  The 
Syrian FM praised Ankara for defending its ties with Syria 
despite `great pressure' coming from other countries  `The 
improvement in Syrian-Turkish relations has been received 
positively in the Arab world,' Shara said, adding that the 
US is `uneasy' over this development.  Shara claimed that 
the US has been unable to raise its relations with Middle 
Eastern countries to a desired level due to Washington's 
insistence on viewing the region through Israeli eyes. 
Shara blamed the US for cooperating with illegal 
organizations in causing instability in the Middle East.  He 
added that Israeli troops should pull out of the West Bank 
and Golan Heights before negotiating peace with Israel can 
be negotiated.  `Israel's withdrawal from Gaza is not 
sufficient,' Shara said.  `What about other areas under 
Israel's occupation?  How can a Palestinian state be founded 
without the West Bank and east Jerusalem?' Shara asked. 
Shara also noted that it is impossible for Damascus to 
protect its 700 km border with Iraq on its own.  `Those who 
blame us for terrorist infiltrations do not control their 
side of the border,' he said, adding that Syria has been 
supporting the democratization process in Iraq. 
 
Iranian Diplomat on Interpol List Detained in Istanbul:  An 
Iranian diplomat, Massoud Amiri, was detained on July 6 at 
Istanbul Airport, where he had arrived to participate in a 
meeting in Ankara, "Milliyet" reports.  Amiri was detained 
by Turkish officials because he was on a wanted list issued 
by the Argentine officials in Interpol.  The Turkish Foreign 
Ministry (MFA) said the police are not authorized to detain 
diplomats, and warned that Tehran could retaliate by 
arresting Turkish diplomats in Iran.  Amiri was subsequently 
sent back to Iran, "Milliyet" reports. 
 
Ocalan Ordered Killing of Dissident Kurd:  Dailies continue 
commenting on the assassination of Kurdish activist Hikmet 
Fidan, a former official from the pro-Kurdish party DEHAP, 
who was allegedly shot to death by the PKK in Turkey's 
mainly Kurdish city of Diyarbakir on July 6.  Sunday papers 
report that Zinnar Tarik, Fidan's son, claimed his father 
was killed for opposing PKK policies of armed violence. 
Kurds paying condolence visits to the Fidan family told the 
press that the order to kill Fidan had been issued by 
imprisoned PKK leader Abdullah Ocalan.  Sunday papers also 
report the killing of Hasan Ozen, a former PKK camp leader 
in northern Iraq, in Austria.  Ozen was allegedly shot to 
death in Austria for leaving the PKK to protest the increase 
in terrorist actions and for his opposition to statements by 
Abdullah Ocalan. 
Osman Ocalan Downplays Possibility of US Action, May Have 
Rejoined PKK:  Osman Ocalan, who had reportedly broken away 
from the PKK to pursue political activity in nortehrn Iraq, 
said he `does not take seriously' reports that the US 
military has been given orders to arrest him and other PKK 
figures.  Ocalan said that `the US won't arrest me.  It is 
US policy to maintain an alliance with all segnments of the 
Kurds in Iraq.'  There have been reports in recent days that 
Osman Ocalan has returned to the PKK. 
 
Kurdish Party Wants Federation for Kurds in Turkey:  A group 
from the pro-Kurdish Rights and Freedoms Party (Hak-Par) set 
up a stand in Diyarbakir to collect signatures calling for 
the establishment of a Turkish-Kurdish federation in Turkey, 
Sunday papers report.  Hak-Par's provincial leader, Halis 
Nezan, said that the objective of the campaign is to support 
the establishment of a federation in Turkey similar to the 
one emerging in Iraq.  Nezan said that Turkey, which demands 
a federal system for the 200,000 Turks in Cyprus, should 
meet similar demands from its 20 million Kurds.  Hak-Par is 
chaired by Abdulmelik Firat, a former lawmaker and grandson 
of Sheikh Said, a rebel Kurdish leader who was hanged for 
revolting against the young Turkish republic in 1925.  Hak- 
Par said the signatures calling for a Kurdish federation in 
Turkey will be submitted to the EU, the UN, EU missions in 
Turkey, and the Turkish Parliament before October 3, the 
date for the start of EU-Turkey membership talks. 
 
Turkey to Suggest Joint Operation Against the PKK:  Interior 
Minister Abdulkadir Aksu will meet with his counterparts 
from Iraq, Iran, and Syria in Istanbul July 17-19 to urge 
Turkey's neighbors to launch a joint initiative against the 
PKK, Saturday's "Sabah" reports.  Turkey wants PKK leaders 
such as Murat Karayilan and Cemil Bayik to be handed over. 
The Turks will also reportedly propose to the Iraqis a joint 
military operation against the PKK in the Kandil mountains. 
US Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Richard 
Myers, had said in response to Prime Minister Erdogan's 
warning that Turkey may launch cross-border operations into 
Iraq in pursuit of terrorists that Iraq is a sovereign 
country, and that such issues should be dealt between Ankara 
and the Iraqi government.  The interior ministers of Iraq, 
Iran, Syria, Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Kuwait and Bahrain will 
attend the Istanbul meeting. 
 
Azerbaijani Delegations to Visit Turkish Cyprus:  Three 
Azerbaijani delegations will travel to Turkish Cyprus to 
attend ceremonies in the breakaway Turkish enclave to mark 
its `peace and freedom day' on the anniversary of Turkey's 
occupation of northern Cyprus on July 20, 1974, Monday 
papers report.  An Azerbaijani delegation of officials and 
businessmen is to visit the `TRNC' from July 22-27 to 
discuss trade and investment opportunities. A delegation 
from the Azerbaijani-Turkish Businessmen's Association will 
go to northern Cyprus from July 28-31.   Prime Minister 
Erdogan praised the Azerbaijani efforts, saying the visits 
constitute a first step toward international recognition of 
the  `TRNC.' 
 
PM Advisor Warns US Congress Against Armenian Drafts:  In a 
letter to members of the US House of Representatives, Prime 
Minister Erdogan's advisor Egemen Bagis wrote that two draft 
resolutions concerning Armenian `genocide' claims (H. Res. 
316 introduced on June 14, 2005, and H. Res. 195 introduced 
on June 29, 2005) submitted by some Congressmen contained 
`misinformation, baseless allegations, and false 
accusations' against Turkey.  Bagis said the drafts 
`misrepresented' a controversial chapter of Turkish-Armenian 
relations at a time when the Turkish government is taking 
positive steps towards neighboring Armenia.  Bagis argued 
that the events of 1915 cannot be labeled as genocide, 
adding that the judgment of history should be left to 
historians.  `We do not want the US Congress making its 
judgment based on one-sided allegations,' Bagis wrote.  He 
noted that the adoption of these resolutions would not help 
efforts to improve Turkish-Armenian relations, as the 
Armenian government and diaspora would only feel encouraged 
to seek political gains based on the genocide claims. 
 
Turkey to Hand Over ISAF Command:  Turkey is to hand over 
its command of the multinational brigade in Kabul to the 
Netherlands on July 20, and the command of ISAF to Italy 
early August, Sunday papers report.  ISAF commanding General 
Erdagi said that, contrary to some recent press reports, 
Turkish troops in Afghanistan would not be actively involved 
in operations against terrorists there. 
 
10 PKK Members Killed in Security Operations:  Turkish 
troops reportedly killed 10 PKK fighters in clashes in a 
remote area of Turkey's Sirnak province, the governor's 
office said on Sunday.  The soldiers seized a rocket 
launcher, rifles, grenades, and 25 kg of plastic explosives 
during the four-day operation.  Meanwhile, four Turkish 
soldiers were injured, two seriously, when their vehicle 
struck a landmine in a rural area of Bitlis province on 
Sunday. 
 
US Supports UN `Alliance of Civilizations' Project:  The US 
State Department praised Turkey and Spain for playing a 
leading role in the UN-sponsired `Alliance of Civilizations' 
project.  The initiative is aimed at bringing Muslim and 
Christian nations closer together.  State Department 
Spokesman Sean McCormack said the US would welcome 
initiatives that complement the Broader Middle East and 
North Africa Initiative (BMENAI). 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  Terrorism 
 
"Ingratitude" 
Zafer Atay commented in the social-economic "Dunya" (7/18): 
"Details about the terrorists who carried out the London 
bombings point to enormous ingratitude on the part of the 
bombers, since all of them were enjoying the benefits of UK 
citizenship.  But this kind of ingratitude does not apply to 
millions of Muslims living in Britain who respect the laws. 
These terrorists are clearly brain-washed puppets.  There is 
also an odd situation concerning entry procedures to the UK. 
Ordinary tourists are asked to fill out a huge amount of 
paperwork, which is so burdensome that it may cause some to 
give up on traveling there.  But these terrorists enjoyed 
the ability to enter and live in the United Kingdom.  There 
are ongoing cases with many European countries as well as 
the US and North Africa when they refuse to extradite 
terrorists.  . Let's not forget that Belgium continues to 
shelter a Turkish terrorist based on the excuse that a fully 
automatic weapon was not used in the killing." 
 
"The Alliance of Civilizations" 
Mim Kemal Oke wrote in the conservative "HO Tercuman" 
(7/18): "The current period in world affairs offers a clear 
dilemma.  On the one hand, the US seeks to establish full 
control over the international system.  But the sole 
superpower has failed to bring stability to Iraq, and 
continues to be criticized all around the world.  On the 
other hand, the US effort to shape the world is facing both 
global terror and a global social opposition.  But this 
social opposition remains weak and inefficient next to the 
growing force of terrorism.  Given the current 
circumstances, UN Secretary General Kofi Annan's initiative 
for the `alliance of civilizations' is an important 
development.  Annan's project is different from the US 
effort to transform a conflict of civilizations to peace 
between civilizations.  The term `alliance' emphasizes that 
the initiative falls outside of the US purview.  Turkey and 
Spain will be the hosts of this very important project.  Its 
success will provide a philosophical basis for Turkish 
diplomacy." 
 
MCELDOWNEY