05ANKARA4791
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Aug 15 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 ANKARA 004791 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, AUGUST 12, 2005 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
Friday, August 12, 2005 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Diyarbakir Prepares for Erdogan Visit - Vatan 
DEHAP Mayors Call on PKK to Leave Arms - Vatan 
PKK Suspends Attacks During Erdogan's Diyarbakir Visit - 
Aksam 
Israel Lifts Antalya Travel Warning - Hurriyet 
Israel Grateful to Turkey for Recent Security Operations - 
Milliyet 
London to Deport al-Qaida Spiritual Leader Katada - Milliyet 
New Signs of Division in Iraq - Vatan 
New Constitution Hints at Farewell to a Unitary Iraq - 
Milliyet 
Al-Hakim Wants Federal Shiite Zone in South of Iraq - Sabah 
50,000 Israelis Protest Gaza Pullout in Tel Aviv - Sabah 
2 Turkish Troops Killed in PKK Ambush - Hurriyet 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Turkish Police Deal Heavy Blow Against al-Qaida - Cumhuriyet 
Diyarbakir Hopeful on Eve of Erdogan Visit - Radikal 
US Warplanes Strike Civilians in Iraq, Afghanistan - Yeni 
Safak 
Iran Rejects Last Call from Vienna on Nuclear Program - 
Zaman 
Iran Warns EU, US Against `Miscalculations' - Cumhuriyet 
Bush Says US Visa to be Granted to Ahmedinajad - Radikal 
Oil Prices Set New Record: 66 USD - Zaman 
33 Million Children Hunger-Stricken in Africa - Cumhuriyet 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
Al-Qaida's Syrian Members Arrested in Turkey:  A suspected 
Syrian al-Qaida militant, Luia Sakra, appeared before a 
court in Istanbul Thursday to face charges of supplying and 
manufacturing the bombs used in the attacks against British 
and Jewish targets in Istanbul in November 2003.  Sakra is 
believed to have received the order to stage the Istanbul 
bombings from Abu Musa al-Zarqawi.  Sakra was caught in 
Diyarbakir yesterday and brought to Istanbul.  Sakra shouted 
to reporters from a courthouse window that he had been 
planning to attack Israeli cruise liners.  `I have no 
regrets, I was going to attack Israeli ships.  Turks would 
not have been harmed -- only the Israelis,' he shouted in 
Turkish with an Arabic accent.  Sakra is believed to have 
been al-Qaida's leading figure in Turkey.  The lawyer for 
Sakra, Osman Karahan, acknowledged that his client had been 
preparing to stage attacks against cruise ships carrying 
Israeli tourists.  `750 kg of explosives were seized in the 
Antalya raid.  My client was planning to attack Israeli 
ships in international waters with these explosives,' 
Karahan said, adding that Sakra had purchased a small yacht 
to carry out the attack.  "Hurriyet" claims that Sakra 
acknowledged during his interrogation that he had been among 
a group of insurgents in Iraq who were responsible for the 
beheading of several Turks working for coalition forces. 
"Milliyet" reports that Sakra claimed he killed 10 US troops 
in Fallujah.  "Vatan" reports that Sakra said there were 
nine other terrorists in Turkey preparing for attacks. 
 
Hamid Obysi, another Syrian national, was also detained as 
part of the same operation and is charged with being a 
courier for al-Qaida.  Obysi was brought to Istanbul and 
arrested after being detained while attempting to flee to 
Syria.  Meanwhile, a travel warning urging Israeli citizens 
to avoid Mediterranean Turkish resorts was lifted after 
successful operations by the Turkish security against al- 
Qaida terrorists, Israeli security sources said late 
Thursday.  A statement from Israel's counter-terrorism 
center said that the threat level had dropped thanks to the 
efforts of Turkish security forces.  However, Israel still 
urged its nationals to be cautious in visiting the region. 
The Israeli Ambassador in Ankara, Pinhas Avivi, lauded 
Turkish security operations against terrorists, adding that 
he was grateful to the Turks for saving the lives of 
thousands of Israelis.  More than 300,000 Israelis visit 
Turkey each year for holidays. 
 
On Friday, Turkish Security Department Spokesman Ramazan Er 
said that Sakra and Obysi had been planning to flee to a 
neighboring European country after staging their attacks in 
Turkey.  `I don't want to name that country, but we gave the 
necessary intelligence to them,' Er said.  He noted that the 
intelligence gathered was shared by some friendly countries, 
adding that operations were carried out solely by Turkish 
security forces.  Er said that the Turkish police continue 
to search for some suspects including Habib Aktas, Gurcan 
Bac, and Azat Ekinci in connection with the Istanbul 
bombings in 2003. 
 
Syria: Sakra Won't Affect Syria-Turkey Ties:  The Syrian 
Information Ministry said on Thursday that the capture of a 
Syrian national terrorist suspect in Turkey, Luia Sakra, 
will not affect bilateral ties between the two countries. 
`Syria deems Turkey's security to be very important.  Syria 
and Turkey maintain a high level of cooperation through 
bilateral agreements on security matters,' a Syrian Foreign 
Ministry official said. 
 
US Citizen With al-Qaida Ties Working at Iraqi Embassy: 
"Sabah" cites a "Newsweek" report claiming that an Iraqi-US 
citizen, Tarik Hamid, is workign at the Iraqi embassy in 
Ankara.  Hamid allegedly took batteries for satellite phones 
to bin-Ladin in Afghanistan in 1998.  "Newsweek" claimed 
there is an outstanding federal indictment against Hamid. 
 
Erdogan Due in Diyarbakir:  Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan's 
meeting with activists and intellectuals on the Kurdish 
question on Wednesday has reversed the atmosphere in 
Diyarbakir, dailies claim, noting that people in the mainly 
Kurdish city of Diyarbakir had been encouraged by the PM's 
remarks in which he acknowledged a `Kurdish problem.' 
Erdogan also stressed that further democratization is the 
sole remedy for the problems in the region.  Mayors of 57 
municipalities in Turkey's east and southeast Turkey 
governed by pro-Kurdish DEHAP called on the PKK to end its 
armed fight against the Turkish state `unconditionally.'  In 
a joint press statement, the DEHAP mayors welcomed 
statements by the PM suggesting that the Kurdish question 
would be solved without making compromises on 
democratization.  Osman Baydemir, the mayor of Diyarbakir, 
said on behalf of the other mayors that the Turkish Republic 
had been founded by the grandfathers of all, and that 
everyone should learn to live together.  Baydemir said the 
growing uncertainties over Turkey's EU accession and the 
rising armed conflict in the southeast placed 
responsibilities on politicians, NGOs, and civilians in 
Turkey.  He stressed that the region is largely 
underdeveloped, but said it would be wrong to see the 
problem purely as a matter of security and economic 
development.  The PKK said yesterday that it will not stage 
attacks during the stay of the PM in Diyarbakir.  Kurdish 
activist Leyla Zana and other former Kurdish 
parliamentarians also welcomed Wednesday's statement by 
Erdogan, describing it as `courageous, necessary and 
important.'  The former MPs said Erdogan's remarks were a 
departure from Turkey's traditional state policies.  An EU 
ambassador in Ankara said Europe expected Erdogan to 
announce a fresh package of measures to develop the region 
and end terrorism.  The main opposition CHP leader Deniz 
Baykal lashed out at Erdogan for engaging in a `political 
flirt' which may damage Turkey's struggle against terrorism. 
`The AKP government cannot see the political project behind 
terrorism, which lays out demands that go beyond a mere 
recognition of identity,' Baykal said.  He argued that 
changes which are to be made under the pretext of 
`democratization' will result in a partition of Turkey. 
`Iraq is an example of this,' Baykal said.  The northern 
Iraq Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK) representative in 
Ankara, Bahros Galali, said the PUK is ready to provide full 
support to the process pledged by Erdogan. 
 
Survey on Social and Economic Conditions in Diyarbakir: 
According to a survey carried out by the municipality, 
chambers of trade, and NGOs in Diyarbakir, 55 percent of the 
1,362,708 residents in the city are unemployed, "Hurriyet" 
reports.  The absolute poverty rate stands at 39.7 percent. 
207,249 citizens applied to the governor's office to receive 
food aid in 2003.  The literacy rate is 69.57 percent, and 
university graduates make up just 5.6 percent of the 
population.  The literacy rate among Diyarbakir women is 
55.37 percent, but 42.38 of women in the city have received 
no education.  Only 38.60 percent of girls are allowed to 
attend school, far below the overall rate of 68.10 in 
Turkey.  15,000 children between the ages of 7-15 work on 
the streets.  23 percent of them are not attending school, 
and 43 percent are drug addicts.  68.6 percent of pregnant 
women do not go to hospital for delivery.  0.57 percent of 
babies in Diyarbakyr die at birth, higher than the average 
figure of 0.43 percent for Turkey.  41.90 percent of the 
buildings in the city are illegally constructed.  There are 
80,000 people living in shantytowns on the outskirts of 
Diyarbakir.  The priovince's per capita income is 1,313 USD, 
making Diyarbakyr 54th among Turkey's 80 provinces. 
 
Ereli on US, Turkey, Iraq Security Talks, PKK:  US State 
Department Spokesman Adam Ereli said that the three-party 
security talks among the US, Turkey, and Iraq in Washington 
were `very productive' discussions aimed at combating 
terrorism.  `A particular focus of the discussions was the 
PKK and its affiliates, and how we could all cooperate to 
eliminate the terrorist threat to Turkey from northern 
Iraq,' Ereli emphasized.  Ereli noted that two US army 
commanders would travel to Ankara soon to discuss military 
tactics for fighting the PKK.  Ereli also said that the US, 
Turkey, and Iraq had agreed to set up working groups for 
further technical discussions. 
 
US Seeks Breakaway Arab Republic in Iran:  The US has 
prepared war plans to break off the oil-rich province of 
Kuzistan from Iran, "Hurriyet" reports from Washington. 
According to the report, which is based on `intelligence 
sources,' the US will first heavily bomb Iranian nuclear 
facilities.  US military operations will be supported by the 
People's Mujahedin organization in Iran.  Kuzistan, a 
province with a majority of Shiite Arabs, will be declared 
the `Ahvaz Democratic Arab Republic' following the initial 
military operation.  The US is also busy making plans to 
incite a revolt of Azeris and other minority groups in Iran, 
according to the report. 
 
Iraqi Journalists Visit Turkey:  A delegation of Iraqi 
journalists visited the Turkish Journalists Association 
(TGC) in Istanbul yesterday as the guests of the Turkish 
Foreign Ministry (MFA) and the Directorate General of Press 
and Information (BYEGM), papers report.  The head of the 21- 
member of Iraqi delegation, Azad Muhamed Ali, said that 
there had been no press freedom during the former Saddam 
Hussein regime in Iraq.  `The Saddam Hussein regime meant 
terror, restriction of freedoms, mass killings, and total 
destruction of some villages and towns,' Ali stressed.  A 
woman Iraqi TV journalist, `Ms. Suzan' said that there had 
been no occupation of Iraq.  `Americans, the British, and 
troops from other coalition countries came to Iraq to 
establish of security.  They will leave when peace is 
established.  Iraq has attained its position today with the 
help of those you define as occupiers,' she said.  The 
director of Kirkuk TV, `Mr. Arif' said there no security 
problem whatsoever in Erbil, Suleymaniye, and Dohuk.  Arif 
noted that press freedom in Iraq today has increased 
drastically compared to the times of Saddam Hussein. 
`Previously, there was not a single independent paper in 
Iraq.  Today, there are hundreds.  We can write any news in 
any way we like,' Arif said.  The Iraqi journalists will 
call on several newspapers and broadcasters for professional 
consultations over the weekend. 
 
Turkish Troops Killed in PKK Ambush:  Two Turkish troops 
were killed and four wounded on early Thursday when PKK 
separatists opened fire on their convoy in eastern Turkey, a 
military official said.  The soldiers were ambushed outside 
Turkey's eastern city of Tunceli.  Meanwhile, police 
detained two suspected PKK members who were reportedly 
preparing to launch terrorist attacks in Turkey's Aegean 
port city of Izmir.  Police seized 800 grams of plastic 
explosives and materials used in bomb-making at the 
suspects' house. 
 
Turkey to Buy 52 Aircraft:  Turkey's Defense Industry 
Undersecretariat is to put forward an international tender 
in December for the purchase of 32 military helicopters and 
20 planes to fight forest fires.  The total package will be 
worth around 700 million USD, "Sabah" reports.  Officials 
expect the US Sikorsky S-70 Blackhawk and the French NH90 
helicopter to be the top contenders in the bid. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  Iran, Turkey-US Relations/PKK 
 
"A Dangerous Standoff with Iran" 
Sami Kohen opined in the mainstream daily "Milliyet" (8/12): 
"It is rather worrying to see Iran, despite the pressure of 
the international community, is continuing its nuclear 
program and is restarting the activities of the conversion 
plant in Isfahan.  The EU-3 efforts to get Iran to comply 
with International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) demands have 
proven to be fruitless.   Despite all of these efforts, 
Iran's decision has increased the tension in the region. 
From the beginning, Iran has claimed that its goal in 
enriching uranium is to establish a new energy source. 
Since Iran signed the nonproliferation agreement with 187 
other countries, it has a right to enjoy the benefits of 
nuclear energy.  However, Iran's political record and its 
recent attitude have convinced everyone that the real goal 
of its enrichment program is to produce nuclear weapons. 
Led by the US, the EU, and Russia, the international 
community has increased the pressure on Iran to halt its 
nuclear activities.  Tehran has so far resisted these 
demands.  Most recently, the new Iraqi President rejected 
the offer of the EU-3 for economic and social benefits in 
return for relinquishing the enrichment program.  As a 
result, Iran and the international community have found 
themselves in a dangerous confrontation.   If Iran doesn't 
stop its nuclear program soon, the issue will be taken to 
the UN Security Council.  The US might request that economic 
and political sanctions be imposed against Iran.  But it is 
expected that China and Russia will not support these 
demands in the Security Council.  Such demands could cause 
Iran to seek revenge.  If Iran increases oil prices, for 
exapmle, economic crises could be triggered around the 
world.  In short, any conflict stemming from Iran's nuclear 
adventure could have serious consequences for everyone. 
Before the crisis grows even bigger, the international 
community should make every effort to achieve a solution 
based on common sense." 
 
"In the Eyes of the Americans" 
Emin Pazarci wrote in the conservative-sensational "Dunden 
Bugune Tercuman" (8/12):  "The biggest problem between 
Turkey and the US is the PKK issue.  Turkey is bothered by 
the PKK presence in Northern Iraq, and emphasizes its 
expectations from the US on this issue at every opportunity. 
The Turkish people have reacted against the US stance on the 
PKK while the world is trying to coordinate efforts in the 
war against terrorism.  What is the Americans' opinion on 
this issue?  I had lunch with a high-level US official the 
other day and talked about the PKK extensively.  The 
official described the PKK as an outlaw group and said `I 
wish we had a button we could press to eliminate them.'  The 
same official reiterated that the US is sincere in its 
stance against the PKK, and reminded us that the US has been 
the only country to help Turkey in its fight against the 
PKK.  When we mentioned the PKK camps in the Kandil 
mountains and PKK offices in Kirkuk, and asked how the 
Americans would feel if the flag of a terrorist organization 
like Al-Qaida was flying in Turkey, the official's reply was 
rather interesting.  The official pointed out that `the PKK 
flag never flies anywhere in the US.'  The official added 
that Barzani and Talabani would take necessary actions 
against the PKK in time. When we screamed that Turkey has no 
patience to wait any longer, the US official said that the 
US is taking necessary measures on the issue, and assured 
that certain things would change in the region soon.  Based 
on these statements, we can surmise that the US has given us 
some guarantees on the PKK.  Now we are waiting to see what 
steps the US is going to take.  It is not good enough to say 
that "Turkey is very important and valuable for us."  Turkey 
needs to see action from the US.  The US is undergoing a 
`test of sincerity' in the eyes of the Turkish public on the 
issue of the PKK and Northern Iraq." 
 
MCELDOWNEY