05ANKARA4905
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Aug 22 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 ANKARA 004905 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, AUGUST 22, 2005 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Muslims to Pope: Muslims Are Not Natural-Born Terrorists - 
Sabah 
Washington Post: Peshmerge Terror in Northern Iraq - 
Cumhuriyet 
Putin Calls on US to Announce Exit Date from Iraq - Aksam 
Another Turk Abducted in Iraq - Sabah 
4 Turkish Terror Suspects Under Detention in Iraq - Milliyet 
Nicosia: Turkey Cannot Begin EU Talks Without Recognizing 
Cyprus - Hurriyet 8/21 
Hamas Vows to Continue Fight Against Israel - DB-Tercuman 
8/21 
Afghanistan Ready for September 18 Polls - Milliyet 
2 PKK Terrorists Killed in Tunceli - Hurriyet 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Iraqi Constitution Deadline May be Extended Again - Zaman 
Turkmen, Sunnis Under Kurdish Pressure in Northern Iraq - 
Yeni Safak 
Kurds, Turkmen, Arabs Rally in Kirkuk Against Federalism - 
Zaman 8/21 
US Allows `Sharia' in Iraq - Cumhuriyet 8/21 
US in Iraq Until 2009 - Yeni Safak 
Saddam: I Will Die for Iraq, Palestine - Zaman 
Americans' Support for Bush Nosedives - Yeni Safak 8/21 
Merkel: We Don't Want Turkey in EU - Cumhuriyet 8/21 
Pope Calls for Dialogue with Muslim World - Zaman 8/21 
Gaza Evacuation to End, Palestine Elections Up Next - Zaman 
8/21 
Israel Hands over Gaza to Palestine - Yeni Safak 8/21 
4 US Troops Killed in Afghanistan - Cumhuriyet 
Kaddafi Invites Bush, Rice to Libya - Radikal 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
Erdogan, Baykal on `Kurdish Problem':  Prime Minister Tayyip 
Erdogan said on Sunday that the Kurdish problem and PKK 
terrorism must be viewed as two separate issues.  `The Kurds 
are also our nationals.  In Turkey there are not only Kurds, 
but also 30 other ethnic identities as well,' Erdogan 
stressed.  `All of these groups have citizenship in the 
epublic of Turkey.'  Main opposition (CHP) leader Deniz 
Baykal criticized Erdogan for paving the way for the 
politicization of the ethnic issue, adding that the PM's 
remarks with regard to the `Kurdish issue' had weakened 
Turkey in the fight against terrorism.  Baykal voiced 
concern that the terrorists will take advantage of the 
concessions made by Erdogan in their efforts to force the 
Turkish government to accept imprisoned PKK leader Abdullah 
Ocalan as an interlocutor. 
 
Media Skeptical on PKK Cease-Fire:  Turkish papers are 
skeptical about the reliability of the unilateral one-month 
cease-fire decision announced by the PKK last week.  Monday 
papers report that two PKK terrorists were killed in 
fighting with security forces in rural parts of the eastern 
province of Tunceli yesterday.  A policeman was wounded in 
fighting with PKK militants in the Black Sea port city of 
Trabzon, and police issued warnings against possible attacks 
by female PKK suicide bombers in major Turkish cities. 
Saturday's "Milliyet" claimed that the PKK shrugged off a 
declaration by former Kurdish lawmakers in the Democratic 
Society Movement (DTH) in which the activists called on the 
PKK to announce an unconditional, indefinite cease-fire. 
Businessmen and non-governmental organizations in Diyarbakir 
also called on the PKK to lay down its arms without 
preconditions.  Sezgin Tanrikulu, a prominent human rights 
lawyer in Diyarbakir, said that `a cease-fire is not 
sufficient. The PKK needs to renounce terrorism as a method 
for achieving its goals.' 
 
Turkey's National Security Council to Discuss Kurdish 
Broadcasting, Terror:  Turkey's National Security Council 
(NSC) is to discuss proposed amendments to regulations on 
Kurdish broadcasting at its monthly meeting on Tuesday. 
Sources at the prime ministry told the press that the 
military views the new regulation, which would pave the way 
for Kurdish language broadcasting on private television 
channels in the southeast, as `positive.'  But the military 
also believes that tight controls are needed to prevent 
broadcasts against national security and unity, according to 
the report.  Tuesday's NSC meeting will bring together PM 
Erdogan, who recently acknowledged the existence of a 
`Kurdish problem' in Turkey, and military commanders who are 
demanding wider authority in the fight against terrorism, 
Monday's "Milliyet" comments.  The military members of the 
NSC are expected to submit to the council a terrorism report 
that argues that the problem in southeast Turkey should be 
defined as a `terrorism issue' instead of a `Kurdish issue,' 
some papers claim.  "Sabah" reports, however, that the 
meeting will focus mainly on the EU, Cyprus, and Iraq. 
 
Controversial Conference on Armenian Issue to be Held in 
September:  A conference on the allegations of Armenian 
genocide will be held at Istanbul's Bogazici University on 
Sept 23-25, "Hurriyet" reported on Monday.  In May, strong 
criticism, including by the government, forced the 
cancellation of the conference, which was to discuss non- 
official approaches to the suffering of the Armenians during 
the decline of the Ottoman Empire.  Academics form Turkey's 
Bosphorus, Bilgi, and Sabanci universities as well as 
Turkish scholars from US universities such as Yale, Harvard, 
Brown, Minnesota, and Michigan are expected to participate 
in the conference. 
 
Ambassador Dowlatabadi on Iran-Turkey Ties:  Iran's 
Ambassador to Ankara, Firuz Dowlatabadi, told "Milliyet" on 
Saturday that the new Iranian President, Mahmud Ahmedinajad, 
wants to improve bilateral ties with Turkey.  `Our goal is 
to increase bilateral trade to 10 billion USD,' Dowlatabadi 
said.  He noted that the appointment of the former Iranian 
ambassador to Ankara, Manoushehr Mottaki, as the new foreign 
minister would positively affect Turkey-Iran ties.  `The new 
priority of Mottaki will be the establishment of good 
relations with Turkey and other neighbors,' Mottaki 
stressed.  The Iranian ambassador downplayed concerns that 
Tehran would resume efforts to export its Islamic revolution 
to Turkey, assuring that Tehran will stick to its policy of 
non-intervention in the internal affairs of other countries. 
 
Senator Graham on Iraq, Turkey:  US Republican Senator 
Lindsey Graham told "Fox News" that if the Iraqi Kurds leave 
Iraq in a that creates problems for Turkey, it would 
represent a big problem for the United States as well, 
Monday's "Zaman" reports.  Graham said that success in Iraq 
is of the utmost importance for the future of the United 
States.  Meanwhile, several papers report that Republican 
Senator Chuck Hagel said over the weekend that the situation 
in Iraq is becoming `more and more like Vietnam.'  Hagel 
reportedly called on the Bush administration to develop 
alternatives for beginning a pullout of US troops from Iraq. 
 
Turkmen Demand Own Federal State if Iraq Goes Becomes a 
Federal Republic:   Iraqi Turkmen Front (ITF) chairman Dr. 
Sadettin Ergec told the private news agency IHA that Turkmen 
would not oppose a federation that respects the demographic 
structure of Kirkuk, Monday's "Yeni Safak" reported.  Ergic 
noted that the Kurds had not given up demands for a federal 
regime in northern Iraq.  `We will not oppose a federal 
system as long as it does not change the demography of 
Kirkuk.  Kikruk has special characteristics, with its 
Kurdish, Turkmen and Arab populations,' Ergec emphasized. 
`The Kurds have the administration of three provinces in the 
north, and the Arabs control 14 provinces in the south.  It 
is only natural that the Turkmen should have the 
administration of one province out of 18 in Iraq,' Ergec 
stressed. 
 
No Evidence Linking Iraqi Diplomat to Terror Groups:  Tarik 
Hamdi, the press attache at the Iraqi Embassy in Ankara, has 
extended his stay in Baghdad, where he had been recalled on 
August 15 following Turkish press reports alleging he had 
links with Osama bin-Ladin.  Hamdi had been expected to 
return to Ankara last Thursday.  Hamdi is a US citizen of 
Iraqi origin.  An investigation was opened about him in the 
United States in 2001, but no evidence was been found 
linking him to al-Qaida or terror activities. 
 
General Tolon Hands Over First Army Command to General 
Basbug:  `I am handing over an army that has not lost its 
identity in the degeneration of globalization, that does not 
need recipes from foreign sources for its modernization, and 
that believes that Turkish troops will not pull out of north 
Cyprus,' outgoing First Army Commander General Hursit Tolon 
said at a change of command ceremony in Istanbul on Sunday. 
Tolon `strongly condemned' the efforts of Turkish 
intellectuals who met with Prime Minister Erdogan last week 
in the government's bid to resolve the `Kurdish problem.' 
Tolon accused the intellectuals of trying to change the 
unitary structure of Turkey.  General Tolon was replaced as 
First Army Commander by former Deputy TGS Chief General 
Ilker Basbug. 
 
New Kurdish Group Aims Constitutional Changes in Turkey: 
Sunday's "Cumhuriyet" carries a report outlining some 
provisions of the draft party program of the Democratic 
Society Movement (DTH), which was established by former 
Kurdish lawmakers including Leyla Zana.  The DTH program 
advocates a new constitution that formally recognizes the 
Kurdish identity.  It aims at removing all restrictions on 
Kurdish education and broadcasting.  The program calls for a 
general amnesty, and argues that armed groups be allowed to 
take part in democratic political life in Turkey.  The DTH 
program also calls for special economic planning for the 
southeast. 
 
Turkish Sanctions Damage Greek Cypriot Economy:  Monday's 
"Yeni Safak" cites the Greek Cypriot press pointing to the 
damage caused by Turkish to the economy of south.  The 
significance of the Cypriot port city of Limasol decreased 
dramatically after Turkey began denying access to its ports 
for Greek Cypriot vessels and other container ships in 1997. 
 
Pope Benedict to Visit Turkey:  Sunday's "Sabah" reports 
that Pope Benedict XVI will visit Turkey from November 28-30 
as the guest of the Greek Orthodox Patriarch Bartholomew I 
in Istanbul. 
 
4 Turks Under Detention in Iraq:  Iraqi security forces have 
under detention 281 foreigners, including 4 Turks, for 
suspected involvement in terror activities, Monday's "Yeni 
Safak" reports.  The majority of the suspects under 
detention are Arabs, an Iraqi government spokesman said. 
 
2 PKK Militants Killed in Tunceli:  Security forces killed 
two members of the separatist PKK in rural parts of the 
eastern province of Tunceli on Sunday, the governor's office 
said.  Security operations continue in the region. 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  Iraq/Terrorism 
"Will Iraq Remain Federal?" 
Yasemin Congar argued in the mainstream daily "Milliyet" 
(8/22):  "If there is no last minute delay, the draft 
constitution for Iraq will be completed today.  But it won't 
eliminate concerns regarding the country's future. 
Actually, this draft will replace the question of `will Iraq 
be federal' with the question `will Iraq remain federal?' 
Although officials in Washington stress that the drafting 
process belongs to the Iraqis, it is well known that the US 
has intervened directly in the process.  An agreement will 
be reached based on the concessions made by the various 
sides.  So far, there are fewer concessions coming from the 
Shiites.  The US Ambassador to Iraq, Zalmay Khalilzad, spent 
his weekend in shuttle diplomacy between the Shiites and the 
Kurds.  Even though we haven't seen the latest 
constitutional draft, the information we do have makes clear 
that this draft anticipates a federal structure.  Sunni 
Arabs are against federalism, because they are concerned 
about Shiite autonomy.  But the principle of federalism has 
become non-negotiable for the Kurds.  Right from the start, 
Washington has believed that federalism is a must to 
maintain the unity of Iraq.  But there are still concerns 
that federalism could ultimately lead to the country's 
disintegration.  A federal regime that allows Shiites and 
Kurds to act illegally will carry the country back to its 
past.  In sum, the struggle in Iraq will not end with the 
completion of the constitution.  Steps taken by the Iraqis 
in the days ahead will determine whether the federal union 
will remain just a paper exercise, and whether the country 
will surrender to violence. 
 
"The PKK:  A Human Rights Issue" 
Ardan Zenturk wrote in the conservative-sensational "Star" 
(8/22):  "I am not interested in whether people call it the 
`Kurdish issue' or the `Southeast issue.'  In my opinion, it 
is a human rights issue.  Young people between the ages of 
15-25 are being taken to training camps - sometimes by 
force, sometimes through brainwashing applied by the 
terrorist organization.  After a short training period, they 
are sent back to Anatolia with a Kalashnikov and a few 
bullets.  The terrorists use these kids for their own 
political goals and send them to fight against the Turkish 
military. .If human life is the most valuable thing for 
them, where are all the human rights defenders in Europe? 
Even if the Turkish soldiers who die defending their 
territory don't mean anything to them, at least they should 
exert some effort to stop the terror organization from 
sending these youngsters to die." 
 
"Learning to Live With Terror" 
Yilmaz Oztuna commented in the conservative "Turkiye" 
(8/22):  "Terrorism has reached almost every country in the 
world.  Some countries have even learned to live with 
terrorism.  Although signs of disintegration can be seen in 
some terrorist organizations, this may be very deceptive. 
Some international powers could immediately push new groups 
onto the scene or try to sell the old ones as new.  It 
shouldn't be forgotten that terrorism is a profitable 
business for terrorists as well as those fighting against 
them.  Last week everyone was focused on  Sharon's 
withdrawal plan from Gaza.  But evacuating Gaza will never 
stop the actions of Hamas and the other terror organizations 
supported by Iran or the Palestinians.  In Turkey, DYP 
leader Mehmet Agar suggested that the PKK would disintegrate 
on its own.  This is probably the only way that Kurdish 
youth can be saved from the terror organization, and for 
Kurdish-origin Turks to have some peace.  But the PKK can no 
longer control these actions.  The strings are not in the 
PKK's hands.  There are some other powers holding the 
strings and gaining time against Turkey by loosening and 
tightening them at their whim.  After the Gaza withdrawal, 
Egyptian President Husnu Mubarak referred to Sharon as a 
`brave man'.  This is an unbelievable change.  But peace in 
the Middle East still has a long way to go.  For the moment, 
it remains well over the horizon." 
 
MCELDOWNEY