05ANKARA4754
LETTER FROM THE DEFENSE MINISTER TO SECDEF ON THE
Fri Aug 12 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

121342Z Aug 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 004754 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MASS MARR PREL EFIN TU
SUBJECT: LETTER FROM THE DEFENSE MINISTER TO SECDEF ON THE 
SEAHAWK SALE AND EXIM FINANCING 
 
REF: ANKARA 4517 
 
¶1. On August 11, 2005, Embassy received the letter in para 2 
from the Turkish Ministry of National Defense.  In it, 
Defense Minister Gonul requests SECDEF's support for 
extension of the 1990 EXIM Bank facility for the sale of 
military helicopters to Turkey.  This extension is a 
condition of the sale of 12 Sikorsky Seahawk helicopters for 
the Turkish Navy (reftel).  Embassy is pouching the original 
to OSD/ISP/EUR (LtCol Joe Collins). 
 
¶2. BEGIN TEXT. 
 
Ankara 09 August 2005 
 
H.E. Mr. Donald H. Rumsfeld 
Secretary of Defense 
 
SIPDIS 
USA 
 
Dear Mr. Secretary 
 
During my visit to USA, in June, I could not have a chance to 
meet with you, since you were abroad.  However; I had the 
opportunity to meet and exchange ideas with your deputy, Mr. 
Gordon England. I hope you accept my invitation and we will 
be able to come together in Turkey. 
 
If you will recall, in June 2002, the Export-Import Bank of 
the United States ("Ex-Im Bank") approved an extension of the 
U.S. Export-Import Bank special loan guarantee facility 
established in 1990 to December 15, 2002 by recognizing the 
strategic cooperation between our two countries.  The $ 1.366 
billion facility has enabled Turkey to expand its helicopter 
fleet through the acquisition of over 100 helicopters, 
providing a significant enhancement to existing Turkish Armed 
Forces' maritime, utility, and special operations 
capabilities.  The BLACKHAWK helicopters being flown by 
Turkish Armed Forces, were acquired using funds under this 
credit facility. 
 
Several factors have necessitated the availability of this 
facility to be extended since its establishment in 1990.  One 
such extension enabled us to procure the above-mentioned 
BLACKHAWKs.  In addition to BLACKHAWKs, 8 naval helicopters 
have been procured by a further extension of the availability 
of the 1990 facility. 
 
With your support in 2002, the third extension of the 
availability to May 15, 2008, we were able to sign a contract 
with a U.S. company for 12 naval helicopters using the 
remaining funds in the 1990 facility.  Because the period of 
performance for this contract falls outside the window of the 
provisions of the facility, it will be necessary to request a 
final extension from the Export-Import Bank.  I solicit your 
support in ensuring that the provisions of the Export-Import 
Bank facility do not interfere with our need to obtain this 
critical capability that effectively supports naval 
operations as a coalition partner in Operation Active 
Endeavor (OAE) and the Proliferation Security Initiative 
(PSI).  These helicopters will also be engaged in Exercise 
Reliant Mermaid with the U.S. and other partners and will 
play a pivotal role in Operation Black Sea Harmony as well as 
continuing to provide protection of our Sea Lines of 
Communication and he Turkish Straits.  Our Navy also requires 
the 12 naval helicopters to help protect the approaches to 
the terminus at Ceyhan, Turkey, of the pipelines carrying 
Caspian and Iraqi oil to the world. 
 
On July 26, 2005, upon authorization receipt by the Minister 
of State in charge of the Undersecretariat of Treasury, a 
final extension request to December 31, 2009 has been 
presented to Ex-Im Bank.  Meanwhile, we would like to draw 
your attention to the fact that the Credit Agreements has to 
be executed on or earlier than December 24, 2005, in 
accordance with the effectivity conditions of the contract 
for 12 naval helicopters. 
 
We look forward to your support to ensure that we can obtain 
these critical assets and there by increase our level of 
engagement in ongoing allied mission and future exercises 
necessitated by today's environment. 
 
Sincerely yours, 
M.Vecdi GONUL 
Minister of National Defense 
Republic of Turkey 
 
END TEXT. 
MCELDOWNEY