05ANKARA3473
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Jun 17 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 ANKARA 003473 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, JUNE 17, 2005 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Edelman: Turkish Government Successful in Economy, Reforms - 
Milliyet 
US Worried About `Unjust' Arrests of Turkmen in North Iraq - 
Aksam 
Schroeder: Turkey, Western Enlightenment Must Meet - 
Hurriyet 
Blair, Schroeder, Chirac Try to Overcome EU Expansion Crisis 
- Sabah 
Bush: Iranian Elections Not Democratic - Milliyet 
Rafsanjani Is Iranian Women's Favorite - Hurriyet 
Hamas Crisis Between Israel, EU - Aksam 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Edelman Gives `Ataturk Message' Before Leaving Turkey - 
Radikal 
Turkey Turns a New Page With Lebanon - Radikal 
Berlin Indirectly Endorses Armenian `Genocide' Claims - 
Zaman 
Senator Durbin Compares Gitmo Prisoner Abuse to Nazi Actions 
- Cumhuriyet 
Durbin: US Conduct in Gitmo No Better Than Pol Pot Regime - 
Yeni Safak 
5 US Troops Killed in Iraq - Cumhuriyet 
Runoff Likely in Iranian Polls; Rafsanjani Close to 
Presidency - Zaman 
Karimov Burns Bridges, US to Take Bases Out of Uzbekistan - 
Zaman 
Ramsey Clark Calls for Fair Trial for Saddam - Yeni Safak 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
Ambassador Edelman Interview With "Milliyet":  The following 
is a summary of an interview with Ambassador Edelman carried 
today in "Milliyet." 
 
`There has been an ongoing debate about whether Turkey's 
relations with the United States constitute an alternative 
to Turkey's full membership in the European Union.  I 
believe this is not the right way to look at it, because 
Turkey's relationship with the US and full membership in the 
EU are complementary.' 
 
`The Turkish government should be praised for its hard work 
during the process that led to December 17, for making the 
reform process a reality, for meeting the Copenhagen 
Criteria, and for putting the economy on the right track.' 
 
`Anti-American statements have come from various circles in 
Turkey.  Whether it comes from the government or the 
opposition, people need to be aware of their responsibility 
while they are speaking.  I am not objecting to criticism of 
US policies.  You may not agree with any of the policies of 
the United States, and voicing criticism of US policies is 
fine.  But the criticism should have a basis in fact.  If 
you say the US has a bad record on Abu-Gharib, that would be 
a fair criticism.  There are a number of investigations 
continuing on that issue.  But if people start saying that 
US military operations are like genocide, or if they compare 
President Bush to Saddam, or they claim that the Broader 
Middle East and North Africa Initiative is an effort by the 
US to achieve world domination, these statements fall in the 
category of anti-Americanism.  I expect responsible Turkish 
leaders, whether they are in the government or the 
opposition, in the universities or in the press, to raise 
their voices against such statements.  Because I believe 
that while we are trying to manage our bilateral 
relationship, this kind of language will not bring any 
benefit to anyone.' 
`Historically, Turkey has had a great tradition of 
tolerance, from which the Jewish community in this country 
has benefited.  My grandparents arrived in Istanbul after 
fleeing Bolshevsm.  My mother was born in Istanbul in 1926. 
In that sense, you can say that I have personally benefited 
from this tradition of Turkish tolerance.  There has been an 
increase in Turkey in the sales of some books with anti- 
Semitic content, including "Mein Kampf."  Taken together 
with some anti-Semitic content in some parts of the Turkish 
press, there are some reasons for concern on the question of 
anti-Semitism.  However, I think the issue should be put 
into a proper framework.  When the synagogues in Istanbul 
were bombed, Prime Minister Erdogan visited the Chief Rabbi 
and the Jewish community and gave the right messages.  He 
made a very important and strong statement there.  Erdogan's 
recent statements condemning anti-Semitism and 
characterizing the Holocaust as one of the greatest crimes 
in human history were also very positive.  There is always a 
need for such leadership. But it is clear that the situation 
is still worrisome.  This is not just my view.  Some members 
of the Jewish community have voiced their concerns as well. 
But we know that Turkey's historical traditions are in a 
different direction.' 
 
`I fully agree with Prime Minister Erdogan that anti- 
Americanism will bring no benefit to Turkey.  Recently, he 
has made very important statements, such as his address to 
the AKP group last month and his statements in Washington 
and New York.  I should also mention similar positive 
statements by National Security Council Secretary-General 
Yigit Alpogan, and TGS Chief General Hilmi Ozkok.' 
 
`We have entered a new period in US-Turkish relations, in 
which public opinion has become more important that it had 
been in the past.  This relationship used to be carried out 
among national security elites on both sides.  But today, 
public opinion has a growing importance in both countries.' 
 
`Mr. Erdogan has shown that he has the capacity for 
leadership as Prime Minister.  He displayed courage and 
leadership on the Cyprus issue last fall, and showed 
important leadership in the process that led to receiving a 
date for entry talks with the EU on December 17.  President 
Bush expressed appreciation for Erdogan's leadership during 
their meeting last week.  Now the rime Minister faces an 
extremely challenging test.  Considering the referenda in 
Europe, the upcoming elections in Germany, and other 
upcoming developments, circumstances in Europe are 
increasingly difficult for Turkey's EU membership.' 
 
US Marks Independence Day in Ankara:  Prior to his departure 
from Turkey later this month, US Ambassador Eric Edelman 
hosted a reception marking the 229th anniversary of the 
independence of the United States.  Edelman told his Turkish 
and American guests that rights and freedoms cannot be 
guaranteed anywhere in the world unless rights of 
individuals are ensured everywhere.  Stressing that the 
United States faced one of the worst foreign threats of its 
history after September 11, 2001, Edelman said noted that 
President Bush has stressed social, political, and economic 
factors that allowed groups like al-Qaeda to flourish. 
Edelman said that Turkey, which was created by Ataturk from 
the ashes of the Ottoman Empire, was based on similar 
principles, and can be a source of `inspiration.'  `United 
States support for democracy in Turkey will continue to be 
one of the basic principles of US foreign policy,' Edelman 
emphasized, stressing that the common values held by the two 
countries have enriched their alliance.  Foreign Minister 
Abdullah Gul said that global threats of the 21st century 
such as the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and 
terrorism have made the strategic partnership between Turkey 
and the United States more important.  `We consider our 
relations with the United States one of the priorities of 
our foreign policy.  We are determined to further 
consolidate our relations,' Gul said.  Gul thanked Edelman 
for his contributions to bilateral ties between Turkey and 
the US.  Several Turkish cabinet ministers, representatives 
from the military and bureaucracy, politicians, and 
academics participated in the reception. 
 
Erdogan Visits Lebanon: Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan, in 
Lebanon on a state visit, urged the 11th Arab Economic Forum 
held in Beirut to increase international cooperation in the 
region.  Erdogan said Turkey aimed to improve economic and 
political ties with the Arab world, adding that the 
establishment of free trade zones in a vast geography from 
Morocco to Syria would contribute to regional prosperity and 
stability.  He said trade between Turkey and Lebanon 
amounted to 280 million USD a year, a figure that could be 
increased to one billion USD.  Addressing Turkish and 
Lebanese businessmen, Erdogan said the Turkish government 
wanted to create opportunities for entrepreneurs from both 
countries in business dealings with third parties.  Erdogan 
said that rising oil prices have brought extra funds to 
Middle Eastern countries.  `This extra cash can be used in 
joint projects,' he said, arguing that Turkey would become 
more attractive after it begins entry talks with the 
European Union.  At a joint news conference with Lebanese 
Prime Minister Najib Mikati, Erdogan said the two countries 
shared similar views with regard to Cyprus and Iraq.  `I 
told Mikati that the Broader Middle East and North Africa 
Initiative (BMENAI) is a project to increase democracy and 
freedom, as well as an effort to establish a joint plan to 
fight terrorism and increase prosperity in the region,' 
Erdogan said.  Erdogan had earlier met with President Emile 
Lahoud and Parliament Speaker Nabih Berri.  On Thursday, 
some 1,500 Armenians living in Lebanon rallied against PM 
Erdogan's visit.  Erdogan is the first Turkish Prime 
Minister to visit Lebanon since 1965. 
 
Bundestag Adopts Armenian `Genocide' Resolution:  The German 
Parliament adopted unanimously a joint motion by all 
parliamentary groups in Berlin which underlined the `almost 
complete extermination' of the Armenians in Anatolia during 
World War I.  The term `genocide' was not used in the 
motion.  The resolution said that over 1 million Armenians 
had been killed in deportations and mass murders, according 
to calculations by independent experts.  The Bundestag 
resolution calls on the Federal Government to ensure that 
the Turkish parliament, government, and nation reappraise 
their role in the Armenian tragedy. 
 
Turkey Condemns German Approval of Armenian `Genocide' 
Allegations:  The Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) 
condemned the German parliament for endorsing a resolution 
regarding the alleged mass killings of Armenians by Ottomans 
from 1915-17.  `The approval of such a decision by Germany, 
always considered as a friend and ally by Turkey, will play 
havoc with our relations,' the MFA statement said, adding 
that the use of such a sensitive issue for political 
purposes has shown `irresponsibility and narrow-mindedness.' 
`The decision, which recommends that the German government 
include `the relocation and destruction of the Armenians' in 
state education programs, is `an extremely dangerous and 
provocative proposal which can cause enmity among German 
young people against Turks,' the MFA statement said.  The 
bill, which was adopted unanimously by the German parliament 
earlier on Thursday, was submitted by the opposition 
CDU/CSU. 
 
Kurds Detain Turkmen in Kirkuk:  Iraqi Turkmen blame US 
coalition forces for not preventing Kurds from detaining and 
torturing Turkmen in Kirkuk, the Turkish media reports. 
Turkmeneli Party official Ali Mehdi said that despite 
several written warnings, US officials did not prevent the 
detentions of Turkmens by the Kurds.  `At the moment, there 
are more than 250 Iraqi Turkmen in prisons in northern Iraq. 
Unfortunately, the Americans are aware of this.  Every month 
some 15 to 20 persons are released from prisons in Erbil and 
Suleymaniye.  No one is being held responsible for the 
arrests,' Mehdi said.  Armed KDP forces are in control of 
Kirkuk, Mehdi said.  `he security of the Iraqi Turkmen is in 
danger.  The Americans are the only recourse we have,' Mehdi 
said, claiming that the Turkmen faced `immoral and corrupt' 
methods aimed at preventing them from becoming a political 
force.  Meanwhile, Turkish papers report that the US State 
Department has expressed concerns over developments in 
Kirkuk.  Department Spokesman Sean McCormack said the US had 
`serious and reliable' information regarding the `unlawful' 
arrests, and urged Iraqi officials to act in line with the 
rule of law and respect for the rights of minorities. 
Papers claim that the Turkish Foreign Ministry (MFA) has 
urged the US Embassy in Ankara to make a serious 
investigation into the allegations. 
 
EU Ambassadors Concerned About Fighting in Southeast Turkey: 
Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan hosted a dinner for EU 
ambassadors Tuesday evening in Ankara.  EU term president 
Dutch Ambassador Sjoerd Gosses conveyed to Erdogan EU 
concerns about the consequences of ongoing military 
operations against the PKK in southeast Turkey.  `The 
military option cannot be the only solution for bringing 
about order.  We would like you to share with us your 
thoughts on this problem, which we hope will not get out of 
control,' Gosses said.  Erdogan did not make any comment to 
the Ambassadors, according to the press, but before 
departing for Lebanon on Wednesday, he denied that the issue 
had ever been raised at the dinner.  `The operations will 
continue,' Erdogan said.  Deputy Chief of General Staff, 
General Ilker Basbug, said that fighting against terrorists 
has been the responsibility of Turkish security forces in 
southeast Turkey.  `This is nothing new,' Basbug said. 
 
 
Germany to Delay Arms Deals With Israel, Turkey:  German 
defense industry sources said the German government will not 
approve major arms deals with Israel and Turkey before 
elections that are expected in September, Turkish papers 
report.  The delivery of 103 Dingo 2 armored transport 
vehicles to Israel will not be approved before the election, 
and a decision on whether to sell a number of used Leopard 2 
tanks to Turkey will also be delayed. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: Iran 
 
"Chance for a Change in Iran" 
Sami Kohen opined in the main stream daily "Milliyet" 
(6/17):   "It is pointless to discuss how democratic the 
elections will be in Iran.  From the West's point of view, 
Iran's election process doesn't meet accepted standards. 
But then again, full democratic steps are not taken in every 
western country either.  The important thing is that despite 
all of the restrictions in the system, people are given the 
chance to choose among rival candidates in Iran.  Compared 
to the times of the Shah and Khomeini, even this is some 
improvement.  One other interesting thing about the 
elections is that almost every candidate has characterized 
himself as a reformist.  Even conservative candidates felt 
it necessary to talk about human rights and reforms.  Could 
real change be expected after these elections?  It is not 
difficult to guess that the reform process will speed up in 
Iran if the `reformist conservative' Rafsanjani takes over 
as President.  But one thing is certain.  Regardless of who 
becomes the new president in Iran, a revolution like those 
seen in Georgia and Ukraine should not be expected in Iran. 
First of all, the current system is not suited to such an 
outcome.  There has not been the necessary civil society 
movement to trigger a real regime change.  There is a new 
generation in Iran that is seeking a freer and more 
prosperous country.   Iran will feel the need for political 
reforms as its economy improves and Iran becomes more 
modern." 
 
"An Election for Iran's Destiny" 
Erdal Safak commented in the mass appeal "Sabah" (6/17): 
"The election in Iran is very much about the future destiny 
of political Islam and the problems related to it.  Even 
though the Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood movement has been 
around for more than 50 years, historians and political 
scientists agree that the Iranian revolution, led by 
Ayatollah Khomeini, started the real rise of political 
Islam.  . This time, something interesting happened during 
the Iranian election campaign: none of the presidential 
candidates used the Koran as part of their campaign 
rhetoric.  They also seem disinclined to exploit the 
Palestinian tragedy to incite a public response.  The 
candidates tend to focus issues of daily life -- problems of 
the young, unemployment, the importance of civil society, 
and the expansion of individual rights and freedoms.  . It 
seems that Iran might start a new day full of hope for the 
future after such a long period of darkness.  This can also 
be a message for those who are still so obsessed by the 
headscarf issue." 
 
"The Turkey Syndrome in the EU" 
Kamuran Ozbir wrote in the nationalist "Ortadogu" (6/17): 
"Europe is currently facing a dilemma.  The EU used to be 
criticized for the slowness of its reform process.  But now 
it it is under criticism by EU voters for rushing into the 
reforms.  In fact, the problem stems form a lack of proper 
debate about the enlargement issue within the European 
public.  EU leaders treated the enlargement issue as part of 
a bureaucratic procedure, and they wanted to believe that 
taking on new members would be treated by the European 
public as a normal event.  But this has not been the case. 
Hence the current dilemma.  The ever-deepening economic 
crisis in Europe has led to a series of concerns and 
skepticism about the future.  . European leaders must 
address the immediate concerns of the public, and they must 
do this as quickly as they can.  Otherwise, the European 
ideal will remain a dream, and the EU will experience worse 
problems in the future." 
 
EDELMAN