05BAGHDAD5032
IRMO DIRECTOR'S MEETING WITH
Sun Dec 18 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS BAGHDAD 005032 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED, NOT FOR INTERNET 
DISTRIBUTION 
 
STATE FOR NEA/I 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: N/A 
TAGS: EAID PGOV PNAT PREL IZ
SUBJECT: IRMO DIRECTOR'S MEETING WITH 
JAPANESE AMBASSADOR ON PROVINCIAL 
RECONSTRUCTION TEAMS (PRT) AND US-JAPAN 
RECONSTRUCTION COORDINATION 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: On December 12, IRMO Director Daniel 
Speckhard met with Japanese Ambassador Toshiro Suzuki 
to discuss a potential Japanese role in the PRT 
initiative and US-Japan cooperation to assist in Iraqi 
reconstruction efforts.  Suzuki reaffirmed Japan's 
continued desire to assist in Iraq's reconstruction and 
said he would consult Tokyo on the PRT initiative. END 
SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Speckhard began the December 12 meeting by 
thanking Suzuki for Japan's deployment of Self-Defense 
Forces (SDF) in Samawa and the SDF's reconstruction 
efforts in southern Iraq.  Speckhard then asked Suzuki 
about Japan's possible participation in the PRTs. 
Suzuki replied that it might be difficult to deploy 
Japanese civilian subject matter experts to PRTs 
because of legal constraints on the movement of 
Japanese government non-combatant personnel in Iraq. 
Noting the difficulty of the SDF's involvement in the 
PRTs in Afghanistan, Suzuki also explained that the 
challenge to deploying SDF personnel in the PRT 
initiative arises from the SDF's restricted rules of 
engagement. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Speckhard rejoined that as the second largest 
donor in Iraq, Japan would benefit from the presence of 
civilian representatives in PRTs.  Even if they were 
not authorized to leave the PRT compound, they could 
still function as provincial liaison officials between 
the Japanese government and the Iraqi government.  By 
providing on-site information to the Japanese 
government and enabling Iraqis to directly access the 
Japanese development aid system, Japanese PRT members 
could provide real value to the Japanese government. 
The Iraqis might access Japanese technical expertise 
and engage in networking, and the Japanese government 
would be able to shape development strategies in Iraq. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) In response to Suzuki's query concerning the 
type of experts needed in PRTs, Speckhard said experts 
are needed in procurement, budget, personnel resources, 
management, urban planning, and development strategy. 
Speckhard went on that the PRTs will help oversee 
USAID's programs in the field and work with the Gulf 
Region Division (GRD) of the Army Corps of Engineers to 
oversee reconstruction projects.  Suzuki asked whether 
a Japanese representative on PRTs might oversee 
Japanese reconstruction programs.  Speckhard replied 
that such persons might possibly do so. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) After describing the initial PRT rollout -- 
PRTs have been established in Mosul, Hillah, and Kirkuk 
-- and possible PRTs elsewhere, Speckhard told Suzuki 
the PRT initiative is a two-year program.  He then 
encouraged him to consider the opportunity to support 
and influence economic development in Iraq through the 
PRTs.  Suzuki, who earlier had noted the flexibility 
and modular make-up of the PRTs, said he would consult 
Tokyo.  He repeated, however, that his government is 
reluctant to send additional personnel to Iraq, adding 
that security arrangements will probably need to be 
worked out if the Japanese Government assigns personnel 
to PRTs. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Toward the end of the discussion, Suzuki said 
the Iraq Strategic Review Board has approved three 
electric power projects to be financed by Japan's soft- 
loan program.  The Japanese Government is also 
contributing to the Secretariat of the Electricity 
Sector Working Group, and is interested in expediting 
contact between the office of the IRMO Senior 
Consultant on Electricity and Japanese representatives. 
Speckhard and Suzuki agreed that U.S. and Japanese 
reconstruction experts should meet in Amman to consult 
on our respective reconstruction programs, possibly in 
January 2006.  Suzuki promised to consult Tokyo on a 
time and place for a bilateral meeting of U.S. and 
Japanese experts. 
 
KHALILZAD