05BAGHDAD3760
TETSURO SHARES JAPANESE PLANS TO FULFILL FUNDS
Tue Sep 13 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS BAGHDAD 003760 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EFIN PREL ETRD EINV EAID ELAB IZ KCRS
SUBJECT: TETSURO SHARES JAPANESE PLANS TO FULFILL FUNDS 
PLEDGED TO IRAQ 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED; GOVERNMENT DISTRIBUTION 
ONLY; NOT FOR INTERNET DISTRIBUTION 
 
¶1. (SBU) On September 2 Amano Tetsuro (Minister- 
Counselor of the Embassy of Japan, Baghdad and Chief 
Liaison and Representative of Japan to Baghdad) met 
with IRMO Director Daniel Speckhard and Deputy Director 
David Harris to discuss Japan's fulfillment on the 
commitment of funds pledged to Iraq at the 2003 Madrid 
Pledging Conference.  Mr. Amano admitted that the 
process of determining which projects might warrant 
support with Japan's $3.5B (yen-denominated) loan 
commitment has been slow. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Mr. Amano also shared two project lists with 
Speckhard.  The first list indicates tentative 
candidate projects that Japan would consider for its 
loan.  There was no indication that GOJ and ITG had 
agreed to any of these projects.  The second list 
indicated projects that have been presented to the 
Iraqi Strategic Review Board (ISRB), the group that 
approves projects for possible international donor 
support [NOTE: A project that reaches the ISRB should 
have been reviewed and approved by the ministry in 
whose area of responsibility the proposed project 
falls.  END NOTE].  The projects on this second list 
are for implementation within the Kurdistan Regional 
Government. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Speckhard informed Mr. Amano that the US IRRF 
commitment would be ending in the not-too-distant 
future, but that additional adjustments in USG plans 
are likely as we accommodate additional costs for 
sustainment of completed projects.  He also told Mr. 
Amano that he looks forward to sharing the revised plan 
with the GOJ once it is completed and discussed with 
the ITG.  Speckhard expressed hope that some projects 
that may no longer receive IRRF funding may be 
considered for funding under the Japanese loan program. 
 
¶4. (U) The meeting concluded with agreement on 
establishing regular consultative meetings to ensure 
continued close cooperation between US and Japanese 
reconstruction efforts in Iraq. 
 
SATTERFIELD