05BRUSSELS1641
APRIL 25 GAERC:  EU FMS DISCUSS MIDDLE EAST,
Tue Apr 26 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Brussels
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 001641 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL EAID LE IZ IS ZF ZI RU EUN USEU BRUSSELS
SUBJECT: APRIL 25 GAERC:  EU FMS DISCUSS MIDDLE EAST, 
RUSSIA, AFRICA, AND BALKANS 
 
REF: A. USEU BRUSSELS 1593 
     ¶B. USEU TODAY 4/26/2005 
     ¶C. STATE 72185 
 
SUMMARY 
-------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) EU FMs' April 25 General Affairs and External 
Relations Council (GAERC) meeting went much as expected (REF 
A), with discussion moving briskly through the day's agenda 
prior to FMs leaving to attend the signing ceremony for the 
EU Accession Treaty of Romania and Bulgaria (REF B).  The EU 
reached fairly positive assessments of recent developments in 
Lebanon, Serbia and on preparations for the May 10 EU-Russia 
Summit; expressed "concerns" over the MEPP and Congo and 
"disappointment" on recent elections in Macedonia; and 
reaffirmed it's readiness to support the new Iraqi 
government.  END SUMMARY. 
 
LEBANON 
------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) The GAERC Conclusions "welcome the continuing 
withdrawal of Syrian troops and expects all Syrian troops and 
security services to have been withdrawn from Lebanon by 30 
April 2005."  In his press conference, Luxembourg FM 
Asselborn characterized the situation somewhat more 
positively, saying the withdrawal had "practically been 
completed" even before the deadline.  A Council source told 
us the EU is awaiting "with interest" the report of UN envoy 
Roed-Larsen to the UNSC, particularly on the issue of 
intelligence agents. 
 
¶3. (U) The GAERC Conclusions also "express the wish that (the 
new) government will be able to organize, on schedule, free, 
fair and transparent elections" and reaffirm the EU's 
readiness to dispatch an election observation mission. 
Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner (F-W) said the EU was still 
hoping for the GoL to invite election observers.  Our Council 
source said the focus of today's discussion was about 
elections assistance, rather than the Commission's 
preparations for how the EU could assist any new government 
post-elections (REF A). 
 
IRAQ 
---- 
 
¶4. (U) Asselborn noted that the situation was not yet 
entirely clear as the new government is still being formed, 
but the GAERC Conclusions reaffirm the EU's commitment to its 
assistance package.  They also reaffirm that the EU "is 
prepared to organize, together with the U.S., in close 
collaboration with Iraq and the UN, and should the new Iraqi 
government so request, an international conference to foster, 
enhance and coordinate the international community's support 
for Iraq during the transitional period."  Asselborn noted 
that the substance of the conference would be "based on the 
needs and wishes of the Iraqis."  F-W told the press the date 
for such a conference would be "most probably the end of 
June."  Conclusions also note that "depending on political 
developments, a visit by the EU Troika to the elected 
transitional government" could be arranged. 
 
MEPP 
---- 
 
¶5. (U) The GAERC Conclusions say EU "is concerned to note the 
lack of dynamism in the implementation of the commitments 
made at Sharm el Sheikh." and "is particularly concerned by 
the announcement of increased settlement building in the West 
Bank, even though the Road Map provides for a freeze....It 
welcomes recent statements by President Bush concerning a 
freeze on settlement activity."  GAERC also welcomed the 
naming of Jim Wolfensohn as the Quartet's envoy for 
disengagement.  F-W told the press the Quartet would meet in 
Moscow on May 8, along with Wolfensohn.  Conclusions also 
recall the EU's support for Gaza disengagement.  F-W 
highlighted some details for the Commission's package of 
support for disengagement, which she said was 20m euros 
available for spending on infrastructure, tax and customs 
reform, trade facilitation, transportation and electoral 
support.  Regarding the latter, she noted the EU was still 
prepared to send an election monitoring mission, but that 
outstanding issues are adoption of an electoral law, setting 
of a date for the elections, and guarantees on freedom of 
movement for Palestinian voters. 
 
RUSSIA 
------ 
 
¶6. (SBU) No formal Conclusions were issued.  Our Council 
source said discussion was essentially about preparations of 
the four "common spaces" for the May 10 EU-Russia Summit.  At 
this stage, the EU's ambition, Asselborn said, is agreement 
on "road maps" for each of the four areas, rather than 
complete agreement on all details.   F-W told reporters "we 
are practically there, although some issues are still open." 
These include details of a deal on Siberian overflights, and 
the linkage between a readmission agreement with Russia and 
any visa "facilitation" by the EU for Russian travelers.  In 
the GAERC session itself, our contact said, Estonia and 
Latvia both reported on the status of negotiations of their 
border agreements with Russia, and prospects for finalizing 
them on the margins of the May 10 summit.  Estonia was 
described as relatively optimistic, Latvia as more skeptical. 
 
AFRICA 
------ 
 
¶7. (SBU) Most of the discussion was on the Great Lakes.  The 
Conclusions note the EU's readiness to support the electoral 
process, MONUC, and DDR efforts in Congo and similar efforts 
in Burundi.  Commissioner Michel and Solana also noted that 
the EU would be ready soon to launch a military mission in 
Congo on reform of the armed forces.  EUFMs also discussed 
how the EU could provide support to AMIS II in Darfur, but 
issued no Conclusions on the issue.  A brief discussion of 
Zimbabwe was also held, but was less about how to influence 
political developments there, and more on the "procedural 
question" of how to organize an EU-Africa Summit in the 
current situation.  The general sentiment was that they 
cannot -- the EU is not prepared to weaken its sanctions, and 
Africans will not attend if Mugabe is excluded. 
 
WESTERN BALKANS 
--------------- 
 
¶8. (U) Commissioner Rehn reported on his recent visit to SaM. 
 The GAERC endorsed the Commission's recommendation to begin 
Stabilization and Association Agreement negotiations with 
Serbia and Montenegro, and tasked the Commission to begin 
preparation of a negotiating framework (a process that will 
take several months).  Asselborn and Solana both noted to the 
press that Belgrade's cooperation with ICTY had improved 
significantly.  Asselborn also noted that the EU was somewhat 
encouraged about Kosovo, particularly by the "more 
constructive" attitude in Belgrade, and that all sides appear 
to exclude partition as a possible solution. 
 
¶9. (U) GAERC Conclusions also include a section on Macedonia 
"expressing disappointment at the irregularities observed by 
ODIHR and others" in recent elections.  The GAERC also "noted 
recent developments concerning the dispute as to the name of 
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and, in particular, 
all of the ideas put forward by the SRSG of the UN, whose 
efforts it supports.  The Council encouraged Greece and FYROM 
to intensify their efforts with a view to finding a 
negotiated and mutually acceptable solution within the 
framework of UNSCR 817 and 845 as quickly as possible." 
MINIMIZE CONSIDERED 
MCKINLEY