05BRASILIA72
BRAZIL - DEMARCHE ON ITU/WTSA VETO ISSUE
Fri Jan 07 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Brasilia
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS BRASILIA 000072 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USDOC FOR 4332/ITA/MAC/WH/OLAC/JANDERSEN/ADRISCOLL/MWAR D 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USCS/OIO/WH/RD/DDEVITO/DANDERSON/EOL SON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AORC ECPS ECON PGOV BR ITU
SUBJECT: BRAZIL - DEMARCHE ON ITU/WTSA VETO ISSUE 
 
REF: 04 SECSTATE 264222 
 
¶1. In a January 5 meeting, EconOffs made reftel points to 
Luis Fernando Serra and Bruno Carvalho Ramos of ANATEL 
(Brazil's Telecommunications Regulatory Agency and the 
entity here responsible for ITU issues).  Serra is the Head 
of the Office of International Affairs and a career 
diplomat.  Ramos, an engineer by profession, is the Mobile 
Communications Standards Manager and ANATEL's lead on ITU. 
Serra and Ramos said the GoB had supported the USG during 
the November 2004 World Telecommunications Standardization 
Assembly (WTSA) in Florianopolis and continues to be 
aligned with the USG on the veto issue.  Although ANATEL 
was disappointed with the results, Ramos saw little ground 
to overturn the decision, since, in his assessment, the 
Assembly has the authority to make this type of decision. 
Whether or not the decision could be reviewed by the 
Telecommunication Standardization Advisory Group (TSAG) or 
the ITU Counsel was a matter that would require study. 
ANATEL did not think the change would have any real impact 
on the day-to-day work of the ITU, but would be concerned 
if it was applied in some other way.  Ramos and Serra 
nevertheless expressed support for USG plans to raise the 
veto issue at both the TSAG meeting in March 2005 and the 
ITU Counsel meeting in July 2005.  Serra and Ramos further 
suggested that the USG initiate a discussion with the 
Executive Committee of the Inter-American Telecommunication 
Commission (CITEL) so that a consensus position or proposal 
could be moved forward. 
 
¶2. In an aside, Ramos told EconOffs the GoB considered the 
Florianopolis WTSA a success, especially in comparison with 
the 2002 meeting in Morocco, although more concrete 
progress could have been made. 
 
DANILOVICH