05CAIRO7997
EGYPTIAN FOREIGN MINISTER MAKES POSITIVE PUBLIC
Mon Oct 17 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS CAIRO 007997 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV EG IZ
SUBJECT: EGYPTIAN FOREIGN MINISTER MAKES POSITIVE PUBLIC 
STATEMENTS ON IRAQI POLITICAL PROCESS 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) During an October 17 meeting with Egyptian Foreign 
Minister Ahmed Aboul Gheit, the Ambassador requested the 
minister's public support for Iraq's constitution referendum 
and political process.  Aboul Gheit said he had given several 
press interviews earlier in the day, during which he had 
remarked positively on the subject of Iraq.  Turning to an 
aide, the Minister ordered that the Embassy be provided with 
a copy of the press statement that was given earlier that day 
to the MFA press pool (text below). 
 
¶2.  (U) Unofficial Embassy translation of October 17 MFA 
press guidance on Iraq: 
 
Begin text: 
 
-- You are all following closely what has been happening in 
Iraq with regard to the political process that witnessed much 
activity in the past few days and weeks, as well as the 
efforts being exerted for the sake of reaching an agreement 
on an Iraqi Constitution and mechanisms for amending it in 
the future in a way that would allow all Iraqi forces to 
contribute to its formulation in order to reach agreement 
that in turn would lead to stability and rebirth for Iraq. 
 
-- This activity concerns Arab League Secretary General Amre 
Moussa,s coming visit to Baghdad that was agreed upon during 
the meeting of the Arab Ministerial Committee on Iraq in 
Jeddah (October 2) aimed at preparing a national 
reconciliation conference.  Hosting such a conference was 
called for during the Sharm El-Sheikh meeting last November. 
It is high time that this meeting proposal is implemented 
since that it has been delayed for so long.  But what is 
important to us now - starting with Sharm El-Sheikh and 
ending with Jeddah - is to work to make our efforts spare 
bloodshed and achieve successful national reconciliation for 
Iraq. 
 
-- Out of this concept, we call on all to participate and 
engage in dialogue to bridge gaps in positions for the sake 
of a safe and stable Iraq that does not recognize 
sectarianism or fanaticism especially since the sons of Iraq 
have paid a dear price.  We stand by every effort that leads 
to supporting UN Security Council Resolution 1546 and the 
evolving political process, and we stand behind and support 
the choice of the Iraqi people in this political process, and 
we express solidarity for them for the sake of achieving 
their aspirations and hopes for living in security, 
stability, and peace. 
 
End text. 
 
 
RICCIARDONE