05CAIRO2736
EGYPT PUBLIC DIPLOMACY RESULTS AND ACTIVITIES
Thu Apr 07 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CAIRO 002736 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NEA/PPD; ALSO FOR NEA/ELA, IIP/SC AND ECA/P 
 
E.O. 12958: NA 
TAGS: SCUL OEXC KPAO EG
SUBJECT:  EGYPT PUBLIC DIPLOMACY RESULTS AND ACTIVITIES 
(03/10/05 - 04/07/05) 
 
REF:  CAIRO 2416 
 
Public Diplomacy programming in Egypt for this 
reporting period continued to address the full range of 
Post's MPP themes.  This programming included support 
for a visit by American iEARN students, a cross- 
cultural dance performance, and engagement with 
Egyptian press on a number of regional stability 
issues.  Post also recorded positive results from its 
information outreach and cultural liaison activities. 
Summary reports follow. Reftel is post's most recent 
prior submission for NEA/PPD reporting and IIP's PD 
results database. 
 
------- 
RESULTS 
------- 
 
(03/29/05) EMBASSY-PROVIDED MATERIALS INFLUENCE 
EGYPTIAN MINISTRY OF FOREIGN TRADE AND INDUSTRY REPORT 
 
Material and weblinks provided by the Embassy's 
Information Resource Center to an advisor to the 
Minister of Foreign Trade and Industry were used by 
that office in a report on U.S.-Egyptian economic 
cooperation that reached senior GOE officials.  The 
materials covered the possibility of a Middle East 
Free Trade Agreement, status of U.S.-Egypt trade, and 
USAID programming in Egypt. 
 
          MPP GOAL: ECONOMIC PROSPERITY 
 
 
(03/28/05) MISSION INFORMATION PACKETS INTEGRATED INTO 
EGYPTIAN CLASSROOMS 
 
In support of the MEPI-supported "Seeds of Peace" 
youth exchange in Egypt, the Embassy's Information 
Resource Center distributed Washington File articles 
and the IIP-produced "Info USA" CD-ROM to "Seeds of 
Peace" participants, many of whom are teachers and 
school administrators. They report using these 
materials to guide classroom discussions of current 
world events. 
 
          MPP GOAL: MUTUAL UNDERSTANDING 
 
 
(04/05/05) MISSION FACILITATES COMMERCIAL AMERICAN ARTS 
VENTURE WITH CAIRO OPERA HOUSE 
 
Embassy Cairo's introduction of prominent American 
arts promoter Miles Copeland to the Cairo Opera House 
leadership opened doors that resulted in an agreement 
for the Opera House to present a group of American 
oriental dancers for three nights in April 2006.  This 
will be the first time for Egypt's premier performing 
arts space to host such a large commercial (i.e. non- 
subsidized) program. A successful run will encourage 
additional commercial American cultural offerings for 
Cairo. 
 
          MPP GOAL: MUTUAL UNDERSTANDING 
 
 
---------- 
ACTIVITIES 
---------- 
 
(03/31/05) EMBASSY ENGAGES VISITING IRAQI JOURNALISTS 
TO REBUT INACCURATE EGYPTIAN MEDIA STEREOTYPES 
 
Post used a reception in honor of visiting Iraqi 
journalists, in Egypt for a training program, to rebut 
inaccurate Egyptian media stereotypes about the current 
situation in Iraq.  By describing their daily living 
and working conditions, the Iraqis presented their 
Egyptian colleagues with a more balanced view of Iraq 
than is typically presented in the Egyptian media. 
 
          MPP GOAL: REGIONAL STABILITY 
 
 
(03/22/05 - 04/07/05) EMBASSY HIGHLIGHTS U.S.-EGYPT TIES 
DURING VISIT OF U.S. STUDENT DELEGATION TO EGYPT 
 
Embassy support to the visit of a U.S. "iEARN" 
(International Education and Research Network) youth 
exchange delegation served effectively to highlight 
the value of U.S.- Egyptian exchanges generally to a 
wide audience. Embassy support to this first visit to 
Egypt by an American delegation as part of the ECA 
Bureau's three-year "iEARN Bridge" project included a 
briefing and tour of the Embassy - for both the 
delegation and their Egyptian hosts, a farewell 
reception - hosted by PAO and addressed by Charge, and 
extensive media activities. The resulting media 
coverage included an interview with two American and 
two Egyptian participants on the Egyptian prime-time 
TV talk show "El Beit Beitak" (The House is Yours). 
 
          MPP GOAL: MUTUAL UNDERSTANDING 
 
 
(03/10/05) DANCER-DIPLOMAT DEMONSTRATES AMERICA'S 
CULTURAL DIVERSITY AT CAIRO CULTURAL CENTER 
 
To highlight America's cultural diversity, the Embassy 
helped to arrange for one of its junior officers, of 
South Asian heritage, to present an evening of 
classical Indian dance at a popular private cultural 
center in Cairo. Her performance, jointly sponsored by 
the U.S. Embassy and the Indian Cultural Center, was 
attended by almost 600, including many Egyptians. 
Detailed narration, in English and Arabic, effectively 
complemented the actual dances. Media coverage was 
excellent - both print and television - conveyinig to 
a wide audience a positive message of American 
diversity. 
 
          MPP GOAL: MUTUAL UNDERSTANDING 
 
 
(03/19/05) EMBASSY FACILITATES DISCUSSION BETWEEN 
VISITING AJC DELEGATION AND EGYPTIAN JOURNALISTS 
 
The Embassy responded to an expression of interest by 
a visiting delegation from the American Jewish 
Committee (AJC) to organize a discussion for them with 
representative Egyptian journalists on the current 
media landscape in Egypt. The resulting interaction 
touched on Arab-Israeli peace efforts, anti-Semitism, 
and the role of the U.S. in the Arab world.  Both 
sides reported profiting from the exchange. 
 
          MPP GOAL: REGIONAL STABILITY 
 
 
(04/05/05)  MISSION PROGRAMS VISITING U.S. TREASURY 
UNDER SECRETARY TO EGYPT'S FINANCIAL COMMUNITY 
 
Taking advantage of the visit to Cairo by outgoing 
U.S. Under Secretary of the Treasury John B. Taylor, 
the Embassy arranged for him to address an invited 
audience of 100 Egyptian economists, bankers, and 
economic reporters.  His remarks focused on U.S. 
monetary policies in emerging markets and their 
implications for Egypt. The Q-and-A session lasted for 
an hour, followed by interviews with Egyptian TV's 
"Nile News" and with the satellite channel CNBC. 
 
          MPP GOAL: ECONOMIC PROSPERITY 
 
 
(03/20/2005) EMBASSY ARRANGES TELEPHONE INTERVIEW FOR 
EGYPTIAN JOURNALIST WITH ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR 
AFRICAN AFFAIRS 
 
The Embassy supported a recent visit to Cairo by the 
Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs by 
arranging a telephone interview for her with a 
prominent Egyptian columnist. The full transcript of 
the interview, along with well-informed commentary on 
U.S. Africa policy, was published in Egypt's largest 
daily, Al Akhbar. 
 
           MPP GOAL: REGIONAL STABILITY 
 
 
(03/30-31/05) MISSION SPOTLIGHTS USAID PROJECTS IN THE 
NILE DELTA 
 
As part of an ongoing effort to counter criticism of 
U.S. development assistance in Egypt's opposition 
press, the Embassy - working with USAID - took a group 
of Egyptian journalists to visit and see first-hand 
the positive results of USAID activities in the Nile 
Delta, especially those of the Commodity Import 
Program (CIP) and various water treatment projects. 
 
           MPP GOAL: ECONOMIC PROSPERITY 
 
GRAY