05CAIRO8124
CAIRO FORMS AVIAN INFLUENZA WORKING GROUP; US -
Sun Oct 23 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS CAIRO 008124 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TBIO ECON PREL SOCI EG WHO KSTH
SUBJECT: CAIRO FORMS AVIAN INFLUENZA WORKING GROUP; US - 
GOE COLLABORATION 
 
REF: A. STATE 153802 
     ¶B. STATE 181885 
     ¶C. STATE 183776 
     ¶D. CAIRO 07552 
     ¶E. CAIRO 08073 
 
This message is sensitive but unclassified, please handle 
accordingly. 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Summary:  DCM convened a meeting of Mission 
representatives on October 11 to establish an Avian Influenza 
Working Group (AIWG) to evaluate Mission preparedness in the 
event of an outbreak, and to discuss Mission's collaboration 
with the GOE on avian influenza (AI) issues.  NAMRU-3 has 
been collaborating with the GOE on AI surveillance.  USAID is 
prepared to offer assistance and has requested that the GOE 
present specific requests.  Issues addressed include: 
compensation and other assistance to the GOE in the event of 
an outbreak; GOE impediments to migratory bird samples needed 
for NAMRU-3 surveillance; GOE preparedness; continued 
surveillance of AI; medical preparedness and internal 
preparedness at post; possible USAID assistance to support 
GOE efforts); and Tamiflu availability.  In an October 16 
meeting at the Egyptian Ministry of Health and Population 
(MOH) emboffs successfully requested resolution of a 
migratory bird sample issue. 
 
End summary. 
 
¶2.  (U) Representatives from Public Affairs, Consular, RSO, 
RMO, NAMRU-3, USAID, and USDA (FAS and APHIS) attended the 
meeting and compose post's AIWG. 
 
-------------------- 
Mission Preparedness 
-------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) RMO has a plan for AI surveillance, prevention, 
education and treatment at post, which includes establishing 
measures for triage, identifying hospitals and isolation 
rooms (as well as alternate sites for treatment in case of an 
outbreak), evaluating availability of supplies, staff and 
community education, immunization for non-avian flu, and 
storage and security for Tamiflu stockpiles.  The AIWG agreed 
to recommend that the EAC consider actions to be taken in the 
event of quarantine, draw-down or closure (see ref E). 
Cairo's Naval Medical Research Unit (NAMRU-3) can support 
post's Health Unit in rapid diagnostics and protective 
measures. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Consular and Public Affairs are planning to 
publicize information on the Internet to the American 
community, and highlight the close U.S.-GOE collaboration 
through NAMRU-3 to the Egyptian public. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
GOE Preparedness & US - GOE Collaboration 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) GOE officials have repeatedly requested USG 
assistance with a compensation program, laboratory and public 
health training, and a supply of antigen for surveillance of 
the H5N1 strain of AI.  NAMRU-3 has offered to train 
technicians in lab techniques and diagnostics.  RMO observed 
that clinical reporting of AI is difficult, and clinical care 
in Egypt, as in most countries, is not suited for a major 
outbreak. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Representatives from ECPO, USAID and NAMRU-3 met on 
October 16 with Dr. Magda A. Rakha, First Under Secretary of 
Health, and Dr. Nasr El-Sayed, Under Secretary for Preventive 
Affairs, at the Egyptian Ministry of Health and Population 
(MOH) to discuss assistance for AI and to request resolution 
of a migratory bird sample issue.  The MOH had recently 
blocked NAMRU-3 from bringing samples from birds believed to 
have died from AI into Egypt for testing.  While GOE 
officials did not respond during the October 16 meeting to 
our request to lift the ban, NAMRU-3 (and the Egyptian press) 
later reported that it was able to get GOE permission to 
bring in the necessary samples. In the meeting, the MOH 
representatives emphasized that the GOE has a national 
preparedness plan; however, post is not convinced that GOE is 
ready for an AI outbreak.  USAID offered to assist the MOH 
with management and logistical support, and training.  USAID 
asked the MOH to present a formal request for specific needs. 
 
 
RICCIARDONE