05CARACAS649
COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR WHA/AND DIRECTOR LISA
Thu Mar 03 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Caracas
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 CARACAS 000649 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OTRA APER VE MGMT
SUBJECT:  COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR WHA/AND DIRECTOR LISA 
BOBBIE SCHREIBER HUGHES, MARCH 9-13, 2005 
 
REF:  STATE 34725 
 
¶1. The Embassy grants country clearance for WHA/AND 
Director Lisa Bobbie Schreiber Hughes to visit 
Venezuela from March 9-13, 2005 for consultations with 
Embassy and Government of Venezuela officials. 
 
The control officer is Carolina Hidea.  Address: 
Embassy of the United States, Calle F con Calle 
Suapure, Colinas de Valle Arriba, Caracas, Venezuela. 
Telephone numbers: Office 58-212-907-8493.  Cellphone: 
58-414-261-9394 
 
Embassy after-hours direct line for Marine security 
guard is 58-212-907-8400. 
 
LODGING 
------- 
Embassy has made reservations for Schreiber-Hughes at 
the Marriott Hotel in Caracas for March 9-13. Telephone 
number: 58-212-957-2222 Fax number: 58-212-957-1111. 
 
PASSPORT REQUIREMENTS 
--------------------- 
All passengers who enter Venezuela on official travel 
(including third country nationals) require a visa. 
Travelers should not use tourist passports. DOD 
personnel participating in GOV-approved deployments and 
exercises, and arriving with military orders, are 
exempt from the visa requirement. 
 
Venezuelan immigration requires citizens of the United 
States and certain other countries to have at least six 
months validity remaining on their passports to enter 
Venezuela.  While this law has not been uniformly 
enforced, some U.S. citizens have been denied entry. 
Ensure your passport has at least six months validity 
from the date of arrival to Venezuela. 
 
COMPUTER POLICIES 
-------------------- 
State Department TDY Visitors requiring OpenNet-Plus 
Systems access during their stay should inform the 
control officer prior to their arrival. Visitors will 
be required to attend a Systems Security briefing and 
complete a Network Access Request Form. 
 
Personnel who intend to bring U.S. Government portable 
microcomputers (laptops) for use in CAA or non-CAA 
areas must notify RSO in advance. Personal Electronic 
Devices (PED), Personal Digital Assistants (PDA) e.g. 
`Palm Pilots', MP-3 players, etc. are NOT authorized in 
CAA spaces and are not authorized connectivity within 
OpenNet unclassified or classified networks, or stand- 
alone classified PCs. 
 
¶2. The following pertains to transportation and 
departures, exchange rate, security, medical 
considerations, weather, and press.  For additional 
information, consult the Consular Information Sheet for 
Venezuela, which can be found on the web at: 
http://travel.state.gov/venezuela.html 
 
CURRENCY / EXCHANGE RATE 
------------------------ 
The exchange rate is USD 1 = 1920 Bolivares (Bs). 
 
Visitors should bring a major credit card.  Travelers 
checks are not recommended as they are honored in only 
a few locations. It is possible to exchange cash at 
major hotel chains in Caracas (personal checks are not 
accepted) and at the Embassy cashier. 
 
 
TRANSPORTATION 
-------------- 
There have been a number of armed robbery incidents 
involving persons who have taken unlicensed "taxis" 
from Maiquetia Airport.  (Please read the Security 
section carefully.) 
 
The Embassy will provide transportation.  To meet the 
driver, proceed to the "Customer Service" kiosk, 
directly across from the customs exit. 
 
Italcambio is the travel contractor for the Embassy. 
If necessary, ask to use a telephone at any Italcambio 
booth to call the Embassy. 
 
Departure Expenses 
------------------ 
An airport user fee of Bs. 73,500 (approx. $39) is 
levied at the airport upon departure for holders of 
official and diplomatic passports. Holders of tourist 
passports must pay the user fee plus an exit tax, for a 
total of Bs. 102,900 (approximately $54).  Payment of 
both must be made in Bolivares. 
 
SECURITY 
-------- 
At the Airport.  Many drivers--often wearing badges 
identifying them as "taxi officials"--have been known 
to rob unwary travelers.  If someone asks if you are 
with the American Embassy: 1) do not give your name, 2) 
ask for the name of the person he is seeking and 
identification.  Do not go with the person if he cannot 
give you the information you request.  Call the 
Embassy. 
 
Airport parking lot robberies are increasing.  The 
Embassy advises all persons to stay away from the 
parking lots, except for the diplomatic lot located 
close to the terminal. 
 
General Crime. There is a significant level of common 
street crime in certain areas of Caracas and other 
major cities in Venezuela. These crimes are of the pick 
pocketing, purse-snatching variety and visitors are 
advised to be aware of their surroundings and to be 
particularly alert in crowded areas. Jewelry items, 
particularly gold-colored, attract the attention of 
thieves and should be left in a safe place along with 
other valuables. 
 
If you are confronted in a robbery situation, the RSO 
suggests that you comply with the criminals' demands. 
Do not attempt to run or antagonize the perpetrator. 
Most criminals only seek cash or jewelry items; many 
will only resort to violence if you resist their 
demands. 
 
To avoid being the victim of a crime, visitors should 
remain alert to their surroundings and maintain 
constant control of purses, backpacks, briefcases and 
luggage. 
 
Taxis within the city are plentiful and relatively 
safe. However, the Embassy recommends the use of hotel 
and radio dispatched taxis and group travel whenever 
possible, especially after dark.  Travelers should 
carry only the minimum cash needed and, if possible, no 
credit cards when venturing outside of the hotel. 
 
Civil Disturbances.  Travelers to Venezuela should be 
aware of the potential for violent demonstrations, 
especially in urban centers, and exercise appropriate 
caution by standing well clear of public protests, 
police lines and barricades. 
 
CAR RENTAL 
--------- 
If you rent a car, you must authorize it with the 
proper authority at post. 
 
MEDICAL 
------- 
Venezuela recommends that all travelers be vaccinated 
prior to arrival.  As Yellow Fever vaccine is difficult 
to obtain in Venezuela, do not count on the Embassy to 
provide a vaccination.  In addition, the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs requires a Yellow Fever vaccination 
certificate for travelers older than one year of age 
arriving from various countries.  Information about 
vaccination requirements for travel to Venezuela may be 
obtained from the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention's Internet site at 
http://www.cdc.gov/travel. 
 
The water is considered contaminated.  Drink only 
bottled water or carbonated soft drinks and avoid ice 
in drinks.  Do not eat raw vegetables or fruits unless 
they have been disinfected, peeled or cooked.  Wash 
your hands often with hot, soapy water. 
 
Cases of dengue fever and malaria are reported 
throughout Venezuela each year.  Travelers planning to 
spend time outdoors should bring insect repellent; wear 
long trousers; and avoid wet areas.  Symptoms include 
fever, headaches, diarrhea and general malaise.  While 
rarely fatal, you should see a doctor if you experience 
these symptoms. 
 
The Embassy does not make or guarantee payments to 
medical providers on behalf of non-U.S. Government 
employees.  All individuals should bring clear evidence 
of medical insurance coverage. In case emergency 
evacuation is required, non-USG employees, USG Contract 
staff, and Locally Employed Staff from other posts must 
have adequate medical and air ambulance insurance and 
must carry the contact information with them. 
Venezuelan hospitals and physicians do not accept 
insurance documents and may require payment in cash or 
by credit card. 
 
WEATHER 
------- 
Daytime temperatures in Caracas are usually between 75 
and 85 degrees Fahrenheit.  During the rainy season, 
roughly from April through November, afternoon rain 
showers are common.  Evenings can be cool at any time 
of the year.  Recommend travelers bring a sweater or 
light jacket for evening outings, and an umbrella, no 
matter the time of year. 
 
Communications with the Press 
----------------------------- 
Travelers are reminded that Public Affairs is 
responsible for handling press arrangements for both 
mission personnel and official visitors. Contact the 
Public Affairs Officer, Salome Hernandez, 975-6990 or 
the Press Attach, Brian Penn, 975-8118 after arrival 
if you believe you may have contact with the press 
while in Venezuela. 
 
Brownfield