05CAIRO3792
Egypt PD Results (04/21/05-05/11/05)
Wed May 18 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CAIRO 003792 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NEA/PPD; ALSO FOR NEA/ELA, IIP/SC AND ECA/P 
 
E.O. 12958: NA 
TAGS: OPRC OEXC KPAO EG
SUBJECT:  Egypt PD Results (04/21/05-05/11/05) 
 
REF:  CAIRO 3066 
 
Public Diplomacy programming in Egypt for the period 
reported continued to address the full range of 
post's MPP themes.  Summary reports follow. Reftel is 
post's most recent prior submission for NEA/PPD 
reporting and IIP's PD results database. 
 
------- 
RESULTS 
------- 
(05/10/05) SUPPORT TO SELF-HELP GRANT SIGNING YIELDS 
POSITIVE EGYPTIAN MEDIA COMMENTARY ON U.S. ASSISTANCE 
 
Embassy Cairo's Press Office worked closely with the 
staff of the Ambassador's Self-Help Grant Program to 
publicize the program via a signing ceremony to which 
local media were invited.  Resulting coverage was 
both accurate and positive, highlighting remarks by 
the Charge that the grants are intended to promote 
the development of Egyptian civil society, to 
encourage democratic and economic reforms, and that 
they come from the American people to the people of 
Egypt. 
 
MPP GOAL: ECONOMIC PROSPERITY 
 
(05/07/05  05/13/05) EGYPT VISIT EXPANDS HORIZONS OF 
AMERICAN YOUNG POLITICAL LEADERS 
 
Once again, Embassy Cairo cooperated with Egyptian co- 
hosts to sponsor a week-long visit by grantees of the 
American Council of Young Political Leaders (ACYPL) 
nine young Americans active in local politics.  During 
their visit, they were introduced to Egyptian 
politics, economics and hospitality. Their visit to 
the People's Assembly actually coincided with an 
historic debate on amending the Egyptian constitution. 
Media coverage, including a 30-minute TV talk show 
appearance, helped raise public awareness of the 
program.  There is strong Egyptian support for 
continuing the program, in both directions, next year. 
 
MPP GOAL: DEMOCRACY AND HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
(04/18/05) EARTH DAY CELEBRATION BRINGS MINISTRIES 
TOGETHER TO BENEFIT YOUTH, ENVIRONMENTAL AWARENESS 
 
Embassy Cairo helped to arranged a lecture/discussion 
program to observe Earth Day, highlighting American 
programs in Egypt to preserve the country's natural 
heritage.  Working with the ministries of Education 
and Youth, the post invited 150 teachers and students 
from 17 governorates to participate in a multi-site 
video conference on environmental issues. Impressed by 
the interaction, the two ministries agreed to devote 
additional time and resources to continue the project. 
 
MPP GOAL: ECONOMIC PROSPERITY 
 
(04/09/05) MEDIA CARRIES FULBRIGHTER COMMENTS ON CIVIL 
SOCIETY'S ROLE IN PROTECTING THE ENVIRONMENT 
 
Embassy Cairo arranged media interviews for a visiting 
Fulbright environmental expert.  Egypt's leading pro- 
government daily Al Ahram accurately reported the 
professor's emphasis on the role of civil society 
and youth - in environmental protection. 
 
MPP GOAL: ECONOMIC PROSPERITY 
 
---------- 
ACTIVITIES 
---------- 
(04/17/05)  IRC CAIRO USES ENVIRONMENTAL PROGRAM TO 
BUILD BRIDGES TO YOUNG EGYPTIAN PROFESSIONALS 
 
To observe Earth Day, Embassy Cairo's Information 
Resource Center held an internet workshop for Egyptian 
professionals.  Seven employees of the Gezira Youth 
Center, a professor from Al Azhar University, and 
professional staff from Al Ahram Regional Press 
Institute participated.  The professor, also vice 
president of an environmental NGO, is sharing 
information gained with both his NGO peers and with 
his students.  The Gezira Youth Center employees 
enrolled as members of the IRC. 
 
MPP GOAL: ECONOMIC PROSPERITY 
 
(04/28/05) AMERICAN CENTER, VOA CLUB MARK EARTH DAY 
 
In honor of Earth Day, the American Center in 
Alexandria (ACA) and the local Friends of the Voice of 
America (VOA) Club co-hosted a seminar on "Mimicry and 
Camouflage in Reptiles," featuring a zoology professor 
from Alexandria University.  Eighty university 
professors, NGO representatives, students and 
journalists attended.  Media coverage, including radio 
and local TV, expanded public awareness of the event. 
IIP publications on the environment, as well as "Hi" 
Magazine and IRC materials were distributed. 
 
MPP GOAL: MUTUAL UNDERSTANDING 
 
(05/04/05) EMBASSY OFFICERS SHARE CRISIS MANAGEMENT 
EXPERIENCE WITH JOURNALISM STUDENTS 
 
Following a terrorist bombing in Cairo that killed one 
American and injured three others, the Embassy 
accepted an invitation from the American University in 
Cairo to organize a panel discussion for journalism 
students on how an embassy responds to such an event. 
Representatives of Consular and Public Affairs 
sections participated.  Topics included rules 
governing release of information to the public and 
consular interactions with local authorities.  The 
students drew on the panel discussion to write 
articles about the work of a U.S. embassy. 
 
MPP GOAL: MUTUAL UNDERSTANDING 
 
(05/05/05) CAIRO USES ARABIC BOOKS TO ENCOURAGE YOUNG 
SCIENTISTS TO LEARN MORE ABOUT AMERICA 
 
Embassy Cairo's Public Affairs Counselor presented 
packages of Regional Book Office (RBO) titles (Arabic 
translations of significant American writing) to 
twenty-two student members of Al Ahram's science club. 
Nearly 80 young scientists participated in an essay 
competition on the occasion of the "centennial of 
flight," reviewing an RBO title "In Their Own Words: 
The Wright Brothers."  Winners received English 
teaching materials, as well as RBO books.  Club 
members were encouraged to participate in Embassy 
events and to visit the Information Resource Center. 
 
MPP GOAL: MUTUAL UNDERSTANDING 
 
(05/09/05) ALEXANDRIA CENTER HOSTS LITERARY FORUM 
 
The American Center in Alexandria (ACA) hosted its 
second annual Literary Forum, featuring an American 
Studies professor who spoke on Edith Wharton and her 
book "The Age of Innocence."  Forty university 
students, journalists and other ACA contacts attended 
the lecture and film program.  Radio and print 
interviews transmitted the event to a wider audience. 
 
MPP GOAL: MUTUAL UNDERSTANDING 
 
(05/11/05) ALEXANDRIA CENTER TEACHES YOUNG JOURNALISTS 
 
In commemoration of World Press Freedom Day, the 
American Center in Alexandria (ACA) organized an 
Internet workshop for nine young journalists 
representing major Egyptian governmental and 
independent newspapers, as well as local radio.  The 
participants were introduced to useful Internet 
websites, especially Department of State sites.  Each 
journalist also received a portfolio featuring a) a 
"webliography," b) two IIP Bureau electronic journals 
- "Media and Ethics" and "Seeking Free and Responsible 
Media," c) a copy of IIP's "Hi" Magazine, and d) a 
Regional Book Office (RBO) Arabic title "Washington." 
 
MPP GOAL: DEMOCRACY AND HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
GRAY