05CAIRO9352
HIGHLIGHTS OF PRESIDENT MUBARAK'S ADDRESS OPENING
Mon Dec 19 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

191553Z Dec 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CAIRO 009352 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NSC STAFF FOR SINGH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM PREL EG
SUBJECT: HIGHLIGHTS OF PRESIDENT MUBARAK'S ADDRESS OPENING 
PARLIAMENT 
 
 
Sensitive but unclassified.  Please protect accordingly. 
 
¶1. (SBU) During an address on December 19, President Mubarak 
opened parliament with a 40-minute address that emphasized 
political and economic reform but did not contain any major 
new proposals or signal any changes of course.  This is not 
unusual, as Mubarak rarely uses the annual parliamentary 
opening to launch new initiatives.  The following is an 
overview of the speech: 
 
---------------- 
Political Reform 
---------------- 
 
¶2. (U) President Mubarak made political reform a centerpiece 
of his address: 
 
-- He described the recent presidential and parliamentary 
elections as a step toward political reform. 
 
-- He acknowledged that there were still challenges that 
needed to be studied and tackled so as not to obstruct "our 
march toward democracy." 
 
¶3. (U) Mubarak emphasized his commitment to the principles 
outlined in his campaign, particularly: 
 
-- Equality of citizens regardless of sex, religion, 
ideology, etc.; 
 
-- respect for the freedoms and rights of citizens; 
 
-- the supremacy of law and judicial authority; 
 
-- strengthening the role of political parties and civil 
society organizations and empowering women; 
 
-- combating unemployment and opening new markets; and 
 
-- realizing a society that supports intellectuals, 
scientists and innovators. 
 
------------------------------- 
The Parliament's Responsibility 
------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (U) On the new parliament and its mission, President 
Mubarak stressed that both the majority and the opposition 
share a responsibility, beyond their normal legislative and 
oversight duties, to continue democratic reform.  Mubarak 
also emphasized that the Egyptian people's desires must be 
taken into account in pursuing further constitutional reforms. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
Legislative Agenda for the Coming Term 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (U) On the legislative agenda for the coming term, 
Mubarak mentioned: 
 
-- a bill that would strengthen the independence of the 
judiciary; 
 
-- new legal articles governing the press and publications; 
 
-- a review of laws concerning criminal procedures, including 
administrative detention; 
 
-- a new law to establish commercial courts that would deal 
with corporate and consumer disputes; 
 
-- a new law that would establish an educational quality 
control authority that would raise Egyptian education to 
international standards; and 
 
-- new bills to complete the reform of tax laws/trade 
transactions, etc. 
 
-------------- 
Foreign Policy 
-------------- 
 
¶6. (U) On foreign policy Mubarak stressed his commitment to 
security and stability in the region; commitment to the MEPP; 
and determination to use Egypt's international prestige to 
attract more investment and tourism. 
 
------- 
Economy 
------- 
 
¶7. (U)  Mubarak underscored his determination to increase 
employment (promising to create 4.5 million sustainable jobs 
over the coming six years); services (including 12 projects 
related to housing, transportation, health, education and 
infrastructure, access to clean water and sewage system 
networks, and developing squatter settlements); social 
security (reforming pensions and public wage systems); and a 
program for the middle class (to include access to finance 
for mortgages and education). 
 
 
JONES