05HELSINKI1321
FINLAND:  2005 ANNUAL TERRORISM REPORT
Thu Dec 29 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Helsinki
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 HELSINKI 001321 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR S/CT RHONDA SHORE AND ED SALAZAR, AND NCTC 
WASHINGTON DC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PTER FI
SUBJECT: FINLAND:  2005 ANNUAL TERRORISM REPORT 
 
REF: STATE 193439 
 
 ¶1.  (U)  This report is keyed to the applicable questions in 
reftel paragraphs 7-10.  Post's summary update has also been 
emailed to Rhonda Shore and Ed Salazar per reftel 
instructions.  Embassy POC for the report is Poloff David 
Schlaefer (SchlaeferDA2@state.gov). 
 
¶2.  (U) General Assessment (paragraph 7) 
 
Overall Response and Cooperation with Multilateral Fora: 
 
--  Finland actively supports and participates in the 
European Union's counterterrorism efforts, and in 2005 
participated in a number of EU and OSCE-sponsored events. 
Interior Minister Rajamaki visited Washington in September 
for consultations with Justice and Homeland Security 
officials.  Marja Lehto, Director of International Law at the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, was appointed to chair the 
Council of Europe's Committee of Experts on Terrorism 
(CODEXTER);  she will assume the chairmanship in January 
¶2006.  Dr. Martin Scheinin, Director of the Abo Institute for 
Peace Studies, was appointed UN Special Rapporteur for the 
Promotion of Human Rights While Countering Terrorism in July. 
 
 
--  Finland remains strongly committed to Afghan 
reconstruction and prevention of the resurgence of the 
Taliban.  Afghanistan is a major recipient of Finnish foreign 
assistance;  Finland aims to provide 10 million Euros in 
development and humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan on an 
annual basis.  Approximately 100 Finnish troops are currently 
deployed in Afghanistan in support of ongoing ISAF 
operations, and a number of Finnish civilian crisis 
management experts are working in Afghanistan as well. 
Finland is a member, along with the UK, Norway, and Iceland, 
of a Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) in Meymaneh in 
northern Afghanistan and plans to join a second PRT in 2006. 
 
--  Finland agreed in 2005 to a U.S. request to extend its 
ten police trainers in Amman through 2006. 
 
--  In 2005, Parliament passed a law that expanded the 
authority of the Frontier Guard to cover the entire country 
instead of just the borders, enhancing their counterterrorism 
capabilities and overrall effectiveness. 
 
--  In 2005, Parliament passed a law allowing the Finnish 
Defense Forces to provide lethal assistance to the Finnish 
police in response to terrorist attacks.  Until this change, 
the Defense Forces could provide only non-lethal aid, such as 
air traffic control assistance and the loan of armoured 
vehicles. 
 
--  Finland signed a Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty (MLAT) 
with the U.S. in late 2004.  The treaty is awaiting 
ratification by the Finnish Parliament.  Some Members of 
Parliament have expressed hesitation about approving the MLAT 
out of concern that certain U.S. rendition practices might 
violate Finnish constitutional law. 
 
--  Finnish security police (SUPO) maintain a dedicated 
anti-terrorism unit.  Finland has national authority to 
freeze terrorist assets.  The Money Laundering Clearing House 
performs investigations on all individuals suspected of 
financing terrorist acts, including all individuals and 
entities on the UN 1267 sanctions committee's consolidated 
list.  In the event that such assets are identified, they can 
be immediately frozen while a criminal investigation (either 
in Finland or abroad) takes place.  Such funds would remain 
frozen throughout the investigation. 
 
--  Finland has implemented regulations that allow it to 
freeze assets without EU or UN approval in cases when another 
government presents a legal request for action or when the 
individual or organization is suspected of having committed 
an offense within Finland's borders.  Finland has amended its 
criminal code to make it possible to sentence leaders of 
terrorist groups to 15 years in jail, although the group has 
to have actually committed acts of terrorism in Finland 
before investigation or prosecution can begin.  If the charge 
also includes murder, the maximum sentence could be life 
imprisonment.  Finnish law enforcement has the authority to 
intercept wire, oral, and email communications with prior 
approval in cases where national security interests are 
involved.  SUPO is responsible for examining the evidence and 
determining when such measures are appropriate.  An amendment 
expanding law enforcement electronic surveillance authority 
in counterterrorism cases went into effect in July 2005. 
 
--  Finland in 2005 implemented legislation in support of the 
International Maritime Organization's amendment to the 
International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea and 
the International Ship and Port Facility Security Code.  New 
regulations entered into force on October 1, 2005 requiring 
ships to submit security-related information prior to entry 
into port. 
 
--  Finland supports the U.S. and the international 
community's efforts to combat extremism and terrorism. 
Finnish officials in 2005 condemned acts of terror such as 
the London bombings and Amman hotel bombing.  However, some 
Finnish officials and a majority of the general public 
believe the likelihood of a terrorist attack inside Finland 
to be remote;  in addition, a 2005 survey conducted by the 
Defense Ministry found that half of Finns believe that U.S. 
anti-terrorism policy has actually decreased Finnish 
security. 
 
--  Finnish officials have expressed concern about U.S. 
renditions in the EU.  The GoF has asked for clarification 
about a 2003 flight that made a stopover in Helsinki on its 
way from Frankfurt to Stockholm.  The Finnish media is 
critical of U.S. policy regarding renditions and detention of 
certain terror suspects. 
 
 
(questions a-e):  Finland does not provide political, 
financial, military, or material support to terrorist 
organizations.  Finland does not provide sanctuary to 
terrorists.  Finland generally supports the U.S. position on 
matters relating to terrorism in the UNGA and other 
international bodies. 
 
 
¶3.  (U)  Sanctuary Assessment (paragraph 8): 
 
--  Finland does not provide sanctuary to terrorists. 
Finland has a relatively small (20,000) Muslim population 
with few extremists.  The GoF monitors individuals believed 
to have ties to terrorist organizations outside the country. 
 
(questions a-c):  Not applicable. 
 
 
¶4.  (U)  Information on Terrorist Groups (paragraph 9): 
 
There are no known terrorist groups inside Finland. 
 
(questions a-e):  Not applicable. 
 
 
¶5.  (U)  Foreign Government Cooperation (paragraph 10): 
 
--  The GoF cooperates effectively with the U.S. to combat 
terrorism, both within the EU and bilaterally.  Interior 
Minister Rajamaki visited Washington in July for discussions 
with Justice and Homeland Security officials, and other 
Finnish officials participated in training courses in the 
U.S.  Finland has announced plans to host a "Designators 
Workshop" in 2006 for U.S. and EU officials to exchange ideas 
on combating terrorist financing.  The GoF has sought USG 
assistance in designing training courses for Finnish 
officials on better understanding the roots of Muslim 
extremism. 
 
¶6.  (U)  Summary for Finland: 
 
Finland actively supports the Global War on Terrorism. 
Finland has implemented regulations that allow it to freeze 
assets without EU or UN approval in cases when another 
government presents a legal request for action or the 
individual or organization is suspected of having committed 
an offense within Finland's borders.  Finland has also 
amended its criminal code to make it possible to sentence 
leaders of terrorist groups to 15 years in jail.  If charges 
against suspected terrorists included murder, the maximum 
sentence could be life imprisonment.  Finland expanded the 
operations of its dedicated anti-terrorism unit in 2005.  On 
October 1, new regulations went into effect requiring ships 
to submit security-related information to Finnish authorities 
prior to entry into Finnish ports.  Finland's Director of 
International Law at the Foreign Affairs Ministry was 
appointed to chair the Council of Europe's Committee of 
Experts on Terrorism (CODEXTER). 
 
Finland remains committed to rebuilding Afghanistan and 
preventing the resurgence of the Taliban.  Approximately 100 
Finnish troops are deployed in Afghanistan in support of 
ongoing ISAF operations.  Finland participates in the 
Norwegian-led Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) in 
Meymaneh and plans to expand its participation into a second 
PRT in 2006.  Afghanistan is a major recipient of Finland's 
foreign aid, which includes support for the Afghan army and 
police force.  Finland maintains 10 instructors at the police 
training academy in Amman to help train Iraqi police. 
 
Finland is a party to all 12 international conventions and 
protocols relating to terrorism, and has implemented all 
applicable EU legislation against terrorism. 
HYATT