05HELSINKI1290
FINLAND: UN RAPPORTEUR WELCOMES THE SECRETARY'S
Thu Dec 15 00:00:00 +0100 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Helsinki
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 HELSINKI 001290 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB, DRL, IO 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/13/2015 
TAGS: PHUM PREL PGOV SOCI FI
SUBJECT: FINLAND: UN RAPPORTEUR WELCOMES THE SECRETARY'S 
REMARKS ON RENDITION 
 
REF: A. STATE 219905 
 
     ¶B. HELSINKI 1211 
     ¶C. HELSINKI 1281 
 
Classified By: POLOFF DAVID ALLEN SCHLAEFER FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) and (D) 
 
¶1.  (C)  Summary:  UN Special Rapporteur for Human Rights 
Scheinin welcomed the Secretary's clarification of U.S. 
policy on transportation of prisoners and U.S. obligations 
under the CAT.  He said her specific reference to "degrading" 
treatment was important, but noted that additional 
clarification of U.S. obligations under the ICCPR would be 
helpful.  Specific details of a 2003 CIA flight to Finland 
are less important than public discussion about the legal and 
human rights implications of rendition.  Finnish media focus 
on flight details could obscure the larger discussion. 
Scheinin's visit to the UK was positive, and he may not make 
a second trip before submitting his report.  End Summary. 
 
 
UN Rapporteur Welcome Secretary's Remarks 
----------------------------------------- 
¶2.  (C)  In response to Ref A instructions to use the 
Secretary's recent remarks as an opportunity to shape public 
 
SIPDIS 
discussion of the arrest and transportation of terrorists, 
Poloff spoke with Martin Scheinin, UN Special Rapporteur for 
the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights While Countering 
Terrorism and Finland's leading scholar on human rights. 
Scheinin welcomed the Secretary's clarifications of U.S. 
policy, especially its obligations under the Convention 
Against Torture (CAT).  He believed her statement was well 
received by the international community and was a "necessary 
ethical marker in an uncertain (security) environment."  The 
fact that the Secretary made specific reference to 
"degrading" treatment was also important; the humiliation of 
Iraqi prisoners in Abu Ghraib proved that degrading treatment 
can be as abusive as physical torture.  Scheinin said that he 
had commented favorably about the Secretary's remarks in an 
interview with Finland's largest Swedish-language newspaper 
and would repeat his positive assessment during additional 
interviews later this week. 
 
 
A Point for Clarification 
------------------------- 
¶3.  (C)  Scheinin said that he hopes the U.S. will now 
clarify its earlier interpretation of the International 
Convention on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR).  A 2005 
annex to the ICCPR suggests that U.S. obligations under the 
Convention do not extend beyond U.S. borders, a position 
seemingly at odds with the Secretary's comments on the CAT. 
The ICCPR is more broad than the CAT and covers issues such 
as arbitrary and extrajudicial arrest and detention. 
Scheinin opined that there would be little room for criticism 
of stated U.S. policy if U.S. interpretation of the ICCPR 
were brought in line with that of the CAT. 
 
 
Rendition Allegations 
--------------------- 
¶4.  (C)  Regarding allegations that an aircraft making a 
Helsinki stopover enroute to Stockholm in 2003 may have 
transported terrorist suspect(s) (Refs B and C), Scheinin at 
first asked Poloff for new details.  He said that a December 
9 MFA press release led him to believe that the USG would 
provide the GoF additional information.  Scheinin said that 
he presumed the GoF would not have posted the release without 
confirming that additional details from the USG were indeed 
forthcoming.  Per Department guidance, Poloff replied that we 
did not expect additional information about the flight in 
question, but that the Secretary's remarks clearly laid out 
U.S. policy concerning renditions; the GoF was aware that 
country-specific information about individual flights was 
unlikely.  Scheinin then said that, in his opinion, questions 
about the Finland flight were not very important; he was 
aware that several countries were inquiring about hundreds of 
flights in toto, and that it was unrealistic to expect the 
U.S. to provide details about all of them.  However, he 
remained concerned about the larger issue of whether such 
flights violated legal and human rights principles.  Too much 
media focus on the flight could also obscure the discussion, 
he added. 
 
 
UK Visit 
-------- 
¶5.  (C)  Scheinin's late November visit to the UK to 
investigate the rendition-overflight issue went well (see Ref 
B).  He said that Home Office officials were helpful and that 
the atmosphere was "professional and cordial."  He is waiting 
for several written responses from the British Government; 
depending upon the information he receives, he may not need 
to visit the UK again in his capacity as rapporteur before 
preparing his report to the UNHCHR.  Scheinin noted that 
British officials were frustrated by European criticism 
directed toward the UK when, in their opinion, British 
intelligence operations were more transparent than the 
operations of countries like Italy and, especially, France. 
Scheinin said that he imagines U.S. officials may feel the 
same way, but that "it is a credit to the UK and U.S. that 
the world looks to you to hold a higher standard." 
HYATT