05HELSINKI1210
CELEBRATING 100 YEARS OF PARLIAMENTARY REFORM IN
Thu Nov 17 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Helsinki
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HELSINKI 001210 
 
SIPDIS 
 
EUR/NB, for MEVANS 
EUR/PPD, for JLOCKARD 
H, for JBORIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV FI
SUBJECT: CELEBRATING 100 YEARS OF PARLIAMENTARY REFORM IN 
FINLAND 
 
 
¶1. (U) Summary and Action Request:  This message contains an 
action request.  Please see para. 7. 
 
¶2. (U) Charg and APAO called on the Secretary General of 
the Finnish Parliament, Seppo Tiitinen, to discuss 
celebration plans for the 100 year anniversary of the 
Parliament beginning on June 1, 2006, and to offer Embassy 
support for the numerous events Parliament will be 
organizing throughout the two years of celebration.  The 
Secretary General informed us that Speaker Paavo Lipponen 
 
SIPDIS 
extended personal invitations to Senator Ted Stevens (R-AL) 
and House Speaker Dennis Hastert (R-IL) to attend the event 
on June 1st.  Tiitinen expressed an interest in having 
Stevens and Hastert present for a gala opening ceremony 
which will include the Speakers and Secretaries General of 
parliaments from throughout the Council of Europe, as well 
as from numerous other democracies.   End summary. 
 
 
Background 
---------- 
 
¶3. (U) In 2006, the Finnish Parliament will begin to 
celebrate the 100 year anniversary of the parliamentary 
reform of 1906, when universal suffrage was introduced and 
Finnish women became the first in the world to receive full 
political rights.  In 2007, Parliament will commemorate the 
100 year anniversary of the first plenary session of the 
unicameral parliament.  The theme for the celebrations 
during these two years will be: "The right to vote - trust 
in law. One hundred years of Finnish democracy." Tiitinen 
remarked that the celebrations are scheduled to last for two 
years and will focus on Finland's Parliament's evolution as 
one of the most modern in the world and on programs designed 
to appeal to younger audiences in an attempt to reverse 
voter apathy. 
 
 
Celebrations on June 1, 2006 
---------------------------- 
 
¶4. (U) On the eve of the Finnish parliamentary celebrations, 
the Speakers of the National Parliaments of Council of 
Europe member states will have concluded their conference in 
Tallinn, Estonia.  The Finnish Parliament has arranged a 
special ferry connection from Tallinn to Helsinki on the 
morning of June 1, 2006.  The invitations for Senator 
Stevens and Representative Hastert request their presence 
for a day of activities in Helsinki on June 1, 2006, 
including an ecumenical church service at the Lutheran 
Cathedral, a special session of the Parliament, a reception 
in the State Hall, and an evening program at the Finnish 
National Opera, which includes a banquet (note: 
accommodation costs for U.S. Congressional representatives 
will be covered by the Parliament). Tiitinen indicated that 
he and Speaker Lipponen would be happy to host a bilateral 
discussion with U.S. Congressional representatives to 
address subjects of mutual interest, including intensifying 
relations between the two parliamentary bodies. 
 
 
Closing the Finnish Institute of International Affairs 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶5. (U) The special plenary session of Parliament will 
announce the creation of a new independent, parliamentary 
research institute, thus leading to the closure of the 
Ulkopoliittinen instituuti (UPI) - Finnish Institute of 
International Affairs (note: the Embassy has historically 
enjoyed very close relations with UPI and its staff as they 
functioned as one of our principal conference partners in 
Finland and elevated the level of debate about Finland's 
international security interests vis--vis the EU and NATO). 
Tiitinen remarked that the new parliamentary institute will 
be focusing very closely on the domestic and international 
dimensions of European Union affairs.  In separate 
discussions with the APAO, Marjo Timonen, Head of 
Information for the Parliament, noted that the thinking 
behind the creation of a new parliamentary research 
institute was shaped in the United States by Finnish visits 
to Congress and several think tanks in Washington DC. 
 
 
Embassy support for parliamentary celebrations 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶6. (U) The Charg praised the efforts and plans of Tiitinen 
and his international relations staff as they manage the 
gargantuan task of organizing Parliament's anniversary 
celebrations with participation from all around the world. 
She offered to provide Embassy assistance and support for 
the celebrations and Tiitinen remarked that he was grateful 
for U.S support and noted that we were the first mission in 
Helsinki to approach him to discuss these plans and offer 
support. The Embassy will be working closely with Tiitinen's 
staff to identify opportunities for cooperation in these 
events. 
 
¶7. (U) ACTION REQUEST:  The Embassy would appreciate any 
information from H and/or EUR/NB on whether Senator Stevens 
or Representative Hastert have confirmed that they will be 
attending the Helsinki celebrations.  Regards.