05JERUSALEM2955
WB/G SITREP: SENIOR PA OFFICIAL ASSAULTED IN WEST
Tue Jul 12 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Jerusalem
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 JERUSALEM 002955 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FRONT OFFICE; NEA/SA/EX FOR AUSTIN-FERGUSON; DEPT 
FOR DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PBTS PHUM KWBG CASC IS
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: SENIOR PA OFFICIAL ASSAULTED IN WEST 
BANK: JULY 12, 2005 (1900 HOURS LOCAL) 
 
 
This is a joint Embassy/ConGen cable. 
 
¶1.    (SBU) Summary:  A senior official from the Palestinian 
Authority (PA) Ministry of the Interior (MOI) on July 12 
sustained injuries from an attack by unknown assailants as he 
traveled from Jerusalem to Ramallah.  The MOI official was 
later hospitalized, but is expected to recover from his 
injuries.  In Shove Shomron settlement, near Tulkarm, on July 
12, a would-be suicide bomber detonated a car load of 
explosives at the settlement's entrance gate, but only the 
bomber was injured in the blast.  Elsewhere in the West Bank, 
the IDF on July 11 arrested three Palestinians during an 
operation in Hebron.  In the Gaza Strip, one Israeli citizen 
was lightly injured when an IDF bulldozer and civilians were 
attacked July 11 with small arms fire and two hand grenades 
north of the Rafah crossing.  Two IDF soldiers were lightly 
wounded on July 12 when an explosive device detonated near 
their jeep on patrol near Nezer Hazani.  In addition, there 
were reported incidents of rocket and mortar fire at Israeli 
targets, but no reported injuries.  End summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2.    (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Death: Nil. 
 
-- Injury: Palestinian gunmen on July 12 assaulted the PA 
Ministry of Interior Director General, Ibrahim Salama, as he 
was traveling from Jerusalem to Ramallah.  Salama sustained 
injuries from the attack and was hospitalized following the 
incident. 
 
-- Attack: Palestinians on July 11 threw two Molotov 
cocktails at an Israeli vehicle traveling near Homesh 
settlement, north of Nablus.  There were no reported injuries 
from this incident. 
 
-- Attack: Palestinians July 11 threw a pipe bomb at an IDF 
jeep traveling near the Aidah refugee camp near Bethlehem. 
There were no reported injuries from this incident. 
 
-- Attack/Injury: In Shove Shomron settlement, near Tulkarm, 
on July 12, a Palestinian would-be suicide bomber detonated a 
car load of explosives at the settlement's entrance gate, but 
only the bomber was injured in the blast, according to 
Israeli radio. 
 
-- Shooting: Unknown assailants on July 11 fired gunshots at 
the home of the local Fatah leader in Hizma village, north of 
Jerusalem.  There were no injuries reported from this 
incident. 
 
¶3.    (SBU) ARRESTS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Arrests: The IDF on July 11 entered Hebron and arrested 
three Palestinians, according to Palestinian sources. 
 
-- Curfew: The IDF continued on July 12 to impose a curfew on 
al-Mughayyir village, northeast of Ramallah, following an 
attack on an IDF vehicle that resulted in injuries to one 
Israeli soldier, according to Palestinian security sources. 
 
¶4.    (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- According to Palestinian media reports, Fatah Central 
Committee head Faruq al-Qaddumi said that legislative council 
elections would be held on January 20, 2006.  In addition, 
the Fatah General Congress was rescheduled for March 21, 2006. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injuries/Shootings: According to the IDF, one Israeli 
citizen was lightly injured when an IDF bulldozer and 
civilians were attacked July 11 with small arms fire and two 
hand grenades north of the Rafah crossing.  UNRWA reported 
that the attack involved an RPG (instead of hand grenades) 
and that the IDF returned fire into the Al Shouka area. 
 
-- Injuries/Explosive Devices: IDF radio reported that two 
soldiers were lightly wounded on July 12 when an explosive 
device detonated near their jeep on patrol near Nezer Hazani. 
 UNRWA reported that the explosion was caused by an RPG and 
that the IDF closed the Gush Qatif checkpoint separating 
northern and southern Gaza in response. 
 
-- Injuries/Explosive Devices: The Voice of Palestine 
reported July 12 that a Palestinian in Rafah was injured 
while preparing an explosive device in his house. 
 
-- Shootings: In addition to the shooting listed under 
"injuries," the IDF reported three other shooting incidents: 
shots fired on July 11 at an IDF outpost located one 
kilometer east of Netzarim; shots fired at an IDF APC located 
1.5 kilometers south of the Sufa crossing; and shots fired at 
an IDF outpost south of Rafah.  UNRWA reported that the IDF 
responded to the latter attack with fire into the Al Barahma 
area and Block J.  There were no reported injuries in these 
three incidents. 
 
-- Explosive Devices: The IDF said that Palestinian police 
located and disarmed an explosive device located 
approximately three kilometers southeast of the Sufa crossing. 
 
-- Mortars: The IDF reported that on July 11, mortar shells 
were fired at civilians and IDF forces in two locations.  One 
shell was launched at an IDF outpost located 50 meters from 
Netzarim (confirmed by UNRWA), while four shells were 
launched in the vicinity of Neve Dekalim.  UNRWA said the 
latter attack consisted of three rounds, adding that the Abu 
Rish Brigades claimed responsibility.  No injuries were 
reported in either incident. 
 
-- Explosion: UNRWA reported that the IDF had identified and 
detonated an explosive device on July 11 near Nezanit. 
 
-- Rockets: According to UNRWA, Palestinians fired two 
homemade rockets at IDF troops on July 11 near the Sofa 
crossing.  The military wing of Fatah reportedly claimed 
responsibility. 
 
-- Rockets: UNRWA reported that Palestinians fired three 
homemade rockets on July 11 at Neve Dekalim. 
 
-- Protest: UNRWA reported that 200 disabled Palestinians 
protested on July 12 in front of the PLC building in Gaza 
City.  The demonstrators allegedly damaged two PA automobiles 
on the compound before PA police arrived to calm the 
situation. 
 
¶6. (SBU) ARRESTS: 
 
-- Arrest: UNRWA reported that a 19-year-old unarmed 
Palestinian was arrested on July 11 near Khan Yunis while 
trying to infiltrate into Israel. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS/INTERNAL CHECKPOINTS: 
 
-- Erez Crossing was open on July 12; 4,208 laborers and 571 
merchants crossed into Israel. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone was on July 12 and 561 laborers 
entered the zone. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers on July 
12, but was open for construction materials. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was partially open on July 12. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open on July 12 in both directions 
without age restrictions. 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was open on July 12 with the exception of the closure 
noted below, with a major detour at Netzarim Junction. 
 
-- The Gush Qatif checkpoint was open July 12 after the 
closure reported above in "injuries/explosions." 
 
-- Toufah checkpoint was open, except to males aged 16-30. 
 
¶8. (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- Israeli radio reported that the GOI's political and 
security cabinet would meet on July 12 to discuss the 
deployment of Egyptian border police along the Philadelphi 
Strip, the issue of crossing points, and the question of when 
Gaza would be sealed-off in preparation for disengagement. 
 
-- Israeli press noted that on July 12 that a number of 
members of the Knesset, including the Chairman of the 
Knesset's Foreign Affairs and Defense Committee, filed an 
appeal against the Attorney General's decision that the 
Knesset need not approve the deployment of Egyptian border 
guards along the Philadelphi Strip. 
 
-- Several Israeli papers reported July 12 that a GOI team 
had traveled to Washington to request USD 2.2 billion in 
assistance to cover military costs of disengagement and to 
develop the Negev and Galilee regions within Israel. 
PEARCE