05JERUSALEM2225
WB/G SITREP: JUNE 1, 2005 (1800 HOURS LOCAL) --
Wed Jun 01 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Jerusalem
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 JERUSALEM 002225 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FO; NEA/SA/EX FOR AUSTIN-FERGUSON; DEPT FOR 
DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PBTS PHUM KWBG KPAL IS ASEC
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: JUNE 1, 2005 (1800 HOURS LOCAL) -- 
PALESTINIAN SHOT BY ISRAELI SETTLER IN THE WEST BANK, FATAH 
AND HAMAS AGREE TO DELAY ELECTIONS FOR SEVERAL 
MUNICIPALITIES IN THE GAZA STRIP 
 
 
This is a joint ConGen Jerusalem/Embassy Tel Aviv cable. 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: In the West Bank, an Israeli settler shot 
and wounded a Palestinian near Itamar settlement, near 
Nablus, May 31.  In al-Fraides village, near Bethlehem, three 
Palestinians were assaulted by Israeli settlers May 31.  Five 
Fatah and six Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ) members were 
arrested by the IDF in different areas of the West Bank May 
¶31.  Five Palestinian and foreign peace activists were 
arrested May 31 in Bil,in village, near Ramallah, during a 
rally to protest the construction of the separation barrier 
in the area.  According to Israeli and Palestinian sources, 
the Jerusalem municipality plans to demolish 88 
Palestinian-owned houses in the East Jerusalem neighborhood 
of Silwan to create space for a national park.  Up to 1,000 
Palestinian residents of Silwan could be affected if the 
demolitions take place.  In the Gaza Strip, according to 
UNRWA and media sources, Fatah and Hamas agreed May 31 to 
delay repeat elections for several municipalities in Gaza. 
End Summary. 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) ATTACKS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injuries: According to the Palestinian and Israeli media, 
an Israeli settler shot and wounded a Palestinian near Itamar 
settlement, near Nablus, May 31.  The settler was arrested by 
Israeli police, and said he opened fire when he saw the 
Palestinian youth was setting fire to a field next to the 
settlement.  The settler claimed that he attempted to stop 
the Palestinian from doing so, but the latter pulled out a 
knife and attempted to attack him.  Palestinian sources 
reported that the wounded Palestinian, Yusif Bani Fadel, is 
mentally handicapped. 
 
-- Injuries: According to Palestinian sources, in al-Fraides 
village, near Bethlehem, three Palestinians were assaulted by 
Israeli settlers May 31.  The three suffered light to 
moderate injuries. 
 
-- Injuries: According to Palestinian sources, a Palestinian 
youth was attacked and lightly injured by settlers in the Old 
City of Hebron, May 31. 
 
-- Arrests: According to Palestinian sources, IDF troops 
entered Nablus and arrested two Fatah activists May 31. 
Palestinian gunmen opened fire at the IDF during the arrest 
operation, but no injuries were reported. 
 
-- Arrests: According to Palestinian sources, IDF troops 
arrested three members of Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ) in 
Deir al-Ghusun village, near Tulkarm, May 31. 
 
-- Arrests: According to Palestinian media, the IDF arrested 
three PIJ members in Beitunia village, near Ramallah, May 31. 
 Palestinian youths threw stones at IDF soldiers, but no 
injuries were reported.  The three arrested were identified 
as Labib and Samir Barghuti from Ramallah, and Mohammad 
Radad, a prominent PIJ member from Saida village, near 
Tulkarm. 
 
-- Arrests: According to Palestinian sources, the IDF entered 
Dura village, near Hebron and arrested three members of 
Fatah, May 31.  IDF soldiers set up an observation post on 
the roof of a house at the entrance to Dura village. 
 
-- Arrests:  According to Palestinian sources, five 
Palestinian and foreign peace activists were arrested May 31 
in Bil,in village, near Ramallah, during a rally to protest 
the construction of the separation barrier in this area. 
 
¶3. (SBU) CLOSURES 
 
-- According to Palestinian sources, on May 31, the IDF set 
up a metal gate at the entrance to al-Khadr village, near 
Bethlehem, which they claim blocks access to the main road 
from the village.  According to Israeli sources, the new gate 
will allow for periodic access to al-Khadr, which has been 
blocked by a dirt berm for several years.  The IDF dirt 
roadblock remains. 
 
-- According to Israeli and Palestinian sources, the 
Jerusalem municipality plans to demolish 88 Palestinian-owned 
houses, reportedly for lack of building permits, in the East 
Jerusalem neighborhood of Silwan, to create space for a 
national park.  Up to 1,000 Palestinian residents of Silwan 
could be affected if the demolitions take place. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶4. (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Clashes: Nil. 
 
-- Shooting: The IDF reported a shooting May 31 north of the 
Rafah crossing.  No injuries were reported. 
 
-- Shooting/Injury: The IDF reported that its troops 
initiated a shooting May 31 near an IDF outpost south of the 
Katif village in which, according to Palestinian claims, one 
Palestinian was injured. 
 
-- Shooting: Palestinians shot at Israeli vehicles near 
Netzarim May 31, according to the IDF. 
 
-- Shooting: The IDF reported that a shooting occurred near 
an IDF outpost south of Rafah in the early morning of June 1 
in which IDF soldiers were targeted.  No injuries were 
reported. 
 
-- Mortars/rockets:  Two mortars were fired at Israeli 
targets in the vicinity of Khan Younis in the early morning 
of June 1, according to the IDF. 
 
-- Explosions: Nil. 
 
¶5. (SBU) ARRESTS: Nil. 
 
¶6. (SBU) INCURSIONS/DEMOLITIONS: Nil. 
 
¶7. (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS/CHECKPOINTS: 
 
-- Route Four (Salah Ed-Din Road), the main north-south 
traffic artery, was open June 1, but closed at Netzarim 
junction.  The coastal road was open. 
 
-- The Erez Crossing was open to internationals, diplomats, 
and Palestinian laborers May 31.  According to UNRWA, 3,832 
laborers and 346 merchants crossed into Israel May 31. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone was open May 31.  According to 
UNRWA, 600 Palestinian laborers entered the zone May 31. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for laborers, but open for 
aggregates used in construction June 1. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was open for the import and export of 
materials June 1. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open without restrictions June 1. 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan checkpoint was closed, and Toufa checkpoint 
was open with restrictions on males age 16-30, June 1. 
 
¶8. (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- According to UNRWA and media sources, Fatah and Hamas 
agreed May 31 to delay repeat elections for several 
municipalities in Gaza. 
Connelly