05LJUBLJANA57
SLOVENIA: PUBLIC SUPPORT FOR IRAQ'S ELECTIONS AND
Wed Jan 26 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ljubljana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS LJUBLJANA 000057 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL IZ SI
SUBJECT: SLOVENIA: PUBLIC SUPPORT FOR IRAQ'S ELECTIONS AND 
MORE? 
 
REF: STATE 12757 
 
 ¶1.  Pol/Econ Chief and British DCM, Bob Setterfield, met 
jointly with Jasna Grasek, the new Head of the Department for 
Africa, Asia, and the Pacific, and Iraq desk officer, Beti 
Likar to deliver reftel points.  Grasek, reflecting the new 
openness towards the U.S. PM Jansa has made a priority for 
his government, was receptive to this demarche and the 
suggestion that a statement come from either the Prime 
Minister or Foreign Minister. 
 
¶2.  As reported previously, the Jansa government is committed 
to strengthening the trans-Atlantic relationship both 
bilaterally and through the EU.  On January 25, PM Jansa was 
in Brussels to meet with EU Commission President Barosso and 
NATO Secretary General de Hoop Scheffer.  In a press briefing 
after the NATO meeting, Jansa made the most forward-leaning 
statement to date on Iraq saying "We will consider and debate 
(these issues).  We expect the situation in Iraq will improve 
after Sunday's election.  As a NATO member, we will do 
everything we can to contribute to future stability."  These 
remarks were followed up by both the Foreign and Defense 
Ministers on January 26 stressing that no policy change has 
been made, only that the topic would be opened for 
discussion, and as a member of NATO, Slovenia was obligated 
to consider how it could contribute to this mission. 
 
¶3.  COMMENT. During the demarche, Grasek referred several 
times to the explicit desire of the Jansa government to draw 
closer to the U.S. and she suggested that Slovenia would be 
inclined to do what it could on an issue so important to the 
USG prior to President Bush's visit to Europe next month. 
So, while not a guarantee of a forthcoming statement, this 
meeting along with Jansa's remarks in Brussels indicate a 
significant shift of GOS policy on Iraq.  It will be 
important for the GOS to win over public opinion, the 
greatest potential stumbling block, as it moves down the path 
of greater cooperation in Iraq. Post will follow up with 
Grasek in the next few days to determine if a statement will 
be forthcoming. END COMMENT. 
 
¶4.  Bio Note.  From 2000 through July 2004, Grasek was Deputy 
Chief of Mission at the Slovene mission in Washington, and 
prior to transferring to the Department for Africa, Asia etc. 
in 2004, Likar spent eight years covering western European 
affairs. 
ROBERTSON 
 
 
NNNN 

 2005LJUBLJ00057 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED 


 
v1.6.2