05MADRID2988
SPAIN COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR DOE/NNSA/NNTRAV ROGERS
Fri Aug 19 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Madrid
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

191430Z Aug 05UNCLAS MADRID 002988 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DOE: G.VERRY; PNNL:E.EISEMNAN; NNSA:P.DILL; NNSA:B.SHORTER 
STATE FOR J.W.COFFEY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG KNNP PARM OTRA SP
SUBJECT: SPAIN COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR DOE/NNSA/NNTRAV ROGERS 
+ 17 - MEGAPORTS 
 
REF: A. STATE 151711 
 
     ¶B. STATE 111840 
     ¶C. MADRID 2325 
     ¶D. STATE 128554 
     ¶E. MADRID 2741 
 
¶1.  Embassy welcomes and extend country clearance as 
requested Ref. A, to: Randy R. Rogers; Terry L. Baumgartner; 
Guadalupe M. Chavez; Stephanie P. Clarke; M. Robert Corlew; 
Edward E. Coyne; Whitney J. Creer; Timothy A. Gregoire; Cody 
¶J. Hostick; Elizabeth M. Hughes, Paul M. Jackson; Dung Z. Le; 
Gary E. Mizell; Roy L. Phares; Peter B. Rice; Rebecca L. 
Settle; Craig L. Stinson; Scott M. Vermillion; Janet S. 
Ahrens; Chris Horley; Richard Rothrock; David G. Pelowitz; 
Allison C. Bennett; Joe J. Capezza; Ramon Chavez; Steven M. 
Dinehart; William J. Dougherty; Scott E. Gable; Michael G. 
Hoxie; Albert S. Kacoroski; William E. Kilmartin; Timothy Y. 
Lai; Mark R. Melany; John D. Mortensen; Brian B. Peters; 
Susan E. Pickett; Robert D. Price; Luis G. Rivero; Loring E. 
Robbins; and Christopher R. Smith, to travel to Algeciras, 
August 27-September 27.  The U.S. Second Line of Defense 
SLD/Megaports Initiative Program team will meet with Port 
Authority officials and Spanish contractors to begin 
construction and installation activities of radiation portal 
monitors at the Port of Algeciras. 
 
¶2.  Embassy understands that no assistance is necessary. 
 
¶3.  Visitors are reminded that bearers of diplomatic and 
official passports coming to Spain on official business need 
to obtain a Spanish visa prior to arrival to Spain. 
 
¶4.  THREAT ASSESSMENT: 
 
In general, Spain is safe.  However, Madrid, Barcelona and 
other large cities in Spain --including resort/convention 
areas such as Benidorm-- attract a large number of criminals 
and pickpockets and frequent incidents of crime of 
opportunity against the unwary do occur.  Carry only 
essential items including a photocopy of your passport's 
photo page.  Visitors can protect themselves against crime by 
being street-smart, alert and aware of their surroundings. 
In the event you are victimized by crime, or experience any 
security-related incident, please contact the Embassy's 
Regional Security Office at 91-587-2550 or after hours at 
91-587-2355.  Official visitors to the Embassy in Madrid or 
the Consulate General in Barcelona are encouraged to receive 
a security briefing from the RSO office at their earliest 
convenience.   Additional information regarding safety and 
security in Spain is available on the U.S. Department of 
State's website (www.embusa.es). 
 
Travelers are encouraged to review the most recent Worldwide 
Caution issued by the Department of State. As the Department 
of State continues to develop information on any potential 
security threats to Americans overseas, it shares credible 
threat information through its Consular Information Program 
documents, available on the Internet at 
http://travel/state.gov.  In addition to information on the 
Internet, U.S. travelers can hear recorded information by 
calling the Department of State in Washington, D.C. at 
202-647-5225 from their touch-tone telephone, or receive 
information by automated telefax by dialing 202-647-3000 from 
their fax machine. 
AGUIRRE