05MADRID66
COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR STAFFDEL KNOWLES
Mon Jan 10 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Madrid
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MADRID 000066 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR H/BUREAU OF LEGISLATIVE AFFAIRS/EMILY HUNT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OREP AMGT ASEC AFIN IT SP
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR STAFFDEL KNOWLES 
 
REF: STATE 03227 
 
¶1.  Embassy welcomes and grants country clearance to Sean 
Knowles, Staff Member, and delegation to travel to Spain from 
January 12-13, 2005 to review programs and activities under 
the jurisdiction of the Military Construction Subcommittee. 
 
¶2.  Embassy administrative Point of Contact for this visit is 
POLECON Officer Michael Sestak, tel: (34) 91-587-2388 
(office), (34) 618-529-364 (cell).  Overnight accommodation 
has been arranged for Staffdel and other group members in the 
BOQ at Rota Naval Base. 
 
¶3.  Visitors are reminded that bearers of diplomatic and 
official passports coming to Spain on official business need 
to obtain a Spanish visa prior to arrival in Spain. 
 
¶4.  THREAT ASSESSMENT: 
 
In general, Spain is safe.  However, Madrid and other large 
cities in Spain -- including resort/convention areas such as 
Benidorm -- attract a large number of criminals and 
pick-pockets and frequent incidents of crimes of opportunity 
against the unwary do occur.  Carry only essential items, 
including a photocopy of your passport's photo page. 
Visitors can protect themselves from crime by being 
street-smart, alert, and aware of their surroundings.  In the 
event you are victimized by crime, or experience any other 
security-related incident, please contact the Embassy's 
Regional Security Office at 91-587-2550, or after hours at 
91-587-2355.  Official visitors to the Embassy in Madrid or 
the Consulate General in Barcelona are encouraged to receive 
a security briefing from the RSO office at their earliest 
convenience.  Additional information regarding safety and 
security in Spain is available on the U.S. Department of 
State's website (http://www.state.gov), and the U.S. 
Embassy's website (www.embusa.es). 
 
Travelers are encouraged to review the most recent Worldwide 
Caution issued by the Department of State.  As the Department 
of State continues to develop information on any potential 
security threats to Americans overseas, it shares credible 
threat information through its Consular Information Program 
documents, available on the Internet at 
http://travel/state.gov.  In addition to information on the 
Internet, U.S. travelers can hear recorded information by 
calling the Department of State in Washington, D.C. at 
202-647-5225 from their touch-tone telephone, or receive 
information by automated telefax by dialing 202-647-3000 from 
their fax machine. 
MANZANARES