05MADRID3506
SPAIN COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR HHS/CDC MARC-ALAIN
Wed Oct 05 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Madrid
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MADRID 003506 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DHHS FOR STEIGER OGHA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OTRA TBIO SP
SUBJECT: SPAIN COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR HHS/CDC MARC-ALAIN 
WIDDOWSON 
 
REF: A. ATD 3235 
     ¶B. ATLANTA 3445 
 
¶1.   Embassy welcomes and grants country clearance to 
Marc-Alain Widdowson, Medical Epidemiologist, NCID, CDC, HHS, 
to travel to Menorca, October 13-16, to attend the conference 
on "European Programme for Intervention Epidemiology Training 
(EPIET)." 
 
¶2.  Embassy understands that no assistance is necessary. 
 
¶3.  Visitors are reminded that bearers of diplomatic and 
official passports coming to Spain on official business need 
to obtain a Spanish visa prior to arrival to Spain. 
 
¶4.  THREAT ASSESSMENT: 
 
In general, Spain is safe.  However, Madrid, Barcelona and 
other large cities in Spain --including resort/convention 
areas such as Benidorm-- attract a large number of criminals 
and pickpockets and frequent incidents of crime of 
opportunity against the unwary do occur.  Carry only 
essential items including a photocopy of your passport's 
photo page.  Visitors can protect themselves against crime by 
being street-smart, alert and aware of their surroundings. 
In the event you are victimized by crime, or experience any 
security-related incident, please contact the Embassy's 
Regional Security Office at 91-587-2550 or after hours at 
91-587-2355.  Official visitors to the Embassy in Madrid or 
the Consulate General in Barcelona are encouraged to receive 
a security briefing from the RSO office at their earliest 
convenience.   Additional information regarding safety and 
security in Spain is available on the U.S. Department of 
State's website (www.embusa.es). 
 
Travelers are encouraged to review the most recent Worldwide 
Caution issued by the Department of State. As the Department 
of State continues to develop information on any potential 
security threats to Americans overseas, it shares credible 
threat information through its Consular Information Program 
documents, available on the Internet at 
http://travel/state.gov.  In addition to information on the 
Internet, U.S. travelers can hear recorded information by 
calling the Department of State in Washington, D.C. at 
202-647-5225 from their touch-tone telephone, or receive 
information by automated telefax by dialing 202-647-3000 from 
their fax machine. 
AGUIRRE