05MADRID2652
SPAIN COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR MISSILE TECHNOLOGY
Thu Jul 14 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Madrid
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MADRID 002652 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PLEASE PASS TO NP/CBM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC MNUC PREL PARM AMGT OTRA SP MTCRE
SUBJECT: SPAIN COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR MISSILE TECHNOLOGY 
CONTROL REGIME (MTCR):  US DELEGATION TO MADRID PLENARY: 
MR. VANN H. VAN DIEPEN + 13 
 
REF: SECSTATE 130114 
 
¶1.  Embassy welcomes and grants country clearance to the 
following individuals: 
 
Mr. Vann H. van Diepen, Head of Delegation, Director, Office 
of Chemical, Biological and Missile Nonproliferation, US 
Department of State 
 
Mr. Steven Clagett, Director, Nuclear and Missile Technology, 
US Department of Commerce 
 
Mr. Ralph Palmiero, Foreign Affairs Officer, Office of 
Chemical, Biological and Missile Nonproliferation Policy, 
Office of Nonproliferation Policy, US Department of Defense 
 
Mr. Phillip Kellogg, Senior Assistant for Nonproliferation 
Policy, Office of Nonproliferation Policy, US Department of 
Defense 
 
LTC Jason Lagasca, Nonproliferation Branch, Joint Chiefs of 
Staff 
 
Mr. Frank Procida, Foreign Affairs Officer, Office of 
Chemical, Biological and Missile Nonproliferation, US 
Department of State 
 
Mr. Dennis Krepp, Foreign Affairs Officer, Office of 
Chemical, Biological and Missile Nonproliferation, US 
Department of State 
 
Mr. Jesse Crump, Senior Engineer, Department of Defense 
 
Mr. Michael Rithmire, Senior Engineer, Department of Commerce 
 
Mr. Geoffrey Buescher, Aeronautical Engineer, Department of 
Defense 
 
Ms. Norma Curtis, Senior Special Agent, Office Export 
Enforcement, Department of Commerce 
 
Mr. David Hooks, Arms and Strategic Technology 
Investigations, US Immigration and Customs Enforcement 
 
Mr. Alexander Tounger, Nonproliferation Officer, US Embassy 
Paris 
 
to travel to Madrid, Spain from September 8-17, 2005.  The 
purpose of this visit is to attend the 2005 Missile 
Technology Control Regime (MCTR) at the Palacio de Congresos 
de Madrid and to attend the Technical Experts Meeting (TEM) 
on September 9, 2005. 
 
¶2.  Temporary Embassy point of contact is Ken Forder, 
Environmental, Science, Health and Technology Officer (TEL: 
34-91-587-2385 and FAX:  34-91-587-2392; E-Mail: 
ForderK@state.gov).  From August, Embassy control officer 
will be Rob Allison, Political and Military Affairs Officer 
(TEL:  34-91-587-2387 and FAX:  34-91-587-2391). 
 
¶3.  Embassy understands delegation has made its own 
reservations at the Holiday Inn Madrid. 
 
¶4.  Visitors are reminded that bearers of diplomatic and 
official passports coming to Spain on official business need 
to obtain a Spanish visa prior to arrival to Spain. 
 
¶5.  THREAT ASSESSMENT: 
 
In general, Spain is safe.  However, Madrid, Barcelona and 
other large cities in Spain --including resort/convention 
areas such as Benidorm-- attract a large number of criminals 
and pickpockets and frequent incidents of crime of 
opportunity against the unwary do occur.  Carry only 
essential items including a photocopy of your passport's 
photo page.  Visitors can protect themselves against crime by 
being street-smart, alert and aware of their surroundings. 
In the event you are victimized by crime, or experience any 
security-related incident, please contact the Embassy's 
Regional Security Office at 91-587-2550 or after hours at 
91-587-2355.  Official visitors to the Embassy in Madrid or 
the Consulate General in Barcelona are encouraged to receive 
a security briefing from the RSO office at their earliest 
convenience.   Additional information regarding safety and 
security in Spain is available on the U.S. Department of 
State's website (www.embusa.es). 
 
Travelers are encouraged to review the most recent Worldwide 
Caution issued by the Department of State. As the Department 
of State continues to develop information on any potential 
security threats to Americans overseas, it shares credible 
threat information through its Consular Information Program 
documents, available on the Internet at 
http://travel/state.gov.  In addition to information on the 
Internet, U.S. travelers can hear recorded information by 
calling the Department of State in Washington, D.C. at 
202-647-5225 from their touch-tone telephone, or receive 
information by automated telefax by dialing 202-647-3000 from 
their fax machine. 
AGUIRRE