05MADRID1050
SPAIN COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR CODEL SHELBY
Thu Mar 17 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Madrid
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MADRID 001050 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OREP AMGT ASEC AFIN SP
SUBJECT: SPAIN COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR CODEL SHELBY 
 
REF: A. STATE 42191 
     ¶B. STATE 44934 
 
¶1.  Embassy warmly welcomes and grants country clearance to 
CODEL Shelby consisting of Senator Richard Shelby, Dr. 
Annette Shelby, Staff Director Kathleen Casey, Communications 
Director of SBANK Andrew Gray and LTC Doug Carney to travel 
to Madrid, Barcelona, Granada and Seville March 28-April 1, 
to meet with high-level officials focusing on economic 
issues, financial services, trade and financing of terrorism. 
 
¶2.  Control Officer at Embassy Madrid for Madrid and Seville 
portions of visit is Political Officer Robert J. Riley who 
can be reached at work (34-91-587-2392) on his mobile at 
(34-609-057-454) or via e-mail: rileyrj@state.gov.  Control 
officer at Consulate General Barcelona for Barcelona, Andorra 
and Granada portions of visit is Consul General Juan Alsace, 
who can be reached at work (34-93-280-2227 ext. 203) on his 
mobile at (34-649-295-948) or via e-mail:  alsaceja@state.gov. 
 
¶3.  Specific requests to be confirmed via e-mail. 
 
¶4.  Visitors are reminded that bearers of diplomatic and 
official passports coming to Spain on official business need 
to obtain a Spanish visa prior to arrival in Spain. 
 
¶5.  THREAT ASSESSMENT: 
 
In general, Spain is safe.  However, Madrid and other large 
cities in Spain attract a number of criminals and 
pick-pockets and frequent incidents of crimes of opportunity 
against the unwary occur.  Carry only essential items, 
including a photocopy of your passport.  Visitors can protect 
themselves from crime by being street-smart, alert, and aware 
of their surroundings.  In the even you are victimized by 
crime, or experience any other security-related incident, 
please contact the Embassy's Regional Security Office at 
91-587-2550).  Additional information regarding safety and 
security in Spain is available on the U.S. Department of 
State's website (http://www.state.gov). 
 
Travelers are encouraged to review the most recent Worldwide 
Caution issued by the Department of State.  As the Department 
of State continues to develop information on any potential 
security threats to Americans overseas, it shares credible 
threat information through its Consular Information Program 
documents, available on the Internet at 
http://travel/state.gov.  In addition to information on the 
Internet, U.S. travelers can hear recorded information by 
calling the Department of State in Washington, D.C. at 
202-647-5225 from their touch-tone telephone, ore receive 
information by automated telefax by dialing 202-647-3000 from 
their fax machine. 
MANZANARES