05OTTAWA640
CANADA'S 2005 BUDGET:  SOMETHING FOR EVERYONE
Tue Mar 01 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ottawa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS E F T O SECTION 01 OF 05 OTTAWA 000640 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EB/IFD, EB/OMA, WHA/EPSC, AND WHA/CAN 
STATE PASS FEDERAL RESERVE BANK FOR CHUGH 
STATE PASS SEC FOR JACOBS 
TREASURY FOR WILBUR MONROE AND DAVID NAGOSKI 
PARIS ALSO FOR USOECD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN ECON PGOV CA
SUBJECT: CANADA'S 2005 BUDGET:  SOMETHING FOR EVERYONE 
 
REF: A. OTTAWA 594 (BUDGET POLITICS) 
     ¶B. OTTAWA 375 (BUDGET PREVIEW) 
     ¶C. 04 OTTAWA 2779 (SURPLUS) 
     ¶D. 04 OTTAWA 2837 (EQUALIZATION) 
     ¶E. 04 OTTAWA 2560 (HEALTH CARE SUMMIT) 
     ¶F. 04 OTTAWA 832 (2004 BUDGET) 
 
¶1.  Sensitive but unclassified.  Not for Internet or 
distribution outside the USG. 
 
¶2.  (U) Introduction and Summary:  Canada's Opposition 
parties were hard-pressed to complain about the minority 
Liberal Party's February 23 budget.  Prime Minister Paul 
Martin and Finance Minister Ralph Goodale listened to 
Canadians, and tabled a smorgasbord that funds Liberal 
campaign promises, appeases Conservatives with tax cuts and 
increases in defense spending, and provides a nod to the Left 
with funding for the environment and social programs (refs A 
and B).  This budget takes a five-year, rather than the 
previous years' two-year, outlook and continues the GOC's 
commitment to "balanced budgets or better."  The hefty budget 
drew criticism from some for its lack of focus, its skimpy 
funding for many programs, and for back-loading most spending 
and tax cuts until after 2007. It is expected to be approved 
by Parliament the week of March 7. 
 
¶3.  (U) With fiscal impact next year (2005-06) of C$7.4 
billion (US$6 billion), new initiatives in Canada's eighth 
consecutive balanced budget total C$75.7 billion (US$60 
billion) through 2010, with relatively little spending in the 
first two "skinny" years and most spending in the out years 
(2008-10).  The Liberal party campaigned on promises to boost 
spending on health care (ref E), to revise equalization 
payments for the provinces (ref D), and to support cities, a 
national childcare program, and senior citizens.  This budget 
funds those priorities while adopting attractive initiatives 
from the Opposition parties.  The budget previews the 
long-awaited (and long delayed) International Policy 
Statement by providing additional money for foreign affairs, 
steep increases in defense spending (someday), and continuing 
the commitment to increase aid budgets by 8% a year. 
 
¶4.  (U)  Although markets were largely unmoved (pre-budget 
leaks were, on the whole, accurate), analysts attribute the 
Canadian dollar's brief post-budget fainting spell to the 
announcement that the 30% foreign content ceiling on 
tax-advantaged retirement investments would be abolished. 
Details of spending follow in paragraph 8.  End introduction 
and summary. 
 
Notes: 
-- Canada's fiscal year runs from April 1-March 31. 
-- Canadian dollar amounts are converted at the exchange rate 
of about C$0.80/US$1. 
-- The budget documents are available at the Department of 
Finance website: www.fin.gc.ca/finsearch/wn e.asp. 
 
Assumptions 
----------- 
 
¶5.  (U) Using a consensus of private-sector forecasts, the 
budget assumes that Canada's economy will grow 2.9% in 2005 
(slightly lower than previous forecasts), at 3.2% in 2006, 
and at an average of 2.9% for 2007-2009.  Growth slowed 
towards the end of 2004, and expectations for economic growth 
in 2005 have been revised downward as the impact of Canadian 
dollar appreciation is re-assessed.  The budget is based on 
the assumption that in the near term the GOC will not enjoy 
revenue flows that created larger-than-anticipated surpluses 
in recent years. 
 
--  Commodity prices will remain strong, providing continuing 
support to the Canadian dollar. 
 
Fiscal Projections 
------------------ 
 
¶6.  (U) Measures proposed since the last budget (ref F) have 
a fiscal impact of C$10.9 billion (US$8.7 billion) in 2004-05 
and C$7.4 billion (US$6.9 billion) in 2005-06.  In addition 
to the measures announced on February 23, these figures 
include federal commitments made later in 2004 to fund 
healthcare (ref E), revise the equalization framework (ref 
D), and support those affected by the impact of discovery of 
cases of BSE (bovine spongiform encephalopathy) in Canada. 
After a surge in spending this fiscal year, the GOC projects 
two "skinny" years before spending increases after 2007.  Tax 
cuts are either phased in gradually (as with elimination of 
the tax on jewelry) or take effect starting in 2007 or 2008. 
Total net cost of budget initiatives proposed since March 
2004: 
 
Fiscal Year C$ billions US$ billion 
----------- ----------- ----------- 
2004-05     10.9         8.7 
2005-06      7.4         6.9 
2006-07            8.8         7.0 
2007-08           11.1         8.9 
2008-09           16.3        13.0 
2009-10     21.2        17.0 
Total net cost    75.7        60.6 
 
¶7.  (U) This budget continues the GOC's decade-long 
commitment to debt reduction. The unexpectedly large surplus 
in 2004, added to the usual annual C$3 billion set aside for 
debt reduction, mean Canada's debt/GDP ratio continues to 
decline, reaching 38.6% in 2004-05. The federal debt/GDP 
ratio is on target to reach 30.6% by 2009-10 (down from 68.4% 
in 1995 and with a goal of reaching 25% in 2015). This budget 
maintains the traditional C$3 billion contingency reserve and 
an additional cushion for "economic prudence."  If not needed 
during the year, the contingency reserve is dedicated to 
reducing the federal debt.   The allocation for economic 
prudence increases from C$1 billion (US$800 million) next 
year to C$2 billion (US$1.6 billion) in 2006-07 and C$4 
billion (US$3.2 billion) in 2009-10, reflecting the increased 
uncertainty in longer-term projections. 
 
--  Program expenses:  Federal program spending as a share of 
GDP is expected to increase 0.6% to 12.2% in 2004-05 due to 
one-time commitments to the provinces made last year. 
Program expenses in 2005-06 are expected to increase only 2%, 
due to the impact of the one-time measures in 2004-05 that 
boosted spending by 11.9%.  Growth in program expenses in 
2006-07 and 2007-08 is expected to be about 5%.  In the last 
two years of the budget horizon the GOC anticipates growth in 
program spending of about 4.5%.  Overall, program spending 
increases 23% through 2009-10, to C$194.5 billion (US$155.6 
billion) from the current C$158.1 billion (126.5 billion). 
 
--  Surplus:  This year's surplus is expected to exceed last 
year's C$9 billion (US$7 billion) windfall (ref C) but the 
GOC projects declining surpluses in the next two years 
(2006-07 and 2007-08).  Current forecasts show increasing 
surpluses after 2008 as economic growth picks up.  (Note: 
The surplus in 2004 and 2005 has benefited from unexpectedly 
strong growth in tax revenue.  Corporate tax revenues in 2004 
increased 16.6% in 2004 and profits are strong this year. 
Revenue from personal taxes grew by 5.8% in 2004.  End note.) 
 The GOC budget addresses that by front-loading some spending 
commitments to 2004-05 and postponing others.  Over C$11 
billion (nearly US$9 billion) committed to the provinces for 
healthcare and equalization payments in 2004-05 are pending 
Senate passage and royal assent, but are expected to be 
booked by the March 31 end of this fiscal year. 
 
--  Expenditure review:  Upon taking office in December 2003, 
Prime Minister Martin called for expenditure review by all 
departments and agencies, with the objective of identifying 
C$12 billion in low-priority spending that could be 
reallocated (refs C and F).  This budget reflects the result, 
with C$11 billion (almost US$9 billion) in cost cutting. 
Minister Goodale emphasized in his budget speech that 
expenditure review will be an ongoing feature of government 
operations.  Changes include standardizing procurement, 
upgrading technology for check processing, reducing the space 
and cost of furnishings allocated to federal employees, and 
improved property management.  About 10% of the savings comes 
from actually eliminating programs. 
 
--  Provincial governments:  The GOC has agreed to C$41.3 
billion (US$33 billion) over 10 years in new health care 
funding (ref E) and an increase of C$33.4 billion (US$26.7 
billion) over 10 years for a new framework for "equalization" 
payments from rich to poor provinces (ref D).  The 
consolidated provincial-territorial budgets are expected to 
return to surplus this year after two years of deficit, with 
combined federal, provincial and municipal surpluses of C$17 
billion (US$13.6 billion).  The provincial-territorial 
debt/GDP ratio declines to 22.3% in 2004-05, well below the 
federal level.  The recent deals with the provinces have 
focused attention on the ways in which the federal government 
distributes revenues, with Ontario (a net donor province) 
calling for more federal money. 
 
Specific Programs:  a little for everyone 
----------------------------------------- 
 
-- Diplomacy and International Relations 
 
¶8. (SBU) This budget provides an encouraging preview of the 
likely direction of the GOC's long-delayed International 
Policy Statement.  The Department of Foreign Affairs receives 
a significant boost: 
 
o C$42 million (US$33.6 million; "what we hoped for" 
according to a policy expert at Foreign Affairs) to increase 
the number of diplomats abroad. (Canada severely cut back its 
overseas presence in the 1990s due to budget constraints.) 
 
o C$59 million (US$47 million) to boost security at foreign 
missions. 
 
o C$500 million (US$400 million) over five years for new a 
"Peace and Security Fund" controlled by the Department of 
Foreign Affairs.  (Comment:  Although this money is part of 
the foreign assistance envelope, it will be used to fund 
foreign policy initiatives such as capacity building for 
counter-terrorism and African peacekeeping; police training 
(Iraq and Haiti); the Global Partnership with Russia to 
dismantle nuclear weapons, and other similar projects.  End 
comment.) 
 
-- Defense 
 
¶9.  (SBU)  The C$12.8 billion (US$10.2 billion) headline 
figure in additional spending for defense is the largest in 
20 years, although most spending will be after 2008 and much 
is for previously-announced projects.  Spending increases in 
2005-06 (C$500 million/US$400 million) and 2006-07 (C$600 
million/US$480 million) are actually smaller than in past 
years.  By 2009, it is anticipated that the defense budget 
will include additional spending of C$5.7 billion (US$4.6 
billion) a year.  (Note:  Officials at Finance explained that 
once these spending increases are implemented, the reference 
level for future defense spending will be over 20% higher. 
End note.)  Provisions include: 
 
o C$3 billion (US$2.4 billion) over five years to increase 
the number of active duty troops by 5,000 and reservists by 
3,000 and C$3.2 billion (US$2.6 billion) for sustaining 
operations. 
 
o C$2.8 billion (US$2.2 billion) to fund equipment purchases 
such as transport helicopters, aircraft, and support for the 
special forces teams and C$3.8 billion (US$3 billion) to fund 
the "new defense policy."  None of those funds will be 
allocated until 2007. 
 
-- Foreign Assistance 
 
¶10. (U) The foreign assistance envelope increases by C$3.4 
billion (US$2.7 billion) over five years, continuing the 
commitment to increase foreign aid by 8% a year through 2010 
and double aid to Africa from 2003 levels.  As with defense, 
most of the increased aid spending will come after 2006, with 
only C$100 million (US$80 million) of the increase in 
FY2005-06.  This also signals the start of Canada's new 
policy of reducing the number of its recipient countries to 
target those that can make best use of assistance.  The GOC 
says that Canada's generous tsunami response boosted Canada's 
ratio of aid to GDP to 0.3% (from 0.25%), and the new money 
will allow it to maintain the 0.3% level. 
 
-- Security 
¶11. (U) C$1 billion (US$800 million) over five years is 
allocated for security, including: 
o C$222 million (US$178 million) for marine security (patrol 
vessels in the Great Lakes and port patrols). 
 
o C$433 million (US$346 million) for U.S.-Canada border 
security.  (Comment:  This funding is new, and hasn't yet 
been allocated.  End comment.) 
 
--  Environment 
 
¶12. (U) Environmental programs are considered "winners," with 
C$5 billion (US$4 billion) in funding, of which C$3 billion 
is new, scattered through a range of programs.  Canada is a 
Kyoto Accord signatory, and is feeling public pressure to 
start addressing emissions targets.  About half the spending 
provides incentives to reduce greenhouse gases, including: 
 
o  C$1 billion (US$800 million) for a "Clean Fund" to 
stimulate reduction in greenhouse gases. 
 
o C$225 million (US$180 million) over five years to subsidize 
energy-efficient retrofitting of homes. 
 
o C$200 million (US$176 million) over five years (and C$920 
million over 15 years) to encourage installation of wind 
power turbines; 
 
o C$295 million (US$236 million) over five years to 
accelerate the write-off of business spending on energy 
efficient technology. 
 
o C$85 million (US$68 million) over five years to combat 
invasive species in the Great Lakes and 
 
o C$209 million (US$167 million) over five years to improve 
the infrastructure in national parks. 
 
-- Taxes and Finance 
 
¶13.  (SBU) Businesses received a cumulative C$4.9 billion 
(US$4 billion) in tax breaks, but they are either phased in 
very gradually (such as elimination of the tax on jewelry) or 
take effect after 2007.  One of the most notable is the 
reduction in the corporate income tax rate to 19% from 21% by 
¶2010.   Capital cost allowance rates will also be better 
aligned with the life of the assets.  (Note:  We are told 
that tax cuts will not be a high priority going forward.  The 
magnitude of corporate tax cuts probably won't change, but 
implementation may be advanced.  It would be hard to take 
further action on corporate taxes without matching efforts on 
personal taxes.  End note.)  Tax provisions include: 
 
o Increasing the basic personal tax exemption to C$10,000 
(US$8,000) over five years (from C$6,500 now). 
 
o Increasing the contribution limits for tax-advantaged 
retirement accounts to C$22,000 in 2010, from C$18,000 in 
¶2006. 
 
o Increasing tax benefits for those caring for disabled 
dependents or adopting a child. 
 
-- Financial sector 
 
¶14.  (U) There was reiteration of federal support 
(non-financial) for "an enhanced system of securities 
regulation," and the GOC plans to convene a meeting with the 
provinces to work on the issue. 
 
-- There was no mention in the budget of a long-awaited 
decision on bank mergers. 
 
-- The budget launched a review of financial institutions 
legislation, seeking to "refine the current framework to 
increase legislative and regulatory efficiency."  The review 
should result in legislation in 2006. 
 
--  A provision removing the 30% limit on foreign content in 
tax-advantaged retirement plans received widespread 
attention.  Analysts attribute the Canadian dollar's brief 
post-budget fainting spell to this measure); 
 
Everybody's paid, but not everybody's happy 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶15. (SBU)  A GOC fiscal expert describes the budget as a 
"qualified success."  The Liberals handily avoided a 
no-confidence vote, but have been criticized for lack of 
focus, skimpy funding for many programs, and for back-loading 
the spending and the tax cuts.  Several analysts commented on 
the switch to a five-year horizon, despite Paul Martin's 
repeated opposition to long-term budgeting while he was 
finance minister.  The explanation is straight-forward: 
revenues in the coming two "skinny years" are inadequate to 
fund campaign promises and an increasing number of 
initiatives have a five-year (or longer) implementation 
strategy.  Finance officials say "we would have been killed" 
had the budget only addressed funding for the next two years. 
  The five-year time frame was praised by private-sector 
forecasters (and was recommended by the IMF and others) but, 
given that most spending was deferred to the out-years, drew 
some cynical response that this government is making promises 
it may not be around to fulfill.  There has also been 
criticism that for a government preaching "fiscal prudence," 
this much spending is only possible due to surpluses 
resulting from over-taxing Canadians. 
 
¶16.  (SBU) Some of the strongest opposition came from 
officials of the Ontario Liberal Party (not to be confused 
with the federal Liberals).  Premier Dalton McGuinty is 
outspoken about the fact that Ontario provides 40% of federal 
government revenues but receives C$23 billion a year less 
than it provides due to the "equalization payments" to fund 
health care and other provincial services.  As the central 
government revises the equalization framework to provide more 
goodies to Quebec, the Atlantic provinces, the west and 
various interest groups (ref D), Ontario, one of the three 
"donor" provinces, is starting to demand more attention. 
 
Visit Canada's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/ottawa 
 
CELLUCCI