05OTTAWA2672
FY 2006 DVC REQUEST on U.S. Intelligence Reform,
Wed Sep 07 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ottawa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

071500Z Sep 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 OTTAWA 002672 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE 
 
SECSTATE FOR IIP/G/WHA - CBARONE; WHA/PDA - JCARPENTER-ROCK 
MONTREAL, TORONTO, VANCOUVER AND CALGARY FOR PA 
 
E.O.12958:  N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OIIP CA
SUBJECT:  FY 2006 DVC REQUEST on U.S. Intelligence Reform, 
November 2005 
 
 
1.PROGRAM DESCRIPTION: Post requests a November 2005 
  digital video conference with a U.S. specialist on 
  intelligence reform for the University of Montreal's 
  Center for International Studies, International Security 
  Research Group, and potentially other audiences in 
  Canada. 
 
2.TIME FRAME: November 15, 16 or 17, 2005 from 11:30a.m. - 
  1:00 p.m. (EST) with possibility of second, consecutive 
  conference with additional Canadian audiences across 
  Canada. 
 
¶3. JUSTIFICATION and OBJECTIVES:  Launched in April 2004, 
the University of Montreal's Centre for International 
Studies is a new voice in the field of international 
research, exploring such themes as the trans-Atlantic 
dynamic, economic globalization, world government, peace and 
security policy, among other topics.  The Centre frequently 
collaborates with other Canadian and foreign institutions, 
among them McGill University (Montreal), York University 
(Toronto), UNAM in Mexico, and CERI (Paris, France), on 
research into pressing contemporary international topics and 
commands attention from Quebec's and Canada's academic, 
public policy, and research communities.  (Website at 
http://www.cerium.ca/) 
 
¶4.  The Center's International Security Research Group 
(GERSI) plans a series of lectures on the theme of 
intelligence this fall.  As part of the series, the group 
would like to host, via teleconference, an expert on the 
ongoing reform of the U.S. intelligence system.  Like many 
observers, Canadians puzzle over the changes taking place 
within the United States security and intelligence 
establishment as counterterrorism tops the U.S. policy 
agenda and investigative panels such as the 9-11 Commission 
identify priority areas for improvement in U.S. 
intelligence, communications and preparedness. 
 
The Mission would like to program an expert on U.S. 
intelligence who can place today's reforms in an historic 
context, underline the new realities to which U.S. security 
institutions must respond, and outline the administration's 
goals for improving the quality of intelligence gathered, 
its interpretation, and appropriate sharing of intelligence 
in the interests of identifying and combating threats 
against U.S. security. 
 
The post expects the program to inform Canadian scholars on 
security matters, policy advisors and students on lessons 
learned in the intelligence arena and current efforts to act 
on those lessons; underline the common interest of civilized 
nations in working together to combat common threats, and 
the role of intelligence sharing in their efforts; and 
discuss trends in U.S. intelligence strategy and oversight 
in today's environment. 
 
As a close ally and partner in supporting U.S. homeland 
security objectives, Canada has a stake in understanding 
changes in U.S. security policies.  This program will engage 
some of Canada's leading defense and security scholars and 
commentators in an informative discussion, very much 
advancing Mission goals of strengthening counterterrorism 
and defense cooperation with Canada. 
 
4.AUDIENCE: defense and security experts (including media 
  commentators), faculty and graduate students at the 
  University of Montral.  If the speaker agrees, the post 
  may organize a separate, consecutive video conference 
  following the University of Montreal session for 
  academics, officials and media representatives at other 
  sites in Canada. 
 
5.TYPE OR NAME OF SPECIALIST REQUIRED: 
  Post requests a recognized expert on U.S. intelligence 
 
  who can offer illustrations and insights on how and why 
  the U.S. has chosen its current direction in managing 
  national intelligence. 
 
  Former Congressman Lee Hamilton (now Director of the 
  Woodrow Wilson Center for International Affairs), who 
  served as co-chair of the National Commission on 
  Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States and won the Paul 
  ¶H. Nitze Award for Distinguished Authority on National 
  Security Affairs in 1999, or 9-11 Commission contractor 
  and national security historian Timothy Naftali, author 
  of "Blind Spot," a history of US counterterrorism efforts 
  since the second world war, would be ideal.  Both have 
  some understanding of Canadian perceptions of US security 
  policy, from recent contacts, first-hand insight into the 
  issues the 9-11 Commission grappled with, and credibility 
  with Canadian audiences. 
 
  If neither Hamilton nor Naftali is available, the post 
  welcomes IIP suggestions of other intelligence experts 
  drawn from the 9-11 Commission, U.S. military or security 
  bureaus or academies, or highly regarded independent 
  think tank or university scholars.  The speaker should be 
  able to discuss the evolution of U.S. security needs and 
  approaches as well as current thinking on how best to 
  manage the complex demands of the current international 
  security environment.  The speaker may speak frankly 
  about the findings of the 9-11 Commission and lessons 
  learned over the past four years, but should clearly 
  present the expected improvements current reforms should 
  make in intelligence community structure and the role of 
  intelligence in policymaking. 
 
6.LANGUAGE REQUIREMENTS: English 
 
7.MPP THEME:  Counterterrorism, Close Ties with Allies and 
  Friends 
 
8.MISSION PROGRAM OFFICER: PA Montreal Annick Landreville 
  (pending late Sept. arrival of PAO Susan Bell); tel 
  (514)908-3655; fax (514)398-0899;  Back-up, Elizabeth 
  Kauffman, Cultural Affairs Officer Ottawa, (613) 688- 
  ¶5314. 
  DVC Technican:  Michel Papineau; Tel (613)688-5392; fax - 
  (613)688-3101; e-mail:  papineaumr@state.gov; Back-up, 
  Danielle Lorrain, tel (613) 688-5315, e-mail 
  lorraind@state.gov. 
9.FUNDING SPECIFICS:  Speaker honorarium from I-Bucks if 
  eligible. 
Post appreciates IIP support for this request. 
 
WILKINS