05PARIS3406
FRANCE:  VISIT OF TASK FORCE ON THE UNITED NATIONS
Wed May 18 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 003406 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OREP AMGT FR
SUBJECT: FRANCE:  VISIT OF TASK FORCE ON THE UNITED NATIONS 
 
REF: A. STATE 85180 
     ¶B. SENSIBAUGH-KANEDA E-MAILS 
 
¶1.  Embassy Paris welcomes May 31-June 1 visit by the Task 
Force on the United Nations (ref A) and grants country 
clearance. 
 
¶2.  Embassy Control Officer is Political Assistant Robert 
Kaneda, who can be reached by phone at (33-1) 43.12.27.44, by 
fax at (33-1) 43.12.26.63, or by e-mail at 
kanedarj@state.gov.  He can also be reached through the 
Embassy switchboard at (33-1) 43.12.22.22.  When calling from 
within France, visitors should use the local prefix "01" 
instead of the international prefix (33-1). 
 
¶3.  Based on information in refs A and B, we have begun 
logistical preparation for the visit.  Please advise whether 
Heather Sensibaugh will be in the delegation when it visits 
Paris (the e-mail and printed schedule she provided are not 
clear on that point).  Please advise if delegation members 
want to stay in the George V hotel (above perdiem), where the 
Gingriches will be staying, or would prefer a hotel within 
perdiem.  Delegation is requested to provide credit card 
information (brand of card, name on card, card number, 
expiration date) so that we can hold the rooms.  We will do 
our best to obtain early-morning access to the hotel rooms 
but some hotels can guarantee early access only if the rooms 
have been reserved for the previous night.  If early-morning 
access is essential, please authorize us to reserve rooms for 
the preceding night.  We would also appreciate any updates in 
the schedule so that we can assist with arrival/departure and 
also arrange a meeting with the Ambassador or charge 
d'affaires.  Embassy will make a vehicle available for 
airport pickup/departure and for the party's use during its 
stay in Paris. 
 
¶4.  In the event of a crisis or serious international 
incident involving the United States, visitors should 
immediately contact the Embassy. 
 
¶5.  Mission Media Policy:  In accordance with Embassy Paris 
media policy, visitors from all agencies should coordinate 
all media events, including press interviews or statements, 
with the Embassy press officer. 
 
¶6.  Embassy wishes to remind visitors that visas are required 
for holders of U.S. diplomatic or official passports on 
official business in France. 
 
¶7.  Action request:  Each visitor must bring a copy of their 
travel orders (or forward fiscal data) to cover costs of 
visit.  Each agency, organization, or visiting delegation 
will be charged for the actual costs attributed to their 
visit.  These costs include, but are not limited to, American 
and FSN overtime, field travel by Embassy employees, vehicle 
rentals, long distance telephone calls, equipment rentals, 
representational events and all other costs that are directly 
attributable to the visit. 
 
¶8.  Following is current security information for France: 
 
(A)  Terrorism:  The current terrorism threat in France 
mirrors the general worldwide threat.  Trans-national terror 
groups such as al-Qaida likely have a presence in France and 
do present a general threat.  French law enforcement and 
intelligence services are effective in responding to this 
threat and remain in a heightened state of alert, but cannot 
completely negate it.  For this reason American citizens 
should practice good personal security when visiting France. 
Remaining unpredictable is perhaps the simplest but most 
effective way of ensuring personal safety.  This is 
particularly true when departing or arriving at your place of 
residence.  Being aware of your surroundings and suspicious 
persons or activities is also critically important.  Do not 
accept packages, do not open hotel doors to strangers and 
immediately report any suspicious activities to the police 
(telephone 17) and Regional Security Office (telephone 
33.1.43.12.27.96). 
 
(B)  Crime:  Street crime in French cities is similar to that 
in most large metropolitan areas.  The two most frequent 
crimes are pick pocketing and snatch/run theft.  These 
criminals most often ply their trade on public transportation 
routes used by tourists and at tourist sites. In Paris, 
visitors should be particularly alert when using Metro lines 
number one and two, in addition to the RER trains serving the 
airports.  Tourist sites such as the Eiffel Tower, 
Montmartre, the major museums and the Avenue des Champs 
Elysees are all areas of heavy activity. Visitors should use 
hotel safes whenever possible to store valuables and excess 
cash.  Awareness should go up when conditions are crowded. 
Maintain control of camera and bags; do not carry these items 
behind you.  Criminals on metros often push into you for 
distraction and pickpocket while doing so.  Another technique 
is to grab valuables and escape just as the metro doors are 
closing.  If credit cards are stolen, proceed to the nearest 
telephone and immediately notify the card issuer.  Stolen 
credit cards are used immediately.  Whenever possible, take a 
seat or keep your back to a wall when on the metro system. 
It is also recommended that a photocopy of your passport 
identification page be carried in lieu of the passport 
itself.  Report any incident to the Regional Security Office 
as soon as possible. 
 
(C)  Electronic devices: privately owned laptops and personal 
computers are prohibited in controlled access areas (CAAs) of 
the Mission and consulates.  Cellular telephones are also 
prohibited in the CAA and must be left outside this area. 
Questions concerning other types of electronic devices may be 
directed to the Information Management Office or Regional 
Security Office. 
 
(D)  Travelers planning to stay longer than 30 days are 
required to schedule a security briefing with the RSO.  For 
additional threat assessment information regarding France 
and/or Europe, you may contact DS/ITA in the State Department 
at (202) 663-0787. 
 
¶9.  Health Concerns:  For up-to-date information on Severe 
Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), Mad Cow Disease and other 
health precautions for France, the U.S. Centers for Disease 
Control (CDC) website contains a detailed analysis of risks 
involved at: http://www.cdc.gov/travel/diseases.htm. 
WOLFF