05PARIS2662
COMMUNITY OF DEMOCRACIES: FRENCH PARTICIPATION
Tue Apr 19 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS PARIS 002662 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM PREL FR
SUBJECT: COMMUNITY OF DEMOCRACIES: FRENCH PARTICIPATION 
 
REF: STATE 66867 
 
¶1. France will be represented at the April 28-30 meeting of 
the Community of Democracies by MFA IO Director Jean-Maurice 
Ripert, who will be accompanied by Ambassador-at-large for 
human rights issues Michel Doucen and MFA IO human rights 
expert Donatienne Hissard.  The French Ambassdor in Santiago 
and a member of the embassy staff will complete the French 
delegation. 
 
¶2. Asked about any French initiatives, Hissard told poloff 
April 19 that France preferred not to be "in listening mode," 
but that the GoF had received few details from the Chileans 
concerning the round tables on various issues.  When we cited 
examples of initiatives launched since the Seoul ministerial, 
and stressed that the USG welcomed creative proposals, 
Hissard had no specifics to offer.  Hissard queried whether 
Under Secretary Dobriansky would be in Santiago, but made no 
request for a bilateral meeting. 
 
¶3. According to the Chilean Embassy in Paris, the Chilean 
Director General for political affairs met with Ripert and 
MFA Polical Director Stanislas de Laboulaye in early March to 
press for high-level attendance.  The Chilean Embassy told us 
that France had considered sending Secretary of State for 
Foreign Affairs Renaud Muselier, but that Muselier was 
unavailable. 
WOLFF