05PRETORIA4711
BLUE LANTERN:  RESPONSE TO PRE-LICENSE END USE
Tue Nov 29 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Pretoria
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS PRETORIA 004711 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PM/DTCC BLUE LANTERN COORDINATOR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC KOMC SF
SUBJECT: BLUE LANTERN:  RESPONSE TO PRE-LICENSE END USE 
CHECK ON LICENSE 05-970107 
 
REF: STATE 202806 
 
¶1.  PolOff made appropriate enquiries concerning license 
05-970107.  Through telephone contact with Ergonomics 
Technologies (Ergotech) company technician Karen Bredenkamp, 
PolOff learned that Ergotech is a research-oriented business 
that examines the effects of vibration on the human body. 
Ergotech's client base consists primarily of the South 
African National Defense Forces (SANDF) and mining companies. 
 Bredenkamp explained that Ergotech uses its equipment to 
study vibrations emanating from equipment such as aircraft, 
tanks, and mining carts, and the resultant effects upon 
people working in that environment. 
 
¶2.  During a November 23 site visit, Ergotech Executive 
Manager Jan Ryno Smith confirmed to PolOff that Ergotech did 
place the order in question.  Smith produced a folder with 
all relevant documents, including the DSP 83 Nontransfer and 
Use Certificate.  Smith then showed PolOff around the 
facility, including demonstrations of Ergotech's existing 
telemetry transmitter, which Smith stated was close to being 
obsolete.  Smith noted that the order in question was one of 
the few systems they found that could detect vibrations in 
the 0-80 Hz range, which is the range evaluated by Ergotech 
for its clients. 
 
¶3.  COMMENT:  Smith was credible and forthcoming, and 
acknowledged understanding of his responsibilities in regard 
to potential transfer of this order.  Mission assesses that 
the likelihood of diversion of the order is negligible, given 
Ergotech's need for the equipment to conduct its research 
into the effects of vibrations on human workers.  END 
COMMENT. 
TEITELBAUM