05PRETORIA1704
SAG OFFICIALS RECEPTIVE TO U.S. INTERNATIONAL PORT
Tue May 03 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Pretoria
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PRETORIA 001704 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/EPS AND AF/S/TCRAIG AND KGAITHER 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EWWT PTER ECON SF IMO
SUBJECT:  SAG OFFICIALS RECEPTIVE TO U.S. INTERNATIONAL PORT 
SECURITY PROGRAM 
 
REFTEL:   A)  04 PRETORIA 4199 
          B)  04 DURBAN 113 
 
(U) Sensitive but Unclassified.  Not for Internet distribution. 
Please protect accordingly. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY.  South African officials were receptive to 
U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) Officer Brian Gilda's presentation of the 
International Port Security Program (IPSP).  Officials openly 
discussed South Africa's efforts to comply with and implement the 
International Ship and Port Facility Security (ISPS) Code.  The 
Coast Guard's follow-up letter to formalize the program should be 
addressed to Department of Transport (DOT) Director-General Mpumi 
Mpofu.  U.S. officials should continue to highlight the value of 
multilateral cooperation, reciprocal visits, and the exchange of 
port security best practices to ensure maximum SAG cooperation on 
the program.  Meetings with officials from other Department of 
Homeland Security (DHS) agencies based in South Africa were also 
productive.  This cable was cleared by USCG Officer Brian Gilda. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (U) U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) Officer Brian Gilda and Econoff 
met with South African government officials and maritime 
transport industry representatives April 18-21 to present the 
U.S. Coast Guard's International Port Security Program (IPSP). 
The program fulfills USCG responsibilities under the U.S. 
Maritime Transportation Security Act to assess the effectiveness 
of security measures implemented in overseas ports.  Gilda also 
presented the program to officials from other DHS agencies based 
in South Africa (i.e., Customs and Border Patrol - CBP, 
Immigration and Customs Enforcement - ICE, Container Security 
Initiative - CSI, ICE Attache, as well as the Drug Enforcement 
Agency).  Those officials expressed appreciation at being 
informed of the IPS program prior to its formalization in South 
Africa and offered valuable insight on key individuals and 
agencies within South Africa's maritime industry. 
 
------------------------------ 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESPONSE TO IPSP 
------------------------------ 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Gilda was well-received by DOT, Customs, NPA, and South 
African Port Operations (SAPO) officials who also expressed 
interest in Gilda's proposal to cooperate in the areas of ISPS 
compliance and maritime security.  DOT Deputy Manager for 
Maritime Regulation Andrew Maswanganye, who is also acting-chair 
of the national maritime security committee (MSEC), said he 
looked forward to "an exchange of best practices."  He said that 
he would like to present the program at the next MSEC meeting 
scheduled for May.  South African port stakeholders hold monthly 
port security meetings (PSEC) and national stakeholders meet 
every other month (MSEC). 
 
¶4.  (SBU) SAPO Senior Manager for Security Vusi Khumalo and NPA 
Durban Port Manager for Security Justice Blose were excited about 
prospects for bilateral collaboration on port and maritime 
security issues.  These officials and others openly discussed 
South Africa's efforts to implement the ISPS Code as well as 
challenges they have faced. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
SOUTH AFRICA'S ISPS IMPLEMENTATION EFFORTS 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶5.  (SBU) South Africa has created a "master security plan" to 
serve as the basis for all port and port facility security plans. 
(NOTE: Unlike the United States where the entire port is a port 
facility, South Africa considers individual terminals within the 
port to be port facilities. END NOTE).  In addition, Econoff 
observed noticeable improvements since last July at Durban Port's 
Maydon Wharf.  Security officers now conduct thorough screenings 
at temporary booms stationed at every road throughout Maydon 
Wharf where the water can be accessed from public roads. 
Officials also confirmed that South Africa requires a 96-hour 
notification and manifest prior to arrival at port. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) NPA officials told Econoff that the Authority is 
developing a web-based portal system to receive and disseminate 
pre-arrival documentation to the various national agencies and 
will begin rolling it out at the East London port in September 
¶2005.  Officials also said that South African Police Services 
(SAPS) plan to launch a harbor police unit consisting of 900 
officers later this year.  Officials and industry representatives 
at the Durban and Cape Town ports said they have struggled to 
find a balance between the need for security and restricting 
access to areas that historically have been open to the public. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
WHO HAS AUTHORITY OVER PORT SECURITY ISSUES? 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) South Africa's Department of Transport (DOT) issues 
policies and regulation pertaining to sea ports, while the 
National Ports Authority (NPA) implements them.  In June 2004, 
the DOT amended the Merchant Shipping Act of 1951 to include 
Maritime Security Regulations.  The regulations incorporate the 
International Ship and Port Facility Security (ISPS) Code.  South 
Africa declared its ports to be in compliance with the ISPS Code 
in July 2004 (Reftel B).  DOT Director-General Mpumi Mpofu has 
direct responsibilities for maritime security and should be the 
recipient of the Coast Guard's follow-up letter to formalize the 
program. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) The South African government values a multilateral 
approach on most issues.  Gilda's emphasis on the reciprocal 
visit aspect of the International Port Security Program resonated 
with South African officials.  His depiction of the program as an 
opportunity to share best practices in the interest of effective 
ISPS implementation was also well-received.  This strategy and 
focus should be pursued during future interactions with the SAG 
to ensure maximum cooperation on the program. 
 
¶9.  (U)  This cable was cleared by USCG Officer Brian Gilda. 
 
FRAZER