05SANJOSE1740
PRESIDENT PACHECO COMMENTS ON CAFTA-DR
Wed Aug 03 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy San Jose
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SAN JOSE 001740 
 
SIPDIS 
 
WHA/CEN 
EB FOR WCRAFT 
E FOR TSMITHAM 
WHA FOR WMIELE 
WHA/EPSC FOR KURS 
H FOR JHAGAN 
STATE PASS TO USTR FOR JYOUNG, CPADILLA, AMALITO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD ECPS ECON PREL PGOV SOCI CS
SUBJECT: PRESIDENT PACHECO COMMENTS ON CAFTA-DR 
 
REF: (A) SAN JOSE 01639 
     (B) SAN JOSE 01455 
     (C )SAN JOSE 01713 
     (D) SAN JOSE 01720 
     (E) SAN JOSE 01722 
 
¶1. (U) On August 3, 2005, during his first weekly press 
conference held since CAFTA-DR was approved and signed by 
President Bush, Costa Rican President Abel Pacheco 
officially congratulated the U.S. government for ratifying 
the United States-Central America-Dominican Republic Free 
Trade Agreement(CAFTA-DR) and remarked on the efficiency of 
the U.S. Congress.  At the same time, President Pacheco 
insisted that, in Costa Rica's case, there is no hurry to 
approve the agreement and it is necessary to take the time 
to analyze CAFTA-DR and to not make hasty decisions. 
 
¶2.  (U) "I am happy that George W. Bush ... signed CAFTA- 
DR.  It is enviable how American democracy works," said 
President Pacheco.  He added that "throughout history, 
Costa Rica has been prudent, and I prefer to wait until the 
clouds clear ... I will wait on the opinion of the 
Commission of Eminent Persons who are studying the 
agreement." (Ref A) 
 
¶3.  (U) Pacheco added, "I always have said that in Costa 
Rica we will sign CAFTA-DR at the appropriate moment, and 
it is the Legislative Assembly that will make the 
decision."  He continued "...why do you push me regarding 
how long it will be until I send CAFTA-DR to the Assembly? 
I don't understand.  Throughout history we have seen that 
when we rush to judgment, things turn out badly."  When 
asked about mounting pressure from various business and 
political groups (Refs C, D, and E), he retorted "What is 
the hurry?  We will go slow." 
 
¶4.  President Pacheco reiterated his requirement that the 
Legislative Assembly approve the Fiscal Reform package 
prior to his sending CAFTA-DR to the Assembly (Ref B). 
KAPLAN