05SANAA300
NOMINATING YEMEN TV TO UNDERTAKE A TV CO-OP PROJECT
Mon Feb 14 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Sanaa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SANAA 000300 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR GEORGE SANTULLI, PA/OBS/BS, NEA/PD 
CENTCOM FOR POLAD 
NEA/PPD FOR MQUINN, JSMITH, CWHITTLESEY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO YM KSRE
SUBJECT: NOMINATING YEMEN TV TO UNDERTAKE A TV CO-OP PROJECT 
IN THE UNITED STATES. 
 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: The US Embassy's Public Affairs Office, Sana'a, 
nominates Yemen TV to undertake a TV co-op project during 
FY2005. Two people from Yemen TV, a reporter and a 
cameraman, would participate. 
 
¶2. The primary aim of the project is to focus on key aspects 
of US foreign policy objectives in the Middle East with 
particular emphasis on Iraq and the Palestine/Israel 
conflict, both issues of concern to the Arab- American 
community. In this respect, the program will seek to explore 
views of the American Arab communities and organizations 
about how the US government is responding to their concerns 
and what role these groups and organizations are playing to 
influence US foreign policy towards the Arab region. The 
program will seek to explore views of US State Department 
officials as well. 
 
¶3. The project aims to increase coverage of American 
political culture, make Yemeni viewers more aware of the 
relationship between the US government and Arab-American 
communities and the role these communities play in 
presenting regional concerns to US foreign policy makers. 
Participation of a Yemeni TV team in this program will also 
improve Yemeni TV professionalism helping them produce well- 
investigated and well-prepared programs and provide Yemen TV 
with an opportunity to get involved and share opinions and 
experiences with their counterparts. 
 
¶4. It is important for Embassy Sana'a to support Yemeni 
participation in this program to increase Yemeni TV 
professionalism, offer Yemen TV hands-on training, increase 
awareness of American society and help create a better 
understanding of the relationship between the US Government 
and Arab-American communities. Yemen TV participation will 
also enhance cooperation and improve an already positive 
relationship which the US Embassy's Public Affairs Office 
maintains with Yemen TV. 
 
KRAJESKI