05TAIPEI4927
TAIWAN POLICE NAB COUNTERFEIT PHARMACEUTICALS
Tue Dec 20 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TAIPEI 004927 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/RSP/TC AND EB/TPP/IPE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KIPR ETRD TBIO SOCI TW ESTH IPR
SUBJECT: TAIWAN POLICE NAB COUNTERFEIT PHARMACEUTICALS 
 
REF: TAIPEI 2143 
 
¶1.  Summary: Taiwan law enforcement has had two significant 
counterfeit pharmaceutical cases leading to arrests and 
seizures in December.  In the first case, Taiwan's IPR Police 
busted a ring selling counterfeit drugs on the internet, 
arresting two and seizing 5000 pills of counterfeit medicines 
smuggled from China.  On December 7, police raided a 
warehouse in a Taipei suburb, arresting two suspects and 
seizing over 500,000 pills of counterfeit medicines that were 
also smuggled from China.  This was the largest seizure of 
counterfeit pharmaceuticals in Taiwan this year, and police 
officials consider it a major blow to sales of counterfeit 
medications in northern Taiwan.  End Summary. 
 
==================================== 
IPR Police Nab Internet Drug Sellers 
==================================== 
 
¶2.  Taiwan police investigations of counterfeit 
pharmaceutical rings have resulted in two significant raids 
and the arrest of four suspects in December.  On December 2, 
Taiwan's IPR police, the Criminal Investigation Bureau and 
Taipei prosecutors led a raid on two locations in central 
Taiwan, arrested two suspects, and confiscated 5000 pills of 
counterfeit medicines including weight-loss drug Reductil, 
erectile dysfunction drugs Viagra and Cialis, and about 1600 
unidentifiable pills.  The suspects had paid couriers to 
smuggle the pills from China and then used the internet to 
sell to unsuspecting Taiwan customers at a price 
significantly below the market price. 
 
============================================= 
Biggest Drug Bust in Taiwan Nets Flu Medicine 
============================================= 
 
¶3.  On December 7, police from four separate units raided a 
warehouse in the Taipei suburb of Xizhi, making two arrests 
and seizing 550,000 pills of counterfeit medicines including 
Viagra, Cialis, Reductil, Stillnox, Zantac, over 120,000 
doses of counterfeit flu medication and another 210,000 pills 
of undetermined medicines.  In addition to the counterfeit 
medications, police also found large quantities of packaging 
materials, instruction pamphlets, and labels.  Police 
estimated the street value of the counterfeit drugs was over 
NT$300 million (US$9 million).  The quality of the 
counterfeits was extremely high.  Product colors and markings 
were identical to the real product and the packaging 
contained security features identical to genuine product. 
According to the Taipei Prosecutor's office, even company 
representatives were unable to determine visually that these 
products were counterfeit. 
 
¶4.  According to the police investigation report, the 
suspects purchased the counterfeit medicines from suppliers 
in China and then smuggled the counterfeit products into 
Taiwan through air cargo, sea-freight containers, and the 
postal system.  Once in Taiwan, the counterfeit drugs would 
be packaged and resold to pharmacies, medicine shops and 
night-market sellers all over Taiwan.  The suspects used 
Taiwan's express-delivery companies to make deliveries. 
According to a statement from one of the suspects, they had 
already begun importing chemicals and were planning to begin 
producing some counterfeit drugs in Taiwan.  Police believe 
that this raid has successfully shut down the biggest 
counterfeit pharmaceutical importing operation in Northern 
Taiwan. 
 
==================================== 
Comment: Welcome and Unwelcome Signs 
==================================== 
 
¶5.  These two raids are welcome signs of the seriousness of 
Taiwan's law enforcement agencies determination to crack down 
on piracy.  The IPR police have been involved in a series of 
raids over the past year on criminals using the internet to 
sell counterfeit drugs, clothes, watches, and optical media 
-- mainly smuggled into Taiwan from China.  Other police 
units and prosecutors have been actively investigating 
counterfeit pharmaceutical sales occurring through 
pharmacies, drug shops, and night markets leading to several 
arrests.  Like many of Taiwan's other manufacturing 
industries, the making of counterfeit products seems to have 
been outsourced across the Strait.  The lack of a mechanism 
for cross-Strait law enforcement cooperation makes this kind 
of outsourcing even more attractive for counterfeiters. 
¶6.  However, the size of the seizure is an unwelcome sign of 
the scope of the counterfeit pharmaceutical problem in 
Taiwan.  Arrests of petty criminals selling small amounts of 
fake goods have increased but arrests of larger-scale 
counterfeiters is still rare, making the successful Xizhi 
raid even more significant.  Penalties for dealing in 
counterfeit pharmaceuticals were increased in 2004 but 
judicial backlogs and lack of expertise lead to lengthy 
prosecutions and non-deterrent sentences. One newspaper 
reported that the main suspect in the Xizhi case had been 
arrested previously for selling counterfeit medicines but was 
out on bail awaiting trial. 
¶7.  The seizure for the first time in Taiwan of large amounts 
of counterfeit flu medication is clearly linked to public 
concerns about insufficient stock of Tamiflu to treat Avian 
Influenza.  Apparently, the counterfeiters know their market. 
 End Comment. 
PAAL