05TAIPEI727
MEDIA REACTION: TAIWAN STRAIT SECURITY IN U.S.-
Wed Feb 23 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TAIPEI 000727 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/RSP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - 
ROBERT PALLADINO 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: TAIWAN STRAIT SECURITY IN U.S.- 
JAPAN SECURITY PACT 
 
 
¶1. Summary: Only the two limited circulation English- 
language newspapers in Taiwan continued to editorialize 
about the joint statement of the U.S.-Japan 
Consultative Committee, while almost all Taipei dailies 
focused their coverage on local politics.  The centrist 
"China Times" carried on its front page President 
George W. Bush's comment in Brussels on lifting the 
arms ban toward China by the European Union, while the 
largest Taiwan daily, the pro-independence "Liberty 
Times" spent half of its page two discussing the 
possible contents and impact of China's "anti- 
secession" law, which is scheduled to be passed in 
early March. 
 
¶2.  An editorial in the limited circulation, 
conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China 
Post" called on the people in Taiwan to note that the 
"noticeable inclusion [of the issue of tensions in the 
Taiwan Strait in the U.S.-Japan security pact] 
reflected the two countries' increasing uneasiness 
about China's growing military might and a concerted 
effort by them to keep an emerging superpower in 
check."  It also urged Taiwan to seek to thaw its 
relations with Beijing so that Taiwan does not have to 
make a huge military investment.  The limited- 
circulation, pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan 
News," however, said in its editorial that Washington 
and Tokyo's decision should lead the Taiwan people to 
take more seriously their own obligations for self- 
defense instead of fostering complacency or dependence 
on the protection of other countries.  End summary. 
 
A) "Joint U.S.-Japan Effort to Contain a Rising China" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language 
"China Post" [circulation: 30,000] noted in an 
editorial (2/23): 
 
"We in Taiwan must not see Saturday's joint declaration 
by Washington and Tokyo to include the issue of 
tensions in the Taiwan Strait in the scope of their 
alliance simply as an expression of a shared concern 
about the security of this island.  There is something 
more to it: The noticeable inclusion also reflected the 
two countries' increasing uneasiness about China's 
growing military might and a concerted effort by them 
to keep an emerging superpower in check. 
 
"Taiwan surely should welcome the U.S. and Japan's 
proclamation that easing tensions in the Taiwan Strait 
was part of their `common strategic objectives' and 
that they intend to make it a goal to encourage a 
`peaceful resolution of issues concerning the Taiwan 
Strait through dialogue.' 
 
"But Taipei needs to understand that the decision by 
the two governments for the first time to cover Taiwan, 
along with North Korea, in their bilateral security 
treaty as an issue of concern was prompted also by 
their own strategic interests.  An understanding by 
Taipei of this broad background will help it avoid 
making mistakes in addressing relations with 
Washington, Tokyo and Beijing in particular. . 
 
". [T]he reason that Washington wanted to put Taiwan 
into the joint U.S.-Japan declaration might not 
entirely be a consideration for this island's security. 
Rather the U.S. government hoped that Japan from now on 
assume a bigger role in blocking the military expansion 
of China.  This is because the U.S., too, has begun to 
feel the threat of Beijing's growing military strength. 
. 
 
"In short, Taipei must not unrealistically take Tokyo 
and Washington's heightened concern about Taiwan's 
security as a new policy of their willingness to side 
with this island against Beijing.  It would be 
seriously wrong to believe that this island could thus 
push ahead with plans to pursue formal independence 
without having to worry about retaliation from China. 
When the U.S. and Japan expressed hope that Taiwan and 
China would resolve their differences peacefully, they 
also meant that neither side should provoke the other 
by seeking to change the status quo. 
 
"Any attempt by Taipei to use the newfound opportunity 
to build an alliance with the U.S. and Japan to 
antagonize China would also be seriously wrong.  Even 
Washington and Tokyo, while wary of China's growing 
military strength, want to do their best to improve 
their relations with that country, rather than pursuing 
a confrontational approach. 
 
"Taiwan, a small island which has become increasingly 
reliant on the Chinese mainland for economic growth, 
naturally cannot afford to continuously treat Beijing 
like an enemy.  It is in Taiwan's best interests to 
achieve a thaw in Beijing's relations. 
 
"An improvement of such ties would not only help Taiwan 
secure a greater share of the mainland market, it may 
also eliminate the need for us to continue to make a 
huge military investment, which has become financially 
unbearable for us." 
 
B) "Taiwan Cannot Just Depend on Others" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" 
[circulation: 20,000] editorialized (2/23): 
 
"The United States and Japan sent a clear and welcome 
message to the People's Republic of China February 19 
to rein in its intensifying campaign on the military, 
diplomatic and legal fronts to pressure Taiwan to 
accept `unification,' peaceful or otherwise. 
 
"However, the expression of concern by Washington and 
Tokyo should lead Taiwan citizens to take more 
seriously our own obligations for self-defense instead 
of fostering complacency or dependence on the 
protection of other Pacific powers. . 
 
"The point manifests the fact that although the 
positions of Washington and Tokyo on the Taiwan Strait 
problem are gradually converging, the triangular 
relationship between the U.S., Japan and the PRC 
continues to be extremely delicate. 
 
"The U.S. and Japan have used the joint security 
statement to express their grave concern over the 
expansion of the PRC's military clout and the 
aggressive nature of its deployment.  However, the two 
Pacific powers clearly still hope that Beijing can play 
a constructive mediating role to resolve the festering 
crisis in North Korea and also do not wish to provoke 
the PRC. 
 
"Therefore, Taiwan should not lapse into excessive 
optimism and exaggerate the implications on Saturday's 
new development and neglect our own responsibility and 
obligation for our own defense or let down our guard 
against the PRC. . 
 
"The inability of our country, for reasons of partisan 
antagonism and ideological disputes, to act in 
accordance with its own national interests will 
inevitably lead to a day when the U.S. and Japan are no 
longer willing to act as our effective protectors.  If 
Taiwan cannot become recognized as a country, then its 
reliance on `reflected interests' from the Japan-U.S. 
security alliance will ultimately be limited. 
 
"The Taiwanese people should strive to join with the 
U.S. and Japan to sign a joint mutual security treaty 
and should not sanguinely expect to receive the 
protection of foreign countries." 
 
PAAL