05TAIPEI1620
MEDIA REACTION: U.S. AND CROSS-STRAIT
Mon Apr 04 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

040832Z Apr 05UNCLAS TAIPEI 001620 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/RSP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - 
ROBERT PALLADINO 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S. AND CROSS-STRAIT 
RELATIONS 
 
 
Summary: Focus of the major Chinese-language Taipei 
dailies fell on local politics and the possibly 
upcoming visits to China by KMT Chairman Lien Chan and 
PFP Chairman James Soong.  The centrist "China Times" 
ran a banner headline on its front page April 4 that 
read: "James Soong: Seriously considering Beijing's 
invitation to visit China."  On the same day, however, 
Taiwan's largest daily, the pro-independence "Liberty 
Times," carried a page two story that said "James Soong 
questioned the timing and the role of Chiang when he 
visited China."  In addition, the "China Times" noted 
in an editorial that all three major political parties 
in Taiwan have been racing to play the cross-Strait 
relations card lately, but the real climax of this 
gambling game, according to the article, lies in how 
the behind-the-scenes United States will now play its 
card.  End summary. 
 
"It's the Big Brother's Turn to Show His Card Now" 
 
The centrist, pro-status quo "China Times" 
[circulation: 600,000] noted in an editorial (4/4): 
 
"The three major political parties [in Taiwan] have all 
been busy playing the cross-Strait [relations] card 
lately. .  But the real climax of this gambling game is 
to see how the United States, which hides itself behind 
the game, will play its card. 
 
"The real reason that forced [President] Chen Shui-bian 
to abandon his plan to write a new constitution for 
Taiwan, to rectify the island's name, and to return to 
the so-called new middle-of-the-road route was not the 
[DPP's] defeat in last year-end's Legislative Yuan 
elections or Beijing's intimidation.  Instead, it was 
the behind-the-scene strong pressure from the United 
States that forced Chen to do so.  [PFP Chairman] James 
Soong [faced a similar situation]; Soong found a new 
political foothold for himself because of [his 
connection with] the United States, and that was how 
the Chen-Soong meeting was born.  The same for the KMT 
-- it dared to move westbound boldly to visit Beijing 
simply because it knows that in the short term, Chen 
must maintain a moderate attitude toward cross-Strait 
issues.  It is the United States who plays the key role 
in all these series of changes and developments. 
 
"But what really displeased Washington about Chen was 
not his pro-independence stance but his disobedience. 
That is why Washington wants to teach Chen a lesson. 
Chen's recent performance was like a student who tried 
very hard to do good in order to make up for his 
demerit record. . A-bian knows very clearly that an 
obedient prodigal son can please the United States 
better than a prodigal son that returns. 
 
"On the other hand, even though the KMT emphasized that 
its meetings with the Chinese Communist Party were to 
alleviate cross-Strait tensions and accomplish 
something that the DPP has failed to do, the KMT might, 
if acting carelessly, likely step on the red line drawn 
by the United States on the other end.  The KMT's move 
might make the United States which was originally 
worried about a possible outbreak of conflicts across 
the Taiwan Strait to start concerning that the 
accelerated development of the cross-Strait relations 
might run counter to the interests of Washington ." 
 
"The United States is in general pleased with the Chen 
Shui-bian administration's recent performance.  But now 
it may be the KMT's turn to become the target that 
receives pressure from the United States." 
 
KEEGAN