05TELAVIV87
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Thu Jan 06 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 TEL AVIV 000087 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Mideast 
 
¶2.  Iraq 
 
¶3.  Israel-Turkey Relations 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Maariv and Yediot highlighted issues related to the 
opposition to the disengagement plan.  Maariv bannered 
a call by PM Sharon on IDF soldiers to resist 
protesters and not to let them "slap you in the face." 
Sharon was visiting a paratrooper battalion that had 
participated in the evacuation of two caravans in a 
settler outpost near Yitzhar on Monday.  (All media 
reported that an IDF conscript from Yitzhar who 
disrupted the evacuation was tried on disciplinary 
charges Wednesday and sentenced to 28 days in a 
military stockade.)  Yediot reported that four 
battalion commanders and 30 commanders in an IDF 
reserves unit have signed a letter calling for massive 
refusal to enlist in the evacuation of settlements. 
Israel Radio and leading Israeli web sites reported 
that Thursday IDF Chief of Staff Lt. Gen. Moshe Ya'alon 
summoned the members of group, saying he will summarily 
kick them out of the military if they do not rescind 
their threats.  Ha'aretz, Jerusalem Post and Israel 
Radio reported that Wednesday A-G Menachem Mazuz 
ordered police to launch an investigation against the 
head of the West Bank's Kedumim Regional Council, 
Daniella Weiss, as well as the founder of the far-right 
Defensive Shield organization, Noam Livnat (the brother 
of Education Minister Limor Livnat, who told Israel 
Radio that although she opposes the evacuation of 
settlements, she does not support disobedience by 
soldiers), who are suspected of inciting soldiers to 
evade their duty and disobey orders.  Israel Radio says 
that they are not likely to be indicted. 
 
All media (banners in Ha'aretz and Jerusalem Post) 
reported that United Torah Judaism (UTJ) has decided 
that it will join the coalition for a three-month trial 
period, after Rabbi Yosef Shalom Elyashiv, the 
spiritual leader of Degel Hatorah, a key faction of the 
party, gave his consent to the deal on Wednesday. 
According to Israel Radio, the new government is likely 
to be sworn in on Monday. 
 
Mahmoud Abbas (Abu Mazen), the leading contender for PA 
chairmanship, was quoted as saying in an interview with 
Maariv, whose tone was conciliatory, that he will "make 
order" in the PA after being elected.  Abbas was quoted 
as saying that he is not afraid of Hamas, only of 
Allah, that now is an excellent time for peace, and 
that he will move the road map forward.  A senior PA 
official in Ramallah was quoted in an interview with 
Jerusalem Post as saying that the PA could launch a 
"Fallujah-style" operation against Hamas and its 
supporters if the movement continues its verbal 
offensive against Abbas.  Leading media reported that 
Wednesday the Fatah Central Committee officially called 
on Hamas to stop firing rockets and cease the 
incitement against Abbas, saying that the rocket 
attacks provide an excuse for continued IDF activity in 
the Gaza Strip. 
 
Ha'aretz cited an announcement by the State Department 
Wednesday that Senators John Sununu (R-NH) and Joe 
Biden (D-DE) will head the official U.S. observer team 
monitoring the Palestinian elections.  The delegation 
will also include a number of U.S. representatives and 
American public figures of Palestinian origin, such as 
George Salem and Ziad Assali, and will be accompanied 
by U.S. Consul-General in Jerusalem David Pearce. 
Michel Rocard, head of the EU's 260-person election 
monitoring team, was quoted as saying in an interview 
with Jerusalem Post that one properly run election may 
not make a democracy, but that is a good place to 
begin. 
 
Israel Radio reported that this morning IDF troops 
killed a terrorist who infiltrated the greenhouses of 
the Ganei Tal settlement in the Gaza Strip's Katif 
Bloc. 
 
All media reported that Wednesday the State Department 
released a new report to Congress -- the "Report on 
Global Anti-Semitism" mandated by President Bush in 
October.  Jerusalem Post notes that the report says 
that a combination of traditional anti-Jewish 
prejudice, strong anti-Israel sentiment, and Europe's 
growing Muslim population has contributed to a recent 
rise in global anti-Semitism.  Leading media write that 
the report adopts the position that demonization of 
Israel or comparison of Israeli leaders to Nazis is not 
legitimate criticism but rather anti-Semitism. 
 
Ha'aretz quoted GOI sources as saying that a "highly 
classified problem" was the reason for a special 
meeting Sharon convened earlier this week on the crisis 
in Israel's relations with Russia, with the 
participation of FM Silvan Shalom, Defense Minister 
Shaul Mofaz, the heads of the intelligence agencies, 
and a few civil servants.  The newspaper quoted the 
sources as saying that the information given to the 
media after the meeting -- that Israel is worried by 
recent statements of an anti-Semitic nature made by 
President Vladimir Putin-- was partial and tendentious, 
and that it was aimed at concealing the real reason for 
the crisis, which Sharon insisted be kept secret. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that Education Ministry D-G Ronit 
Tirosh has announced that the position held by a Shin 
Bet representative charged with carrying out background 
checks on teachers and principals in the Israeli Arab 
education system is being done way with. 
 
Akiva Eldar of Ha'aretz describes Israeli-Palestinian 
talks that took place at various Israeli locations from 
February 2004 until the end of the year, at which point 
they ended with a concluding document that was released 
after Arafat's death.  IPCRI (the Israeli/Palestine 
Center for Research and Information) participated in 
the talks. 
 
Leading media reported that National Union MK Aryeh 
Eldad has demanded that the A-G bar Abbas from entering 
Jerusalem because the Palestinian leader published a 
book in 1984 denying the Holocaust.  Eldad said that a 
recent amendment to the penal code allowed putting 
Holocaust deniers on trial. 
 
Yediot reported that the Knesset has passed, 43-16, a 
decision memorializing the heritage of Rehavam Zeevi 
(a.k.a. Gandhi), the minister assassinated by PFLP 
gunmen in October 2001, who had advocated the idea of 
transfers of Arabs from Israel.  The newspaper cited 
the response of former Labor Party leader, MK Amram 
Mitzna, that the vote represented a cheapening of the 
concept of commemoration. 
 
Ha'aretz noted that Israel is ranked 33rd in that Wall 
Street Journal-Heritage Foundation Worldwide Index of 
Economic Freedom, which evaluated 155 countries. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that 82 UN member states have so far 
responded to UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan's appeal 
to hold a special session in the General Assembly to 
mark the 60th anniversary of the liberation of 
Auschwitz. 
 
Citing statements by police that there is a huge 
improvement in the enforcement of IPR-related laws in 
Israel, Yediot ran a feature on the distribution of 
counterfeit products in Israel.  The newspaper notes 
that punishing measures are ineffective. 
 
Erratum: Ha'aretz printed corrected graphics of poll 
results from Tel Aviv University's December Peace 
Index, which appeared in the newspaper on Wednesday. 
The figures should read: 
-"Do right-wing soldiers have the right to refuse 
service in the territories?"  No: 68 percent; yes: 27 
percent; 5 percent are undecided. 
-"Do left-wing soldiers have the right to refuse 
service in the territories?"  No: 76 percent; yes: 18 
percent; 5 percent are undecided. 
 
 
 
 
 
------------ 
¶1.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Chief Economic Editor and senior columnist Sever 
Plotker wrote in the editorial of mass-circulation, 
pluralist Yediot Aharonot (January 6): "The basic 
premise of Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's latest 
political move, i.e. that the ultra-Orthodox circles 
will lend a hand to his disengagement initiative ... 
has proven itself." 
 
Liberal columnist Yehuda Litani wrote in mass- 
circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot: "All sides -- 
Israelis, Palestinians, Americans, and others -- expect 
significant changes to happen in the Palestinian 
Authority in the wake of the elections... [But Mahmoud 
Abbas] is likely to fail." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
¶I.  "Ultra-Orthodox Part From Greater Israel" 
 
Chief Economic Editor and senior columnist Sever 
Plotker wrote in the editorial of mass-circulation, 
pluralist Yediot Aharonot (January 6): "The basic 
premise of Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's latest 
political move, i.e. that the ultra-Orthodox circles 
will lend a hand to his disengagement initiative -- if 
they only receive in return Shinui's removal from the 
government -- has proven itself.  Rabbi Yosef Shalom 
Elyashiv permitted the United Torah Judaism (UTJ) 
faction last night to join Sharon's new disengagement 
coalition.... From a foreign policy standpoint, the 
position taken by the leaders of ultra-Orthodox Jewry 
is clear: in favor of the withdrawal from Gaza and 
evacuation of all its settlements.... In the last 
generation ... nationalistic opinions have [actually] 
heightened among the young ultra-Orthodox 
generation.... After the PA elections and the beginning 
of negotiations between Sharon and Abu Mazen, [Shas 
party mentor] Rabbi Ovadia [Yosef] will also find 
reasons to cancel the ruling against the withdrawal, 
since this will no longer be a 'unilateral' move but 
rather a 'consensual' one.  In the space of less than a 
year, then, Sharon has succeeded in causing an 
earthquake in the Israeli right wing.... The government 
that stands to be presented to the Knesset next week is 
far from perfect.... Sharon does not have all the time 
in the world.  In the coming months, which will be 
critical for his plan, his vision and the country's 
future, he must focus on one sole issue: 
disengagement.... Sharon is now a prime minister 
leading a government made up of parties with no love 
lost between them, and the only adhesive binding them 
together is the faith they have in his withdrawal 
vision.  Any move that may jeopardize this coalition 
can and must be deferred." 
 
II.  "There's No Void Around Abu Mazen" 
 
Liberal columnist Yehuda Litani wrote in mass- 
circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot (January 6): 
"All sides -- Israelis, Palestinians, Americans, and 
others -- expect significant changes to happen in the 
Palestinian Authority in the wake of the elections. 
Even for a charismatic leader such as Arafat, who, as 
PA chairman, earned support -- albeit reserved -- from 
all factions of the Palestinian people, this had been 
an arduous task.  Abu Mazen does not enjoy such 
support.... He is likely to fail.  How can he put an 
end to the violence when various factions of the Fatah 
organization he heads are disobedient and refuse to 
dismantle their weapons?.... Regarding the presence of 
the IDF in Palestinian population centers, and the 
continuation of the settlements, Abu Mazen will be 
totally dependent on Israel -- at this stage, there's 
no sign of willingness for a change.  As regards 
corruption, Mahmoud Abbas is part and parcel of the PLO- 
Tunisia establishment that is now working to have him 
elected.... It looks as though the optimism currently 
surrounding the election campaign will dissipate 
quickly: Palestinian violence will go on, the IDF will 
continue to rule the Palestinians heavy-handedly, and 
the situation of corruption won't improve.  An accusing 
finger will be pointed at Abu Mazen, who believes he 
can rescue his nation from the impasse in which it find 
itself.  He is not aware that that he will actually be 
elected as a sacrificial lamb." 
 
--------- 
¶2.  Iraq: 
--------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Middle East affairs commentator Guy Bechor, a lecturer 
at the Interdisciplinary Center, wrote in mass- 
circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot: "It is time for 
the Americans to understand that in the Syrian case, 
severe reprimands will not be enough.   Even sanctions 
will not do." 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"It Is Time for the Americans to Understand" 
 
Middle East affairs commentator Guy Bechor, a lecturer 
at the Interdisciplinary Center, wrote in mass- 
circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot (January 6): 
"The Americans are slowly losing their illusions 
regarding Syrian President Bashar Assad.  After four 
years, he appears in their eyes not as a great hope but 
as a bitter disappointment and even a threat....  Just 
as Hafez Assad undermined Lebanon's internal stability 
from the outside and encouraged terror and violence to 
the point of civil war there, the Syrians are now 
trying to do the same in their eastern neighbor, 
formerly their fierce contender for regional 
hegemony....  In light of Iraq's historical standing in 
the Middle East, elections in this country are expected 
to have a dramatic effect on the future of democracy 
and the regimes in the entire Middle East.  For the 
sake of this critically important experiment, for the 
sake of unfortunate Iraq, and what is no less important 
for the Americans, for the sake of their downtrodden 
soldiers, it is time for the Americans to understand 
that in the Syrian case, severe reprimands will not be 
enough.   Even sanctions will not do." 
 
 
 
 
 
---------------------------- 
¶3.  Israel-Turkey Relations: 
---------------------------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized: "The 
erroneous approach that has thus far guided Jerusalem 
is that Turkey needs Israel, due to the latter's ties 
with Washington, more than Israel needs Turkey." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"A Test of Friendly Relations" 
 
Independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized 
(January 6): "The chill that has characterized Turkey's 
official relations with Israel thawed this week when, 
for the first time in two years, Turkish Foreign 
Minister Abdullah Gul agreed to visit here. It is hoped 
that in the wake of this visit, Turkish Prime Minister 
Recep Tayyip Erdogan's promise to visit Israel will 
also be fulfilled.... Turkey is the only Muslim state 
whose relationship with Israel has popular, economic 
and security dimensions.... The bilateral relationship 
is therefore a mutual strategic asset that requires 
continuous mutual nurturing, and Turkey can cushion the 
path of diplomatic talks if Israel allows it to do so. 
Israel, however, has taken this relationship for 
granted.  The erroneous approach that has thus far 
guided Jerusalem is that Turkey needs Israel, due to 
the latter's ties with Washington, more than Israel 
needs Turkey.  This distorted approach has led Israel 
to spurn Turkey's efforts to sell it water or to 
increase the number of Turkish workers in the country. 
Israel has also refrained from proposing Turkish 
participation in major projects here, yet at the same 
time it seeks to participate in major projects in 
Turkey.  This approach needs a shake-up, just as the 
Turkish prime minister's views on Israeli policy need 
correction." 
 
CRETZ