05TELAVIV571
WB/G SITREP: IDF ARRESTS FIVE PALESTINIANS IN THE
Mon Jan 31 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEL AVIV 000571 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR BURNS/SATTERFIELD/DIBBLE; 
NEA/SA/EX FOR RICHIE; DEPT FOR DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR 
DS/IP/NEA; 
NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN; USAID FOR DCHA, DCHA/FPP, PRM FOR 
DEWEY/GREENE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG PHUM PREL PTER ASEC CASC GZ IS
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: IDF ARRESTS FIVE PALESTINIANS IN THE 
WEST BANK, INCLUDING AN AL-AQSA MEMBER; IN GAZA, THE IDF 
KILLS A 10 YR-OLD PALESTINIAN AND WOUNDS A 7 YR-OLD IN 
RAFAH;  JANUARY 31, 2005 (1300 HOURS LOCAL) 
 
 
This is a joint ConGen Jerusalem/Embassy Tel Aviv cable. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: Despite the absence of incursions or 
demolitions in the Gaza strip, the IDF accidentally shot and 
killed a 10 year-old girl and wounded another 7 year-old 
Palestinian child in Rafah January 31.  As many as 32 
Palestinians, including passersby, were injured in violent 
clashes that broke out between Hamas and Fatah supporters 
January 29 in al-Maghazi camp, one of the few areas won by 
Fatah during the election.  In the West Bank, the IDF 
arrested five Palestinians, including one al-Aqsa Brigades 
member.  End Summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) ATTACKS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Death: Nil 
 
-- Injury: Nil. 
 
-- Clashes: Israeli and Palestinian demonstrators clashed 
with the IDF January 28 in the vicinity of Iskaka village, 
near the Israeli settlement of Ariel. 
 
-- Curfew/Arrest: IDF soldiers January 29 imposed a curfew 
and conducted searches of Palestinian homes in the village of 
Seida east of Tulkarm.  The IDF arrested a senior al-Aqsa 
Brigades member. 
 
-- Arrests: The IDF arrested the evening of January 29 four 
Palestinians in Hebron. 
 
-- Arrests: The IDF January 30 arrested two Fatah activists 
in a refugee camp near Nablus. 
 
-- Shooting: Unknown gunmen fired upon an IDF vehicle January 
29 traveling in the vicinity of Hebron.  There were no 
injuries reported from the incident. 
 
-- Shootings: IDF soldiers January 30 came under gunfire in 
two separate incidents in Nablus.  There were no injuries 
reported from the two incidents. 
 
-- Prisoner Release: The IDF January 29 released from custody 
a senior Preventive Security Officer from Nablus arrested 
last week.  Mohammad Dahlan had requested the PSO officer's 
release in advance of Dahlan's meeting with Israeli Defense 
Minister Mofaz. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) DEMOLITIONS: 
 
-- The IDF January 31 announced plans to demolish 
approximately 74 buildings, including homes, constructed 
without permits in the Sur Baher neighborhood of East 
Jerusalem.  The buildings are located within 500 meters of 
the separation fence. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- Senior PA officials met with their Israeli counterparts 
the evening of January 29 to discuss the handing over of West 
Bank cities to Palestinian control.  The parties discussed 
the handover of Ramallah, Tulkarm, Qalqiliya, and Jericho. 
 
-- Palestinian Authority (PA) President Mahmud Abbas is 
scheduled to return to Ramallah February 2 following overseas 
visits to Jordan, Russia, and Turkey. 
 
-- Prime Minister Abu Ala'a arrived January 29 in the Gaza 
Strip for meetings with PA officials and members of the 
various Palestinian factions.  Palestinian press reports 
speculated on possible cabinet appointments including 
Mohammad Dahlan as Minister of Cabinet Affairs, Nabil Amr as 
Minister of Information, and Nasir Yusif as Minister of 
Interior. 
 
-- The Palestinian Legislative Council commenced 
deliberations January 29 over the amended general elections 
law, retirement law, and several other draft laws.  These 
deliberations will continue until February 3. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Death: A 10 year-old Palestinian girl was killed by IDF 
fire in the southern Gaza Strip on January 31, according to 
Israeli media (see "injury"). 
 
-- Death: The IDF reported that one Palestinian suspect was 
killed on January 30 near Rafah (see "shooting"). 
-- Injury: According to Israeli media, a 7 year-old 
Palestinian girl was injured by IDF fire in Rafah January 31 
(see "death"). 
 
--Injuries: UNRWA and Israeli media reported that as many as 
32 Palestinians, including passersby, were injured in violent 
clashes that broke out January 29 in al-Maghazi camp, one of 
the few areas won by Fatah during the election.  The clashes 
were reportedly provoked by Hamas supporters who entered the 
camp chanting slogans.  Shots were fired and both sides used 
IEDs, small arms, knives, rocks and clubs in their dispute 
until the fight was broken up community leaders, according to 
UNRWA. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: According to the IDF, two mortar shells 
exploded January 29-30 at Netzer Hazani, but no injuries 
occurred. 
 
-- Shootings: The IDF reported two shooting incidents, one 
near Rafah (see "death") and one near Khan Yunis January 
29-31. 
 
-- Explosive devices: According to the IDF, four explosive 
devices, none of which detonated, were discovered between 
January 29-31.  Two of these were discovered near Sufa 
crossing, one at Kissufim and one at Atzmona. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) INCURSIONS/DEMOLITIONS: Nil. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS: 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was open January 29-31, with a major detour at 
Netzarim Junction. 
 
-- Erez Crossing was open for internationals and diplomats, 
but closed for Palestinians January 29-31. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone remained closed January 29-31. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers January 
31, but was open for the import of aggregates used in 
construction. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was closed January 29-31. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open for arrivals January 29-31, but 
not departures. 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan checkpoint was closed January 29-31.  Toufah 
checkpoint was open for departures only for residents of 
al-Mowassi January 29-31. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS 
 
-- Israeli media reported that approximately 150,000 people 
demonstrated peacefully in Jerusalem January 30 against the 
PM Sharon's Gaza disengagement plan. 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
KURTZER