05TELAVIV2310
WB/G SITREP: TWO PALESTINIAN YOUTHS INJURED IN THE
Wed Apr 13 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEL AVIV 002310 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FRONT OFFICE; NEA/SA/EX FOR RICHIE; DEPT FOR 
DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN; USAID 
FOR DCHA, DCHA/FPP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG PHUM PREL PTER ASEC CASC GZ IS
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: TWO PALESTINIAN YOUTHS INJURED IN THE 
WEST BANK APRIL 12-13; IN THE GAZA STRIP, THE IDF DISCOVERS 
TWO EXPLOSIVE DEVICES AND TWO MORTAR SHELLS -- APRIL 13, 
2005 (1300 HOURS LOCAL) 
 
 
This is a joint ConGen Jerusalem/Embassy Tel Aviv cable. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: One Palestinian youth was injured 
critically when a stray bullet hit him in the chest in 
Tulkarm in the West Bank April 12.  Another Palestinian youth 
was injured in the Balatah refugee camp in Nablus when an 
explosive device detonated in his hands April 12.   Two 
mortar shells were discovered near Gadid in the Gaza strip 
April 13.  Two explosive devices were also discovered, 
according to the IDF, near Karni and Rafah April 12.  End 
Summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
(SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injury: A Palestinian youth on April 12 sustained critical 
injuries when a stray bullet hit him in the chest as he stood 
on the roof of his house in Tulkarm.  Palestinian sources 
claimed that the bullet likely originated from the direction 
of the Israeli District Coordination Office, located several 
hundred meters away from the house. 
 
-- Injury: A Palestinian youth on April 12 suffered critical 
injuries in the Balatah refugee camp in Nablus, after an 
explosive device detonated in his hands. 
 
(SBU) ARRESTS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Arrest: The IDF on April 12 arrested a Palestinian 
teenager at the Huwwara checkpoint, south of Nablus, after he 
attempted to detonate one of five homemade bombs that he 
carried underneath his overcoat. 
 
-- Arrests: The IDF on April 12 arrested three Palestinian 
youths in Salim village, east of Nablus.  The youths had 
thrown firebombs at Israeli vehicles traveling in the West 
Bank. 
 
-- Shooting: Palestinian gunmen on April 12 fired on IDF 
soldiers in the Qaddim settlement, southeast of Jenin.  There 
were no reported injuries from this incident. 
 
(SBU) DEMOLITIONS: 
 
-- Israeli bulldozers on April 13 demolished two Palestinian 
homes in the village of  Anata, on the outskirts of 
Jerusalem, for lacking the proper building permits. 
 
(SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- Palestinian media reported on April 13 that the 
Palestinian Authority (PA) cabinet has approved a resolution 
to unify all official media institutions under the control of 
the PA Ministry of Information.  The cabinet also approved 
the creation of a &media executive council8, to be headed 
by the Information Minister, that will include Palestine 
Broadcasting Corporation, Wafa News Agency, and the State 
Information Service (SIS). 
 
-- Israeli and Palestinian media reported on April 13 that 
Abdel-Fatah Hamayel, a former PA cabinet minister who is 
heading a committee responsible for disarming Palestinian 
gunmen, stated that some 200 Palestinians have already signed 
a pledge not to carry out acts of violence.  Hamayel reported 
that 80 former gunmen have enlisted with the PA security 
services, even though they have yet to turn over their 
weapons to the PA. 
 
-- Fatah secured 23 seats, followed by 22 seats for Hamas, 
during April 12 student council elections conducted at Bir 
Zeit University in Ramallah.  Pro-PIJ activists won one seat, 
a coalition of PFLP/DFLP/FIDA won three seats, and the 
Palestinian People,s Party and an independent bloc each won 
one.  Hamas activists have led the council since 1994. 
 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
(SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injuries: Nil. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: According to the IDF, two mortar shells 
were discovered near Gadid April 13. 
 
-- Shootings: Nil. 
 
-- Explosive Devices: The IDF reported that its troops 
discovered two explosive devices April 12, one north of Karni 
crossing and another one north of Rafah. 
 
(SBU) INCURSIONS/DEMOLITIONS: Nil. 
(SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS: 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was open April 13, with a major detour at Netzarim 
Junction.  Abu Khouli checkpoint was open April 13. 
 
-- Erez Crossing was open for internationals and for a 
limited number of Palestinians April 12, and 4,606 laborers 
and 250 merchants crossed into Israel. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone was open April 12 and 674 
laborers entered. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers April 
13, but was open for the import of aggregates used in 
construction. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was open, but operating slowly April 13. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open for arrivals and departures April 
¶13. 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan checkpoint was closed April 13.  Toufah 
checkpoint was open for residents of al-Mowassi. 
 
(SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- According to Israeli media, PM Sharon announced April 13 
that the homes of settlers in Gush Katif will not be 
destroyed if disengagement plans are coordinated with the 
Palestinians in July. 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
CRETZ