05TELAVIV3226
WB/G SITREP: PA SECURITY OFFICERS AND CIVIL POLICE
Fri May 27 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEL AVIV 003226 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FRONT OFFICE; NEA/SA/EX FOR RICHIE; DEPT FOR 
DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN; USAID 
FOR DCHA, DCHA/FPP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG PHUM PREL PTER ASEC CASC GZ IS
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: PA SECURITY OFFICERS AND CIVIL POLICE 
CLASH IN RAMALLAH -- MAY 27, 2005 (1400 HOURS LOCAL) 
 
 
This is a joint ConGen Jerusalem/Embassy Tel Aviv cable. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: Officers from the Palestinian Authority 
(PA) Preventive Security Organization (PSO) and the PA civil 
police clashed in Ramallah on the evening of May 26 following 
a dispute between a PSO officer and members of the civil 
police.  At least three civil police sustained injuries in 
the clashes.  Egyptian mediators continue efforts to resolve 
the dispute between Fatah and Hamas over a re-vote in several 
municipalities in Gaza.  The IDF made a number of arrests in 
the West Bank and Gaza, including of two Fatah activists in 
Nablus.  The IDF demolished several agricultural structures 
in the West Bank, reportedly for lack of proper building 
permits.  End Summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Death: Nil. 
 
-- Clashes/Injuries: Officers from the Palestinian Authority 
(PA) Preventive Security Organization (PSO) and the PA civil 
police clashed on the evening of May 26 in Ramallah. 
According to Palestinian sources, the clashes erupted after 
the PA police arrested a PSO officer who refused to remove 
his vehicle from the entrance of the Muqatta'a.  PA police 
reportedly beat the PSO officer while in their custody before 
releasing him later the same day.  In response, some ten PSO 
personnel attacked several civil police officers and 
kidnapped at least two (later releasing them).  An additional 
three civil police officers sustained injuries following an 
intense exchange of gunfire in central Ramallah.  PA 
officials have ordered an investigation into the incident. 
 
 
-- Shooting: Palestinians on May 26 fired gunshots at an IDF 
position near Qaddim settlement, southeast of Jenin.  There 
were no injuries reported from this incident. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) ARRESTS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Incursion/Arrests: The IDF on the evening of May 26 
entered Nablus and arrested two Fatah activists.  The IDF 
withdrew following the operation. 
 
-- Arrests: The IDF on May 26 arrested one Palestinian from 
Bayt Iba village near Nablus, and one Palestinian from 
Qalqilya. 
 
-- Arrest: The IDF on May 26 arrested a Palestinian at an IDF 
checkpoint near Nablus, after discovering that the 
Palestinian was carrying ammunition in a bag. 
 
-- Incursion: The IDF on May 26 entered Bayt  Awwa village, 
west of Hebron, and surrounded a house that the IDF suspected 
contained wanted gunmen.  During the operation, the IDF 
opened fire on the house, causing significant damage to the 
property.  The house turned out to be uninhabited. 
 
-- Incursion: The IDF on May 26 entered the al-Fariah refugee 
camp, south of Tubas, to conduct a search for wanted 
militants.  There were no arrests reported from this 
operation. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) DEMOLITIONS: 
 
-- The IDF on May 26 bulldozed four structures used for 
farming in the vicinity of Tubas.  The structures reportedly 
lacked the proper building permits. 
 
-- The IDF on May 26 bulldozed an unknown number of shacks 
and agricultural structures in Idhna village, west of Hebron, 
for lacking the proper building permits. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- PA security advisor Jibril Rajub on May 26 met with jailed 
West Bank Fatah leader Marwan Barghuti to discuss upcoming 
elections for the Palestinian Legislative Council (PLC), as 
well as internal Fatah elections scheduled for August. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injuries: According to UNRWA, a 14-year-old Palestinian 
girl was wounded May 26 when IDF soldiers opened fire towards 
Rafah/Shabora camp. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets:  The IDF reported that one explosive 
device was found and dismantled May 27 about one kilometer 
north of the Kissufim crossing. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets:  According to the IDF, one mortar shell 
was fired May 27 at an IDF outpost south of Katif Village. 
No injuries resulted. 
 
-- Shootings: According to UNRWA, IDF soldiers in the outpost 
near Gadid settlement opened fire at a group of persons near 
the Austrian Housing project in Khan Younis.  No injuries 
resulted. 
 
-- Explosions: Nil. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) ARRESTS: According to UNRWA, the IDF arrested four 
unarmed Palestinians when they attempted to infiltrate into 
Israel through the security fence south of the Karni 
crossing. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) INCURSIONS/DEMOLITIONS: Nil. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS: 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was open May 27, with a major detour at Netzarim 
Junction. 
 
-- Erez Crossing was open May 26, and 3,898 Palestinian 
laborers and 465 merchants entered. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone was open May 26, and 605 laborers 
entered. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers May 27, 
but was open for the import of aggregates used in 
construction. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was partially open May 27. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open for arrivals and departures May 
¶27. 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan checkpoint was closed May 27.  Toufah 
checkpoint was open for residents of al-Mowassi, except males 
aged 16-30. 
 
¶10.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: Egyptian mediators met 
with Fatah and Hamas leaders May 26 in an effort to resolve 
the municipal election dispute.  No resolution was reached, 
but the mediation efforts are supposed to continue. 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
KURTZER