05TELAVIV5913
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Fri Sep 30 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

301031Z Sep 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 TEL AVIV 005913 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
USCINCCENT MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
Mideast 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Kol Israel quoted a senior U.S. Government official in 
Washington as saying that the Palestinian Authority 
must immediately begin to impose its authority in the 
Gaza Strip, and that implementation of the road map 
cannot even begin unless this precondition is 
fulfilled. The source said the acts of violence in the 
Gaza Strip are sabotaging the efforts of the 
administration to promote the move towards peace. 
Earlier the White House spokesman said President Bush, 
at his meeting with Abu Mazen, would demand that the 
Palestinian Authority chairman impose law and order in 
the Gaza Strip. 
 
All media quoted PM Sharon's vehement denial yesterday 
of rumors that Israel was planning additional 
unilateral steps similar to the Gaza disengagement. 
Speaking at the Annual Israel Management Conference, PM 
Sharon said: "Yesterday there was a rumor, as a result 
of baseless remarks...I am telling you here, Israel is 
not about to examine any other plans.  We have only one 
plan, the road map, which the U.S. backs, and I see no 
change in its position, and that is the only plan that 
exists." On the same subject, Ha'aretz and Kol Israel 
reported on the meeting yesterday between the PM and 
Ambassador Jones, in which the PM presented this 
position of rejecting further unilateral moves and 
adhering to the road map. 
 
Jerusalem Post reports that Kim Howells, Britain's 
Minister of State for the Middle East, praised Israel's 
response to the firing of Kassam from Gaza and hinted 
that financial aid to the PA might be withheld if the 
PA did not seriously begin tackling the terrorism in 
its midst. 
 
Ha'aretz quoted PA Leader Mahmoud Abbas as saying 
yesterday that the IDF is jeopardizing any chance of 
peace, and condemning the ongoing IDF offensive against 
Palestinian militants in the West Bank and Gaza. 
 
Israel Radio reported this morning that two Al-Aqsa 
Martyrs brigades activists were killed in the Balata 
refugee camp in Nablus following an exchange of fire 
with an IDF paratrooper force that came to apprehend 
fugitives. Eleven fugitives were arrested. Ala Danakra, 
a leader of the wanted El-Aksa Martyrs Brigade in 
Balata, warned that his men would respond to the 
killing of two of their comrades, saying that the 
"Tahadiya" - the temporary ceasefire - had ceased to 
exist. Yediot Aharonot reports that following 
intelligence information, there is an high alert in the 
IDF, out of a fear that the Hamas will try kidnapping 
an IDF soldier. 
 
Ha'aretz report that former Pentagon employee Larry 
Franklin has struck a deal with prosecutors and plan to 
plead guilty next week to a number of charges against 
him.  He will also testify against former AIPAC 
officials suspected of passing on information they 
received from him to a number of Israeli Embassy 
employees and journalists. 
 
Kol Israel reported this morning that the Fatah 
organization won in yesterday PA elections with more 
than sixty percent of the votes in the third round of 
the local authority elections in the West Bank. The 
Palestinians say Israel did not try to disrupt the 
elections in the areas under its control, even though 
Hamas was taking part. 
 
All media focused on the decision by Attorney General 
Meni Mzuz to re-open a probe into October 2000 riots, 
which left 13 Israeli-Arab citizens dead. The Ministry 
of Justice is considering the option of exhuming the 
bodies, even if the families oppose the move. A/G Mazuz 
is quoted as saying that "if we erred, we will correct 
it." 
 
Yediot Aharonot reported that Jordan's Ambassador to 
Israel Maaruf Suleiman el Bahith confirmed yesterday 
that King Abdullah of Jordan will soon visit Israel and 
the PA. 
 
------------ 
Mideast 
------------ 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
Military correspondent Alex Fishman opined in mass- 
circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot that: "Israel's 
pullout from Gaza gives it legitimization to expand the 
intensity and variety of the military responses to 
infringement of its sovereignty.  The window that the 
Americans are giving us is a function of catastrophe. 
Until a catastrophe occurs-Israel can continue." 
 
Military correspondent Amos Harel wrote in independent, 
left-leaning Ha'aretz:  "The military reaction in Gaza 
helped Sharon's standing in the Likud vote..  Yet, in 
both cases, success will be hard to preserve in the 
long run..  The question is, when will the IDF attacks 
boomerang because, instead of turning the Gaza public 
against HAMAS, they bolster hostility toward Israel." 
 
Political analyst Yoel Marcus wrote in independent, 
left-leaning Ha'aretz:  "To reach the April primaries 
safely, if indeed they are held on time, Sharon will 
have to form an internal coalition in his party.  He 
will have to pledge his adherence to the political 
arrangement and, speaking in a closed forum, he indeed 
pledged not to deviate from his political plan and 
execute it according to the road map." 
 
 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
Â¶I.  Military correspondent Alex Fishman opined in 
Yediot Aharonot: "The interest at the heart of the US 
policy in the region is: to safeguard Arik Sharon. 
Associates of Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice were 
even disappointed by Sharon's achievement in the Likud 
Central Committee.  From their standpoint, it would 
have been preferable for him to fail and establish a 
new centrist party, which would make order in the 
Israeli political establishment.  The polls carried out 
by the US embassy in Israel regarding Sharon's 
political situation strengthened their sense that he is 
the best investment they have in the region. 
Ostensibly, the Americans are demonstrating a great 
deal of activity in the Gaza Strip.  For example, they 
are now looking for a replacement for the security 
coordinator to the Palestinian security 
services-General Ward, who is returning to command the 
US Central Command (CENTCOM) in Europe.  There is also 
extensive activity surrounding the economic envoy to 
the PA James Wolfensohn, who is threatening to leave 
his position, since he feels he has done all he can as 
fundraiser for the Palestinians.  The job is too small 
for him.  He wants to enter the emerging history of the 
region in a more central role, and he needs to be 
placated.... As far as the Americans are concerned, 
Israel's pullout from Gaza gives it legitimization to 
expand the intensity and variety of the military 
responses to infringement of its sovereignty.  The 
window that the Americans are giving us is a function 
of catastrophe.  Until a catastrophe occurs-Israel can 
continue." 
 
II.  " Military correspondent Amos Harel wrote in 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: "Ari'el Sharon's 
week ended better than it started on both the political 
and the security fronts....and the two fronts are 
closely connected. as the military reaction in Gaza 
helped Sharon's standing in the Likud vote.... Yet, in 
both cases, success will be hard to preserve in the 
long run because they do not resolve the basic 
paradoxes in which Sharon performs....  On the 
Palestinian ring, Israel is currently taking steps to 
remove HAMAS from the PA political game, knowing that 
if it succeeds, it will be forcing the organization to 
resume its terrorist war against it.... Presently, the 
strong-arm policy in the Gaza Strip provides Sharon and 
Defense Minister Mofaz with political gains., but if 
the skirmishes should continue, Israel will apparently 
be facing a problem..  The question is, when will the 
IDF attacks boomerang because, instead of turning the 
Gaza public against HAMAS, they bolster hostility 
toward Israel....  The scenario where an escalation of 
the struggle against the organization would make it lay 
down its guns sounds too far-fetched, at least for the 
moment. and international understanding and sympathy 
could vanish in an instant." 
 
III.  " Political analyst Yoel Marcus wrote in 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz:  "PM Sharon won the 
Likud Central Committee vote, but the truth is that he 
did not win the war, but only one battle..  His future 
rule is still hanging on a thread. with the budget vote 
that might advance the elections and the Likud 
primaries in April, where he needs his party to elect 
him candidate for prime minister..  He must work with 
his head, not his gut. and first mend the rifts and win 
the next primaries on the ticket of forsaking the 
Greater Israel dream...  To reach the April primaries 
safely, if indeed they are held on time, Sharon will 
have to form an internal coalition in his party.  He 
will have to pledge his adherence to the political 
arrangement and, speaking in a closed forum, he indeed 
pledged not to deviate from his political plan and 
execute it according to the road map, provided the 
Palestinians do their share..  Revenge against those 
who played their tricks on him can wait.  It is always 
better served cold." 
JONES