05TELAVIV4183
WB/G SITREP: CLASHES BETWEEN FATAH AND HAMAS
Tue Jul 05 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

051340Z Jul 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEL AVIV 004183 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FRONT OFFICE; NEA/SA/EX FOR RICHIE; DEPT FOR 
DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN; USAID 
FOR DCHA, DCHA/FPP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG PHUM PREL PTER ASEC CASC GZ IS
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: CLASHES BETWEEN FATAH AND HAMAS 
ACTIVISTS INJURE SIX IN GAZA. -- JULY 5, 2005 (1400 HOURS 
LOCAL) 
 
 
This is a joint ConGen Jerusalem/Embassy Tel Aviv cable. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: Israeli Press reported that six 
Palestinians were injured July 4 in clashes between Fatah and 
Hamas activists in Bani Suhelia, east of Khan Yunis.  Hamas 
leaders Mahmoud al-Zahar and Mushir al-Masri rejected PA 
Prime Minister Abu Ala'a's call to form a national unity 
government, saying that priority should be given to setting a 
date for elections.  According to Israeli media reports, PA 
Minister of Interior and National Security Nasir Yusef will 
meet Israeli Defense Minister Shaul Mofaz this evening to Tel 
Aviv to discuss security coordination in Gaza.  End Summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injury: Palestinian security sources reported that an IDF 
soldier and six activists were wounded on July 1 during a 
protest against the separation barrier in the village of 
Bil,in, west of Ramallah. 
 
-- Security Incidents: Palestinian media sources reported 
that unidentified gunmen opened fire at IDF soldiers in the 
village of Dir Istia, southeast of Qalqilia, on July 1. 
 
-- Security Incidents: On July 2, Palestinian militants 
hurled an explosive charge and opened fire at IDF forces in 
the village of Kalil, south of Nablus.  No casualties were 
reported. 
 
-- Security Incidents: Palestinian media reported that shots 
were fired at Qadim settlement near Jenin on July 1. No 
injuries or damages were reported. 
 
¶3. (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- According to Israeli media reports, PA Minister of 
Interior and National Security Nasir Yusif will meet Israeli 
Defense Minister Shaul Mofaz this evening in Tel Aviv to 
discuss security coordination in Gaza. 
 
-- Hamas leaders Mahmud al-Zahar and Mushir al-Masri rejected 
PA Prime Minister Abu Ala'a's call to form a national unity 
government, saying that priority should be given to setting a 
date for elections.  Mahmoud al-Zahar also said that he has 
lost confidence in President Mahmud Abbas, leadership 
because he has failed to fulfill his promises to the Islamist 
factions. 
 
--------- 
Jerusalem 
--------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- A larger than usual number of Palestinian Authority 
ministers and senior oficials attended the ConGen's July 4 
celebration at the Notre Dame Hotel in Jerusalem.  Among the 
attendees were: Interior Minister Yusif, Foreign Affairs 
Minister al-Kidwa, National Economy Minister Sinogrot, 
Tourism Ministes al-Bendaq, Minister of State Khoury, 
Palestinian Monetary Authority head Abed, Presidential 
National Security Advisor Rajub, and Presidential Political 
Advisor Abd al-Rahman.  According to a number of Palestinians 
in attendance, the better-than-usual turn-out is probably the 
result of the GOI's more liberal approach to issuing travel 
permits to Palestinian political leaders, and to a sense 
among Palestinians tha the U.S. has become more engaged in 
efforts to resolve the conflict. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶5. (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: UNRWA reported that a 22-year old Palestinian 
woman was killed on July 2 by her brother in Jabalia for 
"honor" reasons. 
 
-- Injuries: According to UNRWA reports, IDF soldiers fired 
their weapons at the Zurub area and Tel el-Sultan quarter 
July 1, injuring an 18-month old girl. 
-- Injuries: IDF reported IDF soldiers shot at a Palestinian 
suspect near the IDF outpost east of Rafiah Yam village on 
July 1.  Palestinians claimed the suspect was injured. 
 
-- Injuries: Acording to IDF reports, IDF soldiers discovered 
an explosive device near Morag Village on July 2. 
Palestinians and UNRWA reported one Palestinian was injured 
in a responsive shooting by the IDF. 
 
-- Injuries: On July 2, an IDF tank fired on a Palestinian 
trying to plant a bomb near Nitzarim, moderately injuring the 
Palestinian. 
 
-- Injuries: The IDF briefly entered the Rafah Brazil quarter 
of Gaza on July 3.  One Palestinian gunman was moderately 
wounded. 
 
-- Injuries: On July 3, the IDF reported its soldiers shot 
and injured one armed Palestinian in the vicinity of Slav 
settlement. 
 
-- Injuries: Israeli press reported that six Palestinians 
were injured July 4 in clashes between Fatah and Hamas 
activists in Bani Suhelia, east of Khan Yunis.  The 
Palestinians were injured after members of the Iz a Din 
al-Kassam Brigade, a Hamas military wing, deployed roadblocks 
and began patroling the streets, reportedly in an attempt to 
challenge Fatah and the Palestinian Authority. 
 
-- Injuries: UNRWA reported a Palestinian male was injured 
when IDF soldiers opened fire in the al-Shouka Palestinian 
area of Rafah on July 2. 
 
-- Injuries: UNRWA reported that a 24-year old Palestinian 
was shot and injured by IDF soldiers responding to light arms 
fire at the Atzmona settlement on July 3. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: Palestinians fired two mortars on July 3 
at IDF postions in Gaza with no reported injuries. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: The morning of July 5 saw a mortar shell 
fired at Gush Katif.  There was some damage, but no injuries 
were reported. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: IDF reported a total of 18 mortars were 
fired July 2-July 5.  No reports of injuries. 
 
-- Shootings: Overnight on July 3, Palestinians opened fire a 
total of six times on IDF positions.  No casualties were 
reported. 
 
-- Shootings: IDF reported a total of 20 shooting incidents 
July 2-July 5.  No casualties were reported. 
 
-- Explosions: A bomb exploded on July 2 near IDF troops in 
the area of Gush Katif.  No casualties were reported. 
 
-- Explosions: An IDF patrol was targeted by a bomb on July 2 
in the Muwassi area.  There were no reports of casualties. 
PIJ took credit for the attack. 
 
¶6. (SBU) ARRESTS: 
 
-- Israeli Border Police arrested nine Gaza residents on July 
4 for attempting to infiltrate Israel from Egypt. 
 
-- On July 2, the IDF arrested seven unarmed Palestinians in 
two separate incidents as the Palestinians attempted to 
infiltrate into Israel. 
 
¶7. (SBU) INCURSIONS/DEMOLITIONS: 
 
-- The IDF briefly entered the Rafah Brazil quarter of Gaza 
on July 3.  One Palestinian gunman was moderately wounded. 
 
-- UNRWA reported that IDF tanks, APCs and bulldozers removed 
the southern part of an Islamic cemetery in Rafah on July 3 
in order to construct the separation fence on the Philadephi 
Route and widen the buffer. 
 
¶8. (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS: 
 
-- Erez Crossing was open for internationals and Palestinian 
laborers July 1-4.  On July 1, 2,440 laborers and 210 
merchants entered Israel.  On July 2, 164 laborers and 51 
merchants entered Israel.  On July 3, 5,958 laborers and 405 
merchants entered Israel.  On July 4, 4,328 Palestinian 
laborers and 517 merchants entered Israel. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone was closed during the weekend. 
On July 3, 589 Palestinians entered the zone.  On July 4, 563 
Palestinians entered the Zone. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers July 4, 
but was open for construction materials. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was open July 4. 
-- Rafah Terminal was open for all Palestinians July 1 and 4. 
 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
KURTZER