05TELAVIV1890
WB/G SITREP: SETTLERS BEAT AND INJURE PALESTINIANS
Mon Mar 28 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEL AVIV 001890 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR BURNS/SATTERFIELD/DIBBLE; 
NEA/SA/EX FOR RICHE; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; 
DEPT FOR DS/IP/ITA; DRL FOR A/S CRANER; 
NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN; 
USAID FOR DCHA, DCHA/FPP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG PTER ASEC PHUM CASC KPAL
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: SETTLERS BEAT AND INJURE PALESTINIANS 
AND FOREIGN ACTIVISTS IN WEST BANK: MARCH 25-28 (1630 HRS 
LOCAL) 
 
This message is sensitive but unclassified.  Please protect 
accordingly.  This is a joint message from Embassy Tel Aviv 
and ConGen Jerusalem. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY: The IDF reported no security incidents in 
the Gaza Strip between March 25-28.  UNRWA reported that 
Palestinian militants fired small arms at Gadid settlement 
and fired a mortar shell at Netzarim settlement, causing no 
injuries.  Israeli media reported that anti-disengagement 
"squatters" have occupied empty buildings in Gush Katif.  In 
the West Bank, the IDF shot and injured a Palestinian 
motorist who reportedly refused to slow down at a roadblock, 
and Palestinian gunmen reportedly shot an IDF soldier during 
an IDF arrest operation in Jenin.  Israeli security forces 
arrested eight PIJ members; two settlers attempting to enter 
the Haram al Sharif; and two IDF soldiers who reportedly 
attempted to sell an M16 to a Palestinian.  Israeli settlers 
beat and injured several Palestinians and foreign activists 
in locations throughout the West Bank.  End Summary. 
 
---------- 
Gaza Strip 
---------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injuries: Nil. 
 
-- Shootings: UNRWA reported that Palestinian gunmen fired 
small arms at Gadid settlement at 0800 hrs March 28.  No 
injuries were reported. 
 
-- Mortars: UNRWA reported that Palestinian militants fired a 
mortar shell at Netzarim settlement at 2330 hrs March 25.  No 
injuries were reported. 
 
-- Explosives: UNRWA reported that a Palestinian-made bomb 
exploded in Gaza City at 2230 hrs March 25.  No injuries were 
reported. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS/CHECKPOINTS 
 
-- Israeli media reported that the holiday-related closure of 
the Gaza Strip was lifted March 27.  Route Four (Salahadeen 
Road), the main north-south traffic artery, was open March 
27-28 at both Netzarim and Abu Khouli checkpoints. 
 
-- The Erez Crossing was open to diplomats, internationals, 
Palestinian laborers, and merchants March 27-28.  UNRWA 
reported that 3,024 laborers and 368 merchants crossed into 
Israel March 28. 
 
-- Erez Industrial Zone was open March 27-28.  UNRWA reported 
that 570 laborers entered the zone March 28. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian workers, but open 
for the import of aggregates used in construction, March 
25-28. 
 
-- Karni terminal was open March 25-28. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open, without age restrictions, for 
Palestinians March 27-28. 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan and Toufa checkpoints were open March 27-28. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS 
 
-- Israeli media reported that anti-disengagement "squatters" 
have occupied 280 of the 410 empty publicly-owned housing 
units in the Gush Katif settlement block.  The GOI will 
reportedly require the Amidar company, who manages the units, 
to evict the squatters or pay a fine of NIS 60,000 per head. 
 
-- Israeli and Palestinian media reported that several 
thousand unemployed Palestinians marched to the PLC offices 
in Gaza City on Sunday, protesting the lack of government 
assistance. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) ATTACKS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Deaths:  Nil. 
 
-- Injuries:  Israeli settlers severely beat a Palestinian 
woman near Ein Yabus, south of Nablus, on March 25, according 
to Palestinian newspapers. 
 
-- Injuries:  An Israeli peace activist suffered head 
injuries and five Palestinians suffered minor injuries during 
clashes with Israeli police during separation barrier 
protests near Qalqiliya on March 25, according to Palestinian 
newspapers. 
 
-- Injuries:  The IDF shot and seriously injured a 
Palestinian motorist who reportedly failed to slow down at an 
IDF roadblock on March 26, according to Palestinian 
newspapers. 
 
-- Injuries:  Israeli settlers from Ma,un settlement, south 
of Hebron, beat up four foreign peace activists accompanying 
Palestinian animal herders near Yatta village on March 27, 
according to Palestinian and Israeli newspapers. 
 
-- Injuries:  Several Palestinian and Israeli youths suffered 
minor injuries in scuffles that broke out near Jaffa Gate in 
Jerusalem,s Old City on March 27, according to Palestinian 
newspapers. 
 
-- Injuries:  Settlers beat up three Palestinian youths 
during a settler demonstration in Hebron on March 27, 
according to Palestinian newspapers. 
 
-- Injuries:  One IDF soldier was shot and injured in an 
arrest operation in Jenin on March 28, according to Israeli 
radio. 
 
-- Attacks:  Settlers from Yitzhar settlement, near Nablus, 
threw stones at and broke windows in Palestinian homes in 
Asira al-Qibilya village on March 25, and were dispersed by 
the IDF, according to Palestinian sources. 
 
-- Attacks:  A total of five firebombs were thrown at Israeli 
vehicles in the West Bank on March 27, in incidents near 
Helmesh settlement, west of Ramallah, and Salem village near 
Nablus, according to Israeli and Palestinian media. 
 
-- Arrests:  The IDF arrested two Israeli soldiers on March 
27 on suspicion of selling an M16 to a Palestinian near 
Jenin, according to Israeli newspapers. 
 
-- Arrests:  Two Jewish settlers, apparently drunk, were 
arrested by Israeli police for trying to enter the Haram 
al-Sharif/Temple Mount on March 27, according to Israeli and 
Palestinian newspapers. 
 
-- Arrests:  The IDF arrested eight PIJ members in and around 
Jenin on March 28 for attempting to manufacture rockets, 
according to Israeli security sources quoted on Israeli radio. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- The Fatah Revolutionary Council (FRC), a key Fatah 
governing body, began a two-day meeting on March 27 in Gaza. 
The FRC is discussing holding primaries to identify the 
candidates who will run on Fatah,s party slate in July PLC 
elections.  President Abbas, Prime Minister Quraya,, FM 
al-Qidwa and other PA officials in the FRC are currently 
attending. 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
KURTZER