05TELAVIV103
WB/G SITREP: TWO GUNMEN KILLED IN ATTACK ON THE
Thu Jan 06 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEL AVIV 000103 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR BURNS/SATTERFIELD/DIBBLE; 
NEA/SA/EX FOR RICHIE; DEPT FOR DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR 
DS/IP/NEA; 
DRL FOR A/S CRANER; NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN; 
USAID FOR DCHA, DCHA/FPP, PRM FOR DEWEY/GREENE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG PHUM PREL PTER ASEC CASC GZ IS
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: TWO GUNMEN KILLED IN ATTACK ON THE 
EREZ CROSSING: JANUARY 6, 2004 (1500 HOURS LOCAL) 
 
This is a joint ConGen Jerusalem/Embassy Tel Aviv cable. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: The body of second Palestinian gunman was 
found late on January 5 near the Erez Crossing, both men 
having been shot and killed after they succeeded in 
approaching the crossing overnight January 4-5 along with a 
group of pilgrims leaving to go on the Hajj.  The militants 
used small arms, anti-tank missiles, and hand grenades 
against the soldiers, who responded in kind, calling in an 
IAF helicopter gunship for support.  In addition to the two 
militants killed, three PA security officers were also 
reportedly injured and the crossing itself was damaged in the 
attack (although it re-opened for Hajj travelers and 
diplomats January 6).  One of the militants was reportedly 
associated with Fatah, the other with PIJ.  A total of 12 PA 
security officers were arrested.  Elsewhere in Gaza, at least 
one Palestinian militant threw hand grenades at an IDF patrol 
after he infiltrated Ganei Tel settlement January 6.  In the 
West Bank, Palestinian gunmen opened fire on an IDF 
headquarters near Jenin on January 5, but no casualties were 
reported.  The IDF arrested a total eight Palestinians 
January 5, mostly near Nablus and Salfit.  End Summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) ATTACKS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injuries: Nil. 
 
-- Attacks: Palestinian gunmen opened fire on an IDF 
headquarters near Jenin on January 5, according to Israeli 
and Palestinian media, but no casualties were reported. 
 
-- Arrests: The IDF arrested eight Palestinians, mostly near 
Nablus and Salfit, in the West Bank on January 5, according 
to Palestinian sources. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- A coalition of civil society organizations issued a 
statement January 5 calling on the PLC to take action to pass 
draft laws establishing a mixed majoritarian and proportional 
representation system. 
 
-- Abu Mazen was to visit Nablus and Salfit January 6, attend 
morning Orthodox Christmas celebrations on Friday, January 7, 
and may hold a rally in al-Ram, near Jerusalem, on January 7, 
according to Palestinian political sources. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Death: Israeli media reported that at least one 
Palestinian militant threw hand grenades at an IDF patrol 
after he infiltrated Ganei Tel settlement January 6.  A 
gunfight erupted between the soldiers and the militant, with 
the soldiers calling in an IAF helicopter.  One militant was 
killed, with a possible second attacker remaining at large. 
Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack. 
 
-- Deaths/Injuries/Arrests: UNRWA and Israeli media reported 
that the body of second Palestinian gunman was found late on 
January 5 near the Erez Crossing (see January 5 SitRep). 
Both gunmen were shot and killed after they succeeded in 
approaching the crossing overnight January 4-5 along with a 
group of pilgrims leaving to go on the Hajj.  The militants 
used small arms, anti-tank missiles, and hand grenades 
against the soldiers, who responded in kind, calling in an 
IAF helicopter gunship for support.  In addition to the two 
militants killed, three PA security officers were also 
reportedly injured, according to UNRWA, and the crossing 
itself was damaged (although Erez re-opened for Hajj 
travelers and diplomats January 6.  See "Border Crossings"). 
One of the militants was reportedly associated with Fatah, 
the other with PIJ.  A total of 12 PA security officers were 
arrested, according to media reports. 
 
-- Injury: UNRWA reported that a Palestinian woman was shot 
and wounded January 5 during an exchange of fire between IDF 
soldiers and Palestinian militants in Rafah. 
-- Injuries: UNRWA reported that five militants were wounded 
January 5 near Bayt Hanoun when a mortar they were attempting 
to fire exploded prematurely. 
 
-- Injury: UNRWA reported that one Palestinian was shot and 
wounded January 5 during an exchange of fire between IDF 
soldiers and Palestinian militants in Rafah.  The man, a 
teacher at the UNRWA boys school, was shot while inside the 
school with his class.  A second Palestinian was shot and 
wounded in exchanges later the same day, according to UNRWA. 
 
-- Catch-up item: Injuries: UNRWA reported that eight 
Palestinians were treated for tear gas inhalation in Khan 
Yunis January 4 after IDF soldiers fired gas grenades, in 
response to rocket fire at Neve Dekalim. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: The IDF reported that Palestinian 
militants fired a total of eight mortar shells and two 
anti-tank missiles January 5 at IDF and Israeli settler 
targets in the Gaza Strip.  Militants fired one Qassam rocket 
at Dugit settlement January 5.  No injuries were reported. 
 
-- Shootings: The IDF reported that Palestinian militants 
launched a total of six shooting attacks at IDF soldier and 
Israeli settler targets January 5-6. 
 
-- Explosions: The IDF reported that soldiers discovered and 
safely deactivated an explosive device near the Erez Crossing 
the morning of January 5 and a second near an IDF outpost 
south of Rafah later the same day.  No injuries were reported. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) ARRESTS: 
 
-- UNRWA reported that IDF soldiers arrested one Palestinian 
north of Bayt Lahiya January 6. 
 
-- UNRWA reported that IDF soldiers arrested three men in 
Rafah January 5.  The three are accused of digging tunnels 
used to smuggle arms. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) INCURSIONS/DEMOLITIONS: 
 
 -- UNRWA reported that the Erez checkpoint re-opened January 
6 after closing January 5 following an attack by Palestinian 
militants (see"Deaths/Injuries/Arrests").  PA security forces 
were allowed to return to their posts, although IDF 
bulldozers continued excavations in the area near the 
industrial zone. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS: 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was open January 6, with a major detour at Netzarim 
Junction. 
 
-- The Erez Crossing was open for internationals and for a 
limited number of Palestinian merchants and Hajj travelers 
January 6.  A total of 50 merchants crossed into Israel 
January 6. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone remained closed to laborers 
January 6, although 62 factory owners were authorized to 
enter. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing remained closed for Palestinian laborers 
January 6, but was open for the import of aggregates used in 
construction. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was open January 6. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was closed January 6. 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan and Toufah checkpoints were both closed 
January 6. 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
CRETZ