05TELAVIV4244
WB/G SITREP: ONE PALESTINIAN DEAD, FOUR INJURED IN
Thu Jul 07 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEL AVIV 004244 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FRONT OFFICE; NEA/SA/EX FOR RICHIE; DEPT FOR 
DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN; USAID 
FOR DCHA, DCHA/FPP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG PHUM PREL PTER ASEC CASC GZ IS
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: ONE PALESTINIAN DEAD, FOUR INJURED IN 
THE WEST BANK; TWO DEAD, FOUR INJURED IN GAZA -- JULY 7, 
2005 (1300 HOURS LOCAL) 
 
This is a joint ConGen Jerusalem/Embassy Tel Aviv cable. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: IDF troops shot and killed 17-year-old 
al-Aqsa Brigades member Ahmad Masimi and lightly injured an 
accomplice, Ahmad Sanakreh, on July 6 in Nablus.  According 
to Israeli security sources, the IDF returned fire after 
shots were fired at several busloads of settlers who had 
entered Nablus accompanied by an IDF protective force to pray 
at the Tomb of Joseph.  In a separate incident, Palestinian 
security sources reported that an al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades 
gunman was critically injured on July 6 in an exchange of 
fire with IDF forces that entered into Balata camp earlier 
that day.  In the Gaza Strip, one PIJ militant was killed and 
three others were injured July 6 near Morag, when IDF 
soldiers responded to a mortar attack on the settlement with 
heavy machine gun fire.  An 8-year-old Palestinian girl was 
also injured in the crossfire.  A senior officer of the PA 
General Intelligence service was found dead of a gunshot 
wound to the head July 7 in Gaza City.  The officer had 
reportedly been kidnapped the night before, according to 
UNRWA.  End Summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: IDF troops shot and killed 17-year-old al-Aqsa 
Brigades member Ahmad Masimi and lightly injured an 
accomplice, Ahmad Sanakreh, on July 6.  According to Israeli 
security sources, the IDF returned fire after shots were 
fired at several busloads of settlers who had entered Nablus 
accompanied by an IDF protective force to pray at the Tomb of 
Joseph. 
 
-- Injury: In a separate incident, Palestinian security 
sources reported that an al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades gunman was 
critically injured on July 6 in an exchange of fire with IDF 
forces that entered into Balata camp earlier that day. 
 
-- Arrests: Palestinian media reported that the IDF arrested 
three Fatah activists in Yatta village outside Hebron on July 
¶6.  One of the Fatah activists was reportedly in possession 
of an M-16 rifle and a small amount of ammunition. 
 
-- Arrests: Israeli media reported that a Palestinian youth 
carrying improvised explosives and a knife was arrested on 
July 6 by the IDF with at a roadblock near the village of 
Baqa Sharqiya north of Tulkarem. 
 
-- Security Incidents: In Allar village outside Tulkarem, the 
IDF raided the homes of two wanted PIJ activists on July 6, 
according to Palestinian media.  No arrests were made. 
 
-- Security Incidents: According to Palestinian security 
sources, two Palestinian youths were lightly injured on July 
6 in stone throwing clashes with the IDF in Ayda camp near 
Bethlehem, according to Palestinian media. 
 
-- Security Incidents: In the village of Imnaizel outside 
Hebron, three Palestinians were lightly injured during 
protests against the building of the separation barrier, 
according to Palestinian media. 
 
--Demolitions: Palestinian media sources reported that the 
IDF, citing a lack of building permits, demolished two homes 
in the Nablus area on July 6. 
 
¶3. (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- The Palestinian Legislative Council will hold a closed 
session in Ramallah on July 7.  PM Ahmad Quraya and Minister 
of Interior Nasir Yusif will brief PLC members on security. 
 
-- President Abbas arrived in Damascus on July 6. Abbas will 
meet with Syrian President Bashar al-Asad and representatives 
of the Palestinian factions based in Damascus.  He plans to 
visit Lebanon on July 8 and arrive back in Ramallah on July 
¶10. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Death/Injuries: UNRWA reported that one PIJ militant was 
killed and three others were injured July 6 near Morag, when 
IDF soldiers responded to a mortar attack on the settlement 
with heavy machine gun fire.  An 8-year-old Palestinian girl 
was also injured in the crossfire. 
 
-- Death: UNRWA reported that a senior officer of the PA 
General Intelligence service was found dead of a gunshot 
wound to the head July 7 in Gaza City.  The officer had been 
kidnapped the night before, according to UNRWA. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: The IDF reported that Palestinian 
militants fired one mortar shell each at Netzarim, Nissanit, 
and Kfar Darom overnight July 6-7.  UNRWA reported an 
additional four mortars fired at Morag settlement the evening 
of July 6 
 
-- Shootings: The IDF reported that Palestinians launched a 
total of five shooting attacks on IDF and Israeli settler 
targets in the southern Gaza Strip overnight July 6-7. 
 
-- Explosions: The IDF reported that IDF soldiers found and 
safely disposed of an explosive device near the Kissufim 
Crossing July 6. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS: 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was open July 7, with a major detour at Netzarim 
Junction. 
 
-- Erez Crossing was open July 6, and 3,445 laborers and 361 
merchants crossed into Israel. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone was open July 6, and 540 laborers 
entered the zone. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers July 7, 
but was open for the import of aggregates used in 
construction. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was open July 7. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open for arrivals and departures July 
¶7. 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan checkpoint remained closed July 7.  Toufah 
checkpoint was open for residents of al-Mowassi, except males 
aged 16-30. 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
KURTZER