05WELLINGTON448
UN DEMOCRACY FUND: NEW ZEALAND'S RESPONSE
Wed Jun 08 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS WELLINGTON 000448 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM NZ
SUBJECT: UN DEMOCRACY FUND: NEW ZEALAND'S RESPONSE 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 104045 
     ¶B. SECSTATE 99849 
 
¶1.  Poloff on June 2 delivered ref B demarche points, 
proposed letter and UN terms of reference to Valerie Meyer, 
Deputy Director of New Zealand Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
and Trade's United Nations, Human Rights and Commonwealth 
Division.  Meyer responded on June 3, noting three key areas 
of concern for the GoNZ.  First, the GoNZ seeks a better 
understanding of how the UN Democracy Fund would differ from 
other UN promotion activities such as the UNDP Democratic 
Governance Thematic Trust Fund.  Second, the GoNZ requests a 
list of countries that have indicated a willingness to sign 
the proposed letter.  Third, the GoNZ desires information 
regarding the necessary funding for the UN Democracy Fund and 
the level of contribution that would be anticipated for the 
GoNZ. 
 
¶2.  Adding to the third point, Meyer asked whether 
contributions would be one-time or recurring.  Meyer further 
noted that the GoNZ would need to determine how it would fund 
a contribution to the UN Democracy Fund, whether via its 
development agency, NZAID, or another mechanism.  Meyer 
indicated that the GoNZ would be unable to sign the proposed 
letter without knowing what its fiscal commitment would be as 
a contributing supporter. 
 
¶3.  Poloff on June 7 delivered ref A demarche points to 
Meyer, but has not yet received a response.  Post will report 
any GoNZ reply septel, but meanwhile stands ready to convey 
any further response from the Department to the GoNZ.  While 
ref A responds to some of the GoNZ's key concerns, it does 
not appear to fully address the government's concern 
regarding its prospective fiscal commitment to the UN 
Democracy Fund. 
Swindells