05WELLINGTON428
INVITATION TO THE US-EU INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE
Wed Jun 01 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

010245Z Jun 05UNCLAS WELLINGTON 000428 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/FO, EUR/FO, NEA/IR, EUR/ERA, AND EAP/ANZ 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PREL
SUBJECT: INVITATION TO THE US-EU INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE 
ON IRAQ:  NEW ZEALAND 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 94861 
 
     ¶B. STATE 93742 
 
¶1.  On May 27, Ambassador Swindells presented reftel 
background information about the U.S.-EU Iraq conference to 
Simon Murdoch, Chief Executive at the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs (Minister Goff is on official travel in North 
America.)  The Ambassador made the presentation together with 
Dutch Ambassador Rasha ter Braack, who was acting in her 
capacity as EU Presidency representative.  Both Ambassadors 
stressed that their joint presentation to GONZ -- and the 
conference itself -- was an historic moment, rising out of 
President Bush's February trip to Brussels.  Ambassador 
Swindells said that two years ago, it would have been hard to 
imagine such a combined effort.  Murdoch said that he 
understood the symbolism of two great allies, America and 
Europe, coming together in this way. 
 
¶2.  Ambassador Swindells recalled how quickly New Zealand 
came to the fore when it was time to rebuild Afghanistan.  He 
said that since the liberation of Iraq, the President has 
worked hard to bring allies to the cause.  Iraq's 
reconstruction has to work, the Ambassador said.  The 
President's first job was to sell our continued role in Iraq 
to the American public during the last election campaign, and 
the stakes were high.  Americans came together in agreement 
on the issue, and we hoped now others will as well.  There 
was no better way to convey this to New Zealand than this 
appeal by the U.S. and EU Ambassadors. 
 
¶3.  Murdoch reiterated that the Ambassadors' joint 
presentation spoke for itself.  He said that he would consult 
with both Foreign Minister Goff and Minister of Defense 
Burton, and would let them know this was a serious, urgent 
request to make Minister Goff available for the conference. 
Murdoch acknowledged the conference as a watershed moment 
from which the next steps in Iraq will emerge.  He added that 
the conference date could pose a problem, as New Zealand is 
starting to gear up for general elections.  (NB: Elections 
will be called some time between late July and 
mid-September.)  Murdoch predicted that the Government would 
nevertheless want Minister Goff to attend if at all possible. 
 He emphasized that his Ministry would recommend that Goff 
attend, or if that were not possible that a senior minister 
would go in his place. 
 
¶4.  Murdoch cautioned that New Zealand might not be able to 
dedicate manpower to Iraq immediately, having decided NZ's 
ongoing reconstruction work in Afghanistan must be 
maintained.  He also reminded the Ambassadors that New 
Zealand had provided 60 military engineers to Iraq 
reconstruction, and that they had doubled the length of their 
original tour to one year.  But the timing of the U.S.-EU 
conference is very good, Murdoch said, as the Ministry has 
been doing a lot of in-house thinking regarding options for 
future GONZ engagement in Iraq, including reconstruction and 
peace maintenance.  He predicted the Minister or other New 
Zealand rep would come to the conference well briefed about 
the issue.  He promised to provide an answer to the 
invitation as soon as possible. 
Swindells