05WELLINGTON740
NEW ZEALAND: COMMERCIAL SOURCES OF MRES
Fri Sep 23 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

230344Z Sep 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 WELLINGTON 000740 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/ANP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL AMGT EAID ECON ETRD NZ
SUBJECT: NEW ZEALAND: COMMERCIAL SOURCES OF MRES 
 
REF: STATE 175147 
 
¶1. Per reftel, following is information on three companies 
in New Zealand that supply ration packs or "retort meals." 
The packs are similar to MREs, but do not include a heating 
source.  The pouched meals can be eaten cold, but normally 
would be heated in boiling water or opened and heated over a 
flame.  All three companies supply the packs to the New 
Zealand and Australian defense forces.  The first two 
companies have stocks on hand; the third company does not 
but is capable of filling large orders. 
 
Serco Project Engineering Ltd. 
------------------------------ 
A) Serco Project Engineering Ltd. 
 
B) Point of contact: David Montgomery, Serco Project 
Engineering, Trentham Military Camp, Private Bag 905, Upper 
Hutt, New Zealand; tel 011-64-4-527-5444; fax 011-64-4-527- 
5192; cell 011-27-4-375-947; e-mail D.Montgomery@spel.co.nz. 
 
C) NZ $25 (US $17.35) per 24-hour ration pack, enough for 
one day for a military member involved in heavy activity; 
otherwise, it could feed an adult for three days. 
 
D) The packs are available in four different menus, 
including beef and vegetable stew and chicken curry; beef 
satay and lamb and mint gravy; chili beef with rice and 
chicken pasta and vegetables; and, chicken teriyaki and 
mushroom risotto.  The packs also include high-energy snacks 
such as fruit muesli bars and cookies; chocolate bars; tea 
and coffee; chocolate drink; soup and crackers; and, muesli 
cereal. 
 
E) If the packs were shipped via air freight, the estimated 
time for delivery to the U.S. would be 24 to 36 hours. 
 
F) Ten meal packs are packaged in a carton.  Each carton 
weighs 15 kilograms (33 pounds) and is roughly 600mm by 
400mm by 250mm (23.6 by 16 by 10 inches). 
 
G) The company could immediately provide 30,000 to 40,000 of 
its 24-hour ration packs (possibly equivalent to 100,000 
MREs).  The company has a website: www.spel.co.nz. 
 
Multi-Pack Ltd. 
--------------- 
A) Multi-Pack Ltd. 
 
B) Point of contact: Neil Duncan, Multi-Pack Ltd., P.O. Box 
15192, Wellington, New Zealand; tel 011-64-4-380-9634; fax 
011-64-4-380-9635; e-mail neil@portionpackfoods.com. 
 
Alternate point of contact: Garth MacIntyre, Multi-Pack 
Ltd., P.O. Box 15192, Wellington, New Zealand; tel 011-64-4- 
976-4814; fax 011-64-4-976-4581; e-mail 
garth@portionpackfoods.com. 
 
C) Cost would depend on the number and type of meals 
purchased. 
 
D) The company offers various types of packs.  As an 
example, its "bush fire meal pack" includes a pouch of beef 
and vegetables or mushroom risotto; beef or chicken instant 
noodles; fruit muesli bars; sultanas; chocolate bar, 
sweetened condensed milk; sugar; chocolate drink powder; 
instant coffee; tea bag; and, a sports drink. 
 
E) If the packs were shipped via air freight, the estimated 
time for delivery to the U.S. would be 24 to 36 hours. 
 
F) Thirty-two meal packs are packaged in a carton.  Each 
carton weighs 14.75 kilograms (32.5 pounds) and is 560mm 
long, 380mm wide and 220mm high (22 by 15 by 8.6 inches). 
 
G) The company could not estimate how many meals it could 
provide immediately, except to suggest the number would be 
in the thousands.  The company's website is at 
www.portionpackfoods.com, which lists additional types of 
meal packs available. 
 
Prepared Foods Processing Ltd. 
------------------------------ 
A) Prepared Foods Processing Ltd. (PFL) 
 
B) Points of contact: Jim Pendleton, CEO, or Dean Moana, 
commercial manager; 117 Ruahini Street, P.O. Box 942, 
Palmerston North, New Zealand; tel 011-64-6-357-1009; fax 
011-64-6-356-1733; e-mail for Jim Pendleton: 
foodpro@pfl.co.nz; e-mail for Dean Moana: DeanM@pfl.co.nz. 
 
C) NZ $4 to $6 per ration pack (US $2.78 to $4.17) 
 
D) Meal packs are put together on order; ingredients range 
from beef to chicken to vegetarian dishes. 
 
E) Because the company provides its ration packs based on 
orders, it would take four to six weeks to manufacture and 
deliver the packs to the U.S. 
 
F) Forty meals are packed in a carton. Each carton weighs 
11.24 kilograms (24.7 pounds). 
 
G) The company's website is at www.pfl.co.nz.  Under 
"Products - Types of Products" is a list of potential meal 
ingredients. 
 
¶2. As requested in reftel, post also will respond via e-mail 
to OFDA. 
 
BURNETT