06ADANA2
SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY FOR DECEMBER 27, 2005
Wed Jan 04 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ADANA 000002 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU ADANA
SUBJECT: SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY FOR DECEMBER 27, 2005 
 
This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary for December 27, 
Â¶2005.  Please note that Turkish press reports often contain 
errors or exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch for 
the accuracy of the reports summarized here. 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
HURRIYET (CUKUROVA) / EVRENSEL: Ceremonies were held in 
Gaziantep to celebrate the 84th anniversary of the city's 
liberation won through driving French troops out of Gaziantep 
during the Turkish War for Independence.  Bulent Arinc, 
Chairperson of the Turkish Parliament, and Kursat Tuzmen, State 
Minister, attended the ceremonies. 
 
OZGUR GUNDEM:   Members of the EMEP (Labor Party) provincial 
party administration laid a wreath on the monument of liberation 
in Gaziantep.  Provincial Chairperson of EMEP said that Turkish 
and Kurdish people fought together against the enemy 84 years 
ago in many parts of the country.  However, Turks and Kurds have 
been made enemies today because of the policy of denial, 
oppression and intolerance pursued by those circles holding 
power. 
 
HURRIYET (CUKUROVA):    Adana city governor Aytac Durak, blaming 
the government for disregarding the large amount of migration 
Adana has been getting from the southeastern provinces since 
1980s, criticized the government for allocating much less money 
for Adana than the money allocated for Istanbul. 
 
BOLGE / EKSPRES / OZGUR GUNDEM: The nephew of the terrorist 
leader Abdullah Ocalan has been detained, arraigned and arrested 
in the Ceyhan district of Adana on charges of recruiting new 
members for the PKK/Kongra-Gel.  Meanwhile, a person connected 
to Ocalan's nephew has been arrested in Van province reportedly 
as he was attempting to go abroad. 
 
BOLGE / EKSPRES:        After the police started following a suspected 
person carrying a bag and wandering around the Adana Court Hall, 
the suspect escaped as he noticed the police, and threw his bag 
onto a street.  Bomb squad teams from Adana's Security 
Directorate safely detonated the explosives in the bag with a 
remote control device.  According to the police, there were 
approximately 2 kilograms of explosives in the bag, most 
probably A-4 or C-4, and the explosives were placed in a book. 
 
EVRENSEL:       Mehmet Corten, Intelligence Service Chairperson and 
Brigadier Commander of the National Jandarma Command, who was 
supervisor of the non-commissioned officers arrested for their 
alleged involvement in the Semdinli case, reportedly secretly 
paid a visit last week to the Chairperson of the Turkish 
Parliament's Commission for Probing the Semdinli Case and 
submitted a report.  The other members of the commission were 
not informed about this visit. 
 
EVRENSEL:       The daily criticized the decision of the 
Privatization Authority to close down Malatya Cigarette Factory 
and claimed that through pursuing a policy of negligence over 
the years the state had deliberately rendered the factory 
unproductive. 
 
OZGUR GUNDEM / EVRENSEL:   Reportedly, people of Semdinli are 
worried that the Semdinli incidents will suffer the fate of the 
Susurluk scandal and will be covered up and soon forgotten. 
 
OZGUR GUNDEM:   Eleven people, who are members of a group 
called Rights and Liberties Front (RLF) and who were detained on 
December 24 as they were protesting in Adana the "Return to Life 
Operation" launched against inmates in 20 prisons nationwide in 
December 2000 (see press summary 12/19), have been arraigned. 
Other RLF activists protested the arraignment and demanded 
release of their friends.  DTP (Democratic Society Party) 
members extended support to the RLF activists. 
 
OZGUR GUNDEM:   A military operation has reportedly been 
launched in Siirt's Eruh district. 
 
OZGUR GUNDEM:   The relatives of a PKK militant, who was 
killed during a PKK attack on a Jandarma station in Sirnak on 
December 9, said that they have not been able to get back the 
body of the deceased for seventeen days despite the fact that 
they have applied to the Cizre Chief Prosecutor for the return 
of the militant's body. 
 
OZGUR GUNDEM:     Doctors, journalists, employers and 
non-governmental organizations will found a European Union 
Association in Mersin.  The association aims to prepare Mersin 
at local level for the process of integration with the EU. 
 
ZAMAN:  Five persons, who were allegedly making arrangements 
to assassinate Van Governor Niyazi Tanilir, were caught and 
detained.  The police reportedly seized handguns, bullets, 
handcuffs and some explosives found in connection with the 
detainees. 
 
ZAMAN:  Reportedly, the number of children contracting 
lethal SSPE disease has reached seventeen in Sanliurfa province. 
 A pediatric neurologist from Harran University said that early 
diagnosis in diseases associated with measles was very critical 
in fighting against SSPE, a disease caused by a virus that 
multiplies itself in the brain of a child who had measles.  The 
doctor advised that families should have their children get 
three vaccinations at designated separate times.  Sanliurfa's 
Health Drectorate launched a project and detected 900 children, 
who contracted measles in the last two years in Sanliurfa. 
These children will go through a health check in the Hacettepe 
Medical School of Ankara. 
 
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS 
 
HURRIYET (CUKUROVA):    During a meeting held upon the arrival 
of Aleppo Chamber of Commerce's Businesswomen's Delegation to 
Gaziantep, Chairperson of the Gaziantep Chamber of Commerce 
pointed out that cooperation between Syria and Turkey, and 
similarly that between Gaziantep and Aleppo had been increasing 
every day. 
REID