06AITTAIPEI1371
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA SUMMIT
Wed Apr 19 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0015
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1371/01 1090801
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 190801Z APR 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9787
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5089
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 6289UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001371 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - ERIC BARBORIAK 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA SUMMIT 
 
 
¶1. Summary: Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies continued to 
give extensive coverage April 19 on the controversial battle over 
the ownership of the Sogo Department Store, in which First Lady Wu 
Shu-chen was allegedly involved; the local oil price hike; and the 
aftermaths of last weekend's KMT-Chinese Communist Party (CCP) 
Economic Forum in Beijing.  The pro-independence "Taiwan Daily" ran 
a banner headline on its page two that quoted President Chen 
Shui-bian as saying in an interview with French "Le Figaro" that 
Taiwan's pledges with regard to cross-Strait relations remain 
unchanged and that he believes the United States fully understands 
it. 
 
Most Taiwan papers gave only moderate coverage of Chinese President 
Hu Jintao's U.S. trip and the upcoming U.S.-China summit.  The 
pro-independence "Liberty Times," Taiwan's biggest daily, spent 
nearly half of its page four on this topic and ran a news story with 
the headline: "The U.S. Promises that It Will Not Discuss the 
Cessation of the National Unification Council during the Bush-Hu 
Meeting."  The pro-independence "Taiwan Daily" ran a banner headline 
on its front page that read: "The U.S. Will Urge China to Reduce Its 
Military Buildup against Taiwan."  The pro-status quo "China Times" 
spent its page 13 on Hu's U.S. trip and what will be talked about 
during the Bush-Hu meeting.  A "China Times" news story carried the 
headline: "Image Is the Key to the Success of Hu's U.S. Trip," and 
"China Times" Washington correspondent Norman Fu said in an article 
that Hu is the focus of attention in both the U.S. media and in 
Washington D.C.  The pro-unification "United Daily News" also 
devoted nearly the whole of its page two on the U.S.-China summit; a 
news story by the newspaper's Washington correspondent was topped 
with the headline: "Bush Will Reiterate That the U.S. One China 
Policy Remains Unchanged." 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, a "Liberty Times" 
editorial called upon the United States to put forth bigger actions 
and stronger pressure to push China to engage in dialogue with 
Taiwan's duly-elected government.  Cao Changqing, a PRC-born 
freelance journalist currently residing in the U.S., wrote in the 
"Liberty Times" that the Bush-Hu meeting will hardly produce any 
substantive results primarily because the two countries have 
completely different systems and senses of values.  Lin Chong-pin, 
president of the Foundation of Cross-Strait and International 
Studies in Taipei, said in the limited-circulation, 
pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" that Beijing's 
current foreign policy is how it should approach the U.S., namely, 
"cooperation is more important than contradiction."  A "China Times" 
news analysis said Bush, with only two years in office, will focus 
on short-term issues that impact U.S. domestic politics while Hu is 
more interested in developing Beijing-Washington ties from a 
long-term strategic perspective.  An editorial in the 
limited-circulation, conservative, pro-unification, English-language 
"China Post" said "Hu's new Taiwan policy of not wanting to push for 
unification and offering to carry out talks for peaceful development 
across the strait" may "help in his effort to talk Bush into 
adopting a firmer stance on President Chen."  End summary. 
 
A) "The United States Should Push China to Engage in Dialogue with 
Taiwan's Duly-Elected Government" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 600,000] 
editorialized (4/19): 
 
"Having concluded the KMT-CCP forum, a big show of the united-front 
tactics, Hu Jintao departed for a visit to the United States.  The 
fact that [U.S. President George W.] Bush and Hu have met many times 
over the past year showed that [Washington] has given the Chinese 
leader a big face.  It is truly an irony that the United States, 
which always upholds democratic values, treats the totalitarian 
Chinese leader as an honorable guest. ... 
 
"Having undergone democratic reforms and rotation of political 
parties, Taiwan has proved itself to be a democratic and independent 
sovereign state.  Washington should have accepted this fact based on 
[its criteria of the] U.S democratic values.  But under China's 
strong pressure, the United States still insists on the 'one China 
policy,' which is in reality different from China's 'one China 
principle.'  It is a great pity that Washington is still reluctant 
 
to recognize in public that Taiwan is a sovereign nation. ... 
 
"China's move to deliberately bypass Taiwan's duly-elected 
government stemmed from its intent to use the united-front tactics 
to divide and conquer Taiwan.  Washington's call on China to contact 
Taiwan's duly-elected government demonstrates the United States' 
democratic values.  But this newspaper discovered that if the United 
States does not put forth bigger actions and stronger pressure, 
China will surely do what pleases itself and will totally ignore 
Taiwan's elected government.  At this moment when Hu is visiting the 
United States, this newspaper, as well as the majority of the Taiwan 
people, hope that Washington will pay more attention to Taiwan's 
elected government, respect the Taiwan people's choices, and not 
comply with China's schemes to divide, belittle, and eventually 
annex Taiwan, intentionally or not." 
 
B) "Bush-Hu Meeting: the United States Is Working with a Tiger to 
Try to Get Its Hide" 
 
Cao Changqing, a China-born freelance journalist based in the U.S., 
opined in the pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 
600,000] (4/19): 
 
"... Hu Jintao has two main objectives to attain for his U.S. trip: 
that is, he wants to receive a red-carpet treatment as extended to 
the leaders of big nations so as to enhance his ruling prestige in 
China.  Also, he attempts to draw the United States to its side in 
order to urge Washington to restrain Taiwan independence and 
criticize the Chen Shui-bian administration. ... 
 
"The 'Bush-Hu meeting' will not produce any substantive results 
primarily because China and the United States have totally different 
systems and senses of values.  The meeting between Bush, a pious 
Christian, and Hu, an atheist who believes in nothing but violence, 
is like 'negotiating with a tiger for its hide - namely, to try to 
persuade someone to do what is against his interest.' ..." 
 
C) "China's Newfound Diplomatic Skills" 
 
Lin Chong-pin, president of the Foundation of Cross-Strait and 
International Studies in Taipei, opined in the pro-independence, 
English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 30,000] (4/19): 
 
"... The cornerstone of Beijing's current foreign policy is how it 
approaches the US, namely 'cooperation is more important than 
contradiction.'  It is based on a realistic assessment that military 
confrontation with the sole superpower now would be disastrous.  The 
notion also reflects Beijing's confidence that time is on its side, 
which stems from the country's seemingly unstoppable economic 
growth. ... 
 
"The good news about Beijing's recently acquired diplomatic aplomb 
is that a war across the Pacific is less likely, as China prefers 
extra-military tools such as economic and cultural measures to the 
military options in its pursuit of great power status.  The rapid 
modernization of the People's Liberation Army is mainly intended to 
boost Beijing's diplomacy, not intended for use in actual combat. 
The bad news is that those who anticipate the continuing US 
dominance of East Asia may face an uncertain future.  An emergence 
of China without bloodshed will encounter less resistance, and 
therefore be more likely to succeed.  When Bush and Hu meet this 
time, we should keep our eyes open for the third-party loser." 
 
D) "Bush Tends to Focus on Short-term Trading While Hu Is More 
Interested in Long-term Planning" 
 
Beijing correspondent Yu Hui-chien said in a news analysis in the 
pro-status quo "China Times" [circulation: 400,000] (4/19): 
 
"... Since the United States' domestic politics normally has a great 
impact on the U.S. president's foreign policy, Bush's focus in his 
meeting with [Chinese President] Hu Jintao will differ greatly than 
that of Hu's.  Bush's remaining term of office is two years, but 
unless there is an accident, Hu's term will last until 2012.  As a 
result, in terms of the issues that need to be discussed between 
China and the United States, Bush will focus on 'short-term' 
trading, centering on issues concerning the U.S. domestic politics. 
But for Hu, he can 'conceal his ability and bide his time' and try 
to develop Beijing-Washington ties from a long-term strategic 
perspective. ..." 
 
E) "Beijing Offering More Incentives to Taiwan" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] wrote in an editorial (4/19): 
 
"The four proposals raised by Chinese President Hu Jintao on Sunday 
suggested a distinct shift in Beijing's policy toward Taiwan, a 
change that may boost China's attraction for this island and prevent 
it from drifting further away.  Hu's new policy may also help in his 
effort to take George W. Bush into adopting a firmer stance on 
President Chen Shui-bian as he meets with the U.S. leader tomorrow 
in Washington. ... 
 
"Hu's new Taiwan policy of not wanting to push for unification and 
offering to carry out talks for peaceful development across the 
strait should resonate well with Washington, as the U.S. government 
as a basic position opposes any moves by either side of the Taiwan 
Strait to change the status quo.  And it always encourages the two 
sides to hold talks as a way to reduce tensions in the strait.  So 
the Beijing leader could have a better chance this time of 
persuading President Bush into adopting a firmer stance against Chen 
taking moves to pursue formal independence during his remaining two 
years in office.  Chen infuriated both Beijing and Washington by 
abruptly announcing his plan early this year to abolish a 
15-year-old advisory council that aims to promote eventual 
unification with the Chinese mainland." 
 
YOUNG