06AITTAIPEI3834
MEDIA REACTION: U.S. MIDTERM ELECTIONS
Mon Nov 13 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0010
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #3834/01 3170916
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 130916Z NOV 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3002
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5924
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 7143UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 003834 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - DAVID FIRESTEIN 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S. MIDTERM ELECTIONS 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused their 
coverage November 10-13 on the aftermath of the prosecutor's 
indictments of First Lady Wu Shu-chen and three Presidential aides 
in early November; on the first televised debates among the Taipei 
mayoral candidates Sunday; and on follow-on investigations into the 
Presidential allowance for state affairs case.  Former Academia 
Sinica President Lee Yuan-tseh and Former Presidential Office 
Secretary General Chen Shih-meng, both close friends of President 
 
SIPDIS 
Chen Shui-bian, over the weekend openly urged President Chen to step 
down.  The pro-unification "United Daily News" ran a banner headline 
November 13 on page two that read "Blue and Green Each Has Its Own 
Intent; Osting Bian Has Become an Imminent Consensus."  In 
addition, the media reported November 13 that two DPP legislators 
have announced their resignation effective this week because they 
think their party's handling of President Chen's case has failed to 
respond appropriately to Taiwan society's expectations. 
 
¶2. Most Taiwan dailies continued to editorialize on President Chen's 
allowance for state affairs case and his and the DPP's political 
future.  Several commentaries and editorials tended to compare 
Chen's future with the results of the U.S. mid-term elections.  A 
"United Daily News" column urged Taiwan voters to wake up and vote 
against the DPP, as the U.S. voters did vis-a-vis the Republican 
Party.  An analysis in the pro-status quo "China Times" said the 
political earthquake caused by the U.S. mid-term elections has 
sounded a death knell for the Republican Party.  The article also 
urged Taiwan not to nurture any wishful thinking about future U.S. 
House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, because even though she may love Taiwan, 
she will not embrace a corrupt Taiwan leader.  An editorial in the 
limited-circulation, conservative, pro-unification "China Post" also 
compared President Chen with President Bush and urged Taiwan voters 
to use their ballots to let Chen know their decision.  An editorial 
in the limited-circulation, pro-independence, English-language 
"Taipei Times," however, said the results of the U.S. mid-term 
elections will have very little impact on U.S.-Taiwan relations. 
End summary. 
 
A) "The United States Wakes Up, While Taiwan Remains Asleep?" 
 
The "Black and White" column in the pro-unification "United Daily 
News" [circulation: 400,000] (11/10): 
 
"The 'George W. Bush's lies' have been exposed, followed by 
disillusionment with the 'George W. Bush myth.'  It is globally 
acknowledged that the severe defeat of the U.S. Republican Party in 
the mid-term elections stems from the fact that voters have cast a 
no-confidence vote against Bush.  There were two means Bush adopted 
that were behind his ascendancy after the September 11 tragedy:  One 
was that he chose a foreign enemy, Saddam Hussein, to inflame the 
American people's sense of justice and desire for revenge.  Second, 
he took advantage of [the slogan of] 'anti-terrorism' to uphold 
'national security' as the highest criterion for judging political 
right and wrong, in an attempt to suppress criticism in the United 
States. ... 
 
"Bush has used the war in Iraq and the war on terrorism to build an 
autocratic position for himself.  But last week's mid-term elections 
showed that the American people who had once crazily supported 
Bush's war in Iraq have now exposed his lies and spurned this 
populist politician after 3,000 American soldiers and 600,000 Iraqis 
died in the war in Iraq! ...  American voters did not buy Bush's 
story, but will Taiwan voters buy Chen Shui-bian's story?  The 
United States can, but Taiwan cannot?  The United States has woken 
up, but does Taiwan still remain asleep?" 
 
B) "Political Earthquake of the Mid-term Elections Sounds the Death 
Knell of the Republican Party" 
 
Washington correspondent Norman Fu noted in the "Washington Outlook" 
column in the pro-status quo "China Times" [circulation: 400,000] 
(11/10): 
 
"... President George W. Bush immediately fired universally loathed 
Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld following the mid-term elections, 
replacing him with former Central Intelligence Agency Director 
Robert Gates.  Bush reluctantly let his confidant Rumsfeld go, and 
this is a price that the Democratic Party and future U.S. House 
Speaker Nancy Pelosi demanded of him.  All Bush could do was to send 
his favored right hand man who launched the war in Iraq to the altar 
as a sacrifice following the elections. ...  One need not look far 
for a lesson; [Taiwan] must not nurture any wishful thinking about 
[future U.S. House Speaker Leader] Nancy Pelosi.  One must know that 
Pelosi is a vanguard against Republican corruption.   How could she 
possibly like and embrace a Taiwan leader who is used to telling 
lies every day and who is corrupt by nature? ...  It may be true 
that Pelosi loves Taiwan, but it is definitely not Chen Shui-bian 
whom she loves." 
 
C) "Can President Chen Learn from Bush's Defeat?" 
 
 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (11/13): 
 
"George W. Bush's defeat at the polls on Tuesday should have 
surprised nobody.  Although his name was not on the mid-term 
election, the election was all about him - a referendum on his 
leadership, in general, and his war in Iraq, in particular.  After 
six years in the White House, Bush has proved one thing: he is 
perhaps one of the worst American presidents since World War II, if 
not of all time.  He has made lives miserable for both Americans and 
Iraqis. ... 
 
"Like his American counterpart, President Chen is also famous for 
his hubris, fickleness, and chicaneries.  Although his name is not 
on the ballot for next month's election, the election is all about 
him - a referendum on his integrity and performance.  America's 
mid-term election has proven one thing:  that the American people 
are no longer stupid, at least not as stupid as Bush and his top 
political strategist, Karl Rove, had presumed.  Are voters in Taiwan 
getting smarter?  We'll have the answer next month." 
 
D)  "Don't Bother Reading US Tea Leaves" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] editorialized (11/10): 
 
"Political analysts look for changes in the Taiwan-US relationship 
after even the most insignificant events, so it is not surprising 
that they will jump into overdrive after a major development such as 
the US midterm election. ...  So when the usual commentators start 
putting their cutting insights into print, telling us how the US 
election is good for the pan-blues, or good for the pan-greens, for 
good for Taiwan, or bad for Taiwan, or whatever their formulation 
might be, we would do well to remember that the election will 
probably have very little impact on US-Taiwan relations.  There are 
manifold reasons for this, but primarily it is because Taiwan is on 
the periphery of political debate in the U.S.   American voters and 
politicians are worried about a lot of things, but on the whole, 
Taiwan isn't foremost among them. ... 
 
"The common ideological thread that most of these people share, 
however, is support for Taiwan's right to self-determination.  That 
support will continue so long as Taiwanese show that they are 
interested in their own future.  This is why US State Department 
isn't interested in taking sides in the current brouhaha over the 
president.  From the US' point of view, it is immaterial which 
Taiwanese political party or faction has the upper hand from week to 
week.  The important question relates to process.  There is a vast 
difference between red-clad rabble-rousers bringing down the 
president using mob rule, and a prosecutor bringing down the 
president using legal means.  The more rabid extremists may not see 
this, but we must hope that these people remain where they belong: 
on the fringe of popular opinion.  And if that happens, there may 
come a way when people here are confident enough in their own system 
of government that they no longer need to seek affirmation from a 
staid foreign bureaucrat speaking from a podium." 
 
YOUNG