06AITTAIPEI3361
MEDIA REACTION: PRESIDENT CHEN'S CONSTITUTIONAL REFORM
Thu Sep 28 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0004
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #3361/01 2710916
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 280916Z SEP 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2362
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5712
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 6928UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 003361 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - DAVID FIRESTEIN 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: PRESIDENT CHEN'S CONSTITUTIONAL REFORM 
PROPOSAL, DPP'S TWENTIETH ANNIVERSARY 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused their 
coverage September 28 on the planned meeting between Premier Su 
Tseng-chang and KMT Chairman Ma Ying-jeou; on the DPP's twentieth 
 
SIPDIS 
anniversary; on the follow-on movements of former DPP Chairman Shih 
Ming-teh's campaign to oust President Chen Shui-bian; and on the 
investigation into the Presidential Office's special fund for state 
affairs.  The pro-status quo "China Times" ran a front-page banner 
headline thaQaid "DPP's New Generations: Rejecting Bian [as their] 
Political Leader." 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, a "China Times" analysis 
discussed Beijing's attitude toward President Chen's recent 
constitutional reform proposal, saying China is working with the 
United States to put on a two-man show in an attempt jointly to 
restrain Taiwan independence.  A "China Times" editorial commented 
on the DPP's twentieth anniversary, saying the party has won 
political power but has lost its cleanliness.  An editorial in the 
pro-unification "United Daily News" also strongly criticized the 
DPP, saying it has no imagination and is full of deception.  End 
summary. 
 
¶3. President Chen's Constitutional Reform Proposal 
 
"Taking Preemptive Move to Oppose Independence, U.S., China Put on a 
Two-man Show" 
 
Journalist Chu Chien-ling said in an analysis in the pro-status quo 
"China Times" [circulation: 400,000] (9/28): 
 
"With regard to the DPP's move to push 'provocative' constitutional 
reforms when the party itself is in a relatively 'fragile' state 
now, almost everyone knows clearly what the DPP's intention was and 
what the result of such a move will be.  Beijing, however, lashed 
out at the DPP's move using harsh language that has rarely been seen 
over these past few years, [even] when the entire situation is not 
quite clear yet.  In addition to taking a 'preemptive' move, Beijing 
also intended to put on a two-man show with the United States. ... 
Beijing tried to stop Taiwan from moving toward independence in such 
a big way, even though it knows very clearly that the chances are 
slim for the [DPP] constitutional reform proposal on territorial 
redefinition to be passed, mainly because it wants to draw a red 
line to indicate clearly and firmly its position toward Taiwan. 
Also, Beijing did it to rehearse with the United States regarding 
how to work together to restrain Taiwan independence." 
 
¶4. DPP's Twentieth Anniversary 
 
A) "Does the DPP Still Remember the 'DPP' of Twenty Years Ago?" 
 
The pro-status quo "China Times" [circulation: 400,000] 
editorialized (9/28): 
 
"When we look back at the past two decades, [we saw that] the DPP 
has spent most of its time fighting an uphill battle.  Under an 
unfair system and environment, the DPP, with the assistance of 
[various] movements over time, has gradually expanded its room for 
survival and consequently won political power based merely on its 
obsession with ideals and closeness to the public opinion. ...  It 
is a pity that, after having attained the highest office, the DPP 
started to roll downhill at an accelerating speed and with a rather 
ugly posture. 
 
"What people feel most evidently was that the DPP got the power but 
lost its cleanliness; it became almost the same as the rival that it 
wanted to defeat.  Many [DPP] members, from the president on down, 
took high positions and enjoyed immense resources beyond their 
dreams, and they seem to have lost themselves in the dark holes of 
corruption without any signs of struggling. ...  The party's 
previous ideals of democracy and human rights have turned into sharp 
irony now.  The party that was once designated to pursue democracy 
has put aside all the major policy decisions a government should 
make; there seems to be only one single opinion inside the party, 
with those on the top chanting their support for Bian, while few 
down below dare to state the truth. ...  Over these years, the DPP 
has not transformed itself, grown, or walked out of its past; nor 
has it attempted to lead Taiwan forward.  This is not simply because 
of laziness; the DPP's real problem lies in its aging. ..." 
 
B) "From Imagination to Hoax: Green Political Experiences of 
University Youth" 
 
The pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 400,000] 
editorialized (9/28): 
 
"In the face of the violent waves caused by the campaign to fight 
corruption and oust Bian, the DPP will celebrate its twentieth 
anniversary today. ...  The DPP is a twenty-year-old, sloppy-looking 
'old man' now, which has lost its wisdom and ability and is on the 
 
verge of dying.  As of now, it is still communicating with the young 
men using sixty-plus-year-old hackneyed discourses.  The party has 
no imagination and is full of deception.  If the DPP loses the 
support of youth, it will lose its future as well!" 
 
WANG