06AITTAIPEI2290
MEDIA REACTION: TAIWAN'S POLITICAL SITUATION, U.S.-JAPAN
Wed Jul 05 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0005
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #2290/01 1860811
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 050811Z JUL 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0990
INFO RUQJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5372
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 6578UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 002290 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TQEAP/PA, EAP/PD - ERIC BARBORIAK 
DQRTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: TAIWAN'S POLITICAL SITUATION, U.S.-JAPAN 
ALLIANCE 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused their 
coverage July 4-5 on the Academia Sinica Biennial Convocation, which 
kicked off Monday; investigation into the alleged role of First Lady 
Wu Shu-chen in the Sogo Department Store gift certificates scandal; 
and the rumored rift between President Chen and former President Lee 
Teng-hui.  All papers reported on inside pages July 4 the remarks by 
AIT Taipei Director Stephen Young at the reception celebrating 
Independence Day on Monday; Young said he remains optimistic about 
Taiwan's future.  The pro-unification "United Daily News" ran an 
exclusive news story on page four July 5 with the headline: "Ma 
[Ying-jeou] and Wang [Jin-pyng] Agree to Deal with Arms Procurement 
Bill in September." 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, an editorial in the 
pro-independence "Liberty Times," Taiwan's biggest daily, criticized 
KMT Chairman Ma Ying-jeou, former KMT Chairman Lien Chan, and People 
First Party Chairman James Soong, saying they lack even the minimum 
of Taiwan-centered consciousness and thus cannot be regarded as 
nativists.  An opinion piece in the mass-circulation "Apple Daily" 
discussed the predicament facing Taiwan's democracy, saying Taiwan 
needs an effective decision-making mechanism.  An "Apple Daily" 
column discussed the new U.S.-Japan alliance, but said the two sides 
do not have equal relations and thus cannot be regarded as each 
other's equal.  End summary. 
 
¶3. Taiwan's Political Situation 
 
A) "Can People 'Whose Position Is Basically Consistent with That of 
Beijing's' Be Regarded as Nativists?" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 600,000] 
editorialized (7/4): 
 
"... The so-called nativists must at least insist on the 
Taiwan-centered entity and Taiwan's sovereignty, and they should try 
their best to push Taiwan into becoming a normal nation.  Based on 
these criteria, the rectification of Taiwan's name, writing a new 
constitution, and reforms are the things that those who identify 
with nativism should do.  But people like Lien Chan, James Soong, 
and Ma Ying-jeou have never regarded Taiwan as a country; they just 
used different keys to sing the one-China song.  Lien and Soong's 
joining hands with Communist China to restrain Taiwan, and Ma's call 
for ultimate unification all demonstrated that they are in need of 
the minimum of Taiwan-centered consciousness.  It would be shameless 
if they dare to claim that they represent nativism. ..." 
 
B) "Taiwan's Democracy Predicament" 
 
Chiu Hei-yuan, research fellow at Academia Sinica's Institute of 
Sociology, opined in the mass-circulation "Apple Daily" 
[circulation: 500,000] (7/4): 
 
"... The recent presidential recall attempt called to the Taiwan 
people's attention the serious flaws in the president's competence 
and the decision-making mechanism.  What's even more worrisome and 
surprising is that not only is there something wrong with Chen 
Shui-bian, but there are also more serious problems with Ma 
Ying-jeou.  Even though no one can tell who will win the 2008 
presidential election, Ma has the biggest chance to win, despite the 
severe blow dealt to him by the failed presidential recall attempt. 
But the fact that Ma has made a series of mistakes while seeking to 
recall the president showed that there are serious flaws in his own 
capabilities and the decision-making mechanism.  Not only was Ma's 
position toward the recall motion flip-flopping, but he was also 
evidently hijacked by the deep-Blue supporters and James Soong. 
Moreover, he was incapable of sticking to his own position and 
convincing the elites in his own party. ..." 
 
¶4. U.S.-Japan Alliance 
 
"The Curtain Falls on the Koizumi Theater" 
 
Columnist Antonio Chiang noted in his column in the mass-circulation 
"Apple Daily" [circulation: 500,000] (7/5): 
 
"... The "U.S.-Japan Alliance of the New Century" signed between 
U.S. President George W. Bush and Japanese Prime Minister Junichiro 
Koizumi has upgraded U.S.-Japan relations to a level that is almost 
that of U.S.-United Kingdom relations.  But Japan needs U.S. 
protection, while the United States only needs Japan's help.  On the 
U.S. chessboard, Japan is merely a strategic chess piece, not an 
equal chess player.  The two sides do not have equal relations and 
thus cannot be treated as each other's equal. 
 
"Right now, in order to restrain the rapid rise of China, 
strengthening the U.S.-Japan alliance seemed to be Japan's only 
option.  Koizumi has contributed greatly to this alliance.  But such 
a relationship is based on the personal friendship between Koizumi 
 
and Bush, and the foundation is very fragile.  Koizumi will soon 
step down, and his successor might have a different attitude.  The 
Bush administration, on the other hand, is still stuck in the 
quagmire of anti-terrorism, and can hardly protect itself. ..." 
 
YOUNG