06AITTAIPEI848
MEDIA REACTION: CROSS-STRAIT RELATIONS AND U.S.
Wed Mar 15 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0848/01 0740834
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 150834Z MAR 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9091
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 4864
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 6054UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000848 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - ERIC BARBORIAK 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: CROSS-STRAIT RELATIONS AND U.S. 
 
 
¶1. Summary: Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies continued to 
center their reporting March 15 on the call for a new investigation 
into the 319 shooting incident, a third U.S. BSE case, and other 
local issues; coverage also focused on President Chen Shui-bian's 
interviews with the international press ("The Washington Post" and 
Germany-based "Frankfurt Allgemeine Zeitung").  The pro-independence 
"Taiwan Daily" ran a banner headline on its front page that read: 
"As Long As the Conditions Are Ripe, Taiwan Must Have a New 
Constitution."  The sub-headline added: "The President Gives 
Interviews to European and American Media, Reiterating That the Push 
for a New Constitution Is Aimed at Consolidating Democracy and That 
Any Handling of Sovereignty-Related Issues Will Have to Meet 
[Taiwan's] Constitutional Procedures."  The pro-independence 
"Liberty Times," Taiwan's biggest daily, ran a news story on its 
page two with the headline: "Bian Confirms That the Wording for 
'Cessation of the National Unification Council (NUC) and National 
Unification Guidelines (NUG)' Was Originally 'Abolition.'"  The 
pro-status quo "China Times," ran a similar news story on its page 
two with a different headline: "Bian Clarifies the Crucial Wording 
for the First Time; Cessation of the NUC and NUG 'Is not Abolition 
and Does Not Violate [Chen's] Pledges.'" 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, an editorial in the 
pro-unification "United Daily News" seeks a definition of "Taiwan 
independence" by asking how would Taiwan benefit if the name of the 
island were to be changed from "Republic of China."  Journalist Lin 
Shu-ling said in a news analysis in the "China Times" that Chen's 
interviews with members of the international press were aimed at 
clarifying his position with the United States in order to prevent 
Washington and Beijing from signing a fourth communiqu.  A "Taiwan 
Daily" editorial asserted that Chen's call for a new constitution 
for Taiwan is in line with universal values.  End summary. 
 
A) "What is Taiwan Independence All About?" 
 
The pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 400,000] 
editorialized (3/15): 
 
"... [As President Chen has asked publicly in the wake of NUC/NUG 
decision] Has A-bian done anything wrong?  He has to answer the 
following questions first:  First, the view of Taiwan independence 
[activists] is that the termination of the Republic of China (ROC) 
must be carried out, [but] is it true that Taiwan must change its 
name and move toward 'de jure Taiwan independence' so that it can 
become an independent sovereign state?  That is, does 'Taiwan' have 
to put an end to the ROC in order to declare 'independence'? 
Second, the Taiwan independence [activists'] belief is that Taiwan 
independence can best resist the People's Republic of China, [but] 
will Taiwan's moving toward 'de jure independence' provide an 
ultimate safeguard for cross-Strait peace or will it be an ultimate 
showdown leading to war across the Taiwan Strait? 
 
"What is Taiwan independence?  Why do we need Taiwan independence? 
Does Taiwan independence simply mean just wanting to change Taiwan's 
official title to the 'Republic of Taiwan' (de jure Taiwan 
independence)?  Doesn't Taiwan independence also seek the mutual 
prosperity of the 23 million [Taiwan] people?  Or is it simply 
wanting to 'rectify Taiwan's name and write a new constitution' at 
the risk of tearing apart [Taiwan] society?  When answering these 
questions, Taiwan independence [activists] must ask themselves 
first:  What is there for Taiwan if the ROC no longer exists? ... 
What is Taiwan independence?  Is it just changing Taiwan's official 
title?  Why do we need Taiwan independence?  Is it just testing 
whether Beijing will really attack Taiwan or just trying to see if 
the United States will really come and 'help to defend' [Taiwan]? 
... 
 
"If the Taiwan independence [activists] consider moves to 'rectify 
Taiwan's name and write a new constitution' and 'de jure Taiwan 
independence' as goals they must achieve, they are probably 
narrowing the [definition] of Taiwan independence and leading the 
Taiwan independence movement downhill; that is, these activists are 
boxing Taiwan independence into a corner themselves.  If the Taiwan 
independence [movement] finally terminates the ROC via 'de jure 
independence,' Taiwan independence itself can hardly be sustained. 
If Taiwan independence fails to be sustained, Taiwan will hardly 
survive. ... When Chen Shui-bian said he wants to continue sticking 
to his dream of Taiwan independence, it means he will continue using 
the nightmare of Taiwan independence to torture Taiwan, depriving 
the island of the right to live a sober life. " 
 
B) "Bian Steps on the Brake in Order to Avoid the United States and 
China from Signing a Fourth Communique" 
 
Journalist Lin Shu-ling said in a news analysis in the pro-status 
quo "China Times" [circulation: 400,000] (3/15): 
 
"President Chen launched a publicity campaign to [try to influence] 
the international media immediately after the controversy over his 
'cessation of the National Unification Council (NUC) and the 
National Unification Guidelines (NUG) subsided for the time being. 
Chen's publicity campaign was not merely aimed at seeking the 
international community's support for Taiwan in the face of China's 
potential attack against the island, but also focused on clarifying 
with the United States that his administration will not continue 
moving toward 'the road of Taiwan independence.'  Also, Chen is 
trying his best to prevent Washington and Beijing from signing a 
fourth communiqu during the upcoming meeting between U.S. President 
George W. Bush and Chinese President Hu Jintao. ... 
 
"When it comes to Washington's changing attitude [toward Chen's NUC 
and NUG decision] ..., sources said Taiwan had explained to 
Washington very clearly during their communications the island's 
legal procedures for writing a new constitution and the possible 
developments.  Washington accepted [Taiwan's explanation] that 'Bian 
can hardly take the next step,' so the alarm was muted. ...  Bian's 
publicity campaign is targeting mainstream American media this time, 
and his move is actually aimed at clarifying [his attitude] with the 
United States to avoid any possible development in the upcoming 
Bush-Hu meeting that might put Taiwan in an unfavorable position. 
..." 
 
C) "President Chen's Call for a New Constitution Is in Line with 
Universal Values: [Chinese Premier] Wen Jiabao's Appeal to Ethnic 
Bonds Is Nothing But His Wishful Thinking!" 
 
The pro-independence "Taiwan Daily" [circulation: 100,000] 
editorialized (3/15): 
 
"... The cessation of the National Unification Council and its 
guidelines has released the Taiwan people from the sole and only 
option of unification [with China].  Writing a new constitution will 
tailor for Taiwan a timely, suitable, and useable new constitution 
so that Taiwan can stride ahead toward a broad future.  All these 
moves have to be done according to democratic procedures step by 
step, and during the process, the rights of the 23 million Taiwan 
people must also be taken care of ...  This development is not aimed 
at provoking China and it is something a modern democracy must do. 
Only by doing so can Taiwan move forward bravely and win the support 
of the international community. ..." 
 
KEEGAN