06AITTAIPEI2162
AIT TRAVEL CLEARANCE FOR USCC: HOUSTON, MULLOY,
Thu Jun 22 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0011
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #2162/01 1730833
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 220833Z JUN 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0829
INFO RUEHML/AMEMBASSY MANILA PRIORITY 9750UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 002162 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OTRA TW USCC
SUBJECT: AIT TRAVEL CLEARANCE FOR USCC: HOUSTON, MULLOY, 
BUNTON - 6/27-30/2006 
 
 
REF: STATE 102269 
 
¶1.  AIT welcomes and grants travel clearance to U.S.-China 
Economic and Security Review Commission (USCC) officials, 
Caren (Kerri) Houston, Patrick A. Mulloy and Executive 
Director T. Scott Bunton for their visit to Taipei from 
6/27-30/2006, per reftel.  We understand that the delegation 
wishes to meet with AIT personnel and representatives from 
the Taiwan political and business communities.  We also 
understand Mr. Blumenthal will not be traveling as originally 
planned. 
 
¶2.  Visitors to Taiwan are reminded that they must travel on 
a tourist passport and are considered AIT consultants while 
conducting U.S. Government business in Taiwan.  Your passport 
should be valid for at least six months.  No visa is required 
for American citizens entering Taiwan for visits of under 30 
days.  Stays over thirty (30) days require a visa, which can 
be obtained through AIT Washington from the Taipei Economic 
and Cultural Representative office in Washington, DC. 
 
¶3.  AIT Political Officer Brad Parker is the control officer 
for the visit.  He may be reached at the office at 
886-2-2162-2086; Fax 886-2-2162-2241; Cell-phone: (09) 
1038-0773, and e-mail: parkerbs@state.gov.  AIT is located at 
#7, Lane 134, Hsin Yi Rd., Section 3, Taipei.  Official hours 
of business are: 8:00 AM through 5:00 PM. The after-hours and 
emergency number at Post 1 is 886-2-2162-2319. 
 
¶4. Hotel Reservations for 3 nights have been made at 
Shangri-La's Far Eastern Plaza Hotel, located at Tun Hwa 
South Road, Section 2, No. 201; tel. no. 886-2-2378-8888, fax 
no. 886-2-2377-7777. The rooms have been reserved at the U.S. 
government room rate of NT$5500 (US$172) per night, including 
buffet breakfast, internet access, a ten percent service 
charge, and tax. 
 
¶5. Security assessment: The Department of State is deeply 
concerned about the continued threat of terrorist attacks 
against U.S. citizens and interests abroad, as well as the 
potential for demonstrations and violent actions against U.S. 
citizens and interests overseas. U.S. citizens are reminded 
that demonstrations and rioting can occur at any time. U.S. 
citizens are reminded to maintain a high level of vigilance 
and to take appropriate steps to increase their security 
awareness. The Department of State remains concerned by 
indications that al-Qaida and affiliated groups continue to 
prepare to strike U.S. interests abroad. Terrorist actions 
may include, but are not limited to, suicide operations, 
assassinations, hijackings, bombings or kidnappings. These 
may involve aviation and other transportation and maritime 
interests. Terrorists do not distinguish between official and 
civilian targets. These may include facilities where U.S. 
citizens and other foreigners congregate or visit, including 
residential areas, business offices, clubs, restaurants, 
places of worship, schools, hotels and public areas. U.S. 
citizens are encouraged to maintain a high level of vigilance 
and to take appropriate steps to increase their security 
awareness. U.S. Government facilities worldwide remain at a 
heightened state of alert. These facilities may temporarily 
close or suspend public services from time to time to assess 
their security posture. In those instances, the American 
Institute in Taiwan will make every effort to provide 
emergency services to U.S. citizens. Americans abroad are 
urged to monitor the local news and maintain contact with the 
nearest U.S. embassy or consulate, or the American Institute 
in Taiwan. As the Department continues to develop information 
on any potential security threats to U.S. citizens overseas, 
it shares credible threat information through its consular 
information program documents, available on the Internet at 
http://travel.state.gov. In addition to information on the 
Internet, travelers may obtain up-to-date information on 
security conditions by calling 1-888-407-4747 toll-free in 
the U.S. or outside the U.S. and Canada on a regular toll 
line at 1-317-472-2328. 
 
¶6. Restrictions: AIT strictly controls the entry of laptop 
computers, personal digital assistants (PDAs) and any other 
electronic devices into the main office building. Travelers 
desiring to bring official electronic equipment to the AIT 
Office must provide the following information to the Control 
Officer: 
 
--  Type of equipment (electronic camera and/or computer). 
--  Model number. 
--  Serial number. 
--  WPAS or NEPA barcode number. 
--  Purpose of use. 
 
Personal equipment, PDAs, cameras, cell telephones, etc. will 
be checked in with the AIT main gate guards. 
 
 
 
¶7. Remarks: Thank you for providing AIT with your security 
clearance information.  We look forward to your arrival in 
Taiwan. 
KEEGAN