06ANKARA1622
TIP IN TURKEY: TURKISH MEDIA ATTENTION, March 1-15,
Mon Mar 27 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 ANKARA 001622 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, EUR/PGI, EUR/SE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD PREF TU TIP IN TURKEY
SUBJECT: TIP IN TURKEY: TURKISH MEDIA ATTENTION, March 1-15, 
2006 
 
¶1.  In response to G/TIP inquiries, national and 
international media sources published the following articles 
about TIP in Turkey.  Text of articles originally published 
in Turkish is provided through unofficial Embassy 
translation. 
 
¶2.  Reported by Aksam on Thursday, March 2: 
 
TITLE:  "The Cat," sought by red bulletin, captured while 
shopping 
 
BEGIN TEXT:  Ukrainian Deniz B., who was sought for an 
incident in which a Russian girl was raped, was captured 
while she was shopping in an operation dubbed "Cat" against 
a human trafficking network. 
 
Deniz B. has been sought by Ukrainian officials for human 
trafficking, and a red bulletin (international arrest 
warrant) was issued by Interpol.  According to allegations, 
two months ago Deniz brought a Russian girl to Ejder T., who 
was arrested during "Operation Cat".  The Russian girl was 
raped by Ejder T.'s men.  She was sold to other men.  The 
Russian girl managed to escape from the house she was kept 
in and told police what she lived through. 
 
The Foreigners' Police found out that Deniz's name was also 
mentioned in "Operation Cat," conducted ten days ago.  She 
had been bringing women to Ejder T. from the Ukraine, Russia 
and Moldova and she was also one of the leaders of the gang. 
She managed to escape the police operation, but as she was 
shopping in Atakoy the other day, police detained her.  She 
refused to testify.  She was sent to the prosecutor on 
charges of human trafficking, bribery and rape.  Ten more 
people are sought in connection with the rape incident. 
 
Ukrainian Tamilla A., married to a Turk in 2000 and assumed 
Turkish citizenship, adopted the name Deniz.  END TEXT. 
 
¶3.  Published by Sabah on Thursday, March 2: 
 
TITLE:  Apparent prostitution trap 
 
BEGIN TEXT:  Girls who flee or who are kidnapped from the 
Taksim Child and Youth Center (where older orphans are 
kept)in Istanbul, are forced into prostitution. 
 
They are given drugs; they live on the streets and are 
raped.  All this happens in front of the police. 
 
They are the children of divided families who did not 
receive affection.  They are forced into prostitution with 
men.  They sleep on the streets and are made drug addicts. 
They are dragged into prostitution at a very young age. 
What is worse, a majority of these girls are from the Taksim 
Child and Youth Center.  According to allegations, the 
Center authorities and the police, although they are aware 
of this fact, kept quiet. 
 
T.K. (17) and G.B. (16) are two of these children.  After 
two weeks of hard work in the back streets of Beyoglu, we 
finally could convince them to tell us about their 
experience.  G.B. has never met her parents.  The two sons 
of the family who adopted her sodomized her when she was 
eight. 
 
She said that her stepmother forced her to be involved with 
men for money.  "When I was ten, I fled.  Two boys were 
bugging me and a woman told me that she could be of help. 
We went to her house.  She drugged me and her husband raped 
me.  I got pregnant.  She arranged an abortion and then 
began to sell me to men.  I fled after three years.  The 
police took me to the Taksim Child and Youth Center, but 
that place is like a jail.  I ran away.  I served at bars 
and I was raped," she said. 
 
T.K. is from Eskisehir.  She was kidnapped and raped by two 
people when she was 13.  She was raped again when she was 15 
and got pregnant.  She was put in the Taksim Child and Youth 
Center.  "I could not stand the environment in that 
institution and left.  A cab driver who promised to help me 
kidnapped me for one week.  I was forced to take drugs and 
became an addict.  Later, I was sold to a brothel in 
Unkapani.  I served at different bars in Beyoglu and I still 
do," she noted. 
 
T.K. recounted how she fell into this trap.  "None of us 
want to be involved in prostitution.  But they make us drug 
addicts and beat us.  When desperate, you have to do 
whatever they want.  These are dangerous people.  My 
greatest dream is having a house one day.  I'm not thinking 
of marrying at all.  Because when I think of marriage, I 
remember my own parents.  I hate it." 
 
G.B. said that there were many brothels in the back streets 
of Beyoglu and Tarlabasi and added, "One of them is the 
brothel on Baskurt Street in Cihangir.  From time to time, 
girls from this brothel, by lying, manage to enter the Youth 
Center.  After spotting some other girls, they are able to 
lure them out.  Many of my friends ended up there.  There 
are still those who work there.  Some others who manage to 
flee are now serving at bars and night clubs." 
 
G.B. went on, "I was wandering around in Taksim.  Two boys 
came up to me and began to tease me.  Since I knew how the 
system worked, I wanted to escape.  They held my arms and 
forced me into a brothel in Tarlabasi where transvestites 
work.  On the upper floor of that brothel, little girls are 
forced into prostitution.  They began to talk at the door. 
They were going to sell me.  I managed to run away from 
them." 
 
G.A. (17), who came to the center when she was 15 and two 
months pregnant, had to leave because of maltreatment. 
"When I wanted to return, I was not allowed in.  I served at 
bars and used pills.  Now I am trying to earn money by 
selling beads," she said.  She argued that although police 
knew what was going on, they kept quiet. 
 
Police Come and Go. 
 
It is around 9:00 p.m.  The street is very calm.  As time 
passes, the number of men entering the brothel in an 
apartment in Cihangir increases.  A man with a long coat, 
standing in front of the building, constantly looks around. 
Around 11:00 p.m., a red car approaches and a blonde woman 
wearing workout clothes comes out to greet him.  All of a 
sudden there is a lot of movement and then a police car with 
a blue light is seen.  A policeman runs into the apartment 
and comes out after five minutes.  The police car leaves. 
 
S.Y. has been living on Baskurt Street in Cihangir for six 
years and she has witnessed what has been going on at the 
brothel.  She said that during the day, little girls come 
and go and in the evening young boys.  "I filed complaints 
many times and the owner of the brothel was charged at least 
20 times.  A couple of times her apartment was shut down. 
But after a short time, it opened again.  The police, too, 
go there.  Nobody says `stop' to this," she said. 
 
M.A., who frequently goes to the brothel on Baskurt Street, 
said that the house is operated by a 60-year-old woman.  He 
said that three flats were used for this purpose.  "Serpil, 
who is from Kayseri, operates the flats and she has men 
working for her.  When girls object, they are beaten and 
tortured.  When we go in, the girls form a line and you can 
rent the one you like for 50 YTL (approximately 38 USD) per 
hour.  Girls can get pregnant.  It is possible to see some 
babies there.  Later those babies disappear.  They even 
shoot pornographic movies in that house," he added.  END 
TEXT. 
 
¶4.  Published by Sabah on Friday, March 3: 
 
TITLE:  Life forgot them; they forgot how to laugh. 
 
BEGIN TEXT:  The story of the girls who were dragged into 
prostitution when they were very young hurt everybody 
deeply.  The things that happened to G.A. and G.B. 
demonstrate their tragedy.  G.B., who is only 16, has 
already had four abortions.  When she was only 8-years-old, 
she was abused by her stepbrother and her stepmother sold 
her to men.  She was sent to the Taksim Child and Youth 
Center where she was maltreated.  When a woman who offered 
to help her handed her over to her husband, he raped her and 
she got pregnant.  That woman carried out an abortion on her 
with an iron bar. 
 
G.B., who had been living on the streets for one year, said, 
"The Institution's director Bahriye Karatay gave permission 
to girls with boyfriends.  She gave them money to rent 
houses.  Everybody knows everything, but they do not do 
anything.  We want a good life from now on." 
 
G.A., who was born in Kirikkale and who had four sisters and 
brothers, was raised with her father beating her.  She said, 
"My father beat us all with an iron bar.  He used to hang us 
by our feet from the ceiling when he wanted to punish us." 
When she was 13, she was forced to marry a 45-year-old man 
in return for 1000 YTL (about 770 USD).  Instead, she ran 
away with the man she loved.  When her boyfriend was sent to 
jail, she tried to commit suicide.  She married the relative 
of a woman she met in a literacy course by religious 
ceremony (Note:  not legal).  One year later she was 
pregnant.  Her husband showed her the door since he did not 
want the child.  She was sent to the Taksim Child and Youth 
Center.  But when those in the Center constantly ridiculed 
her for her clothing, she fled. 
 
The unfortunate girl said the following about the evening 
she fled the Center, "I was very cold and hungry.  A man 
said that he would help.  I went with him.  But there is 
nothing free in life.  I could eat something in return for 
sleeping with him." 
 
G.A. returned to the Center and delivered her baby.  Her 
baby was sent to the Bahcelievler Orphanage and she was sent 
to the 80th Year Youth Center.  G.A. said, "Bahriye Karatay 
adopted the baby of a girl who delivered a child when she 
was 15, but she did not do the same thing for me.  I have 
not seen my daughter for three months and she does not have 
an identification card.  Please help me to get her one as 
soon as possible." 
 
We hosted G.A. (17) and G.B. (16) at a hotel.  It was 
obvious that the hotel room felt like home for them after 
all that suffering and poverty that they went through.  When 
I entered their room, they immediately said, "This is like a 
palace.  We wish we had such a home.  We could live in 
peace."  We entered the room and G.B. turned on the TV.  She 
immediately found a cartoon channel.  Then she asked, "This 
dream will end, no?" 
 
When we went down to the restaurant of the hotel for dinner, 
G.B. said, "This is a luxurious place.  I will feel very 
embarrassed if I make a mistake."  When we were filling our 
plates from a buffet, she said, "If we take a lot of food, 
they will not be angry, will they?"  They keep asking for 
permission from me for everything they put on their plates. 
When I told them that they could eat as much as they wanted, 
they said, "This is a luxurious place and we do not want to 
embarrass you." 
 
After dinner, when we went back to the room, they jumped 
into bed.  They began a pillow fight and laughed.  As they 
caressed the white sheets, they appreciated that they were 
white and soft.  They fell asleep, maybe the most peaceful 
sleep they ever had. 
 
After breakfast we went to the paper (Sabah).  As we 
arrived, they talked about the night they spent in their 
comfortable beds and what they ate.  When I asked what they 
wanted to eat for lunch, they said, "Fish."  They had their 
lunch, and when I said that we would go back to the hotel, 
they rejoiced that they would spend one more night in soft 
beds.  On our way back, I bought G.A. a doll for her to give 
to her daughter.  She was very pleased.  G.B., on the other 
hand, gave the gifts she received to girls that she saw on 
the street who were in worse shape.  END TEXT. 
 
¶5.  Published by Sabah on Friday, March 3, written by Fatih 
Altayli: 
 
TITLE:  Those who force children into prostitution 
 
BEGIN TEXT:  Sabah, for the past two days has been 
publishing a sad story that turns our stomachs.  This is the 
story of kids who were dragged into prostitution.  Girls as 
young as 12 and 13 are being sold in front of police in 
Istanbul.  They are somehow being taken out of state- 
controlled centers and being dragged into prostitution. 
These poor girls could be our daughters. 
 
Following our report, an operation was not conducted against 
the brothel where children are sold.  I am curiously waiting 
to see what kind of action will be taken.  Meanwhile, I 
learned that the person behind the child prostitution is 
Serpil from Kayseri.  Her real name is Cemile Aydin.  She is 
involved in child prostitution. 
 
Authorities took action 23 times against this woman and her 
brothel where she employs children.  It was raided most 
recently on October 9, 2005.  She was captured while forcing 
girls to prostitute themselves.  This house was raided again 
late last night. She was released by the court in which she 
appeared.  Child prostitution is the biggest shame in 
civilized countries, but it is openly conducted in Turkey. 
And one of those who are responsible for this is wandering 
freely, despite the fact that she was captured 23 times. 
 
How are the shelters run? 
 
Two of the children who were dragged into prostitution are 
right now under the protection of Sabah newspaper.  I talked 
to Nimet Cubukcu, State Minister for Families, yesterday. 
She said that despite all efforts, there was a very serious 
problem and she said that she would take care of the girls 
who reportedly were taken away from the youth center.  But 
the issue is not admitting the girls into these centers. 
The issue is that the girls should be treated in a humane 
way. 
 
Due to professional deformation, some administrators whose 
feelings have been numbed might regard these girls as 
prostitutes, and this attitude lead to girls going back to 
school. 
 
It is not enough to give a bed and food to these kids in 
order to drag them out of the quagmire.  They need to be 
treated in a humane way.  This is what is lacking and this 
deficiency is in their minds.  END TEXT. 
 
¶6.  Reported by Aksam on Saturday, March 4: 
 
TITLE:  Police raid on female prostitution boss 
 
BEGIN TEXT:  Cemile Aydin, known as "Serpil from Kayseri," 
was detained in a sting operation for forcing young girls 
into prostitution and for operating a brothel.  Civilian 
police teams from the Beyoglu Police Department, after 
obtaining permission from the prosecutor, raided Aydin's 
brothel at 11:00 p.m. the other evening on Cihangir's 
Baskurt Street, where she had forced young girls into 
prostitution.  During the operation, Aydin, referred to as 
"the Female Boss" by the girls, was detained.  END TEXT. 
 
¶7.  Published by Hurriyet on Wednesday, March 8: 
 
TITLE:  Thirty Sex Slaves Saved 
 
BEGIN TEXT:  The police raided several houses in Fethiye, 
Mugla, which had been under surveillance for prostitution 
for three months.  Thirty women, most of whom were 
foreigners and who were forced into prostitution, were saved 
in an operation named "Valley."  Ten people who were 
marketing the women were detained.  END TEXT. 
 
¶8.  Published by Sabah on Wednesday, March 8: 
 
TITLE:  Guardian Angel of Modern Slaves 
 
BEGIN TEXT:  Selin Arslan, who works in the International 
Organization for Migration's fight against human trafficking 
office, and who is also the coordinator for public 
relations, is extending her helping hand to Ukrainian, 
Moldovan and Russian women drug into prostitution in Turkey. 
 
Arslan, along with her professional team, works like a 
detective following information coming to the 157 hotline 
operated by such women. 
 
The 157 hotline operates 24 hours a day, seven days a week. 
Operators speak Russian, Romanian, English and Kyrgyz. 
 
In 14 months, 248 of 290 women victims were sent back to 
their countries and 98 percent of those women were forced 
into prostitution, while two percent were used as domestic 
help.  END TEXT. 
¶9.  Published by Hurriyet on Thursday, March 9: 
TITLE:  Bullets followed the message 
 
BEGIN TEXT:  Pinar Ozayar (16), Hatice Col (20), and her 
brother Irfan Col (25), who had allegedly sold the two 
girls, were found dead in a dump in Eregli, Konya.  They 
were shot in the chest and head with seven bullets.  The 
Jandarma initiated a comprehensive investigation and 
detained eight people, including Kamil Esen, who allegedly 
sells women.  The Jandarma also questioned around 30 
prostitutes.  The prostitutes reportedly said that Hatice 
and Pinar could not be shared by the prostitution mafia and 
the gang had fought for the women with sticks and stones in 
the past. 
 
Ayse Col (55), mother of the murdered Col brother and 
sister, was questioned for five hours.  The weeping mother 
claimed that her daughter Hatice had been threatened 15 days 
ago and noted, "Kamil Esen 15 days ago sent a message to my 
daughter's cell phone and threatened her by saying, `You 
will either be mine or I will shoot you.'  Fifteen days 
later Hatice was taken to Pinar's house by some men.  During 
the same time, my son came home and some men took him to a 
car and left.  I have never seen those men before." 
 
The three bodies were sent to the Adana Forensic Medicine 
Institution and the investigation is ongoing.  END TEXT. 
 
¶10.  Reported by Yeni Safak, Radikal, and Aksam on Saturday, 
March 11: 
 
TITLE:  Pinar's Tragedy 
 
BEGIN TEXT:  The life of Pinar O. (16), who was one of the 
two women shot in the head and killed in Eregli, Konya, 
brought into question why we cannot protect our children. 
Pinar, who was one of three children, stabbed her father 
when she was 11 for beating her mother.  Her parents 
divorced because they could not get along.  Meanwhile, 
Pinar, who was a 9th grader at Ataturk High School, ran away 
from home. 
 
When she had nowhere to go, she took shelter at the house of 
G.E., who reportedly forced her into prostitution.  When she 
was forced into relationships with men, she fled and took 
shelter with the police.  Six people were detained for 
keeping her and leading her into prostitution by force.  The 
policemen that she accused were found not guilty in the 
investigation.  The other six people were arrested by order 
of the court.  Since she had nowhere to go, she returned to 
the house where her father lived. 
 
Some people against whom Pinar had filed a complaint hurt 
her 8-year-old sister and 10-year-old brother and threatened 
her if she spoke.  Pinar, who was under psychological 
pressure, fled her father's house and moved in with Hatice 
¶C.  END TEXT. 
 
¶11.  Published by Vatan on Saturday, March 11: 
 
TITLE:  Prostitution in a hot tub 
 
BEGIN TEXT:  The Jandarma, which got a tip that prostitution 
was being conducted at the Sultaniye Hot Springs in 
Koycegiz, Mugla, conducted a "Circle Operation" that 
encircled the hot springs with three teams of officers.  Ali 
¶A. (30), a municipality worker who allegedly forced foreign 
women into prostitution, and his brother, Arif A. (39), and 
his Azeri wife Aygun A. (27), who was deceiving women with 
job offers, were detained.  Ukrainian Valencia M., who 
allegedly was forced into prostitution was rescued. 
 
During searches of the suspects' houses, the Jandarma found 
passports that belonged to foreign women, an unregistered 
pistol, two knives and boxes of vodka.  It was claimed that 
the gang members have been bringing women from abroad to 
Mugla with job offers and forcing them into prostitution. 
END TEXT. 
 
¶12.  Published by Aksam on Saturday, March 11: 
 
TITLE:  Prostitution imports for the cup 
 
BEGIN TEXT:  The 2006 World cup, to be held in Germany from 
June 9 to July 9, is expected to lead to a big increase in 
prostitution.  The Reeperbahn district of Hamburg, in the 
north, famous for its sex shops and brothels, is preparing 
for action. 
 
Following a warning that thousands of women from Eastern 
Europe might be deceived and forced into prostitution, 
officials decided to bring prostitutes in from other 
countries.  END TEXT. 
 
¶13.  Reported by Hurriyet on Saturday, March 11: 
 
TITLE:  Prostitution on the open seas 
 
BEGIN TEXT:  After two months police surveillance, Fethiye 
police in Mugla raided 24 sites in an operation coded 
"Valley" and saved 29 foreign women who had been forced into 
prostitution.  During searches of the sites, the police 
found passports that belonged to the foreign women, one 
unregistered hunting gun, 2 grams of heroin, two open 
vouchers, four receipts for foreign money transfers, a knife 
and an iron bar. 
 
Nineteen people were detained, but the police released five 
of them.  The gang leader, Ali Ihsan Aksak (58), A.K. (36), 
D.K. (29), H.K. (27), R.O. (31), O.C. (36), M.E. (42), Z.A. 
(41), S.K. (30), O.A.Y. (50), Georgian citizen M.K. (39), 
Russian citizens S.A. (42), A.A.K. (35) and A.B. (44), 
forced the women into prostitution and kept them in houses, 
pensions and hotels and had rented a three-story villa for 
prostitution.  It was also determined that they were forcing 
the women into prostitution on a yacht the group had 
purchased. 
 
Georgian citizen M.K. was working in a supervisory position 
in the Tblisi Police Department.  The police are searching 
for 12 others in connection with this case. 
 
Upon order of Court No. 2, A. Ihsan Aksak and 13 others were 
sent to jail.  END TEXT. 
 
¶14.  Reported by Radikal on Saturday, March 11: 
 
TITLE:  Blow to the prostitution on board gang 
 
BEGIN TEXT:  Police saved 29 women, most of whom were 
foreigners, when it cracked down on a prostitution ring in 
Fethiye, Mugla.  The gang rented a hotel for prostitution 
and was providing prostitution on board a boat. 
 
The Mugla Police Organized Crime and Smuggling Department, 
upon complaints by tourism agents and local businessmen, 
began to follow a prostitution ring.  Following a two-month 
surveillance, it raided 24 separate sites last Tuesday and 
detained 19 people.  During searches of their offices and 
homes, police found passports of the foreign women, an 
unregistered shotgun, 2 grams hashish, two vouchers, and 
four bank receipts for international money transfers.  There 
was also a knife. 
 
The ring kept the women in their houses or hotels, had even 
rented a three-story hotel, and forced them into 
prostitution.  From time to time, they were providing 
prostitution services on board a rented boat.  The gang 
members confiscated the passports of the foreign women and 
threatened those who wanted to return home by saying that 
they would throw hydrochloric acid on them. 
 
The leader of the gang, A.I.A., prepared fake visas and 
other documents for foreign women.  M.K., who was detained, 
was working for the Tblisi police.  The suspects were taken 
to the Fethiye courthouse yesterday.  Fourteen of them, 
including A.I.A. and M.K., were put under arrest for human 
trafficking for prostitution.  END TEXT. 
 
¶15.  Published by Sabah on Saturday, March 11, written by 
Fatih Altayli: 
 
TITLE:  A raid on a brothel 
 
BEGIN TEXT:  Some time ago, Sabah published reports exposing 
the prostitution scandal in Beyoglu.  This situation brought 
to agenda indeed has been disturbing to those who have lived 
in Tarlabasi for a long time. 
 
People living in that neighborhood and hotel owners many 
times filed official complaints to the Istanbul Governor's 
office and the Provincial Tourism Director.  They asked 
officials to stop what was going on.  They even gave the 
addresses of the houses involved in prostitution.  Later 
came the comedy.  The Governor and Provincial Tourism 
Director referred the issue to the police. 
 
The police first collected the women working on the street 
and transsexuals.  Certainly, prostitution did not end. 
There was a need to carry out an operation on the brothel. 
They applied to the prosecutor, who gave the go ahead for a 
single search.  The operation was then carried out.  Let me 
read the rest from the official document that was prepared 
after the operation. "When we went to the buildings numbered 
18 and 24 on X Street, and numbers 9 and 14, we noticed that 
their doors were closed.  We rang the bells many times, but 
nobody responded.  We concluded that there was nobody inside 
and we did not conduct a search." 
 
Policemen in official uniforms knocked on the doors of the 
brothels and when nobody answered the door, they decided not 
to conduct an operation. 
 
What were the policemen expecting?  Were they expecting 
someone to tell them, "Welcome.  Let me offer you 
something"?  END TEXT. 
 
¶16.  Published by Sabah on Sunday, March 12: 
 
TITLE:  Saved by a call 
 
BEGIN TEXT:  A young girl (23), who was deceived with a job 
offer to come to Turkey from Ukraine, and was forced into 
prostitution for one month in Koycegiz, Mugla, was saved by 
the Jandarma. 
 
V.B. was kept in a room without a bathroom and was forced 
into prostitution for one month.  When she saw the Jandarma 
units, she began to cry.  The young girl, who allegedly was 
forced into prostitution, called the 157 hotline operated by 
the IOM.  Based on this information, the Jandarma carried 
out an operation to liberate the girl. 
 
Two prostitutes have AIDS. 
 
In an operation against prostitution, 37 foreign women were 
detained in a hotel in Silivri.  During their medical 
checkups, it was determined that 17 of them had venereal 
diseases and two had the deadly AIDS virus. 
 
Seventeen of the women who underwent checkups at the 
Cankutaran Venereal Diseases Hospital, were infected with 
diseases such as hepatitis, gonorrhea and syphilis. 
 
Moldovan Elena T. and Ukrainian Olga B. had AIDS.  After 
processing the women, the authorities will deport them.  END 
TEXT. 
 
¶17.  Published by Radikal on Sunday, March 12: 
 
TITLE:  Valentyna saved 
 
BEGIN TEXT:  Ukrainian Valentyna Butkova, who fell into a 
prostitution web, was saved by a Jandarma operation. 
 
The 24-year-old primary school teacher was deceived earlier 
by Ali Altindal (42), who works temporarily in the Koycegiz 
Municipality, and his Azeri wife Aygul Altindal.  They 
offered her a job.  Altindal took her passport and sold her 
to men at the Sultaniye hot springs where his brother A.A. 
works. 
 
She was locked in a house on the shore of Lake Koycegiz and 
was fed only bread for a month.  When she refused to be 
involved in prostitution, she was beaten by Altindal.  When 
she had the opportunity, she phoned for help.  She was 
finally saved on March 11 by a Jandarma operation.  When she 
saw the Jandarma, she began to cry for joy.  She was sent 
back to Ukraine.  While Ali Altindal was arrested for forced 
prostitution and restricting one's freedom, his brother was 
set free, to be tried on release.  END TEXT. 
MCELDOWNEY