06ANKARA3189
TURKEY/IRAQ: G/IWI AMBASSADOR STEINER DISCUSSES
Thu Jun 01 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO4645
PP RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHAK #3189 1521327
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 011327Z JUN 06
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6180
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS ANKARA 003189 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL EAID KWMN IZ TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY/IRAQ: G/IWI AMBASSADOR STEINER DISCUSSES 
DEMOCRACY TRAINING FOR IRAQI WOMEN 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary.  Acting Senior Coordinator for 
International Women's Issues Ambassador Steven E. Steiner met 
on May 23 with Turkish officials and a quasi-governmental 
training institute, where he found a willingness, and 
capacity, to compare notes and potentially collaborate on 
educational and training programs for Iraqi women.  End 
Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) While in Ankara to take part on the Democracy 
Assistance Dialogue (DAD) Intergovernmental Conference on 
Advancing Women's Rights in the BMENA Region, Ambassador 
Steven E. Steiner met with Turkish Government Iraq 
Coordinator Oguz Celikkol and deputy Fazli Corman on May 23 
to exchange information on U.S. and Turkish democracy 
training programs for Iraq, particularly for Iraqi women. 
Celikkol reported that Turkey had provided week-long 
political and media seminars to a total of 409 Iraqis since 
2005 and expected to train an additional 200 by the end of CY 
¶2006.  The Turkish training is conducted in Turkey and 
organized by the MFA, with the help of political parties, 
media organizations, and the quasi-governmental Public 
Administration Institute for Turkey and the Middle East 
(TODAIE).  Celikkol said Iraqi demand for such seminars has 
grown as newer Iraqi political groups hear about them. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Asked about logistical requirements, Corman said 
Iraqi citizens may apply for Turkish visas at airports and 
border crossings. Visas are generally granted if applicants 
show a return ticket and sufficient funds to cover their 
stay.  Celikkol said that most Iraqi parties now have 
representatives in Turkey who can help with logistics. 
Candidates for both political party and media seminars have 
been selected by the Iraqi parties themselves; the Turks have 
noted an improvement in the quality of selectees over time. 
 
¶4. (SBU) In response to Steiner's questions about the 
participation of women and members of parliament in the 
Turkish programs, Celikkol said that the Iraqi parties have 
sent few women so far, but the Turkish government has lately 
encouraged them to include more.  Turkish training has so far 
not targeted members of the Iraqi Assembly but some of the 
participants have been MPs.  The new speaker of the Iraqi 
parliament has recently requested an exchange of experience 
with Turkish counterparts and the GOT is inclined to support 
this.  Celikkol told Steiner that Turkey is also planning to 
invite to Turkey seven ethnic Turkmen deputies, both Sunni 
and Shia, to encourage them to work cooperatively. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Celikkol also said that Turkey is planning a 
training session in July in Istanbul for about 40 Iraqis, 
with the focus on the Iraqi constitution.  This is being 
organized in cooperation with the UN and the UN is expected 
to choose the Iraqi participants. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Celikkol said that Turkey has sufficient capacity to 
accommodate additional training programs and is open to 
collaboration with the U.S.  He noted there are several 
Turkish NGOs dealing with women's issues that could be 
helpful in organizing programs for Iraqi women.  There are 
also women-owned businesses in Istanbul that could be tapped 
to assist in economic and business training for Iraqi women. 
Steiner and Celikkol agreed to exchange further information 
on our respective programs and stay in contact. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Steiner met separately TODAIE acting director Dr. 
Oya Citci, who outlined TODAIE's role in providing training 
modules for the political party seminars.  The seminars are 
designed for 30 participants, who receive lectures on 
democratic institutions and receive briefings from political 
parties as well as the High Election Council and other state 
bodies.  TODAIE has boarding and dining facilities available, 
and receives from the government 300 YTL (approximately USD 
200) per hour of instruction provided to the groups. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Citci expressed interest in having TODAIE partner 
with U.S. organizations to train Iraqi women.  She was unsure 
of the procedures that would need to be followed and said she 
would have to consult with TODAIE's director general.  She 
provided us later with a copy of instructional materials 
TODAIE uses with the Iraqi groups (e-mailed to G/IWI). 
 
Visit Ankara's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/eur/ankara/ 
 
WILSON