06BASRAH22
MAYSAN PROVINCE:  AVIAN INFLUENZA, FLOODING AND AGRICULTURAL
Mon Feb 20 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
REO Basrah
VZCZCXRO2620
PP RUEHBC
DE RUEHBC #0022/01 0511153
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 201153Z FEB 06
FM REO BASRAH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0251
INFO RUEHBC/REO BASRAH 0268
RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BASRAH 000022 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KFLU AMED EAID ECON EAGR PGOV PREL IZ
SUBJECT: MAYSAN PROVINCE:  AVIAN INFLUENZA, FLOODING AND AGRICULTURAL 
SECTOR WORKING GROUP 
 
REF: (A) BASRAH 006 (B) BAGHDAD 254 (C) BAGHDAD 400 
 
¶1. Summary:  Information from the Danish Embassy Office and the 
UN indicates that there are confirmed cases of H5N1 in birds in 
Maysan province.  There is currently no evidence that it has 
affected humans, but there are six suspicious cases (including 
one death) still awaiting test results.  Recent flooding in the 
province has been brought under control, and the Maysan 
Agricultural Sector Working Group held its first meeting on 
February 18.  End Summary. 
 
AVIAN INFLUENZA 
--------------------------- 
¶2.  On February 18, the Agricultural Advisor (AgAd) from the 
Danish Embassy Office in Basrah attended the Agricultural Sector 
Working Group meeting at Camp Abu Naji in Maysan province.  The 
AgAd was unable to discuss the recent outbreak of avian 
influenza (AI) in detail with his Iraqi counterparts but did 
broach the issue with a British sergeant at Abu Naji.  The AgAd 
told poloff that there were confirmed cases of the H5N1 strain 
in Maysan in birds.  He cited the case of two domesticated 
pigeons that had the disease and confirmed that their owner that 
has died.  The information he received indicated that the owner 
of the birds did not die from AI. 
 
¶3.  The AgAd told poloff that information was circulating that 
Baghdad has provided a US$20 million compensation scheme for 
farmers who must kill their birds.  He said that the local 
government would pay US$3 per chicken and US$1.50 per pigeon 
brought to the veterinary clinic to be disposed of.  The AgAd 
told poloff that he was worried about the way the compensation 
scheme would be carried out.  He said that once people found out 
about the monetary compensation, killing birds and bringing them 
to the veterinary clinic would be seen by some as a business 
venture or opportunity.  And the reward plan to bring dead and 
possibly infected birds to the veterinary clinic would increase 
the spread of contamination.  The AgAd was told that the 
residents in the province were panicking about the discovery of 
H5N1, but the local government was working to take control of 
the situation and ease fears. 
 
¶4.  On February 19, poloff spoke with the UN Coordinator who met 
with local staff of the World Health Organization (WHO) in 
Basrah regarding the WHO visit to Maysan province on February 
¶16.  The UN Coordinator said that there has been one suspicious 
death (the owner of the domesticated pigeons mentioned above), 
and there are currently five suspicious cases.  All cases are 
awaiting results from blood tests.  Therefore, there is 
currently no evidence of H5N1 in humans in Maysan although 
results of the tests are still pending.  If the tests come back 
positive it will add to the growing concern in Iraq regarding AI 
(See Refs).  The UN representative said that WHO would provide 
training in all four southern provinces to medical, laboratory 
and veterinary staff regarding AI and how to handle cases.  WHO 
will also provide masks, suits, boots and Tamiflu to the four 
provinces. 
 
FLOODING 
---------------- 
¶5.  The Danish AgAd was told that the flooding that occurred in 
the southern part of Maysan and northern part of Basrah in the 
past two weeks has been brought under control.  The majority of 
the flooding occurred in the marsh areas of the two provinces. 
The Maysan Provincial Council has been tied up in crisis 
management of the AI outbreak and flooding for the past two 
weeks.  The Maysan PRDC, scheduled for February 16, was 
cancelled so that the local government could focus its attention 
on these matters. 
 
AGRICULTURAL SECTOR WORKING GROUP 
--------------------------------------------- ---------------- 
¶6.  The purpose of the Danish AgAd's visit to Maysan was to 
attend the first Agricultural Sector Working Group meeting for 
the province.  The AgAd had been in constant contact with the 
Director of Agriculture (DA) in Maysan for a week before the 
trip.  Despite the boycott against the Danish Government in 
Basrah province, the DA told the AgAd that he would only attend 
the meeting if the AgAd were there.  The AgAd said there was no 
mention of the cartoon controversy during the meeting. 
 
¶7.  The AgAd said that it was a good first meeting, but there 
was some frustration on his part and the part of his British 
counterparts who work with him and accompanied him to the 
meeting from Basrah.  He said that the Basrah donor 
representatives and the donor representatives based in Maysan 
were not giving the same message to the Iraqis regarding how 
they should outline a strategy for project funding.  He said 
they worked through it during the meeting and believes the issue 
has been resolved.  The Agricultural Sector Working Group agreed 
to a second meeting in three to four weeks. 
 
 
BASRAH 00000022  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
COMMENT 
---------------- 
¶8.  Comment:  The government of Maysan Province is much more 
professional than its counterpart in Basrah.  Though the Brits 
and Danes are considered off limits by almost all the Basrah 
governmental entities, the Maysan government recognized the 
expertise of the Danish AgAd and resolved to work with him even 
with the cartoon controversy still raging in southern Iraq.  A 
matter-of-fact businesslike attitude combined with the 
uncertainty over AI caused the Maysan government to ignore 
possible short-term political gain that could be made by playing 
the cartoon card. 
 
¶9.  Comment continued:  The inability for poloffs to travel 
outside of Basrah has made it increasingly difficult to assess 
the situation on the ground in each of the other three 
provinces.  Poloff attempted to join the Danish AgAd on his trip 
to Maysan but was unable to do so because of limited British 
helicopter capabilities.  Poloffs have been unable to attend 
recent PRDC meetings in other provinces due to British 
restrictions on the number of people that can travel to the 
meetings.  Poloffs must rely on information from counterparts 
such as the Danish AgAd and others who are in the provinces or 
have the ability to travel for information regarding Maysan, 
Muthanna and Dhi Qar provinces.  End Comment. 
GROSS