06BEIJING6852
APRIL 11 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: PRESIDENT HU'S  U.S.
Tue Apr 11 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO9190
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHBJ #6852/01 1011041
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 111041Z APR 06
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2703
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHUJA/AMEMBASSY ABUJA IMMEDIATE 0091
RUEHNR/AMEMBASSY NAIROBI IMMEDIATE 0317
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT IMMEDIATE 0329
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH IMMEDIATE 0521
RUEHUNV/USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA IMMEDIATE 0869
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA IMMEDIATE 0976
RHHMUNA/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HI IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 006852 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL ECON PHUM PARM KNNP CH IR
SUBJECT: APRIL 11 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: PRESIDENT HU'S  U.S. 
AND OTHER TRAVEL, SIX-PARTY TALKS, IRAN, JAPAN,  SUDAN 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  Key points made at the April 11 MFA press briefing 
are as follows: 
 
- President Hu Jintao will visit the United States 
April 18-21, Saudi Arabia April 22-24, Morocco April 
24-26, Nigeria April 26-27 and Kenya April 27-28. 
 
- Beijing hopes President Hu's U.S. trip will help 
reduce bilateral differences and allow for candid 
discussions in an atmosphere of mutual respect. 
 
- Chinese business representatives included in Vice 
Premier Wu Yi's delegation to the United States signed 
important contracts with their U.S. counterparts 
involving a large monetary figure. 
 
- Vice Foreign Minister Wu Dawei and his Six-Party 
Talks counterparts are exchanging views in Tokyo on 
ways to resume the Talks. 
 
- China supports IAEA Director General ElBaradei's 
upcoming visit to Iran. 
 
- During his April 12-15 visit to China, WHA Assistant 
Secretary Shannon and Chinese officials will discuss 
 
SIPDIS 
policies and cooperation in Latin America. 
 
- Tokyo should "face up" to the problems in Sino- 
Japanese ties and try to promote normal relations. 
 
- China is making positive efforts for the restoration 
of peace and stability in Sudan. 
 
- Beijing welcomes improvements in U.S.-Vietnam 
relations.  End Summary. 
 
President Hu's April 18-29 U.S. and Other Travel 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶2.  President Hu Jintao will visit the United States 
April 18-21, Saudi Arabia April 22-24, Morocco April 
24-26, Nigeria April 26-27 and Kenya April 27-28, MFA 
Spokesperson Liu Jianchao announced at the regular 
April 11 MFA press briefing.  Vice Foreign Minister 
Yang Jiechi will offer a preview of the trip during a 
special April 14 press briefing.  Liu noted that 
President Hu will arrive in Seattle on April 18, visit 
Washington, D.C., on April 20 and deliver a speech at 
Yale University on April 21.  He will hold talks with 
President Bush and other U.S. leaders on bilateral 
ties and major international issues, as well as 
interact with U.S. Congressmen, state and municipal 
officials, business representatives and the American 
public.  President Hu's U.S. visit aims to promote 
mutual trust and constructive cooperation.  Asked 
about U.S. pressure on China with regard to 
intellectual property rights and the RMB exchange 
rate, Liu expressed the hope that the visit will help 
reduce differences and allow for candid discussions in 
an atmosphere of mutual respect. 
 
¶3.  Asked by the Bloomberg correspondent what message 
President Hu will deliver on Taiwan, Liu stated that 
on numerous occasions Washington has reiterated its 
opposition to Taiwan independence as well as support 
for its one-China policy and the principles of the 
Three Joint Communiques.  Beijing appreciates these 
commitments, hopes they will translate into actions 
and wishes to work with the United States to safeguard 
cross-Strait peace and stability.  Questioned by the 
Reuters correspondent about the recent call by U.S. 
Congressmen on President Bush to urge President Hu to 
release Legal Permanent Resident (LPR) Yang Jianli, 
Liu maintaied that China has always attempted to 
resolvebilateral differences on the basis of 
equality, mutual respect and dialogue.  Previous 
rounds of U.S.-China human rights dialogue have helped 
reduce disputes.  China's legal and judicial 
authorities will handle Yang's case according to the 
law. 
 
 
BEIJING 00006852  002 OF 003 
 
 
¶4.  Asked whether discussions over oil will be 
President Hu's top priority for the Africa portion of 
the trip, Liu stated that energy cooperation is one 
important but not the only component of China's 
bilateral cooperation.  In order to satisfy its energy 
needs China will not rely solely on imports but rather 
depend on domestic energy resources, which supply 80 
percent of current energy consumption.  President Hu's 
trip will enhance cooperation in various fields, 
including energy, culture and personnel exchanges.  In 
addition to his speech at Yale on China's peaceful 
development path, President Hu will address the Saudi 
Arabian parliament and deliver a talk in Nigeria on 
China's relations with Nigeria and Africa. 
 
VP Wu Yi Presides Over Signing of U.S.-China Contracts 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶5.  Liu reported that during Vice Premier Wu Yi's 
visit to the United States, Chinese business 
representatives included in her delegation signed 
important contracts with their U.S. counterparts. 
These contracts involved large monetary figures.  Liu 
declined to offer information on bilateral agreements 
that will be signed during President Hu's trip to the 
United States. 
 
Six-Party Talks 
--------------- 
 
¶6.  Asked about Vice Foreign Minister Wu Dawei's 
current visit to Tokyo, Liu noted that VFM Wu is 
visiting Japan as the PRC delegation head to the Six- 
Party Talks and is not attending the April 9-13 
Northeast Asia Cooperation Dialogue (NEACD).  Meeting 
outside of the NEACD, he and all his Six-Party Talks 
counterparts are exchanging views on ways to resume 
the Talks.  VFM Wu stressed that dialogue will help 
resolve the DPRK nuclear issue and that the parties 
must focus on a peaceful resolution.  Some of the 
parties have raised helpful suggestions, which China 
hopes will reduce differences among the parties. 
 
¶7.  Questioned about the Macau Government's 
investigation into North Korean money laundering 
schemes, Liu expressed Beijing's opposition to money 
laundering and other illicit financial activities, 
adding that an investigation should be conducted into 
such activities.  China, however, does not want the 
financial sanctions to obstruct the resumption of the 
Six-Party Talks.  China hopes that the parties will 
concentrate on the DPRK nuclear issue and use the 
Talks as a mechanism to resolve the issue. 
 
Iranian Nuclear Issue 
--------------------- 
 
¶8.  Responding to the Xinhua reporter's question, Liu 
expressed China's support for IAEA Director General 
ElBaradei's upcoming visit to Iran.  Beijing welcomes 
his role in resolving the Iranian nuclear issue within 
the IAEA framework and hopes the visit will promote 
diplomatic efforts and receive backing from the 
international community. 
 
A/S Shannon's Visit 
------------------- 
 
¶9.  In response to the Spanish News Agency 
correspondent's inquiry, Liu noted that WHA Assistant 
Secretary Shannon will visit China April 12-15 and 
 
SIPDIS 
meet with Vice Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi and MFA 
Latin American Affairs Director General Zeng Gang. 
They will discuss policies and cooperation in Latin 
America.  This visit is an important part of the U.S.- 
China Senior Dialogue and will help increase mutual 
understanding. 
 
Japanese Official on Chinese Nationalism 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶10.  Asked by the Kyodo News correspondent about 
reported remarks by a Japanese Embassy official on 
 
BEIJING 00006852  003 OF 003 
 
 
Chinese television about a rise in Chinese 
nationalism, Liu rejected the Japanese official's 
remarks and asserted that China disagrees with "narrow 
nationalism."  Beijing opposes such "smears," which 
are not helpful for the improvement of China-Japan 
relations.  Tokyo should "face up" to the problems in 
bilateral ties and try to promote normal relations. 
 
Sudan 
----- 
 
¶11.  Questioned about reported international criticism 
of China for contributing to the war in Sudan, Liu 
asserted that China is making positive efforts for the 
restoration of peace and stability in Sudan.  Beijing 
hopes that the parties concerned will implement 
relevant agreements and that the African Union will 
play a stronger role in resolving Sudan's problems. 
 
U.S.-Vietnam Relations 
---------------------- 
 
¶12.  Asked for China's view on the improvement of 
U.S.-Vietnam relations, Liu remarked that China 
welcomes these developments and hopes the warming of 
U.S.-Vietnam ties will promote regional peace and 
stability. 
 
Zhao Yan 
-------- 
 
¶13.  Asked about detained NY Times researcher Zhao 
Yan, Liu reiterated that the MFA has no additional 
information on the case. 
RANDT