06BEIJING10748
TAO PRESS BRIEFING:  MAINLAND BLASTS TAIWAN
Wed May 31 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO2763
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHBJ #0748/01 1511031
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 311031Z MAY 06
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7123
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RHHMUNA/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HI IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 010748 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV ETRD ECON CH TW
SUBJECT: TAO PRESS BRIEFING:  MAINLAND BLASTS TAIWAN 
NATIONAL SECURITY REPORT, ANNOUNCES NEW CROSS-STRAIT  TRADE 
ROUTE AND AGRICULTURAL TRADE INCENTIVES 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  The Taiwan Security Report exposed the Taiwan 
leaders' stubborn support for Taiwan independence and 
damaged cross-Strait peace, Taiwan Affairs Office 
(TAO) Spokesperson Li Weiyi asserted at the regular 
May 31 TAO press briefing.  A TAO economic affairs 
official reported that the authorities have approved a 
new cargo transport route from Fujian's Shijing Port 
to Kinmen beginning June 8.  Taiwan agricultural 
products transported across China will now enjoy 
preferential or "green passage" treatment.  The 
Mainland is preparing to send a procurement delegation 
comprised of local agricultural groups to the southern 
part of Taiwan.  End Summary. 
 
Chen's Statements Highlight Pursuit of Independence 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶2.  During the regular May 31 Taiwan Affairs Office 
(TAO) press briefing, the Xinhua correspondent asked 
about the recently issued Taiwan National Security 
Report.  The report represents the "Taiwan separatist 
stance" held by Chen Shui-bian and the Taiwan 
authorities, is a complete attack on the Mainland and 
tried to provoke cross-Strait tensions, TAO 
Spokesperson Li Weiyi asserted.  The report once again 
exposed the Taiwan leaders' stubborn support for 
Taiwan independence and their continuation on the path 
toward Taiwan independence, while damaging cross- 
Strait peaceful development.  It is an attempt to 
divert the Taiwan people's attention away from 
Taiwan's social and economic problems.  Criticism from 
the Taiwan people, however, demonstrates that the 
Taiwan authorities' pursuit of Taiwan independence and 
attempts to heighten cross-Strait tensions will "not 
win the people's hearts," Li stated.  With the efforts 
of the people on both sides of the Taiwan Strait, 
cross-Strait relations are currently moving forward 
with a positive momentum.  People on the Mainland and 
Taiwan share the opposition to Taiwan independence 
activities and the hope for regional peace and 
stability.  The Mainland will continue to resolutely 
and sincerely work for the peaceful development of 
cross-Strait ties and hope that the Taiwan people will 
make joint efforts to achieve this goal, Li concluded. 
 
New Fujian-Kinmen Route Approved 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  TAO Economic Bureau Director He Shizhong reviewed 
the development of the Three Mini-Links between Fujian 
Province and Taiwan's Matsu and Kinmen since 2001.  As 
of April 2006, Fujian and the two outer islands have 
conducted 15,200 passenger trips and have transported 
3.96 million tons of cargo freight.  This model 
represents a productive format for two-way direct 
routes and can be expanded to new ports.  He reported 
that the authorities have approved a cargo transport 
route from Fujian's Shijing Port in Quanzhou to Kinmen 
beginning June 8.  The Mainland is prepared to take 
any step that serves the interests of people on both 
sides of the Taiwan Strait.  He also expressed the 
hope for a direct route with the Penghu Islands, 
adding that Penghu residents share this hope. 
 
"Green Passage" Offered for Taiwan Products 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  Deputy Director General of the Ministry of 
Communication Public Affairs Department Li Hua noted 
that Taiwan agricultural products transported across 
China will now enjoy preferential or "green passage" 
treatment.  This special Mainland transportation 
network covers all of China's main agricultural 
production and sales hubs.  The "green passage" 
provides discounts for shipments together with greater 
efficiency and safety, according to Li. 
 
Procurement Delegation Ready 
---------------------------- 
 
¶5.  Highlighting the increasing contact between 
Mainland Taiwan agricultural associations, State 
Administration of Industry and Commerce representative 
Yang Zhanke noted that the Mainland is preparing to 
send a procurement delegation comprised of local 
agricultural groups to the southern part of Taiwan. 
The objectives are to better understand Taiwan's 
 
BEIJING 00010748  002 OF 002 
 
 
agricultural production situation and discuss 
cooperation possibilities.  Responding to a Taiwan 
reporter's question, Yang stated that the amount to be 
procured will depend on Taiwan's production 
capabilities and the needs of the Mainland market. 
Deputy Director of the Ministry of Agriculture General 
Office He Zeyang asserted that contact between cross- 
Strait civil organizations is a productive method of 
developing relations and promotes constructive 
communication, cutting out the middle-man.  Future 
cooperation will continue to follow the format of 
civil association exchanges. 
RANDT