06CAIRO4928
EGYPT MEDIA TRENDS: AUGUST 10, 2006
Thu Aug 10 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
VZCZCXYZ0002
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHEG #4928 2221247
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 101247Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0462
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVEUNCLAS CAIRO 004928 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NEA/PPD FOR ALBERTO FERNANDEZ, ROBIN SMITH AND 
DAVID BENZE 
R/PPR FOR GRETCHEN WELCH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO PREL IS LE EG
SUBJECT:  EGYPT MEDIA TRENDS: AUGUST 10, 2006 
 
 
¶1.  Summary.  All Egyptian terrestrial and 
satellite channels aired Hassan Nasrallah's 
exclusive statement on Al-Manar TV, to include 
Egyptian Television which did not air items from 
Al-Manar before the war in Lebanon.  Lead stories 
in morning television and print news included 
Israel's vote to expand its ground invasion and 
France's break from the US regarding the draft 
resolution.  The day's commentaries included 
differing characterizations of Hassan Nasrallah 
and a criticism of Arab media's influencing of 
the public. End Summary. 
 
¶2.  In the headlines and front pages.  "Israel's 
Losses Continue." "Israel Fires its Army Leader 
in Lebanon, Expands the Land War." These and 
similar headlines in government-owned, 
independent and opposition papers showed Israel 
in a weakening position against Hezbollah. 
Simultaneously, the papers emphasized the 
deadlock over the potential ceasefire resolution 
in headlines such as, "Lebanon is Back to Point 
Zero", "No Progress on the UN Resolution" and, 
"Differences Between Washington and Paris: Chirac 
Threatens to Issue a Draft French Resolution." 
All papers also headlined Nasrallah's latest 
appearance on TV, with headlines such as, "He 
Vowed Lebanon will be a Graveyard for Invading 
Israeli Occupation Troops," and "Welcome to the 
Battle, We Will Force You Out and You Will Pay a 
High Price." 
 
¶3.  In the commentaries.  Independent and 
opposition papers showed a relatively high focus 
on Hezbollah, with columnists using differing 
vernacular in their characterizations of Hassan 
Nasrallah.  For example, a senior columnist in 
opposition daily, Al-Wafd, characterized 
Hezbollah as no longer "an extension of Syria or 
Iran, but as "developing into a national power." 
Meanwhile, a well-known commentator for 
independent daily, Nahdet Misr, called Hezbollah 
"the new Guevara", referencing its popularity 
with the people and its image as an alternative 
to "Arab rulers who were forced to condemn the 
war (only) after their nations became angry." 
 
¶4. In an interesting criticism of the "Arab 
media's approach", especially per paragraph 5 
below, Moneim Said, a well-known intellectual, 
political analyst and celebrity television 
commentator, criticized the media's "showing of 
absolute support for Hezbollah and exclusion of 
any opposition to this trend."  He continued in 
his column in independent daily, Nahdet Misr, by 
comparing Arab media to "Israeli media which 
directs its reports and analysis to real 
information." 
 
¶4.  In the airwaves.  In what would have been an 
unusual practice before the war erupted in 
Lebanon, Egyptian Television aired Hassan 
Nasrallah's full statement, as given to Al-Manar 
TV. ETV broadcast it as the third or fourth item 
following the top-of-the-hour reporting on 
breaking news updates.  Excerpts of the 
statements were repeated throughout all news 
shows, particularly focusing on his comment that 
Lebanon will "be a graveyard for invading 
occupation troops," and his denial that Israel 
"weakened Hezbollah's rocket capabilities." 
RICCIARDONE