06CAIRO268
SUDAN REFUGEES: EGYPT RELEASES ADDITIONAL
Wed Jan 18 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 CAIRO 000268 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
FOR PRM/A, PRM/AFR, PRM/ANE, PRM/MCE, NEA/ELA, AND AF 
GENEVA FOR RMA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREF PHUM PREL ASEC CVIS EG SU UNHCR
SUBJECT: SUDAN REFUGEES: EGYPT RELEASES ADDITIONAL 
DETAINEES, PLEDGES TO STRICTLY ABIDE BY TREATY OBLIGATONS 
AND COORDINATE WITH UNHCR. 
 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED; PLEASE PROTECT ACCORDINGLY 
 
Reference: Cairo 170 
           Cairo 132 
           Cairo 58 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) MFA Assistant Minister for American Affairs briefed 
the DCM January 18 on the status of detained Sudanese asylum 
seekers in Egypt.  Hefny clarified that 153 Sudanese had 
been released January 17, with an unspecified number of 
others to be released shortly.  UNHCR, he said, had been 
given until January 26 to complete its review of cases. 
UNHCR Cairo confirmed January 18 that about 250 Sudanese 
detainees - all of the women and children and some 
Darfurians - were to be released. The GOE publicly named 27 
Sudanese killed during the December 30 confrontation, trying 
to quell rumors of much larger numbers.  UNHCR has completed 
initial screening of all detainees and found a mixture of 
credible and non-credible claims.  There are now unconfirmed 
reports that the GOE has decided against any forcible 
returns although MFA has told us of an "internal consensus" 
within the GOE to cooperate with UNHCR to ensure there would 
be no detentions or deportations inconsistent with Egypt's 
UN obligations.  The Sudanese are detained in harsh but 
humane conditions.  UNHCR says it has "sufficient" privacy 
to conduct interviews in the detention centers, although 
there are reports of mischief making by the Sudanese 
Embassy.  Those who have been released have been absorbed 
back into their communities with support from UNHCR, WFP and 
NGOs.  UNHCR Cairo is again operational and registering 
between 2-300 Sudanese a day. End Summary 
 
---------------------- 
More Sudanese Released 
---------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) GOE Assistant Foreign Minister Ali Al Hefney 
briefed the DCM January 18 that all women and children and 
most Darfurians detained December 30 would be released from 
Cairo detention centers Jan 18-19.  UNHCR has accordingly 
dispatched teams to the detention centers to assist with the 
releases.  This will leave around 213 Sudanese asylum 
seekers in detention (2,100 were detained December 30, 
2005).  Tonight's releases follow an MFA communiqu issued 
January 17 listing 27 names of those killed during the 
police action in an apparent attempt to squash rumors that 
many more people were killed. Hefney advised that autopsies 
were being carried out and forensic reports would be 
released within the next few days.  MFA UN Affairs Office 
Director Hany Saleem clarified separately to poloff January 
18 that there was an "internal consensus" within the GOE 
that there would be no detentions and no deportations 
inconsistent with GOE obligations as a signatory to the 1951 
Refugee Convention. Furthermore the GOE would coordinate 
fully with UNHCR prior to any deportations, according to 
Saleem. 
 
------------ 
UNHCR Update 
------------ 
 
¶3. (SBU) Radhouane Nouicer, Deputy Director of UNHCR's 
Central Asia, South West Asia, North Africa and the Middle 
East Bureau (CASWANAME) briefed Refcoord on the current 
status of detainees. Nouicer is managing the situation in 
the absence of country representative Saad al Attar 
(currently in Geneva for medical treatment). Greg Balke, 
UNHCR Senior Protection Officer from Geneva, joined the 
briefing.  Balke is leading the teams screening detained 
refugees. 
 
------------------- 
Screening Completed 
------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Nouicer reported that UNHCR has now screened all of 
the Sudanese in three detention centers, Abou Zabat, Shedin 
Al Kom and Kanater.  UNHCR has been unable to verify rumors 
that more Sudanese from the December 30 incident are being 
held in other detention centers.  The GOE has denied this 
and UNHCR has found no evidence to the contrary (although 
there could be Sudanese in detention for other offenses). 
 
¶5. (SBU) Today's releases will leave about 213 in detention 
(2,100 were originally detained). About thirteen are 
Darfurians whom UNHCR believes should be released 
immediately in accordance with UNHCR's declared policy that 
Darfurian asylum seekers should be granted prima facie 
refugee status. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Further Evaluation Required for the Rest 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) The remainder of the detainees are males - 
reportedly a mixture of legitimate asylum seekers who lost 
their documentation (20), newcomers who have not previously 
registered (50) and  previously closed cases that were 
evaluated and denied some time ago (130).  Of these, UNHCR 
has identified about 30 who have no credible claim. The rest 
appear to have some grounds for claiming refugee status and 
need to be evaluated further.  Some of these claims (30) 
have been deemed "not manifestly unfounded", and others may 
have a sur place claim relating to their involvement in the 
demonstration or the attention they have been receiving from 
the Sudanese Embassy (which has been observed taking names 
and photographs of detainees). 
 
--------------------------- 
Conditions Harsh but Humane 
--------------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) According to Balke the Sudanese are detained in 
harsh but generally humane conditions.  UNHCR has assisted 
by supplying food, clothing, medical help and counseling. 
Balke says his screening teams have been able to provide 
sufficient privacy for refugee interviews although the 
situation is not ideal.  UNHCR would prefer to have all of 
the refugees released so that they can be dealt with in a 
more acceptable environment. 
 
------------------------- 
Sudanese Embassy Involved 
------------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) UNHCR reports that the Sudanese Embassy has been 
visiting the detention centers and intimidating detainees by 
taking names and photographs.  UNHCR believes this goes 
beyond normal consular responsibilities/activities since the 
detainees are in the middle of evaluation for possible 
refugee status, and have not sought Embassy assistance. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Deadline for Deportations Unclear 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) There is continuing confusion over the deadline set 
by the GOE to complete UNHCR evaluations (before 
deportations).  The previous deadline of January 15 has 
passed and UNHCR is receiving conflicting reports that the 
deadline has now been moved to January 23 or January 26, and 
one report that it has been lifted entirely.  There have 
also been media reports (Al Ahram of January 16) that the 
GOE will not forcibly return any of the detainees.  UNHCR is 
attempting to verify these reports. UNHCR expects to deliver 
the results of its screening to MFA before the end of this 
week. 
 
-------------- 
UNHCR Requests 
-------------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) Nouicer met with MFA January 16 and argued the 
following points: 
 
 -    There should be no forcible return of recognized 
   refugees; 
-    There needs to be an in-depth enquiry about the 
December 30 incident; 
-    All detainees need to be released (those facing 
criminal charges could be prosecuted); 
-    The GOE needs to produce the names of the deceased; 
-    UNHCR and the GOE need to get together to review their 
respective roles vis--vis refugees and distribute 
responsibilities accordingly 
¶11. (SBU) UNHCR will continue to press for the GOE to assume 
greater responsibility for identifying and protecting 
refugees in accordance with its obligations as a signatory 
to the 1951 Refugee Convention.  UNHCR is currently doing it 
all - identification, screening, protection, assistance and 
resettlement - without GOE help, and believes a more 
proactive role by the GOE is needed at an early stage to 
define who are refugees and who are the responsibility of 
the state. 
 
---------------- 
Former Detainees 
---------------- 
 
¶12. (SBU) UNHCR says former detainees seem to have been 
absorbed back into their communities and are not approaching 
UNHCR's office for individual attention, although NGOs and 
UNHCR's implementing partners are continuing to monitor and 
assist the Sudanese refugee population.  Balke says the 
infrastructure for the delivery of food and material support 
for those refugees who have been released from detention 
"remains effective".  WFP has agreed to supply sufficient 
food for three months to 4,000 refugees, and various NGOs 
are helping with food, and other material supplies.  The USG 
has donated $20,000 for clothing and other non-food items. 
 
------------------------- 
Criminal Charges Possible 
------------------------- 
 
¶13. (SBU) UNHCR has heard that the Egyptian Prosecutor 
General will decide on possible criminal charges relating to 
the demonstration and its aftermath within the next few 
days. 
 
--------------------------- 
UNHCR Cairo Now Operational 
--------------------------- 
 
¶14. (SBU) After a three and a half month hiatus, UNHCR Cairo 
is now open for asylum seekers to register and to have their 
cases heard.  Nouicer reports that Sudanese are rushing to 
register with UNHCR at the rate of 2-300 a day to obtain the 
limited assistance and protection afforded by UNHCR's Yellow 
Card. 
 
Ricciardone