06KHARTOUM798
Local Press, AU Special Rep React to Arab
Thu Mar 30 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO7240
PP RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #0798/01 0891512
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 301512Z MAR 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2119
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE
RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 000798 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/SPG 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/SUDAN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL SOCI AL US SU
SUBJECT:  Local Press, AU Special Rep React to Arab 
League Summit and Bashir Interview with Al-Jazira 
 
Ref:  Khartoum 00796 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Khartoum media coverage of the Arab League 
Summit was favorable, with extensive coverage on 
television, radio, and newspapers, both in English and 
Arabic.  AU Special Representative Kingibe criticized 
Arab League offers of financial support for AMIS, 
referring to it as "medicine after death."  Several 
editorials appeared in pro-government newspapers, 
reflecting accurate but targeted coverage of President 
Bashir's March 29 interview with Al-Jazira.  End summary. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
Local Media Coverage Extensive and Positive 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  Media coverage of the Arab League Summit was 
generally positive, in both English and Arabic television 
and radio programming, as well as newspapers.  The pro- 
government Sudan Vision newspaper ran a special issue on 
the event, with numerous color photos, under the 
headline, " Arab League Committed to Arab Solidarity." 
President Bashir's assumption of the role of Chairman 
also received acclaim. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
AU Sp Rep Kingibe:  "Medicine After Death" 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶3.  African Union Special Representative Baba Gana 
Kingibe criticized the Arab League offer to provide 
financial assistance to the African Union Mission in 
Sudan (AMIS) from October 1, 2006.  On March 29 he said 
it was "too late as troops need immediate cash to help 
stop escalating violence there.  This is medicine after 
death.  We need the assistance now in order to be able to 
resolve the crisis." 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
President Bashir Interview Receives Concerted Coverage 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶4.  On March 30, four pro-government Arabic daily 
newspapers, Al-Sahafa, Alwan, Akhbar Alyoum, and Al- 
Hayat, published nearly identical editorials relating 
several of the points made by President Bashir in his 
March 29 interview with Al-Jazira television following 
the Arab League Summit in Khartoum.  The text of the 
editorials is as follows (informal Embassy translation): 
 
(Begin text) 
 
Al-Bashir Says the American Policy of Targeting Sudan 
Never Stops 
 
President Al-Bashir accused the Western countries that 
call for deploying UN forces in Darfur of their real aim, 
which is to have these forces stay for good in Darfur, 
and not to solve the conflict.  He pointed out that the 
American policy of targeting Sudan would not stop, even 
if all Sudan's conflicts were solved.  He renewed 
Khartoum's stance of rejecting foreign forces entry to 
Darfur. 
 
Al-Bashir, in his interview with Al-Gazeera television, 
continued to say that the Arab Summit, which concluded 
its sessions yesterday, decided to provide financial and 
military support to the AU forces operating in Darfur. He 
went on to say that the summit did not fix a certain sum 
of money, but mentioned that it would fund the AU force 
expenses for six months as of October 2006.  He added 
that the summit decision includes supporting the AU 
forces with additional force from some Arab countries 
from Egypt, Libya, Tunisia, Algeria, Morocco, and 
Mauritania. 
 
Al-Bashir considers the United States of America's policy 
of targeting Sudan, and believes it is due to the fact 
that Sudan practices its independent views and has 
political stances that contradict many of the American 
polices in Iraq, Palestine, normalization of relations 
with Israel, and of the commanding geographical position 
of Sudan and its abundant resources in oil, minerals, and 
water supply. 
 
Al-Bashir went on to say that one of our problems is that 
Sudan became one of the American internal political 
elements as well as became one of the American elections 
 
KHARTOUM 00000798  002 OF 002 
 
 
agenda items.  He confirmed that Sudan would not agree 
for international force to enter into Darfur, adding that 
whoever was behind the planned entry of the international 
forces into Darfur wanted this force to stay for good and 
not to solve the conflict.  He reiterated that it is 
possible for the UN to have a role after peace is 
achieved in Darfur, with the consent of the Government of 
Sudan. 
 
(End text) 
 
STEINFELD