06KIGALI192
RWANDA COMMITTED TO ADDRESSING CHILD LABOR BUT
Mon Feb 27 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kigali
VZCZCXYZ0007
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHLGB #0192/01 0581709
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 271709Z FEB 06
FM AMEMBASSY KIGALI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2421
INFO RUEHXR/RWANDA COLLECTIVE
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDCUNCLAS KIGALI 000192 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/C, DRL, AND G/TIP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV ELAB RW
SUBJECT:  RWANDA COMMITTED TO ADDRESSING CHILD LABOR BUT 
LACKS FUNDING 
 
¶1.  Summary:  In a meeting February 24, UNICEF indicated 
that while child labor is a problem in Rwanda, child 
trafficking and prostitution do not appear to be prevalent. 
UNICEF-Rwanda Head of Child Protection attributed the 
incidence of child labor to the large number of vulnerable 
orphans, particularly in the aftermath of the civil war and 
1994 genocide, who do not have access to basic needs.  She 
noted that while Rwanda has child labor laws as part of its 
labor code, there are gaps in the code.  The Rwandan 
government has acknowledged those gaps and demonstrated 
political commitment to addressing the problem.  It has 
drafted an action plan, which includes revision of its labor 
code, and has expressed interest in a nationwide 
International Labor Organization (ILO) survey that would 
measure the extent of child labor in Rwanda.  However, the 
recent government restructuring and lack of funding have 
delayed progress.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  Alessandra Dentice, UNICEF-Rwanda Head of Child 
Protection, told PolCouns February 24 that child labor is a 
problem in Rwanda, although she is not aware of any 
organized network of perpetrators.  Children (ages 1-18) 
comprise 52 percent of the total population, according to a 
2002 census.  Of the 4.2 million children in Rwanda, 352,550 
(47 percent boys, 53 percent girls) are engaged in child 
labor, including 83.1 percent in the commercial agricultural 
sector, 11.9 percent in the domestic sector, 1.2 percent in 
commerce, and 0.7 percent in the manufacturing sector. 
(Note:  According to data from the Ministry of Education, 
approximately 91.5 percent of primary school-aged boys and 
94.5 percent of primary school-aged girls were attending 
school in 2003-04.  End note.)  Dentice noted that child 
labor is under-reported.  She said that although commercial 
sector exploitation is a problem, the more serious and under- 
reported problem is domestic child labor. 
 
¶3.  She attributed the problem of child labor in Rwanda to 
the large number of children orphaned and heading households 
in the aftermath of the civil war and 1994 genocide which 
claimed the lives of up to a million people.  In addition, 
widespread poverty is a contributing factor.  She estimated 
that 106,000 households are headed by children and that 
Rwanda, with 1.3 million orphans, or approximately 30 
percent of the total population of children, has one of the 
highest proportions of orphans in the region compared to the 
total population of children.  (Note:  The GOR classifies 
children with one parent as orphans.  End note.)  Of the 1.3 
million orphans, 160,000 are affected by HIV/AIDS, according 
to an estimate from the 2004 UN HIV/AIDS global report.  She 
noted that while not all orphans are vulnerable, most are 
susceptible due to lack of access to education, a steady 
income, a protective environment, parental care and 
guidance, basic services such as food and medical care, and 
a government safety net. 
 
¶4.  While UNICEF-Rwanda does not have an official position 
and does not keep statistics on child trafficking as it does 
not deal with trafficking issues, Dentice said that child 
trafficking and child sex tourism do not appear to be 
problems in Rwanda.  She noted that there is some child 
prostitution but was unable to provide an estimate of its 
incidence in the absence of UNICEF data.  UNICEF has 
provided piecemeal assistance to an NGO (Sharing Rwanda) to 
address the problem of children, especially street children, 
involved in commercial sector exploitation.  UNICEF-Rwanda 
Child Protection Officer Toihir Mlahaili estimated that 
7,000 children throughout the country currently live on the 
street. 
 
¶5.  The ILO Program for the Elimination of Child Labor 
(IPEC) would like to conduct a nationwide, scientific survey 
of child labor in Rwanda.  Dentice indicated that the 
government has shown strong interest in the project and for 
the past two to three years has urged ILO to conduct the 
survey, but lack of funding has been an issue.  UNICEF has 
begun fundraising for the survey, which ILO estimates would 
cost USD 150,000, based on population figures, and would 
take from six months up to a year to complete.  ILO has 
offered to pay for the first mission and is relying on donor 
support for subsequent missions.  Dentice noted that the 
U.S. Department of Labor funded similar surveys in other 
African countries last year, but that Rwanda was not on the 
short list.  She said that because ILO works on the basis of 
donor interests, its work depends on where donors want ILO 
to go.  ILO has received funding from the U.S. and France, 
but currently Rwanda is not on the list. 
 
¶6.  Dentice highlighted the need for the survey, pointing 
out that it would be the first such survey in Rwanda and the 
 
only scientific survey that would give an indication of the 
extent of child labor, including commercial sector 
exploitation, throughout the country.  According to Dentice, 
the dilemma is that no one views child labor as a priority, 
and, therefore, donors are reluctant to fund the survey.  If 
there is no survey to show that child labor is a problem, 
donors will not donate.  If donors do not donate, ILO cannot 
conduct the survey. 
 
¶7.  She pointed out that the Rwandan government has shown 
strong commitment and interest in addressing the problem of 
child labor.  At the end of 2005, the Ministry of Public 
Service and Labor (MIFOTRA) drafted a long-term national 
strategic plan of action on child labor, which identified 
and addressed rights at risk, including the right to 
education, right to an adequate standard of living, right to 
protection against all forms of discrimination, abuse, and 
exploitation, and right to parental guidance and care. 
 
¶8.  Note:  Since 1997, the Government has been committed to 
combating child labor.  However, activities have been 
limited in scope due to limited funds and experts and lack 
of an integrated national plan of action.  As a result, 
development of a long-term integrated national action plan 
was recommended by the Second National Conference on Child 
Labor in November 2003 to address victims of the worst forms 
of child labor, especially in the areas of the country most 
affected.  The plan of action was drafted in 2005 with 
reference to the 2003 national policy on orphans and other 
vulnerable children, of which child laborers constitute one 
of 12 categories.  End note. 
 
¶9.  The plan, which has not yet been approved by the 
Cabinet, also includes revision of the labor code.  Although 
currently Rwanda has a civil labor code which includes laws 
against child labor, there are gaps in the code.  Dentice 
noted that it does not cover all elements of ILO Convention 
182 (ratified in 1999 and signed in May 2000), which 
addresses the worst forms of child labor, and ILO Convention 
138 (ratified and signed in 1980), which covers the minimum 
age for employment, which varies from country to country. 
 
¶10.  Dentice said that the GOR is aware of the gap and has 
already conducted a survey of all local laws relating to 
children.  The Ministry of Justice intends to conduct a 
review of those laws with a view to establishing a 
comprehensive children's code to protect the rights of 
children.  The Minister of State is very committed to the 
GOR action plan, and MIFOTRA has asked UNICEF to assist the 
GOR in presenting the plan to donors once it has been 
approved.  The problem, said Dentice, is lack of funding and 
lack of a government focal point on child labor issues. 
Prior to the government restructuring, the central point of 
contact was a consultant in the Ministry of Labor, who was 
hired on a temporary three-year basis. 
 
¶11.  Comment:  The GOR's commitment to addressing the issue 
of child labor is a positive sign of its acknowledgment of 
problems that need to be resolved.  Child labor is an issue 
that the government is willing and ready to resolve, with 
support from the donor community.  Post would appreciate 
guidance as to whether funding from Department of Labor or 
other sources might be available for the survey and the GOR 
national strategic plan of action. 
 
ARIETTI