06MANAGUA869
NICARAGUAN ELECTIONS REGIONAL REPORTING: NUEVA
Thu Apr 20 00:00:00 +0200 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0021
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #0869/01 1101803
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 201803Z APR 06
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6031
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 0630
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 000869 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/20/2016 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM SOCI NU
SUBJECT: NICARAGUAN ELECTIONS REGIONAL REPORTING: NUEVA 
SEGOVIA 
 
REF: A. MANAGUA 0802 
 
     ¶B. MANAGUA 0738 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul Trivelli for reasons 1.4 (b and d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: Liberals of all stripes in the largely 
Liberal Nicaraguan department of Nueva Segovia recently 
expressed concern to Emboffs  that the FSLN is gaining 
support with poor voters by distributing agricultural goods 
and helping followers obtain voting documents in advance of 
the November national elections.  Emboffs have heard from 
contacts that such support may well have come from Venezuelan 
"donations".    Officials of the ALN-PC and APRE applauded 
Ambassador's statements against caudillismo, while the PLC 
members were cautiously critical.  Everyone complained about 
partisanship on the local Electoral Council (CED), although 
the local CED president (a Liberal) insisted that all CED 
activities are carried out according to regulations.  End 
Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) The Cultural Affairs Officer (CAO) and Information 
Resources Director (IRD) met with local political, economic, 
and social leaders in Ocotal, Nueva Segovia, on April 6 and 7 
to discuss upcoming national elections and other issues. 
Nueva Segovia has 12 municipalities, four of them controlled 
by the FSLN and eight by the PLC.  The two largest cities of 
Ocotal (32,000) and Jalapa (30,000) are FSLN territory, as 
are the two small towns of Dipilto and San Fernando. 
 
ALN MEMBERS VIEW PLC AS MAIN RIVAL 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶3. (SBU) Former mayor of El Jicaro and ex-Liberal 
Constitutional Party (PLC) chairman for Nueva Segovia Luis 
Sarantes organized almost 35 supporters of the Nicaraguan 
Liberal Alliance (ALN) to meet with Emboffs, who were 
expecting to meet with a more modest group.  The reception by 
teachers, businessmen, small farmers and housewives was 
effusive.  Approximately 90% of the ALN supporters previously 
held positions, some senior, in the PLC.  Regarding the 
upcoming national elections, the ALN expressed concern about 
cedulization (the process of obtaining a national/voter ID 
card) and the partisan nature of the Supreme Electoral 
Council (CSE), and discussed the financial and material 
advantages of the Sandinista Front (FSLN). 
 
¶4. (C) According to the ALN members, the FSLN is reaching out 
to small farmers (campesinos) by offering fertilizer and crop 
assistance, facilitating cedulization paperwork by filling 
out applications, and campaigning with new vehicles. 
(Comment: ALN members were quiet when asked if they were 
doing the same for their supporters.  End Comment.)  They 
complained that the CSE is tightly controlled by the FSLN and 
the PLC, while smaller or newer parties like the ALN are not 
represented.  They insisted that international observers 
should be vigilant with the CSE,s calendar (ref A), ensuring 
that each deadline is met.  One ALN member even insisted that 
international observers should take over the CSE and handle 
the elections. 
 
¶5. (SBU) While enthusiastically supportive of Eduardo 
Montealegre, ALN members claimed that election polls do not 
reflect the true feelings of broader Nicaragua because 
they're taken only in Managua -- the regional elections have 
provided the most convincing survey to date, they said. 
Participants asserted that survey results are distorted  by 
the PLC in radio campaigns that reach rural areas to falsely 
imply that PLC candidates are in lead.  According to the ALN 
interlocutors, the ALN expects to draw its votes from the 
PLC.  They predicted that now that Rizo is  the PLC 
presidential candidate,  local PLC loyalists, mainly farmers, 
are very unlikely to switch to the ALN. 
 
¶6. (SBU) According to ALN supporters, Sandinista dissident 
Herty Lewites visited  Nueva Segovia, but he was received by 
no more than 50 people.  Alejandro Martinez Cuenca, Daniel 
Ortega,s main rival in the FSLN, has also traveled to the 
region, but has drawn no followers, while  APRE presidential 
pre-candidate Jose Antonio Alvarado held  a small reception 
of about 80 supporters from Ocotal. 
 
¶7. (SBU) When asked how citizens from the department viewed 
the U.S. Embassy and the U.S. Government, the room came alive 
with cries of "Bravo" and "Trivelli!"  ALN party members feel 
that the U.S. has an important and valid role to play as a 
"protagonist" in the elections process, and applauded the 
 
Ambassador for not equivocating in his message.  One 
supporter suggested loading  Ortega and Aleman on a plane and 
sending them to play poker with former Panamanian strongman 
Manuel Noriega. 
 
LOCAL CSE OFFICIAL CLAIMS CEDULIZATION NOT A PROBLEM 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶8. (SBU) Embassy officials met with local Departmental 
Electoral Council (CED) President Rommel Enrique Reyes at the 
CED headquarters.  Reyes is a flag-waving PLC member with six 
years of experience as president, having overseen two 
municipal elections and one national election.  He is young 
and was chosen for the office originally as a member of the 
Resistance Party (PRN).  His large office was sparsely 
furnished, with modest accoutrements consisting of a filing 
cabinet, a table, and a small desk with a telephone and 
USAID-donated fax machine.  A framed photograph of Reyes at 
the U.S. Capitol Building, a photograph of his wife and 
daughter at Disneyland, and a photograph of Anastasio Somoza 
were displayed on the table. 
 
¶9. (SBU) When queried  if he thought the upcoming elections 
would be free and fair, Reyes, a lawyer by training, 
immediately recited Nicaraguan electoral law, expressing 
utter faith in its clarity and ability to promote electoral 
transparency.  He compared Nicaraguan electoral law to El 
Salvador,s, noting the similar structure to the laws of both 
countries.  "The difference is that the Left in El Salvador 
is more democratic and rule-bound than the FSLN here," he 
said.  "The FSLN is not prepared to lose the election." 
 
¶10. (SBU) The PLC and FSLN enjoy  the most support in the 
department, he claimed, with the FSLN controlling the cities 
and the PLC gaining its support from the countryside.  "We 
are a Liberal Department," he emphasized.  As for national 
surveys, Reyes, view was similar to  the ALN,s: the results 
can be seen in the Atlantic Coast regional elections "the PLC 
clearly has the mandate."  Candidates campaigning in Ocotal 
include all the PLC pre-candidates and Lewites, who appears 
to have few supporters locally, Reyes noted. 
 
¶11. (SBU) Reyes indicated that there is no problem with 
cedulization, and claims to keep a firm hand on the 
cedulization process, not allowing  the FSLN to interfere. 
Still, the CED office holds 4,300 cedulas, 1,800 of them 
unclaimed since 1988.  Reyes coordinates  with the civil 
registers at the mayors, offices so the CED can project  how 
many people in the Department will reach 16 years in and need 
ceduals to  to vote .  Reyes was satisfied  with  a new 
cedulization initiative that pairs a new employee in each 
municipality with the CED to improve cedula issuance.   (PLC 
mayors criticize the new arrangement, citing inadequate 
training and support by the CSE.)  In May, Reyes added, the 
Council will hire new staff for technical assistance, and is 
already splitting these positions between PLC and FSLN 
loyalists. 
 
¶12. (C) Throughout the meeting, Reyes glanced  down with the 
slight, confounded smile of a person who realizes others may 
doubt his  sincerity.  Nonetheless, he was forthcoming with 
information, including the fact that he was present at the 
meeting where CSE president Roberto Rivas decided to make it 
"difficult" for Embassy officials to get accredited as 
elections observers.  (Comment: Ultimately, post's  efforts 
to elicit cooperation from the CSE succeeded  and the CSE 
accredited Emboffs.  End Comment.)    When asked how the 
party feels about USG statements regarding Aleman, Reyes 
indicated that "some of the party people say things against 
intervention as a public line," but that on a personal level 
"USG interventionism is expected." 
 
PRIVATE SECTOR TIRED OF PACT, APPRECIATES USG EFFORTS 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶13. (SBU): Embassy staff met with four members of the Nueva 
Segovia Chamber of Commerce Board of Directors.  The business 
interests of those present, including board President Daysi 
Reyes and board officers Isasio Beltran and Donald Roque, are 
mainly family operations: bulk resale, supermarkets, 
construction materials, and the production and mid-level 
distribution of coffee. 
 
¶14. (SBU) When asked about the freedom and fairness of the 
upcoming elections,   Roque  criticized the PLC-FSLN pact. 
The businessmen and women claimed that the government "is 
 
good for collecting taxes but not much more."  The local 
producers are starting to feel squeezed between the taxes of 
the central government and new taxes imposed by local mayors. 
 As a result, to avoid appearing too successful, the local 
growers are avoiding making investments in their own 
businesses.  They also noted that in an electoral year, 
everyone thinks twice about investing or purchasing on a 
large scale.  "The economy freezes," they said.  The 
businesses are able to survive because they are family 
businesses.  National surveys are not thought to reflect the 
views of the wider Nicaraguan citizenry: "they never asked 
us," said Reyes indignantly.  They reported a positive 
perception of the Embassy and approved of the USG message, 
which was described as "very clear."  Of the Ambassador they 
reported: "He speaks the truth and does so out of interest" 
for Nicaragua. 
 
PLC OFFICIALS SATISFIED WITH  RIZO 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶15. (SBU) A local group of elected PLC officials agreed to 
meet with Emboffs, although several arrived late.  The vice 
mayor of Mozante and a councilman from Jicaro averred that 
the potential for free and fair elections is evident in the 
PLC "primary" (ref B).  They were happy about the process for 
selecting the candidate, noting "a good deal of consultation 
within the lower ranks" before the vote.  Although the Nueva 
Segovia delegates primarily voted for  Ramiro Sacasa, PLC 
members were  satisfied with  the process despite Rizo,s 
victory. 
 
¶16. (U) When asked if this "success of the democratic 
process" would carry over into November, the members 
responded that "each party has its own fiscales (trained poll 
watchers)" to ensure a fair vote.  They  note, however, the 
problems of 2004 municipal elections, in which voters arrived 
at their voting table (JRV) only to find their names not 
listed in the official registry (padron).  The PLC officials 
expect the same problem this year, and have vehicles ready to 
transport  voters  from one JRV to another. 
 
¶17. (SBU) While CED President Reyes expressed satisfaction 
with the cedulization agreement  with the mayors, offices, 
the PLC mayors are not too happy about the arrangement, 
complaining that now  the mayors are "stuck" with doing all 
the paperwork and bringing it to the CED.  "This is the 
CSE,s job," claimed the councilman from Jicaro, one for 
which the CSE has provided no training or supplies to carry 
out the task.  This process hasn't improved the overall 
system of cedulization, nor is it impartial.  The 
"cedulizers" from FSLN alcaldias, for example, are assisting 
FSLN voters to receive their cedulas, going to their houses 
and helping deliver birth certificates and other pertinent 
documents, "but they are not assisting non-FSLN supporters," 
claimed the officials. 
 
¶18. (U) As for polling results, the PLC officials asserted 
that surveys, especially those taken before the PLC primary, 
do not accurately reflect the level of support for the party. 
 PLC members pointed to the regional elections as an 
appropriate measuring stick for November. 
 
¶19. (SBU) When asked for their views on the US Embassy,s 
role in Nicaragua, the PLC officials carefully responded, 
"The US has helped Nicaragua achieve democracy and through 
its own history of democracy has a lot to teach."   One mayor 
acknowledged all of the assistance the USG had provided to 
Nicaragua before commenting that the US is "too close" to 
Nicaragua and "Nicaragua is inconvenienced by this influence 
and proximity."  The mayor of Jicaro, who arrived an hour and 
forty minutes late, felt the US should "stay out of 
politics," but assist with the development of the local 
economy. 
 
APRE APPLAUDS AMBASSADOR'S COMMENTS 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶20. (C) Seven local APRE directors met with Embassy 
officials.  Luis Emilio Bustamente, departmental president of 
APRE, was the most vocal.  All attending members were former 
PLC and expressed frustration with the election of Rizo as 
presidential candidate of the PLC, declaring "We split from 
the PLC because they are corrupt.  Rizo was one of those that 
split from the PLC and then went back to them."  They 
reiterated many times that Rizo is the wrong man to be the 
Liberal leader, and that APRE was born to fight the pact. 
 
 
¶21. (SBU) All agreed that Herty Lewites has no significant 
following in Nueva Segovia.  They expressed concern that the 
FSLN could win, based on the Sandinistas, performance in the 
mayoral elections of 2004 (the FSLN increased its control 
from fifty municipalities to over eighty municipalities). 
The APRE officials view the pacto as strong, stating that it 
plays to the FSLN,s  political advantage, while the 
Sandinista control of over 80 municipal budgets accords it an 
economic edge. 
 
¶22. (SBU) Regarding the USG, APRE representatives commented 
"Trivelli is extraordinary," and "the Embassy hasn't done 
enough, the Embassy can do more" to have an impact against 
the PLC.  They loved Ambassador's remarks about Ortega, 
noting the reference to Ortega as a tiger who hadn't changed 
his stripes: "the campesinos really responded to the 
colloquial expression."  Bustamente wanted the Embassy to do 
more against the PLC and all present agreed, saying "the US 
should revoke more visas."  APRE noted that the PLC has not 
won an election on its own, but only through alliances.  They 
felt that Alvarado, who hasn't visited the region since 
October, would be better than Jose Rizo. 
 
NUEVA SEGOVIA: DEMOGRAPHICS AND VOTING PROFILE 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶23. (U)     Total Population (2005 est.): 211,233 
            Total Urban Population:       95,041 
            Total Rural Population:       116,219 
 
            Votes Received by Party, 2004 Municipal Elections 
 
            PLC:                    33,975 
            FSLN:                   35,845 
            APRE:                   1,602 
            PRN:                    6,668 
            AC:                     113 
            Others:                 1,064 
TRIVELLI