06PARIS1817
Ambassador Harty learns France will produce e passport
Tue Mar 21 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS PARIS 001817 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CMGT CVIS FR
SUBJECT: Ambassador Harty learns France will produce e passport 
in April 
 
Ref: A) Paris 1472 B) Paris 964 C) Paris 565 
 
¶1. Summary: Assistant Secretary Maura Harty, accompanied by 
Paris Deputy Chief of Mission Karl Hofmann and Consul 
General Donald E. Wells met on March 10 with Claude Gueant, 
the Cabinet Director at the Ministry of Interior (MoI) to 
discuss the French government's progress in developing an 
electronic passport compliant with U.S. Government (USG) 
regulations.  Gueant informed Ambassador Harty that the e- 
passport production impasse (Ref A) ended on March 3, 2006 
when the decision was made to give the French government 
printing office the exclusive right to produce the e- 
passport.  Gueant asserted that by June 2006, all passport 
applicants will be issued the new electronic passport that 
not only will comply with current USG regulations, but also 
with those requirements coming into effect on 26 October, 
¶2006.  He also offered to help expedite issuance of new 
passports to individuals with immediate travel plans to the 
U.S.  Post remains cautiously optimistic as the measures 
taken in the consular section by Embassy Paris to manage the 
high non-immigrant visa demand are having a positive effect 
on the wait-time for an appointment. End Summary. 
 
¶2. On March 10, Bureau of Consular Affairs Assistant 
Secretary Maura Harty met with Claude Gueant, Cabinet 
 
SIPDIS 
Director at the MoI, to discuss the latest developments in 
the French plans to issue an electronic passport. 
Ambassador Harty reiterated that Embassy Paris faces 
unprecedented demand for non-immigrant visas as a result of 
the French government's delay in production of an electronic 
passport and that the Embassy is doing everything in its 
power to assist French nationals in traveling to the U.S. 
Ambassador Harty asked Gueant to brief her on progress 
toward producing an electronic passport, which when realized 
will greatly alleviate the present French demand for U.S. 
non-immigrant visas. 
 
¶3. After providing background information on the delay in 
producing an electronic passport, Gueant informed the 
Assistant Secretary that by June 2006, all new French 
passports will comply with both current and up-coming USG 
requirements for visa free entry to the U.S.  Gueant stated 
that e-passport production will begin on April 13. 
Production initially will focus on applicants in a limited 
region near Paris and then will gradually expand to include 
applicants across the entire country by June. 
 
¶4. Gueant acknowledged that this rollout schedule, as 
envisioned by the French Government Printing Office, may be 
a bit ambitious, nevertheless, he was optimistic that the 
delay in the conversion to an electronic passport would soon 
be over.  When asked by the DCM when the Embassy could see 
the new e-passport, the Cabinet Director stated that he 
hoped exemplars would be available by the end of March. 
After the new passport passes inspections to conform not 
only with USG security regulations but also those of France 
and Europe, then the Embassy will be provided with a 
prototype to evaluate for compliance with USG requirements. 
Gueant acknowledged that he himself had not yet seen an 
exemplar. 
 
¶5. In the spirit of cooperation, Gueant unexpectedly 
proposed that the U.S. Embassy direct to MoI some of those 
French nationals currently in the B1/B2 visa appointment 
queue so that instead of applying for a U.S. visa, they may 
apply for an electronic passport once production goes on- 
line. He stated that this group, as well as others with 
immediate travel plans, would be given priority in receiving 
the new e-passport.  However, Gueant emphasized that this 
expedited service would not be publicized to avoid 
overtaxing the new passport delivery system.  All the U.S. 
officials present at the meeting enthusiastically welcomed 
the offer from the MoI to help the Embassy facilitate the 
travel of French nationals and share some of the burden from 
the current high demand for U.S. visas.  Gueant designated a 
point of contact in his Ministry with whom the Embassy could 
continue to liaise on this proposal and on going efforts to 
get the French e-passport production on line. 
 
¶6. Comment: Gueant delivered a remarkably positive and 
optimistic message.  If the e-passport production timeline 
Gueant presented to A/S Harty comes to pass, a heavy burden 
will be lifted off of Embassy Paris, just in time for the 
busy summer season when non-immigrant visa demand peaks. 
Embassy Paris remains cautiously optimistic about this new 
development and will continue its dialogue with the GoF at 
all levels until production of the e-passport is 
implemented.  In the meantime, post will continue to 
implement measures to meet the on-going high demand for non- 
immigrant visas. End Comment. 
 
Stapleton