06QUITO1400
ECUADOR-COLOMBIA BORDER PROGRESS REPORT - JAN-MAY
Wed Jun 07 00:00:00 +0200 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Quito
VZCZCXYZ0003
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHQT #1400/01 1582212
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 072212Z JUN 06
FM AMEMBASSY QUITO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4537
INFO RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA IMMEDIATE 5672
RUEHPE/AMEMBASSY LIMA IMMEDIATE 0643
RUEHLP/AMEMBASSY LA PAZ JUN 9862
RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA IMMEDIATE 3614
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS IMMEDIATE 1778
RUEHZP/AMEMBASSY PANAMA IMMEDIATE 0616
RUEHGL/AMCONSUL GUAYAQUIL IMMEDIATE 0601
RHMFISS/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FLC O N F I D E N T I A L QUITO 001400 

SIPDIS 

SIPDIS 

E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/06/2014 
TAGS: PREL MARR MASS MOPS SNAR PTER EC CO
SUBJECT: ECUADOR-COLOMBIA BORDER PROGRESS REPORT - JAN-MAY 
2006 

Classified By: PolMilOffJarahnHillsman, Reasons 1.4 (b&d) 

¶1.  (C) Summary: Ecuadorian northern border military and 
anti-drug police units scored several successes against 
narco-terrorists in the first half of 2006.  The Ecuadorian 
military made multiple FARC camp busts, seizing arms, 
communication devices, and military equipment, as well as 
capturing two FARC trainees.  Anti-narcotics police seized 
1.95 metric tons of cocaine and 14 kg of heroin in the 
northern provinces.  These successes underscore the 
Ecuadorian military and anti-narcotics police capacity to 
fend off FARC infiltration of Ecuadorian territory, when 
provided adequate financial and political support. 
Nevertheless, the FARC's covert sphere of influence in border 
towns remains a serious concern, and continues to hinder 
Ecuadorian military and police efforts.

¶2.  (C) The Ambassador visited the province of Carchi on May 
18 to demonstrate USG support for security and development. 
WHA Andean Affairs Director Philip French and the DCM 
delivered a similar message on their April 17 visit to Lago
Agrio and General Farfan, Sucumbios province.  NAS continued 
support for anti-narcotics police and military units by 
funding equipment, infrastructure, and capacity building 
courses.  MILGP supported military units operating in the 
northern border region with funding for food rations, fuel, 
radios, vehicles, communication devices, and training. 
Meanwhile, USAID pushed forward with development programs, 
completing 20 water treatment facilities, 17 sewage systems, 
and will complete work on 10 bridge and road construction 
projects.  USAID also supported civil society development 
programs and increased public outreach to highlight USG 
support in the northern border region.  End Summary. 

Ecuadorian Military Ramps-Up FARC Camp Search 
--------------------------------------------- 

¶3.  (U) Ecuadorian military units on February 18 dismantled a 
FARC encampment in Santa Rosa, Sucumbios province.  Two FARC 
trainees were captured during the raid, along with weapons, 
ammunition, and other logistical support items.  Ecuadorian 
military units on May 7-14 conducted "Operation Clean" in the 
Cuembi Triangle border region around the Putumayo and San 
Miguel Rivers in the Sucumbios province.  The units, which 
included over 1,100 troops from the army, navy and air force, 
dismantled five FARC camps near the towns of Santa Rosa and 
Santa Elena.  Arms, mortar fabrication equipment, ammunition, 
mobile telephone antennas, military supplies, uniforms, and 
revolutionary literature were confiscated in the raids. 

¶4.  (C) Embassy sources estimate that Ecuadorian military 
units discovered at least 25 camps.  However, they informed 
the public about only five them.  These five camps had been 
abandoned within 24 hours of the raids, and were found in 
areas of limited GOE presence and few access roads.  The 
remaining twenty camps had either been cleared previously by 
the Ecuadorian military, or had been abandoned for some time. 

¶5.  (U) Minister of Defense OswaldoJarrin held a press 
conference on May 29 to announce the camp discoveries, and to 
highlight Ecuadorian military efforts to control the troubled 
northern border region.  Jarrin said that his forces are 
dedicated to protecting the nation's borders, and that 
Ecuadorians should have confidence in the professionalism and 
commitment of its military.  Jarrin told the DATT and PolOff
on June 2 that the five camp discovery had generated the 
opportune moment for him to reinforce the need to revise the 
nation's defense strategy, and confirmed reports that the 
Ministry was shifting priorities to the northern border 
region. He said that the Ecuadorian public is finally 
starting to understand the difference between national 
defense efforts in the north, which includes cooperation with 
the Colombian military, and involving the nation in Plan 
Colombia.  Jarrin will be in the U.S. the week of June 11 to 
discuss northern border challenges and successes with DOD 
counterparts. 

Ecuadorian Military Increases Border Presence 
--------------------------------------------- 

¶6.  (C) The 13th Brigade conducted a security sweep in the 
Carchi province near the town of Lita in early May.  The area 
has very little GOE government presence and few access roads. 
 Although there were no major finds, increased Ecuadorian 

military presence will hopefully deter future activity. 

¶7.  (C) Ecuadorian military units in the Esmeraldas province 
tightened efforts to stop fuel sales to FARC and other 
narco-terrorist groups, confiscated illegal arms, eradicated 
four coca plantation sites (each over 1.5 hectares), and 
increased unit patrols in areas where FARC/narco-terrorist 
training camps were suspected.  The 19th Jungle Brigade, 
located in El Coca, Orellana province, seized 72,337 gallons 
of petroleum ether, found and destroyed 22 petroleum robbery 
sites, seized 57 kg of cocaine from routine checkpoint 
inspections, apprehended 20 individuals for illicit 
trafficking of precursor chemicals and cocaine base, and 
destroyed four coca plantations.  The 19th Jungle Brigade was 
also a key participant in "Operation Clean". 

¶8.  (C) The Ecuadorian army increased the 39th Army Infantry 
Battalion's (Tulcan, Carchi) personnel strength to 90% of its 
capacity (approximately 500 troops).  The Army is considering 
moving part of the 38th Battalion, located in the central 
province of Pichincha, to the northern border region.  The 
MOD sent another infantry battalion from Guayas Province to 
the western border province of Esmeraldas, and is considering 
increasing the number of troops in the city of General 
Farfan, Sucumbios province by building a navy riverine 
outpost.  MILGP and NAS provided funding for food, radios, 
vehicles and other basic logistical necessities, which 
allowed border units to conduct more frequent border patrols. 
 MILGP and NAS-funded training programs also helped 
Ecuadorian military units better prepare for the border 
security threat. 

Counter-Drug Initiatives Move Forward 
------------------------------------- 

¶9.  (SBU) The Ecuadorian National Police have been very 
responsive to the narco-terrorist threat.  With NAS support, 
the elite anti-narcotics unit improved border drug inspection 
efforts and increased overall capabilities to combat 
narcotics trafficking.  This directly aided in the seizure of 
1.95 metric tons of cocaine and 14 kg of heroin between 
January and May 2006 in the northern border region.

¶10.  (SBU) NAS counter-drug efforts in the northern border 
region remained steady during the first half of 2006.  In 
Baeza, Napo province, NAS funded improvements to an 
anti-narcotics base for the elite mobile narcotics unit. 
MILGP delivered $3 million in communication radios to 
anti-narcotics police and military officials, and NAS donated 
18 trucks to the anti-narcotics police.  Construction bids 
were sent out for the new $1.8 million anti-narcotics 
inspection center in Tulcan, Carchi province and the $650,000 
port inspection facility in the port of Esmeraldas.  NAS also 
funded two intelligence gathering 
courses in Quito.  Fifty police and military officials 
attended. 

¶11.  (C) In Sucumbios province in May, 12 special mobile 
anti-narcotics police (GEMA) recently trained by the U.S. 
Customs and Border Patrol (BORTAC) tactical team, were 
ambushed by local citizens as they attempted to take away 
three vehicles loaded with petroleum ether, a drug-processing 
chemical precursor likely robbed from local petroleum 
pipelines.  The heavily-armed police were attacked and their 
vehicle doused with gas by dozens of men, women and children, 
who accused them of interfering with their "honest" labors. 
The police returned the vehicles to the mob, but later 
re-captured one and were able to obtain information leading 
them to a large petroleum ether storage facility and tapping 
valve, which they destroyed.  The unit's commander credited 
BORTAC training for enabling them to handle the incident 
without bloodshed.  They plan a large follow-on operation to 
act on intelligence gathered during this incident. 

Ecuadorian-Colombian Military Cooperation Good, But Tenuous 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 

¶12.  (C) Ecuadorian military officials at the operational 
level report that cross-border communication between 
Ecuadorian and Colombian military units is improving, with 
regular intelligence sharing for force protection needs. 

¶13.  (U) The press on May 27 reported an airspace violation 
by two or more Colombian helicopters in Puerto Nuevo, 

Sucumbios province on May 26.  The Ministry of Defense, 
seeking to defuse a potentially volatile issue, on May 26 
issued a statement claiming that Ecuador's air defense system 
had not registered the presence of Colombian helicopters in 
the region, and that the GOE therefore concluded that there 
had been no violation of Ecuadorian airspace. 

Development Projects and Bi-national Plan Progress 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 

¶14.  (U) USAID completed 20 water treatment facilities, 17 
sanitation systems, and will soon finish 10 bridge and road 
construction projects.  Three municipalities were added to 
the local government strengthening program.  The Third 
Northern Border Survey on Development, Security and 
Narco-trafficking, released in February, found that a growing 
number of northern border residents have a more favorable 
image of USG support in the region.  This increase was aided 
by USAID's successful public outreach campaign, "JUNTOS" 
(together).  Five of the six major regions that constitute 
the province of Carchi, however, took to the streets on May 
30 to demand additional funds for infrastructure projects.
The central government met these demands on June 2, agreeing 
to transfer $2 million to the disgruntled province. 

¶15.  (U) USAID reports that this year has marked continued 
successful generation of new jobs in several crop sectors, 
which has significantly increased income and productivity for 
many farmers.  USAID project associates organized a regional 
workshop on cacao, held in Quevedo, Los Rios province. 
Producers and processors from Peru, Bolivia, Colombia and 
Ecuador participated.  They found that there is a strong 
global demand for cacao, and are working to help actors 
access markets.  USAID funded similar events for Ecuadorian 
coffee growers and potential U.S. buyers. 

¶16.  (U) Ecuadorian and Colombian government officials met in 
Quito on April 24-25 to advance plans for an integrated 
development zone along their common border.  The plan aims to 
increase public services in the area of health, education, 
water, and transportation, while encouraging licit economic 
growth and sound environmental management.  High-level GOE 
and GOC officials met in Bogota in mid-May to discuss the 
draft text.  Foreign Ministers Barco and Carrion are 
scheduled to sign the agreement in June. 

Comment 
------- 

¶17.  (C) Country Team members agree that operational 
cooperation from military and police officials on security 
matters continues to be strong.  However, unit commanders 
remain constrained by limited resources and resistance at the 
political level to more publicly aggressive engagement 
against FARC and other narco-terrorist groups operating in 
Ecuador.  Jarrin's recent announcement that Ecuador must 
review its northern border security strategy demonstrates 
that he intends to raise public awareness of the growing 
threat, making more aggressive engagement politically 
feasible.  His comment that international financial support 
would be sought opens possibilities for increased USG 
security cooperation.  The Foreign Ministry, however, remains 
very cautious about actions that could be criticized as 
drawing Ecuador into Colombia's internal conflict. 

¶18.  (C) Meanwhile, cooperation with the GOE on development 
programs remains strong, with local and national officials 
routinely requesting increased support.  Greater development 
funding is needed, however, to more effectively encourage 
licit economic activity. 
JEWELL 

=======================CABLE ENDS============================