06RABAT1483
NDI: UNCLE SAM WANTS TO "EDUCATE" MOROCCAN
Fri Aug 04 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Rabat
VZCZCXYZ0010
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHRB #1483/01 2161206
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 041206Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY RABAT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4404
INFO RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS 4110
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 3048
RUEHNK/AMEMBASSY NOUAKCHOTT 3265
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 4331
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS 8997
RUEHCL/AMCONSUL CASABLANCA 1974UNCLAS RABAT 001483 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR NEA/MAG, NEA/PI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PINR MO
SUBJECT: NDI: UNCLE SAM WANTS TO "EDUCATE" MOROCCAN 
POLITICAL PARTIES? 
 
 
¶1. This cable is sensitive but unclassified.  Please protect 
accordingly. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Summary: French-language daily, l'Economiste (August 
1), published an article about the "American-Canadian" 
National Democratic Institute (NDI), entitled "An NGO to 
'educate' the parties."  The article, which included an 
interview with the director of NDI Morocco, Gerard Latulippe, 
presented NDI's mission and analysis of party politics in 
Morocco.  Latulippe stressed the absence of a national vision 
from Moroccan political parties in the current political 
environment and emphasized that parties must adapt to 
increased public expectations.  He commended the Party of 
Justice and Development (PJD) for being the "only" political 
party in Morocco to be organized on the national level.  The 
interview clearly expressed that NDI does not wish to pass 
judgment on political parties or "impose" change, but rather 
supports the change already underway in Morocco.  Media 
reaction from the Socialist Union of Popular Forces (USFP) 
party French-language daily, Liberation (August 2), and their 
Arabic-language daily, Al Ittihad Al Ishtiraqi (August 2), 
however, criticized the interview for being patronizing and 
reflecting a "deep ignorance" of Moroccan history.  The USFP 
papers denounced Latulippe for demonstrating his "choices and 
preferences" for the 2007 elections and "overstepping" NDI's 
mandate and claim of objectivity. End Summary. 
 
-------------------------- 
Modernizing Party Politics 
-------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) In the interview with Gerard Latulippe, resident 
director of NDI Morocco, l'Economiste states that the goal of 
NDI is to teach political parties modern communication 
techniques and marketing to "seduce their electors."  (NOTE: 
NDI Morocco operates in part under its MEPI-financed 
cooperative agreement under USAID's Consortium for Electoral 
and Political Process Strengthening (CEPPS). END NOTE.) 
Latulippe is quoted as wanting to introduce programs that 
will encourage the "interaction between citizens and their 
representatives," encourage women's political participation, 
and increase the level of ethics in the administration. 
Latulippe claimed that political parties lack a national 
vision because electoral campaigns used to be organized by 
constituency, which meant that candidates were elected 
locally based on "specific references" and not for their 
electoral programs. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) He noted that many parties overlap because they 
"have not been required to differentiate themselves" 
historically, but affirmed that "this is in the process of 
changing," as public expectations are higher than they were. 
Latulippe commented that the larger, traditional parties have 
realized that they must create a "new momentum" to ensure 
2007 will be a "year of change," representing a "rupture with 
the current approach."  Latulippe noted that the interest 
level in NDI's offerings is "unequal" among political 
parties, however, he claimed that more and more parties 
continue to solicit NDI's activities as the election nears. 
He noted the creation of internal committees in several 
political parties dedicated to the organization of an 
electoral campaign for 2007. 
 
------------------------------ 
Latulippe on Political Parties 
------------------------------ 
 
¶5. (SBU) Latulippe commended the PJD as the "only party" 
which has not "hesitated to adhere to modernity," and has 
organized itself on a national level.  Latulippe reported 
that according to his information, the Koutla, or democratic 
bloc alliance between the USFP, Istiqlal, and the Party of 
Progress and Socialism (PPS), will have their own 
organizations and will be running autonomous electoral 
campaigns. (NOTE: On July 26, the Koutla signed a joint 
declaration to coordinate efforts in preparation for the 2007 
legislative elections "in a constructive unionist spirit." 
END NOTE.) 
 
¶6. (SBU) When asked about his predictions for the 2007 
election, Latulippe responded that he was "more optimistic 
than six months ago."  He explained that in his view more 
politicians will enjoy popular legitimacy and that election 
 
day could result in a "theater of surprises."  He noted that 
the transformation currently taking root in certain political 
parties could prove fruitful. 
 
---------------------------- 
Media Criticism of Interview 
---------------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) USFP's French-language daily, Liberation, and their 
Arabic-language daily, Al Ittihad Al Ishtiraqi, published 
critical responses to the l'Economiste interview on August 2. 
 The Al Ittihad Al Ishtiraqi column claimed that although 
Latulippe has the right to his own opinions and to "think he 
has enough information on Moroccan political parties to 
become an expert, he is not allowed at all, in a sovereign 
country that has a long history in democratic struggle, to 
have the 'guts' to describe the national parties as 'not 
political' and think any political party needs his advice." 
Al Ittihad Al Ishtiraqi argued that Latulippe lacks a "real" 
understanding of Morocco's democratic transition because he 
was born in a democratic country and the fact that he is 
taking "his red pen and giving grades and ranks is not 
acceptable."  The Al Ittihad Al Ishtiraqi article concluded 
by saying that even if Latulippe "has choices and 
preferences," he has to learn, just like "any other American 
institution," to "keep (them) to himself." 
 
¶8.  (SBU) The Liberation front page commentary, entitled 
"NDI: Mistake of Cooperation," emphasized that his interview 
was full of judgment, despite his claim of objectivity, and 
that his analysis reflected his "choices and preferences" for 
the 2007 election.  In response to Latulippe's comment that 
political parties lack a national vision and that, 
traditionally, only local elite have had access power, 
Liberation said Latulippe demonstrated a "flagrant ignorance" 
of Morocco's history of rich political opposition and that he 
should have "at least" consulted the Equity and 
Reconciliation Commission (IER) report before "his 'electoral 
pets' had contact with the masses."  Liberation, making a 
reference to the IRI controversy, stated that "the Moroccan 
people do not have short memories, and no sponsored or 
organized polls will substitute for its will." 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Latulippe's Reaction to Media Criticism 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶9.  (SBU) On August 2, Poloff met with Latulippe to discuss, 
among other issues, his interview with l'Economiste. 
Latulippe explained that while the initial media criticism of 
his interview was unexpected, he understood how his comments 
could be misinterpreted.  Elaborating on his comments 
regarding the absence of national vision from political 
parties, Latulippe said that no political party has the 
experience of running a national electoral campaign or 
developing a national campaign message.  Most party expertise 
lies in the organization and execution of local electoral 
campaigns, he explained.  He, however, noted that the PJD, 
because it is organized at the national level, is well-placed 
to run a national election campaign.   Latulippe argued that 
the PJD vote is "soft" and warned of a potential PJD weakness 
in rural areas. 
 
¶10.  (SBU) Recalling the recent visit of Jason Kenney, a 
Member of the Canadian House of Commons, Latulippe explained 
that Kenney held individual sessions with several political 
parties on the technical aspects of running an electoral 
campaign.  According to Latulippe, whereas most political 
parties sent only senior party representatives and were 
questioning the merits of running a national electoral 
campaign, the PJD sent their election team.  This team asked 
technical implementation questions during their session. 
Latulippe said that the PPS, the Popular Movement Union 
(UMP), Al Ahd, the National Rally of Independents (RNI), and 
the USFP are now in the process of forming their respective 
election teams, which is a positive sign and might lead to 
"surprises" if the campaigns are conducted effectivelyQ 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) Although the l'Economiste article features a 
 
front-page cartoon entitled, "Uncle Sam wants to 'educate' 
our political parties," which insinuates US heavy-handedness 
with respect to the direction of political parties, the paper 
clearly explained that NDI does not intervene in party 
platforms, nor does it pass judgment on political parties. 
One of the roles for NDI is to "push the dynamic unleashed by 
Morocco," according to Latulippe, and NDI activities "support 
the democratic process unleashed by the king." 
****************************************** 
Visit Embassy Rabat's Classified Website; 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/rabat 
****************************************** 
 
RILEY