06SANAA539
COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR WILLIAM W. WENG
Sun Mar 05 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Sanaa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANAA 000539 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OTRA YM
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR WILLIAM W. WENG 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 34524 (02/MAR/2006) 
     ¶B. SECSTATE 34252 (02/MAR/2006) 
 
¶1.  Embassy Sanaa grants country clearance and welcomes the 
visit of William W. Weng from 23-30 March 2006.  Security 
Clearance information is on file. 
 
¶2.  Control Officer for the visit will be Troy Fontenot who 
can be contacted at all times through the Embassy at (967) 
(1) 755-2249 cell phone (967) 1-73329-2613.  The number for 
emergencies only is (967) (1) 755-2170 (Post One). 
 
¶3.  Reservations: Moevenpick Hotel Sana'a 
 
¶4.  Fiscal Data:  Each visitor must bring/forward fiscal data 
to cover costs of the visit.  Each agency, organization, or 
visiting delegation will be charged for the actual costs 
attributed to their visit.  These costs include, but are not 
limited to: American and LES staff overtime, field travel by 
Embassy employees, vehicle rentals, long distance telephone 
calls, equipment rentals, office supplies, expediter 
services, representational events and all other costs that 
are directly attributable to the visit. 
 
¶5.  Visas:  All travelers must obtain a Yemeni entry visa 
prior to their arrival.  This is a matter of the utmost 
importance, and is the responsibility of the traveler.  NO, 
repeat, NO airport visas will be issued.  Please note:  there 
should be NO Pakistani or Afghan visas in your passport.  If 
you must travel on a passport with these visas, please notify 
Post in advance so we can make arrangements to facilitate 
your transit through immigration; otherwise, you may be 
detained for a period at immigration. 
 
¶6.  Customs:  To assist with customs, visitors should inform 
the Embassy by fax (967-1-303-182) of any special tools or 
equipment, including computers (serial and model numbers), 
palm pilots or communications equipment, which they plan to 
bring into Yemen.  The importation of these items must be 
coordinated with local military and customs authorities. 
TRAVELERS IGNORING THIS REQUIREMENT RISK THE CONFISCATION OF 
SUCH ITEMS UPON ARRIVAL.  All baggage, including those 
belonging to diplomats, is subject to x-ray and hand search 
upon arrival in Yemen.  If the traveler must carry a radio or 
electronic equipment, it can be carried in as a non-pro 
courier hand-held (i.e., carried aboard the plane in an 
orange classified diplomatic pouch). 
 
¶7.  Work Hours:  Embassy Sanaa's normal workweek is Saturday 
through Wednesday; office hours are 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. 
 
¶8.  Crime Situation in Yemen:  A security briefing by the 
Regional Security Officer (RSO) is mandatory upon arrival. 
The incidence of street crime is very low throughout Yemen, 
and violent crimes against foreigners are rare.  However, 
kidnappings by tribes continue to be a threat to foreigners 
visiting Yemen.  Because of recent terrorist threats against 
U.S. interests on the Arabian Peninsula and the increased 
tensions in the entire Gulf region, the Embassy advises all 
visitors to remain vigilant with regard to their personal 
security and to exercise caution.  Avoid large crowds and 
gatherings, maintain a low profile, and vary routes and times 
of all required travel.  Travelers should read the latest 
Consular Information Sheet, which describes current 
conditions. 
 
¶9.  Money:  Travelers must bring sufficient funds or have 
sufficient funds in personal checking accounts to cover costs 
of entire TDY.  THERE ARE FEW ATMS IN COUNTRY, AND ACCEPTANCE 
OF CREDIT CARDS IS LIMITED ) BRING CASH/CHECKBOOK.  TDY cash 
advances should be taken prior to travel to Yemen ) Embassy 
does not issue cash advances for TDY personnel.  Embassy 
offers check-cashing service and will cash personal checks of 
official travelers.  Cashier will exchange dollars for Yemeni 
Riyals.  Many local merchants and businesses accept U.S. 
currency for purchases.  The current exchange rate is YR 195 
to USD 1. 
 
¶10.  Weather:  The weather in Sanaa is generally warm during 
the day, and a sweater may be necessary at night.  Weather in 
Aden and along the Red Sea coast is normally very hot and 
humid.  Business suits are preferred for meetings with Yemeni 
officials.  All clothing should be modest and conservative. 
 
¶11.  Health Precautions:  Bring at least a 3-month supply of 
medications.  Practice food and water precautions as in other 
developing nations.  Begin immunization for hepatitis A and 
B, rabies, typhoid, tetanus, and polio prior to departure. 
Yellow fever vaccination is required if entering from a 
country at risk.  If you spend more than a few days outside 
Sanaa, malaria prophylaxis may be required and you will be 
required to have G6PD blood testing.  Local hospital care may 
be required for emergencies.  Local medical providers expect 
immediate cash payment.  Be prepared to pay several hundred 
dollars and the rest prior to departure from Yemen.  While 
you will be provided documentation of medical care rendered 
to give to your insurance providers, it is your 
responsibility to recover funds from your agency or insurance 
plan.  The cost of evacuation can cost up to $100,000. 
Emergency Air Evacuations for other than MSGs, Seabees, DOS 
direct hires, and DOD staff require an obligated fund site 
PRIOR to the evacuation.  Travelers should contact their 
administrative offices before departure to obtain this 
information.  Out of country hospitalization for non-DOD and 
non-DOS direct hires require an obligated fund site to cover 
the hospitalization PRIOR to the hospitalization.  Travelers 
should contact their administrative offices before departure 
to obtain this information.  Each traveler should check in 
with the Medical Unit for a short medical briefing as soon as 
possible after arrival.  Individuals with sickle cell trait 
should carefully consider the altitude of this post before 
applying for assignment here.  Short-term (TDY) assignments 
carry an added risk because of the lack of time for 
acclimatization.  Dehydration and stress from exercise or 
illness compound the basic risks of high altitude.  For more 
information, contact your health unit or the medical 
clearances section of the Offices of Medical Services. 
 
¶12.  Special Restrictions:  The Republic of Yemen prohibits 
the import of sexually oriented material, weapons, and 
alcohol; videocassettes are also likely to be confiscated. 
Photography of military installations, individuals in 
uniform, government buildings and industrial facilities are 
strictly forbidden.  Photography of Yemenis, especially 
women, should be done only after receiving explicit 
permission.  We repeat -- All baggage, including those 
belonging to diplomats, is subject to x-ray and hand search 
upon arrival in Yemen. 
 
¶13.  Travel Restrictions:  Travel outside Sanaa will only 
occur with COM/RSO approval. 
Krajeski