06SANJOSE129
COSTA RICA WILL CONSIDER RESETTLEMENT OF PROTECTED
Thu Jan 19 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy San Jose
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SAN JOSE 000129 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PRM (GEHRING) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREF PREL SMIG CS
SUBJECT: COSTA RICA WILL CONSIDER RESETTLEMENT OF PROTECTED 
CUBAN MIGRANTS 
 
REF: A. 05 STATE 201256 
 
     ¶B. 05 SAN JOSE 660 
 
¶1. Per Reftel A, and taking advantage of remarks by visiting 
CODEL Burton, who expressed appreciation for Costa Rica's 
willingness to resettle 20 protected Cuban migrants in 
December of 2004, DCM on January 11 asked Minister of Public 
Security Rogelio Ramos for assistance with resettling another 
group of 20-25 Cuban migrants.  Ramos stated for Congressman 
Burton's benefit that it is the policy of the Government of 
Costa Rica to accept political refugees and protected 
migrants.  Ramos agreed to analyze our request and expressed 
appreciation for the USG's facilitation of interviews of the 
first group of resettled migrants at Guantanamo by Costa 
Rican immigration officials.  Ramos called this facilitation 
key to the success of the previous resettlement.  Ramos also 
stated that the involvement of the International Organization 
for Migration (IOM) was helpful, not only for the technical 
assistance the organization provides, but also for political 
cover due to Costa Rican sensitivities surrounding any issue 
involving Guantanamo. 
 
¶2. An IOM official in San Jose told us that she does not 
believe any member of the December 2004 group of 20 migrants 
resettled in Costa Rica has remained here.  Only four stayed 
until they received their sixth and final monthly stipend. 
Reftel B reported that 14 were still in Costa Rica at the 
three-month point.  According to the IOM official, rumor has 
it that part of the Costa Rica group reunited with a group of 
Cuban migrants in Honduras in order to pool resources for the 
onward trip to the U.S. 
 
¶3.  The Embassy stands ready to follow up on this opening but 
requests details/instrucions on what the USG is prepared to 
offer in order to facilitate the resettlement.  We expect 
that the GOCR will request assistance with conducting 
interviews of the migrants at Guantanamo.  Please advise. 
LANGDALE