06TELAVIV1115
CHIEF RABBI PROPOSES PRESIDENT BUSH CONVENE
Tue Mar 21 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEL AVIV 001115 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KIRF IS ISRAELI SOCIETY
SUBJECT: CHIEF RABBI PROPOSES PRESIDENT BUSH CONVENE 
RELIGIOUS LEADERS TO PROMOTE PEACE 
 
REF: TEL AVIV 427 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: Chief Ashkenazi Rabbi Yona Metzger 
proposed to the Ambassador March 16 that President Bush 
convene a forum of world religious leaders to promote peace 
and establish principles of mutual respect and tolerance 
among religions.  He also called for the creation of a 
standing body of religious leaders that could be utilized to 
mediate conflicts.  Metzger highlighted the ongoing contact 
he has made with other religious leaders, including his 
attendance at inter-religious conferences and meetings with 
the Vatican on this subject.  He asked the Ambassador to 
convey his proposal to the President, as well as a letter 
signed by current and former chief rabbis in Israel calling 
for the release of convicted spy Jonathan Pollard.  He noted 
that he and his Sephardic counterpart, Rabbi Shlomo Amar, 
will be in Washington April 26-27 to attend the International 
Call to Prayer.  The Ambassador said he would convey 
Metzger's proposal and the letter to Washington.  Metzger 
offered no ideas on addressing the Israeli-Palestinian 
conflict.  End summary. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
Rabbi Proposes Key Religious Leaders Meet 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Chief Ashkenazi Rabbi Yona Metzger, accompanied by 
Director-General of the Chief Rabbinate of Israel Oded 
Wiener, began the meeting by highlighting his office's 
ongoing involvement in inter-religious activities, including 
Metzger's attendance over a year ago at a meeting in 
Kazakhstan with religious leaders, including from Iran. 
Wiener added that the Office of the Chief Rabbinate holds 
regular meetings with Vatican representatives on these 
issues.  Metzger noted that he would be attending the Second 
World Congress of Imams and Rabbis for Peace in Seville, 
Spain, March 19-22, organized by "Hommes de Parole 
Foundation," a Paris-based humanitarian and conflict 
resolution organization, to which some 70 imams and 70 rabbis 
were invited. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Metzger said that such conferences are generally 
positive, but he stressed that a conference of select world 
religious leaders convened by President Bush would wield more 
influence and would "show the world that the majority of 
Muslims are not like bin Laden."   Metzger underlined the 
importance that such a gathering be under the auspices of 
President Bush, who, he asserted, has the influence to 
produce results.  Metzger suggested that the meeting be held 
in the U.S. and last perhaps two days, during which time the 
religious leaders could sign a simple agreement laying out 
mutual principles of respect and tolerance.  Metzger stressed 
the importance that Muslim leaders have contact with other 
religious leaders and then return to their communities to 
preach tolerance and moderation.  The Ambassador said he 
would convey Metzger's message and agreed that competing 
elements are trying to influence the world's Muslims, 
including extremist elements such as al Qaeda.  He noted that 
the President has sponsored inter-religious events, including 
prayer breakfasts and Iftar dinners.  In response to the 
Ambassador's query, Metzger did not provide a clear proposal 
on how the President might decide which religious leaders to 
invite. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) As a separate but related idea, Metzger proposed 
that a standing body, which he referred to as a "UN of 
religious leaders" be formed, composed of religious leaders 
from throughout the world who could be utilized as needed to 
help mediate world conflicts.  Metzger stressed that both 
initiatives would focus on providing moderate models of 
behavior for the world's Muslims.  The Ambassador noted that 
the idea of a world wide religious body is similar to the 
Organization of Islamic Conference or the Congress of 
Cardinals, but is ecumenical in nature.  The novelty in the 
Rabbi's proposal was that the new body would be an ecumenical 
one to promote understanding and good relations among 
religions. 
 
------- 
Pollard 
------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Metzger provided the Ambassador with a January 24, 
2005 letter signed by current and former chief rabbis in 
Israel calling for the release of convicted spy Jonathan 
Pollard and asked that the Ambassador convey the letter to 
the White House.  Metzger said that the letter had never been 
transmitted and still lacked the signature of one of the 
former chief rabbis, which he intended to obtain before 
transmitting it officially.  Metzger also noted that he and 
his Sephardic counterpart, Rabbi Shlomo Amar, will be in 
Washington April 26-27 to attend the International Call to 
Prayer and that they would also welcome the opportunity to 
meet with the President both to discuss their proposal for a 
forum of religious leaders and to transmit the letter on 
Pollard in person.  The Ambassador said he would convey 
Metzger's proposal and a copy of the letter to Washington. 
(Note: Post emailed the letter separately to the NSC.  End 
note.) 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
JONES