06TELAVIV1632
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Wed Apr 26 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 TEL AVIV 001632 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
USCINCCENT MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Sinai Bombings 
 
¶2.  Mideast 
 
¶3.  Mordecai Vanunu 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
In its lead story, Ha'aretz quoted senior US 
administration officials in Washington as saying in 
unofficial conversations that the US will not recognize 
a border created after a unilateral withdrawal from the 
West Bank as Israel's permanent border.  The newspaper 
reported that a discussion of Interim PM Ehud Olmert's 
plan of a unilateral pullout, as promised to his 
voters, is at a very preliminary stage.  However, 
Ha'aretz quoted a number of sources as saying 
unofficially that they believed the administration 
would probably support such a withdrawal, but that it 
would not recognize it as one "after which there would 
be no more need for negotiation," according to one 
source.  One official was quoted as saying that he 
believed the US would agree to see the post-withdrawal 
line as a temporary border, "which would become 
permanent, obviously with slight changes, following 
future negotiations between Israel and the PA." 
Ha'aretz quoted sources in Washington as saying they 
believed the US would want to maintain a united 
European-American front on the issue.  The newspaper 
quoted an administration source as saying: "We need 
them for too many things; we won't get into a conflict 
with them over this issue."  Ha'aretz quoted a source 
in Washington as saying that if the Israeli withdrawal 
receives the blessing of the international community, 
"it will be assuming that any reduction of the 
occupation is good for both sides, but it certainly 
won't be support for a new border." 
 
Israel Radio reported that Egyptian security forces 
have identified the three suicide bombers who carried 
out Monday's attacks in Dahab.  The radio cited the 
Egyptian daily Al-Gumhuriya as saying that five 
suspects, who probably belong to the Al-Jihad Wa-Al- 
Tawhid organization that carried out the Taba and Sharm 
el-Sheikh attacks, have been arrested.  Israel Radio 
quoted the Egyptian newspaper Al-Ahram as saying that 
three suspects were arrested in central Sinai, in 
addition to ten others who were apprehended earlier. 
The Jerusalem Post quoted Israeli security officials as 
reiterating that Al Qaida and Global Jihad are slowly 
closing in on Israel and that they are attempting to 
establish cells in the Palestinian territories. 
 
Major media reported that on Tuesday, Abu-Mussab Al- 
Zarqawi, the head of Al Qaida in Iraq, released a 
videocassette in which he threatens Israel for the 
first time.  Al-Zarqawi was quoted as saying that the 
"crusade" in Iraq helps Israel.  Maariv headlined: 
"Zarqawi: The Jews Will Not Enjoy Peace." 
 
Both Yediot and Maariv led with criticism expressed by 
senior members of the Labor Party of party chairman and 
designated defense minister Amir Peretz.  Israel Radio 
reported that Kadima and the Labor Party have agreed to 
implement the recommendations of the Sasson report on 
illegal settler outposts.  The radio reported that the 
Labor Party demands that the new government prevent the 
revocation of the citizenship of Israeli Arabs, a 
demand rejected by Yisrael Beiteinu.   Israel Radio 
said that Kadima and Yisrael Beiteinu are still divided 
over political issues.  Ha'aretz reported that Yisrael 
Beiteinu and Kadima are fighting over the interior 
ministry portfolio.  Israel Radio expected that pending 
last-minute difficulties, Kadima is expected to sign a 
coalition agreement with the Gil Pensioners' Party 
today.  The radio reported that Gil Pensioners' Party 
leader Rafi Eitan is expected to become pensioners 
minister -- a new post in the Prime Minister's Office - 
- and that Gil MK Yaacov Ben Yizri is slated to become 
health minister. 
 
Israel Radio reported that on Tuesday MK Azmi Bishara, 
the leader of the Israeli Arab faction Balad-National 
Democratic Assembly, met with Palestinian FM Mahmoud 
Zahar in Doha, Qatar.  The radio cited an announcement 
by the Palestinian Foreign Ministry, which stated that 
the two discussed ways to break the siege imposed by 
the US and Israel on the Palestinian people. 
 
Israel Radio reported that this morning, Olmert will 
convene an urgent debate regarding the separation fence 
and the "Jerusalem envelope" fence.  The radio said 
that only 335 km of the proposed 870-km security fence 
are currently operational.  The Jerusalem Post reported 
that Orit Koren of the State Attorney's Office told the 
High Court of Justice on Sunday that there have been 82 
attempts by suicide bombers to enter Israel through the 
gaps in the separation fence since the beginning of 
¶2006. 
 
Ha'aretz cited the Ir Amim advocacy group as saying 
that right-wing nonprofit associations are building the 
new Judea and Samaria [i.e. West Bank] District Police 
building in the E1 corridor between Jerusalem and 
Ma'aleh Adumim.  In exchange they are said to receive 
the current police building, located in the heart of 
the East Jerusalem neighborhood of Ras al-Amud. 
Ha'aretz reported that Ir Amim made this claim in a 
petition to the High Court of Justice against the 
construction of the new station. 
 
Israel Radio quoted PA Finance Minister Omar Abdel 
Razek as saying Tuesday that banks fearful of U.S. 
retribution are preventing USD 120 million in foreign 
aid from reaching the Palestinians.  The radio reported 
that Indonesian President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono 
called for the resumption of financial aid to the 
Palestinians. 
 
Yediot reported that on Tuesday, Hamas pointed a finger 
at Jordan for surrendering to Israeli and US pressure 
by taking part in a campaign against it.  The newspaper 
said that Hamas's statement was a response to Jordan's 
announcement that a Hamas cell that originated in Syria 
received instructions to carry out operations against 
senior Jordanian figures.  Israel Radio quoted 
Palestinian sources as saying that Imad El-Alami, the 
commander of Hamas's military wing, gave the order to 
eliminate those figures.  El-Alami is based in Tehran 
and has recently been residing in Damascus.  Israel 
Radio earlier cited the Lebanese newspaper Al-Mustaqbal 
as saying that it was Khaled Mashal, the head of 
Hamas's political bureau, who had given orders to 
assassinate the Jordanian officials. 
 
Major media reported that the Israeli satellite Eros-B 
(not Adom-B, as the media reaction report erroneously 
reported on April 14) was successfully launched from a 
mobile launch-pad at the Svobodny cosmodrome in 
Siberia.  Media quoted officials as saying that the 
satellite would enhance Israel's ability to spy on and 
follow developments at Iran's nuclear facilities. 
Maariv quoted Defense Minister Shaul Mofaz as saying 
that Israel relies first and foremost on itself. 
 
Ha'aretz and Maariv's online service NRG reported that 
a 17-year-old Palestinian was critically wounded 
Tuesday by IDF gunfire in Nablus.  Israel Radio 
reported that Border Police uncovered an important 
cache of weapons in the village of El-Majd near Hebron. 
 
The Jerusalem Post and other media cited the Jerusalem 
Municipality as saying Tuesday that it has authorized 
17 construction plans for Arab building in East 
Jerusalem.  The Jerusalem Post wrote that this was an 
"unusual move." 
 
Yediot reported that on Thursday, "Aqua," a new fund 
investing in water infrastructure around the world, was 
launched by the Israeli company Solomon Energy. Aqua 
was bought from Israel's largest bank, Bank Hapoalim, 
and has already issued 30 million shekels 
(approximately USD 6.6 million) worth of shares. 
 
Israel Radio reported that the New Israel Fund NGO 
urges the GOI not to deport 100 refugees from Darfur. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that this week US 
Ambassador to Israel Richard Jones attended the 
traditional Mimouna festivities as a guest of the Baba 
Baruch Abuhatzeira in Netivot. 
 
------------------- 
¶1.  Sinai Bombings: 
------------------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Arab affairs correspondent Jackie Hoogie wrote in 
popular, pluralist Maariv: "The covert contest that 
Egypt declared against Israel over Middle East hegemony 
is currently being pushed aside." 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post 
editorialized: "Ultimately, Arabs, Israelis, Americans, 
and Europeans must either join to defeat the Islamist 
jihad, or fall together." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
¶I.  "Rapprochement Due to Terror" 
 
Arab affairs correspondent Jackie Hoogie wrote in 
popular, pluralist Maariv (4/26): "As time goes by, and 
indiscriminate terror expands its range of targets, 
Egypt and Israel draw closer to one another.... It is 
true that we should thank the Americans for the free 
trade zone agreement [with Egypt], and thank Sharon's 
bureau for removing the barriers to the gas deal.  But 
with all due respect to them, the strategic 
rapprochement between Cairo and Jerusalem is being 
caused by the pincer movement that envelops the two 
together.  This is evident in three areas.  For over 
two years, Egypt and Israel have been fellow sufferers 
in the area of terrorism, but lately this trend was 
significantly strengthened.... In addition, the two 
countries have only recently felt the touch of 
burgeoning Islam.... A new cloud should be added to all 
of this.  The 'Shi'ite bomb' is not only Israel's 
problem.  The Egyptians, along with all the Arab 
states, view this as a danger to their sovereignty.  A 
nuclear Iran would be a regional power and would 
overshadow Egypt's standing, as well as Israel's.... 
Israel has long since ceased to be the severest problem 
of the Arab regimes.  The covert contest that Egypt 
declared against Israel over Middle East hegemony is 
currently being pushed aside.  In its stead, our 
neighborhood is being divided into two camps: The 
fundamentalists, and all the rest.  The second camp 
includes figures, entire societies and regimes, even 
those who were considered enemies -- Israel and Saudi 
Arabia, for example.  In the past year, Lebanon has 
also joined this club, thanks to al-Qaida in Iraq.... 
Shimon Peres was right.  It is indeed a new Middle 
East.  But he was also wrong.  For our region does not 
match his vision.  This is a Middle East where the 
molecules are arranging themselves in a different order 
than we have become accustomed to for decades." 
 
II.  "Jihad in Sinai" 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post 
editorialized (4/26): "Unlike Hamas, the more moderate 
Arab states, such as Egypt, have some time ago given up 
the attempt to distinguish between 'good' terrorism 
against Jews and 'bad' terrorism against Arabs.  Egypt 
is even reportedly pressuring Hamas to take steps 
toward recognizing Israel's right to exist.  But 
Monday's bombings in Sinai demonstrate the untenability 
of the continuing Arab attempt to straddle the worlds 
of radicalism and democracy, of war and peace.  The 
tool of terrorism, whose use against Israel was once 
enthusiastically endorsed by the entire Arab world, has 
now been turned against Arabs themselves.  Most of the 
casualties on Monday were Egyptians, none of those 
killed were Israelis.... The goal of the Islamists is a 
Taliban-like regime stretching across the entire Arab 
world; a vast dictatorship bent on subduing the Arab 
peoples and the West as well.  For the Arab 
governments, the best antidote to this threat is not 
further crackdowns and attempts to keep the embers of 
the Arab-Israeli conflict alive, but rather the 
opposite: domestic liberalization and full 
normalization with Israel.... There is no neutral place 
for the Arab world in the militant Islamist war against 
the West; this is part of the message of the latest 
massacre in the Sinai.  That jihad will either be 
defeated by Muslims themselves and the West, or it will 
engulf the Arab world and the West.  Ultimately, Arabs, 
Israelis, Americans, and Europeans must either join to 
defeat the Islamist jihad, or fall together." 
 
------------ 
¶2.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Columnist Shaul Schiff wrote in nationalist, Orthodox 
Hatzofe: "We can hear the voices of the generals who 
promise to respond mightily to Qassam rocket fire.  In 
the meantime, everything remains the same -- idle 
talk." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
"All Red Lights Are Switched On" 
Columnist Shaul Schiff wrote in nationalist, Orthodox 
Hatzofe (4/26): "No one intends to create a panic, but 
-- believe me -- former [Israeli] generals, who are 
balanced and reasonable, believe that Israel is under a 
real existential threat.  They say so in circles of 
friends -- it's a shame they don't have the courage to 
speak out openly.... During the Yom Kippur War, we saw 
how promises made by generals melted; only a heavenly 
miracle allowed the crossing of the Suez Canal and the 
reversal of the battle's outcome.  Today as well, we 
can hear the voices of the generals who promise to 
respond mightily to Qassam rocket fire.  In the 
meantime, everything remains the same -- idle talk.  In 
those circumstances, it is only natural that prime 
minister-designate Ehud Olmert should act courageously 
and resolutely and reject irrelevant demands made by 
the leeches [i.e. Olmert's prospective coalition 
partners]." 
 
-------------------- 
¶3.  Mordecai Vanunu: 
-------------------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Intelligence affairs correspondent Yossi Melman wrote 
in independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: "The state 
claims that [Mordecai] Vanunu remains a tangible risk 
to its security.  That is a baseless argument, 
worrisome, immoral and unjust." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"Let Him Go Already" 
 
Intelligence affairs correspondent Yossi Melman wrote 
in independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (4/26): "Almost 
secretly, with the information modestly tucked away in 
 
SIPDIS 
the margins of the news, the [Israeli] Justice Ministry 
has extended by a year the strict limitations imposed 
on Mordecai Vanunu.... The state claims that Vanunu 
remains a tangible risk to its security.  That is a 
baseless argument, worrisome, immoral and unjust.  It 
is baseless because Vanunu stopped working at the 
Dimona nuclear reactor more than 20 years ago.... In 
any case, Vanunu speaks about what the world already 
knows and continues to know: Israel is a nuclear power. 
Morally and legally, and from a democratic perspective, 
it is intolerable that someone who has been punished 
should be punished over and over again for the same sin 
for which he served such a heavy sentence.  It should 
be remembered that it is precisely through the same 
argument of knowing state secrets that the Soviet Union 
prevented Jewish scientists from immigrating to Israel. 
By the same logic that guides the defense establishment 
and the judicial system, as long as Vanunu's memory 
works, he can never leave Israel." 
 
JONES