06THEHAGUE2467
COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR DEBORAH MALAC,
Fri Nov 17 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy The Hague
VZCZCXRO2363
RR RUEHAT
DE RUEHTC #2467/01 3211519
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 171519Z NOV 06
FM AMEMBASSY THE HAGUE
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7454
INFO RUEHAT/AMCONSUL AMSTERDAM 1820UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 THE HAGUE 002467 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AMGT OVIP ASEC GM OTRA NL
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR DEBORAH MALAC, 
DEPUTY DIRECTOR FOR THE OFFICE OF EAST AFRICAN AFFAIRS, TO 
THE HAGUE AND AMSTERDAM 
 
REF: SECSTATE 187795 
 
 ¶1.  Embassy warmly welcomes and grants country clearance for 
Deborah Malac, Deputy Director for the Office of East African 
Affairs to travel to The Netherlands from November 27 - 28, 
2006 to attend the Core Group Meeting on Uganda. 
 
¶2.  Per reftel, reservations have been made at the Sofitel 
Hotel in The Hague for the night of November 27, confirmation 
number 199031. 
 
¶3.  Embassy POC will be Political Officer Ted Burkhalter.  He 
can be reached at his direct telephone number (31) (70) 
310-2336 or his cell phone (31) (65) 181-6873; unclassified 
fax number is (31) (70) 310-2348.  Please remember that when 
dialing from inside the Netherlands, a zero (0) is used in 
front of the city code. 
 
POST ACCESS: 
 
¶4.  Visitors who need unescorted access into secure areas of 
the Mission must provide proof of a clearance. If level of 
clearance was not provided in the original country clearance 
request it should be done by separate cable. The cable should 
include SSN, and the name of the agency granting the security 
clearance. Cables must include the ASEC Tag to ensure 
distribution to the RSO office. 
 
COMPUTER and ELECTRONICS USAGE: 
 
¶5.  Inter-agency security standards prohibit the introduction 
or use of non-USG owned computer hardware and software at all 
USG diplomatic facilities.  Cell phones, palm pilots, radios 
and other convenience electronics are prohibited in all 
secure areas of the Mission. 
 
¶6.  Travelers who anticipate having special needs in terms of 
either access or computer usage should contact the RSO office 
before arriving at post. 
 
 
SECURITY ADVISORY: 
 
¶7.  Since July 9, 2004, the Dutch Government has implemented 
heightened security measures in response to concerns of 
terrorist activity.  US citizens in The Netherlands are 
encouraged to monitor media reports, and are reminded to 
maintain a high level of vigilance and to take appropriate 
steps to increase their security awareness. 
 
Tensions in The Netherlands are high, sparked by the November 
2, 2004 murder of a Dutch film producer known for his 
outspoken criticism of Islam; and by the November 10, 2004 
raid on a home of suspected terrorists, which led to an 
all-day standoff and ended with the arrest of three 
individuals and non-fatal injuries to the suspects and the 
police.  Subsequent arrests were made in connection to this 
raid and further investigation revealed that these suspects 
had ties to known terrorist groups.  These events initiated a 
GoN-wide overhaul of its Counter-Terrorism measures, 
including providing more resources to combat violent Islamic 
radicalism.  There have been a series of protests and arson 
attacks directed at mosques and Islamic schools in the 
Netherlands, plus retaliatory actions against several 
churches.  American citizens should bear in mind that even 
demonstrations intended to be peaceful can turn 
confrontational and possibly escalate into violence. 
American citizens are therefore urged to avoid the areas of 
demonstrations if possible, and to exercise caution if within 
the vicinity of any demonstrations. 
 
The U.S. Government remains deeply concerned about the 
heightened possibility of terrorist attacks against U.S. 
citizens and interests abroad.  As noted in the Department of 
State,s Worldwide Caution of September 10, 2004, terrorists 
do not distinguish between official and civilian targets. 
Such targets may include facilities where U.S. citizens and 
other foreigners congregate or visit, including residential 
areas, clubs, restaurants, places of worship, schools, hotels 
and public areas.  Terrorist actions may include, but are not 
limited to, suicide operations, assassination, hijackings, 
bombings or kidnappings.  These may involve aviation and 
other transportation and maritime interests. 
 
An area of concern for visitors to The Netherlands is crime. 
Most crimes against officials Americans are limited to 
pick-pocketing and purse and luggage theft.  Theft from 
automobiles and hotel rooms are not unknown.  Recently, theft 
of laptop computers has increased, especially at Schiphol 
Airport and major train stations.  The thieves operate in 
small groups that target travelers.  They are determined and 
 
THE HAGUE 00002467  002 OF 002 
 
 
well-practiced at distraction theft.  Official travelers have 
been victimized, losing personal or unclassified government 
computers, software and data.  Travelers are reminded that 
regulations require the use of the diplomatic pouch for 
shipment of classified equipment and information. 
 
Streets can be walked in relative safety but, as in any U.S. 
urban area, caution and vigilance should be exercised 
especially after dark in the more populated cities of The 
Hague, Amsterdam and Rotterdam.  Red-light districts and 
public transportation hubs are common locations for incidents 
of street crimes. 
 
For the latest security information, Americans living and 
traveling abroad should regularly monitor the Department's 
Bureau of Consular Affairs Internet web site at 
http://travel.state.gov, where the current Worldwide 
Cautions, Public Announcements, and Travel Warnings can be 
found.  Up-to-date information on security can also be 
obtained by calling 1-888-407-4747 toll free in the U.S., 
line at 1-317-472-2328.  These numbers are available from 
8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Eastern Time, Monday through Friday 
(except U.S. federal holidays). 
 
Embassy 24-hour contact number if you request further 
assistance is:  (31) (70) 310-2209. 
BLAKEMAN