06USUNNEWYORK1660
UNSC/DARFUR: COUNCIL INCHING TOWARD ADOPTION OF
Mon Aug 28 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO3414
PP RUEHBC RUEHBZ RUEHDE RUEHDU RUEHGI RUEHJO RUEHKUK RUEHMA RUEHMR
RUEHPA RUEHRN RUEHROV
DE RUCNDT #1660/01 2402316
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 282316Z AUG 06
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0012
INFO RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHZO/OAU COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHDS/AMEMBASSY ADDIS ABABA PRIORITY 0959
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 0713
RUEHKH/AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM PRIORITY 0351
RUEHKL/AMEMBASSY KUALA LUMPUR PRIORITY 0570
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 USUN NEW YORK 001660 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ET PGOV PREL SU UNSC KPKO
SUBJECT: UNSC/DARFUR: COUNCIL INCHING TOWARD ADOPTION OF 
DRAFT RESOLUTION 
 
REF: A. A. SECSTATE 140827 
 
     ¶B. B. USUN NEW YORK 01621 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY.  During an August 28 meeting of the 
Security Council on Darfur, the majority of delegations said 
that the dire situation in Darfur argued for swift Council 
action to finalize and adopt the UK-U.S. draft resolution by 
August 31, although delegations acknowledged that the 
Government of National Unity (GNU) had still not granted its 
consent for deployment of UN peacekeepers to Darfur.  No GNU 
representative attended the meeting, but the African Union, 
Arab League and Organization of the Islamic Conference 
missions were represented.  Department of Peacekeeping 
Operations A/SYG Annabi gave a breakdown of the financial 
costs associated with the Secretary-General's recommendations 
for strengthening AMIS and for deploying UN forces in Darfur. 
 He also provided a critical brief on the GNU's plan for 
stabilizing Darfur.  Most delegations dismissed the viability 
of a military solution to the Darfur situation.  At a 
subsequent meeting of P5 Ambassadors on the draft UK-U.S. 
resolution, moderate progress was achieved on OP5 regarding 
date of transition; updated text in paragraph 9.  END SUMMARY. 
 
ANNABI GIVES ANALYSIS OF COSTS AND GNU PLAN 
¶2. (SBU) After repeated requests from Council Members for a 
financial breakdown of the SYG's recommendations to 
strengthen AMIS and to deploy UN forces in Darfur, A/SYG 
Annabi outlined short-term and long-term assistance packages. 
 For a four-month period, short-term support to AMIS, 
including integrated command and control and communications 
assistance, would cost $22.5 million; longer-term support, 
including equipment and infrastructure upgrades as well as 
troop and police training, would cost $76 million.  For 
expanded UNMIS deployment in Darfur, Annabi gave annual cost 
estimates as $1.6 billion for Option 1, $1.7 billion for 
Option 2 and $1.4 billion for Option 3.  He noted a financial 
addendum would be issued to the Council later this week. 
 
¶3. (SBU) In his analysis of the GNU's August 8 'Plan for the 
Restoration of Stability and Protection of Civilians in 
Darfur,' Annabi noted that while certain aspects of the plan 
could be positively developed, DPKO was concerned that the 
GNU's planned deployment of 26,500 SAF and SLM/Minawi forces 
would violate the Darfur Peace Agreement (DPA), since the 
GNU, as a party to the DPA, could not be considered a neutral 
arbiter in the conflict.  According to Annabi, the only 
appropriate party for enforcing the DPA would be a UN force; 
however, reference to this force was conspicuously absent 
from the GNU's plan.  On the plus side, Annabi welcomed GNU 
promises to remove obstacles to UNMIS' freedom of movement, 
to expedite planning for the Darfur-Darfur Dialogue and 
Consultation (DDDC) and to address violence against women and 
children. 
 
EGELAND URGES IMMEDIATE POLITICAL ACTION 
¶4. (SBU) OCHA U/SYG Egeland warned that without immediate 
political action by the Security Council, the situation in 
Darfur could escalate into a 'man-made catastrophe on an 
unprecedented scale.'  He noted that while Darfur insecurity, 
particularly incidents of gender-based violence, was 
currently at its highest, humanitarian access was at its 
lowest level since 2003-2004, a proportion which threatened 
to put Darfur 'at the brink of war.'  Egeland warned that the 
$300 million funding shortfall might cause the World Food 
Programme to cut food rations in October.  Egeland echoed 
Annabi's stance that there could be no military solution to 
the Darfur conflict, and he added that AMIS needed urgent 
strengthening until the UN could take over its 
responsibilities in Darfur. 
 
AU PSC TO MEET ON AMIS' FUTURE; AL AND OIC SUPPORT GNU VIEWS 
¶5. (SBU) The representative of the AU Mission explained that 
the AU Peace and Security Council (PSC) would meet imminently 
to discuss AMIS' future and would take into account the 
provisions of its January 12, March 10 and May 15 communiques 
regarding transition of AMIS to a UN operation in spite of 
GNU resistance.  She urged the Council in its deliberations 
on the UK-U.S. draft resolution to consider the AU PSC March 
10 communique and the AU's responsibilities under the DPA, 
particularly of establishing the DDDC.  Both the AL and OIC 
Ambassadors urged the Council to take into consideration GNU 
concerns before adopting the draft resolution.  The OIC 
 
USUN NEW Y 00001660  002 OF 007 
 
 
Ambassador added that his delegation supported the GNU's 
Darfur plan and that the OIC SYG would try to meet with SYG 
Annan in Beirut to discuss this issue. 
 
MEMBERS DISMISS GNU PLAN, READY TO MOVE ON DRAFT RESOLUTION 
¶6. (SBU) Only Russia, China and Qatar spoke to the 'merits' 
of the GNU stabilization plan for Darfur, such as its 
provisions for disarming the Janjaweed, for providing 
power-and wealth-sharing agreements and for combating 
impunity.  All other delegations dismissed its viability, as 
its proposed massive use of force to address the problems of 
Darfur would constitute a violation not only of the DPA but 
of UNSCR 1591 as well and would result in further human 
rights violations.  Ghanaian PR and current UNSC President 
Effah-Apenteng decried the enforcement aspect of the GNU's 
Darfur pacification plan. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Delegations, especially the African members, spoke 
to the need for the Council to pursue 'robust and resolute 
action' on Darfur, with the UK Ambassador and Ambassador 
Bolton urging adoption of the draft resolution by August 31. 
Most members agreed on the need for rapid Council action. 
The Tanzanian DPR warned of Council 'failure' if the 
resolution were not expeditiously adopted, and the Danish 
delegate remarked that the Council had 'no alternative' to 
adopting the draft resolution while continuing to push for 
GNU consent.  The Ghanaian President characterized 'timely 
transition' as the key to facilitating DPA implementation. 
The Peruvian and Argentine delegates were very firm in their 
support for the draft resolution and in their commitment to 
working toward GNU consent for the UN deployment. 
Delegations expressed regret that the GNU neither 
participated in nor was represented at the Council meeting, 
despite the fact that the GNU itself had sought such type of 
engagement with the Council on this issue of mutual concern. 
 
P5 DISCUSSION 
¶8. (SBU) P5 Ambassadors made moderate progress on the UK-U.S. 
draft resolution in negotiations immediately following the 
adjournment of the private meeting.  Discussion revolved 
around the date of transition in OP5, with Russia and China 
arguing that October 1 was 'unrealistic' for AMIS transition. 
 To resolve this impasse, Ambassador Bolton proposed adding 
to the end of the last line of OP5 the phrase, 'and in no 
event later than 31 December 2006,' in order to specify an 
end date on deploying UN forces into Darfur, which seemed 
acceptable around the table.  Russia proved flexible on the 
wording of the consent reference in the draft text, and China 
is awaiting guidance on whether or not it can accept a trade 
proposed by UKUN to retain the 'Responsibility to Protect' 
reference in PP2 for mention of GNU consent.  P5 Ambassadors 
may re-convene August 29 to continue work on the text. 
 
¶9. (U) Begin draft resolution text: 
 
The Security Council, 
 
Recalling its previous resolutions concerning the situation 
in the Sudan, in particular resolutions 1679 (2006) of 16 May 
2006, 1665 (2006) of 29 March 2006, 1663 (2006) of 24 March 
2006, 1593 (2005) of 31 March 2005, 1591 (2005) of 29 March 
2005, 1590 (2005) of 24 March 2005, 1574 (2004) of 19 
November 2004, 1564 (2004) of 18 September 2004 and 1556 
(2004) of 30 July 2004 and the statements of its President 
concerning the Sudan, 
 
Recalling also its previous resolutions 1325 (2000) on women, 
peace and security, 1502 (2003) on the protection of 
humanitarian and United Nations personnel, 1612 (2005) on 
children and armed conflict, and 1674 (2006) on the 
protection of civilians in armed conflict, which reaffirms 
inter alia the provisions of paragraphs 138 and 139 of the 
2005 United Nations World Summit outcome document, as well as 
the report of its Mission to the Sudan and Chad from 4th to 
10th June 2006, 
 
Reaffirming its strong commitment to the sovereignty, unity, 
independence, and territorial integrity of the Sudan, which 
would be unaffected by transition to a United Nations 
operation in Darfur, and to the cause of peace, expressing 
its determination to work with the Government of the Sudan, 
in full respect of its sovereignty, to assist in tackling the 
 
USUN NEW Y 00001660  003 OF 007 
 
 
various problems confronting the Sudan and that a United 
Nations operation in Darfur shall have, to the extent 
possible, a strong African participation and character, 
 
Commending the efforts of the signatories to the Darfur Peace 
Agreement, expressing its belief that the Agreement provides 
a basis for sustained security in Darfur, reiterating its 
welcome of the statement of 9 May 2006 by the representative 
of the Sudan at the United Nations Security Council Special 
Session on Darfur of the Government of National Unity's full 
commitment to implementing the Agreement, stressing the 
importance of launching the Darfur-Darfur dialogue and 
consultation as soon as possible, and recognising that 
international support for implementation of the Agreement is 
critically important to its success, 
 
Commending the efforts of the African Union for the 
successful deployment of the African Union Mission in the 
Sudan (AMIS), as well as the efforts of Member States and 
regional and international organisations that have assisted 
it in its deployment, and AMIS' role in reducing large-scale 
organised violence in Darfur, recalling the decision of the 
African Union Peace and Security Council of 27 June 2006, as 
outlined in paragraph 10 of its Communique, that the African 
Union is ready to review the mandate of AMIS in the event 
that the ongoing consultations between the Government of the 
Sudan and the United Nations conclude on an agreement for a 
transition to a United Nations peacekeeping operation, 
stressing the need for AMIS to assist implementation of the 
Darfur Peace Agreement until transition to the United Nations 
force in Darfur is completed, welcoming the decision of the 
African Union Peace and Security Council of 27 June 2006 on 
strengthening AMIS' mandate and tasks, including on the 
protection of civilians, and considering that AMIS needs 
urgent reinforcing, 
 
Reaffirming its concern that the ongoing violence in Darfur 
might further negatively affect the rest of the Sudan as well 
as the region, in particular Chad and the Central African 
Republic, and stressing that regional security aspects must 
be addressed to achieve long lasting peace in Darfur, 
 
Remaining deeply concerned over the recent deterioration of 
relations between the Sudan and Chad, calling on the 
governments of the two countries to abide by their 
obligations under the Tripoli Agreement of 8 February 2006 
and the agreement between the Sudan and Chad signed in 
N'djamena on 26 July 2006 and to begin implementing the 
confidence building measures which they have voluntarily 
agreed upon, welcoming the recent re-establishment of 
diplomatic relations between the Sudan and Chad, and calling 
upon all States in the region to co-operate in ensuring 
regional stability, 
 
Re-iterating its strong condemnation of all violations of 
human rights and international humanitarian law in Darfur, 
and calling upon the Government of National Unity to take 
urgent action to tackle gender based violence in Darfur 
including action towards implementing its Action Plan to 
Combat Violence Against Women in Darfur with particular focus 
on the rescission of Form 8 and access to legal redress, 
 
Expressing its deep concern for the security of humanitarian 
aid workers and their access to populations in need, 
including refugees, internally displaced persons and other 
war-affected populations, and calling upon all parties, in 
particular the Government of National Unity, to ensure, in 
accordance with relevant provisions of international law, the 
full, safe and unhindered access of relief personnel to all 
those in need in Darfur as well as the delivery of 
humanitarian assistance, in particular to internally 
displaced persons and refugees; 
 
Taking note of the communiqus of 12 January, 10 March, 15 
May and 27 June 2006 of the Peace and Security Council of the 
African Union regarding transition of AMIS to a United 
Nations operation, 
 
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on Darfur 
dated 28 July 2006 (S/2006/591), 
 
Determining that the situation in the Sudan continues to 
 
USUN NEW Y 00001660  004 OF 007 
 
 
constitute a threat to international peace and security, 
 
OP1 Decides, without prejudice to its existing mandate and 
operations as provided for in Resolution 1590 (2005) and in 
order to support the early and effective implementation of 
the Darfur Peace Agreement, that UNMIS' mandate shall be 
expanded as specified in paragraphs 8, 9 and 12 below and 
that it shall deploy to Darfur on the basis of the support of 
the Government of the Sudan, and urges member states to 
provide the capability for an expeditious deployment; 
 
OP2 Requests the Secretary-General to arrange the rapid 
deployment of additional capabilities for UNMIS, in order 
that it may deploy in Darfur, in accordance with the 
recommendation contained in his report dated 28 July 2006; 
 
OP3 Decides that UNMIS shall be strengthened by up to 
(17,300) military personnel and by an appropriate civilian 
component including up to (3,300) civilian police personnel 
and up to (16) Formed Police Units, and expresses its 
determination to keep UNMIS' strength and structure under 
regular review, taking into account the evolution of the 
situation on the ground and without prejudice to its current 
operations and mandate as provided for in Resolution 1590 
(2005); 
 
OP4 Expresses its intention to consider authorising possible 
additional temporary reinforcements of the military component 
of UNMIS, at the request of the Secretary General, within the 
limits of the troop levels recommended in paragraph 87 of his 
report dated 28 July 2006; 
 
OP5 Requests the Secretary-General to consult jointly with 
the African Union, in close and continuing consultation with 
the parties to the Darfur Peace Agreement, including the 
Government of National Unity, on a plan and timetable for 
transition from AMIS to a UN operation in Darfur; decides 
that those elements outlined in paragraphs 40 to 58 of the 
Secretary-General's report of 28 July 2006 shall begin to be 
 
SIPDIS 
deployed no later than 1 October 2006, that thereafter as 
part of the process of transition to a United Nations 
operation additional capabilities shall be deployed as soon 
as feasible and that UNMIS shall take over from AMIS 
responsibility for (peacekeeping, including) supporting the 
implementation of the Darfur Peace Agreement, by no later 
than 31 December 2006; and calls upon the African Union to 
extend its mandate in order to facilitate transition on this 
basis; 
 
OP6 (Notes that the Agreement between the UN and the Sudan of 
28 December 2005 on the status of the UN in Sudan, as 
outlined in Resolution 1590 (2005), applies equally to UNMIS' 
operations throughout the Sudan, including in Darfur.) 
 
OP7 Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary 
steps to strengthen AMIS through the use of existing and 
additional United Nations resources with a view to transition 
to a UN operation in Darfur; and authorizes the 
Secretary-General during this transition to implement the 
 
SIPDIS 
longer-term support to AMIS outlined in the report of the 
Secretary-General of 28 July 2006, including provision of air 
 
SIPDIS 
assets, ground mobility package, training, engineering and 
logistics, mobile communications capacity and broad public 
information assistance; 
 
OP8 Decides that the mandate of UNMIS in Darfur shall be to 
support implementation of the Darfur Peace Agreement of 5 May 
2006 and the N'djamena Agreement on Humanitarian Cease-fire 
on the Conflict in Darfur ("the Agreements"), including by 
performing the following tasks: 
 
(a)   To monitor and verify the implementation by the parties 
of Chapter 3 ("Comprehensive Cease-fire and Final Security 
Arrangements") of the Darfur Peace Agreement and the 
N'djamena Agreement on Humanitarian Cease-fire on the 
Conflict in Darfur; 
 
(b)   To observe and monitor movement of armed groups and 
redeployment of forces in areas of UNMIS deployment by ground 
and aerial means in accordance with the Agreements; 
 
(c)   To investigate violations of the Agreements and to 
 
USUN NEW Y 00001660  005 OF 007 
 
 
report violations to the Cease-fire Commission; as well as to 
co-operate and co-ordinate, together with other International 
Actors, with the Cease-fire Commission, the Joint Commission, 
and the Joint Humanitarian Facilitation and Monitoring Unit 
established pursuant to the Agreements including through 
provision of technical assistance and logistical support; 
 
(d)   To maintain, in particular, a presence in key areas, 
such as buffer zones established pursuant to the Darfur Peace 
Agreement, areas inside internally displaced persons camps 
and demilitarised zones around and inside internally 
displaced persons camps, in order to promote the 
re-establishment of confidence, to discourage violence, in 
particular by deterring use of force; 
 
(e)   To monitor trans-border activities of armed groups 
along the Sudanese borders with Chad and the Central African 
Republic in particular through regular ground and aerial 
reconnaissance activities; 
 
(f)   To assist with development and implementation of a 
comprehensive and sustainable programme for disarmament, 
demobilisation and reintegration of former combatants and 
women and children associated with combatants, as called for 
in the Darfur Peace Agreement and in accordance with 
Resolutions 1556 (2004) and 1564 (2004); 
 
(g)   To assist the parties, in co-operation with other 
international actors, in the preparations for and conduct of 
referenda provided for in the Darfur Peace Agreement; 
 
(h)   To assist the parties to the Agreements in promoting 
understanding of the peace accord and of the role of UNMIS, 
including by means of an effective public information 
campaign, targeted at all sectors of society, in 
co-ordination with the African Union; 
 
(i)   To  co-operate closely with the Chairperson of the 
Darfur-Darfur Dialogue and Consultation (DDDC), provide 
support and technical assistance to him, and co-ordinate 
other United Nations agencies' activities to this effect, as 
well as to assist the parties to the DDDC in addressing the 
need for an all-inclusive approach, including the role of 
women, towards reconciliation and peace-building; 
 
(j)   To work with the national police, in co-ordination with 
bilateral and multilateral assistance programmes, in reform 
restructuring, and institutional development, training and 
capacity building of the police, movements police liaison 
officers, and community police, and to monitor their 
performance through mentoring, co-location, and joint patrols; 
 
(k)   To assist in promoting the rule of law, including 
through support to strengthening an independent judiciary and 
professional corrections system, and combating impunity and 
protecting the human rights of all people of the Sudan, in 
close co-operation with other United Nations agencies, funds 
and programmes and non-governmental organisations. 
 
(l)   (To ensure adequate human rights and gender presence, 
capacity and expertise within UNMIS to carry out human rights 
promotion, civilian protection and gender sensitive 
monitoring activities.) 
 
OP9 Decides further that the mandate of UNMIS in Darfur shall 
also include the following: 
 
(a)   To facilitate and co-ordinate in close co-operation 
with relevant UN agencies, within its capabilities and in its 
areas of deployment, the voluntary return of refugees and 
internally displaced persons, and humanitarian assistance 
inter alia by helping to establish the necessary security 
conditions in Darfur; 
 
(b)   To contribute towards international efforts to protect, 
 promote and monitor human rights in Darfur, as well as to 
co-ordinate international efforts towards the protection of 
civilians with particular attention to vulnerable groups 
including internally displaced persons, returning refugees, 
and women and children; 
 
(c)   To assist the parties to the Agreements, in 
 
USUN NEW Y 00001660  006 OF 007 
 
 
co-operation with other international partners in the mine 
action sector, by providing humanitarian de-mining 
assistance, technical advice, and co-ordination, as well as 
mine awareness programmes targeted at all sectors of society; 
 
(d)   To assist in addressing regional security issues in 
close liaison with international efforts to improve the 
security situation in the neighbouring regions along the 
borders between the Sudan and Chad and between the Sudan and 
the Central African Republic, including through the 
establishment of a multi-dimensional presence consisting of 
political, humanitarian, military and civilian police liaison 
officers in key locations in Chad, including in internally 
displaced persons and refugee camps, and if necessary, in the 
Central African Republic, and to contribute to the 
implementation of the Agreement between the Sudan and Chad 
signed on 26 July 2006. 
 
OP10 Calls upon all Member States to ensure the free, 
unhindered and expeditious movement to the Sudan of all 
personnel, as well as equipment, provisions, supplies and 
other goods, including vehicles and spare parts, which are 
for the exclusive and official use of UNMIS in Darfur; 
 
OP11 Requests the Secretary-General to keep the Council 
regularly informed of the progress in implementing the Darfur 
Peace Agreement, respect for the cease-fire, and the 
implementation of the mandate of UNMIS in Darfur, and to 
report to the Council, as appropriate, on the steps taken to 
implement this resolution and any failure to comply with its 
demands; 
 
OP12 Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United 
Nations, 
 
(a)   decides that UNMIS is authorised to (use all necessary 
means), in the areas of deployment of its forces and as it 
deems within its capabilities: 
 
-     to protect United Nations personnel, facilities, 
installations and equipment, to ensure the security and 
freedom of movement of United Nations personnel, humanitarian 
workers, assessment and evaluation commission personnel, to 
prevent disruption of the implementation of the Darfur Peace 
Agreement by armed groups, without prejudice to the 
responsibility of the Government of the Sudan, to protect 
civilians under threat of physical violence, 
-     in order to support early and effective implementation 
of the Darfur Peace Agreement, to prevent attacks and threats 
against civilians, 
-     to seize or collect, as appropriate, arms or related 
material whose presence in Darfur is in violation of the 
Agreements and the measures imposed by paragraphs 7 and 8 of 
Resolution 1556, and to dispose of such arms and related 
material as appropriate; 
 
(b)   Requests that the Secretary-General and the Governments 
of Chad and the Central African Republic conclude 
status-of-forces agreements as soon as possible, taking into 
consideration General Assembly resolution 58/82 on the scope 
of legal protection under the Convention on the Safety of 
United Nations and Associate Personnel, and decides that 
pending the conclusion of such an agreement with either 
country, the model status-of-forces agreement dated 9 October 
1990 (A/45/594) shall apply provisionally with respect to 
UNMIS forces operating in that country; 
 
OP13 Requests the Secretary General to report to the Council 
on the protection of civilians in refugee and internally 
displaced persons camps in Chad and on how to improve the 
security situation on the Chadian side of the border with 
Sudan. 
 
OP14 Calls upon the parties to the Darfur Peace Agreement to 
respect their commitments and implement the agreement without 
delay, urges those parties that have not signed the Agreement 
to do so without delay and not to act in any way that would 
impede implementation of the Agreement, and reiterates its 
intention to take, including in response to a request by the 
African Union, strong and effective measures, such as an 
asset freeze or travel ban, against any individual or group 
that violates or attempts to block the implementation of the 
 
USUN NEW Y 00001660  007 OF 007 
 
 
Agreement or commits human rights violations; 
 
OP15 Decides to remain seized of the matter. 
 
¶10.   (U) End draft resolution text. 
BOLTON