07AITTAIPEI1993
MEDIA REACTION: TAIWAN'S UN REFERENDUM AND PRESIDENT CHEN
Thu Aug 30 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0016
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1993/01 2420913
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 300913Z AUG 07
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6594
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 7188
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 8444UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001993 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: TAIWAN'S UN REFERENDUM AND PRESIDENT CHEN 
SHUI-BIAN 
 
¶1. Summary:   Taiwan's major Chinese- and English-language dailies 
August 30 devoted much space again to U.S. Deputy Secretary of State 
John Negroponte's remarks on Taiwan's UN referendum as well as 
President Chen Shui-bian's trip to Latin America, with an emphasis 
on his transit in Alaska and his reaction to D/S Negroponte's 
statement. 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, the pro-independence 
"Liberty Times" said in an editorial that the U.S. opposition to the 
referendum on Taiwan's UN bid violates its own principles.  The 
English-language pro-independence "Taipei Times" said in its 
editorial that the United States, as a friend, should not oppose 
Taiwan people exercising their right to vote in a referendum. A 
column in the mass-circulation "Apple Daily" said President Chen 
Shui-bian is challenging both the United States and China at the 
same time.  A "China Times" news analysis said U.S. objection is 
helpful for the DPP in upcoming elections.  "United Daily News" 
questioned President Chen Shui-bian's motives in an editorial.  The 
English-language "China Post" said Chen's trick cannot fool the 
United States. End summary. 
 
A) "U.S. Objection to Taiwan UN Referendum Violates Its Own Basic 
Principles [lit. the spirit of its foundation] and Democratic 
Values" 
 
An editorial of the pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 
720,000] said (8/30): 
 
"... A series of recent U.S. moves highlighted its clear opposition 
against Taiwan's holding a referendum on its UN bid.  Therefore, 
Negroponte's public remarks did not come as a surprise.  However, 
they make all people in Taiwan feel regret and need solemnly to 
protest to this long-term ally.  We believe the United States 
obviously is not objective about the universal value of a referendum 
as a means directly to demonstrate public opinion and and as an 
indispensable part of the democratic system.  Wouldn't it be 
ridiculous for the leader of the democratic world to be afraid of a 
referendum?  The U.S. opposition seems targeted at the broader 
international strategic level.  That is, [they are] worried that 
China's over-reaction to the referendum on Taiwan's UN bid will hurt 
the current stability of the international order.  As the United 
States can neither predict nor control China's behavior, it has 
turned the pressure on Taiwan, hoping that Taiwan can make 
concessions and give up pushing for the UN referendum. 
 
"... As for the accusation that Taiwan is breaking the status quo, 
it is absolutely reversing truth and falsehood, because what Taiwan 
is doing now is to prevent, by going through the process of making 
Taiwan a normal nation, the Taiwan independence status quo from 
being sabotaged.  It is China that is breaking the status quo by 
aiming its missiles at Taiwan and threatening military invasion.  Is 
the U.S. government unable to distinguish such a simple fact? 
Moreover, the U.S. opposition to the referendum, in fact, violates 
its own basic principles and democratic values and is [equal to] 
succumbing to vicious forces.  Once the United States loses its core 
values, the victims will not be limited to the democracy- and 
freedom-loving people of Taiwan.  It will also be a sign that the 
U.S. super-power position is collapsing." 
 
B) "What Does 'Friendship' Mean?" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] editorialized (8/30): 
 
"If the U.S. State Department has a list of least favorite people, 
President Chen Shui-bian must surely now be on it. U.S. Deputy 
Secretary of State John Negroponte made the U.S. stance on Chen's 
 
SIPDIS 
proposed UN referendum known on Monday, branding the proposal a 
'mistake' and warning it would be seen by Washington as an attempt 
to change the cross-strait 'status quo.' 
 
"It could be that some State Department officials are so frustrated 
with Chen that they are pounding the table in their strategy rooms, 
complaining about the 'trouble-maker,' all the while scratching 
their heads and wondering why Chen is being so adamant this time in 
pushing for the referendum. 
 
"... It is understood that the United States has come under 
increasing pressure from China on the referendum issue. But what is 
China afraid of? Doesn't the Beijing administration often trumpet 
that China 'places its hope in the people of Taiwan?' So what is 
there to fear in having the people of Taiwan raise their collective 
voice to tell the world what they want? 
 
"And why does the United States -- the Big Brother promoter of 
democracy -- all of a sudden fail to understand that exercising this 
universal right is a hallmark of democracy? 
SHUI-BIAN 
 
"In the Hong Kong-based Phoenix TV interview, Negroponte reiterated 
the U.S.' friendship for Taiwan and Washington's support for 
Taiwan's democracy. 
 
"But what does it mean to 'support Taiwan's democracy' and then work 
to the contrary and suppress Taiwanese from taking part in a 
referendum? What does it mean to 'be Taiwan's friend' but then show 
disrespect for the decisions and will of that friend? 
 
"Sure, the United States has its national interests to look after, 
but so does Taiwan. Chen, as the elected president, has the 
responsibility to work in the best interests of Taiwanese and 
continue to follow the people's call for the universal values of 
democracy and respect for human rights. 
 
"... The U.S. State Department should understand that it is not Chen 
who is being adamant in pushing the referendum, but Taiwanese 
themselves -- the true masters and stakeholders in the nation -- who 
are backing Chen up in the wish to exercise this universal right." 
 
C) "Anti-China Turned into Anti-U.S." 
 
Columnist Antonio Chiang wrote in the mass-circulation "Apple Daily" 
[circulation: 530,000] (8/30): 
 
"Big nations and powers can do whatever they want.  Small countries 
and the weak are forced to do what they have to do.  It is a common 
practice that the United States interferes with domestic affairs of 
other countries.  This is the nature of politics played by the 
powers.  However, not only the [U.S.] objection to Taiwan's 
referendum violates the democratic vales it advocates globally, the 
tone of its statement is like lecturing to a small grand child.  It 
is as if the United States is the guardian of Taiwan's interest. 
This face of hegemony is really very nasty. 
 
"... But if without U.S. endorsement, [Taiwan] could find no way to 
[join] other international organizations.  The U.S. open objection 
to Taiwan's UN bid is a huge blow to Taiwan's efforts to participate 
in the international community because, without U.S. support, 
Taiwan's international space will get narrower and narrower. 
 
"As a ruling party, the DPP should know that Taiwan's democracy is 
not only an internal issue, but will have external effects.  While 
there is much overlapping national interests between the United 
States and China, the common interests between the United States and 
Taiwan are reducing.  One can hardly find a common agenda now.  It 
is much to the disadvantage of Taiwan that the United States is 
dealing with its Taiwan policy under the framework of its China 
policy. 
 
"A-Bian attended the anti-America party organized by the Sandinist 
regime in Nicaragua.  It is such a serious matter in the 
international arena.  Yet he was doing it like a child driving a big 
car;  anti-China plus anti-U.S., challenging two giants at the same 
time.  He himself may find it a lot of fun.  But it is a big 
disaster for Taiwan." 
 
D) "U.S. Obstruction Helpful for the Green Camp to Solicit Votes" 
 
A news analysis by journalist Chiang Hui-cheng in the centrist, 
KMT-leaning "China Times" [circulation: 400,000] noted (8/30): 
 
"Chen Shui-bian finally ended his troublesome visit to the allies 
after bearing the humiliation of low-keyed Transits through Alaska 
and putting away stickers promoting Taiwan's UN bid.  Now that the 
most embarrassing scenes are over, for Bian, there will be no 
greater obstruction any more.  The stronger the United States 
objection, the more this diplomatic pressure will be transferred to 
helpful forces for the DPP in elections. 
 
"... Compared to the turbulence resulting from the two-state 
statement and the announcement to cease the operation of the 
National Unification Council, the U.S. side has never been so swift 
and resolute like this: no more special envoys, no more diplomatic 
communications, and even the commercial considerations regarding 
arms procurement were put aside.  Then there is no need for 
superficial rhetoric and what should be said has been brought on the 
table and expressed thoroughly and directly. 
 
"... Taiwan indeed enjoys no diplomatic space as it is caught in 
between the United States and China.  Bian correctly took advantage 
of the U.S. insufficiency in dealing with the Asia-Pacific situation 
and link Taiwan's anxiety to the U.S. anxiety.  However, if the 
little embarrassment of Bian's transit [in the United States] can be 
changed into votes, then probably it is 'worth it.'  This is Bian's 
most important calculation for his tour this time." 
 
E) "Tell Us President Chen: What Is the Meaning of This?" 
SHUI-BIAN 
 
 
The pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 400,000] 
editorialized (8/30): 
 
"... Chen Shui-bian's manipulation of the UN bid referendum is 
entirely out of selfish and political trickery motives.  He is eager 
to bleach and dye the 'corrupted Chen Shui-bian' into the 'Taiwan 
independence Chen Shui-bian.'  Then he could occupy the commanding 
position as the standard-bearer of Taiwan independence in order to 
highjack the presidential elections and the political situation 
afterwards.  Therefore, he is maneuvering the referendum without 
concern over the consequences.  In fact, as the above analysis, he 
knows very well that [Taiwan] cannot 'successfully enter the UN.' 
He just wants to play with the 'failure bid to the UN' in order to 
arouse public anger.  He also knows clearly that these are only 
games played for elections.  But he does not care if the nation 
needs to pay a long-term price which cannot be compensated. 
 
"Tell us, what is the meaning of this that the U.S.-Taiwan relations 
are damaged to such a degree because of the 'fake issue' of the 'UN 
bid referendum'?  The United States downgraded the transit 
treatments to Chen Shui-bian.  When asked if this is humiliating to 
Chen Shui-bian, the State Department spokes person said 'The United 
States respects the people of Taiwan very much.'  This is a more 
obvious denial of Chen Shui-bian's qualification to represent the 
people of Taiwan after U.S. authorities advised Chen Shui-bian to 
demonstrate 'leadership.'  Now the Department of State has played 
brinksmanship with the referendum.  Although Chen Shui-bian deserves 
his own-made disgrace, the U.S.-Taiwan friendship and trust was 
destroyed by Chen Shui-bian to such , how is Taiwan going to get 
together with the United States?  To hurt seriously the 'real 
U.S.-Taiwan relations' because of the 'fake UN bid issue' -- what is 
the meaning of this? ..." 
 
F) "Chen Shui-bian's Trick Can't Fool the U.S." 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (8/30): 
 
"... President Chen Shui-bian and the DPP are not very good at 
bettering the quality of life for the people of the island.  Over 
the past years, a growing number of the island's residents have 
lived a life of hardship and misery.  Taiwan's economic performance, 
which used to outshine that of all over 'Asian Tigers,' has fallen 
behind that of South Korea, Singapore and Hong Kong. 
 
"The presidential election next year may well bring the DPP's rule 
to an end.  If that happens, President chen and some of his family 
members will face imprisonment.  He is trying everything possible to 
prevent that scenario. 
 
"A common method that politicians use to influence the outcome of an 
election in their own favor is to confuse voters.  This ruse is 
popular especially in Taiwan.  Many Taiwanese voters are 
undereducated and have only a vague idea which candidates are really 
capable. 
 
"Chen's UN bid is designed to confuse voters.  The attempt is 
intended to create and promote the false idea that the DPP is more 
concerned about Taiwan's international standing and that its rival 
intends to reunify with the mainland at the expense of Taiwan 
residents' well-being. 
 
"... Although the U.S. has broken off formal diplomatic relations 
with the ROC, Washington has been friendly with Taipei over the 
years.  It remains the ROC's staunchest ally.  Taiwan can't afford 
to lose the support of this friend, but many of the steps the DPP 
has taken in recent years have damaged the good ties between the two 
sides." 
 
WANG