07AITTAIPEI1210
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Fri Jun 01 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1210/01 1520832
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 010832Z JUN 07
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5452
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 6857
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 8108UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001210 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - LLOYD NEIGHBORS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused news 
coverage June 1 on the KMT ticket for the 2008 presidential 
election, following Legislative Speaker Wang Jin-pyng's declining to 
become the running mate of Ma Ying-jeou on Thursday; on the DPP's 
disputes over its legislative primary process; on the American 
Chamber of Commerce's (AmCham) release of its Taiwan White Paper 
Thursday; and on former President Lee Teng-hui's trip to Japan.  The 
pro-independence "Liberty Times" ran a banner headline on page four 
that said "AmCham Calls for Direct [Cross-Strait] Links; Council for 
Economic Planning and Development Alleges [That AmCham] Has 
Interfered in Taiwan's Internal Affairs."  The centrist, KMT-leaning 
"China Times" carried the results of its latest survey on page four, 
which showed that the approval rating for KMT presidential candidate 
Ma Ying-jeou has dropped to a new low of 32 percent, while 21 
percent of respondents said they support DPP presidential candidate 
Frank Hsieh. 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, a "Liberty Times" 
editorial commented on President Chen Shui-bian's remarks at a video 
conference before the National Press Club Tuesday and on the 2008 
presidential election.  The article said Chen's clear elaboration of 
the Taiwan-centered line and Taiwan-U.S. relations would enlighten 
both the international community, in particular the United States, 
and Taiwan's future leader.  An op-ed piece in the pro-unification 
"United Daily News" discussed AmCham's Taiwan White Paper and urged 
the DPP government to listen to the views of an objective third 
party.  End summary. 
 
¶3. U.S.-Taiwan Relations 
 
A) "2008 Election Is the Battle between Nativist Line and Ultimate 
Unification" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 500,000] 
editorialized (6/1): 
 
"... During the video conference [with the National Press Club], 
President Chen elaborated to U.S. political figures and journalists 
on the Taiwan-centered line and how to create a win-win situation 
for Taiwan-U.S. relations, and he also pointed out the threats 
caused by the rise of China.  [Chen's] position was firm and his 
analysis very clear; [the video conference] could thus be viewed as 
a successful publicity activity.  Even though Chen has only one year 
left in his term, the DPP's coming to power in 2000 still marked the 
unprecedented rule of Taiwan by a nativist regime, which has secured 
the structure of 'one country on either side of the [Taiwan] 
Strait.'  How Taiwan, in the face of this brand new historical 
trend, will overcome China's suppression and continue to expand its 
room for survival in this adverse international environment has thus 
become a difficult task.  Chen's concluding of his seven years' 
experience in ruling [the island] was enlightening both to the 
international community and to the future president of Taiwan. 
[Chen's remarks] will allow the international community, in 
particular our important ally, the United States, better to 
understand that Taiwan is a free, democratic country and not a 
troublemaker.  Also, Chen has given sincere advice to the future 
state leader of Taiwan that the island will find no way out except 
byticking to the line of independence and self-determination. ... 
 
"Take Taiwan's bid to join the ASEAN as an example; this idea gave 
no cause for much criticism.  But the biggest problem lies in the 
fact that the KMT's intent behind every move it makes is to unify 
[with China].  In this context, the island's ASEAN bid is bound to 
link up with direct transportation across the Taiwan Strait, and it 
seems that [for the KMT,] only by doing so can Taiwan dodge the 
crisis of being marginalized.  But in reality, such a move will only 
limit Taiwan's plan to go global inside the framework of China and 
will mistake Sinicization for globalization. ...  The presidential 
election in 2008 will certainly be a battle between nativists and 
aliens, and between freedom and authoritarianism; it will be a 
critical battle for determining Taiwan's sovereignty and way of 
living. ... Thus, Chen's worry about the person upholding ultimate 
unification winning the [2008] election is definitely not a 
groundless fear. ..." 
 
B) "Taiwan Dragon with Bad Teeth [Should] Try on U.S. Prescription" 
 
Lin Chin-yuan, associate professor of Tamkang University's 
Department of Economics, opined in the pro-unification "United Daily 
News" [circulation: 400,000] (6/1): 
 
"... The American Chamber of Commerce (AmCham) published its 2007 
Taiwan White Paper Thursday in which it expressed concern over 
Taiwan's economic competitiveness lagging behind the other three 
Asian tigers. ...  What AmCham did not mention was that South Korea, 
which is competing with Taiwan, has overcome barriers and 
demonstrated its grand ambition by championing the railway link 
between South and North Korea.  By contrast, the Taiwan tiger seems 
to have grown old and doddering and lost its power and prestige. 
 
 
"Despite the consideration of its own vital interests, AmCham's 
prescription for Taiwan is worth contemplation, including mitigating 
the incessant acrimonious political wrangling, so that economic 
issues will not be elbowed out of the focus of public discourse; 
speeding up the opening of [cross-Strait] direct transportation to 
allow regularized cross-Strait flows of people, goods and services, 
and investment; and fostering legislative transparency to reduce 
corruption, holding the elected representatives accountable for 
illegal and unethical activities.  These views did not come from the 
pro-unification faction or the Green reformers but from an objective 
third party.  It will be 'game over' for Taiwan if the DPP, which 
has ruled Taiwan for eight years and intends to continue doing so, 
turns a deaf ear to them. ..." 
 
YOUNG