07BAGHDAD403
Iraqi Kurdistan Region Media Summary --
Wed Feb 07 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO0125
RR RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #0403/01 0380630
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 070630Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9460
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000403 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
UNCLASSIFIED 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PKPA PGOV ECON IZ TU US
 
SUBJECT:  Iraqi Kurdistan Region Media Summary -- 
      February 6, 2007 
 
 
¶1.  (U)  This is a Regional Reconstruction Team (RRT) cable. 
 
KRG President Condemns Bombings in Baghdad, Babil, and Kikuk 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶2.  (U)  Newspapers reported on KRG President's condemnation of the 
recent terrorist attacks in Baghdad, Babil, and Kirkuk.  He 
described the attacks as "cowardly" and acts of 
"anti-stabilization". He also expressed his condolences to the 
families of the victims and hoped that these attacks would not 
weaken Iraqis' will and morale to fight terrorism and to work for a 
safe and secure Iraq. 
 
Arab Tribes Council in Kirkuk Refuses Article 140 Committee's 
Decisions 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶3.  (U)  Major print and broadcast media reported on the Arab Tribe 
Councils' rejection of the recent decisions made by Higher Committee 
for the Implementation of Article 140.  The committee announced on 
Sunday that, among other things, lands held by Arab who moved to the 
area during the period of Arabization would be transferred back to 
their original Kurdish and Turkmen owners.  The Arab Tribes Council 
called on all Arab Tribes in Kirkuk to go out to the streets and 
condemn the decision. 
 
PKK Troops at the Ready 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶4.  (U)  A Chawder newspaper correspondent reported from the Qandil 
mountains where PKK guerillas keep bases of operations.  The report 
said that in preparation for any possible attacks or raids by 
Turkey, PKK troops have spread out in different locations throughout 
the mountains and are on stand-by for any abrupt violence Turkey 
might initiate. 
 
KRG Ministries of Justice to Merge Today 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶5.  (U)  All major Kurdish newspapers wrote about the scheduled 
merger of KRG-Sulaimaniyah Ministry of Justice and the KRG-Erbil 
Ministry of Justice which took place today.  This merger comes after 
a series of meetings and debates on how to unify courts and legal 
institutions into centralized KRG authority.  The ministries of 
justice are one of the four ministries that was left under separate 
KDP and PUK party control during the unification that took place at 
the beginning of 2006. 
 
The First Development Conference of Sulaimaniyah Governorate 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶6.  (U)  Major newspapers reported on the first development 
conference of Sulaimaniyah governorate which began yesterday under 
the slogan "Decision-making, Responsibility, Transparency, and 
Honesty."  The conference was presided over by the Governor of 
Sulaimaniyah and was attended by KRG Deputy Prime Minister, the 
Minister of Reconstruction, Regional Reconstruction Team 
representatives, and representatives from all local governmental 
offices.  Reports on all aspects of developing Sulaimaniyah were 
read on the first day of the conference including hydrocarbons, 
electricity, traffic, architecture, industry, and municipalities. 
Group discussions will run today in order to reach final decisions 
about an agenda for reconstructing and enhancing the infrastructure 
of the Sulaimaniyah province. 
 
LG Markets First Cell Phone in Kurdish 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶7.  (U)  All major newspapers wrote today about the first cell phone 
with Kurdish-language compatibility by LG.  The announcement was 
made at a ceremony at the Sheraton Hotel in Erbil attended by KRG 
Prime Minister Nechirvan Barzani, the KRG Minister of Commerce, the 
Governor of Erbil, Kurdish businessmen, and the CEO of LG.  The LG 
CEO thanked the KRG for the support and facilitation it has provided 
for the success of this project. 
 
Commentaries: 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶8.  (U)  Awene newspaper published a statement by Hiwa Sabir, 
Secretary of the Kurdistan Islamic Union Political Bureau that 
 
SIPDIS 
dividing the KRG budget for the year 2007 between the PUK and the 
KDP is an act of terrorism against the Kurdish Parliament.  Sabir 
told Awene that dividing the budget between the PUK and the KDP at a 
rate of 52% for the KDP and 48% for the PUK will jeopardize the 
Kurdish Parliament and reinforce corruption in the KRG. 
 
¶9.  (U)  PUKmedia.com published a statement by PUK's representative 
in Turkey, Bahroz Gallali, calling for an independent state of 
 
BAGHDAD 00000403  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
Kurdistan.  "I and all Kurds want an independent state of Kurdistan. 
 We would establish a state of Kurdistan immediately if we could 
without fear or hesitation, but the current situation is not 
suitable for that," Gallali said.  He also called on Turkey to 
support the establishment of the state of Kurdistan because a state 
is not only a name-it means economy, politics, and foreign 
relations. 
 
¶10.  (SBU)  This media summary is completed by Public Diplomacy 
Assistant Hama Othman.