07BEIJING1676
MARCH 13 MFA PRESS BRIEFING
Tue Mar 13 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO3617
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1676/01 0721133
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 131133Z MAR 07
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5592
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 001676 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL CH
SUBJECT: MARCH 13 MFA PRESS BRIEFING 
 
¶1. Key points made at the March 13 MFA press 
conference were: 
 
-- The first denuclearization working group meeting 
will be held on March 17 chaired by VFM Wu. 
 
-- IAEA Chief ElBaradei was briefed by VFM Wu on the 
Six-Party Talks in Beijing en route to Pyongyang. 
 
-- Australia and Japan should consider concerns of 
third parties when making bilateral security 
agreements. 
 
-- China's position on war reparation cases remains 
unchanged since the 1972 Joint-Statement and China 
hopes Japan can handle historical issues "seriously" 
and consider the "humanitarian factor." 
 
-- China hopes Sudan can reach consensus with the UN 
and AU to take action as soon as possible. 
 
-- Chinese officials will visit Australia, other 
Pacific islands and Pakistan beginning next week and 
Pakistan FM Khurshid will visit China March 18-21. 
 
Denuclearization Working Group to Begin March 17 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶2.  MFA Spokesperson Qin Gang announced at the March 
13 regular press briefing that the first meeting of 
the working group on the denuclearization of the 
Korean Peninsula will be held March 17 in Beijing 
headed by VFM Wu Dawei.  The working group meetings 
should conclude before the Sixth Round of the Six- 
Party Talks commences on March 19, at which time the 
activities and achievements of the groups will be 
reported to the heads of delegations, he said.  Qin 
had no exact information on the other working groups 
or the times and venues of upcoming Six-Party Talks 
meetings. 
 
IAEA Chief Met VFM Wu En Route to DPRK 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. IAEA Chief Mohamed ElBaradei stopped in Beijing to 
meet with VFM Wu Dawei en route to Pyongyang where 
ElBaradei arrived today.  VFM Wu briefed ElBaradei on 
the contents of the Six-Party Talks.  China hopes 
ElBaradei's visit will achieve positive results. 
 
Japan-Australia Security Agreement - China Tranquil 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶4. Countries enhancing bilateral security cooperation 
should take into consideration the interests and 
concerns of relevant countries to increase mutual 
trust and regional stability, said Qin commenting on 
the recent signing of a defensive agreement between 
Japan and Australia.  Qin hopes statements that the 
agreement is not targeted towards China are true and 
would not draw a connection to increased Chinese 
military spending.  China poses no threat to other 
countries, has a defensive military policy, follows 
the UN Charter and upholds the policies of peaceful 
coexistence and mutually beneficial development, said 
the spokesman. 
 
Japan Should Take War Reparations Cases "Seriously" 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶5. Asked repeatedly to clarify whether private Chinese 
citizens have the right to seek wartime reparations 
from Japan and the Chinese government's position on 
pending cases, Qin responded all questions could be 
resolved through a framework with two principles. 
First, China maintains the position outlined in the 
1972 Joint-Statement.  Second, China hopes Japan 
handles the historical issues "seriously" and 
considers the "humanitarian factor" as forced labor 
was a major crime of Japanese militarism.  Qin would 
not comment on Abe's recent apology for remarks about 
comfort women. 
 
Sudan, UN, AU Should Take "Real Action" 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  Questioned about Sudan President al-Bashir's 
letter to the UN calling for restrictions on UN 
deployment plans, Qin replied the international 
community has reached consensus in deploying a mixed 
UN/AU force.  China hopes the Sudanese government, UN 
and AU can reach consensus turning the agreement into 
"real action." 
 
BEIJING 00001676  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
Sri Lanka Port Agreement Just Business 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  A recent agreement signed on March 12 between 
China and Sri Lanka to jointly develop a seaport is a 
business deal between companies, not a government 
matter, said Qin.  China's friendly relations with Sri 
Lanka are based on mutual benefit and equality. 
 
Visits to Pacific Islands, Pakistan, Russia 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  Vice-Premier Zeng Peiyan will visit Australia, New 
Zealand, Vanuatu and Papua New Guinea March 19-31. 
Minister of Communications Li Shenglin will travel to 
Pakistan March 18-21 to celebrate the completion of 
the deep-sea port at Gwadar.  Pakistan FM Khurshid 
Kasuri will pay an official visit to China March 18-21 
at the invitation of FM Li Zhaoxing.  More information 
will be released at a later date regarding President 
Hu's visit to Russia planned for late March. 
RANDT