07BERLIN619
BERLIN: COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR GLOBAL
Tue Mar 27 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Berlin
VZCZCXYZ0016
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHRL #0619 0861233
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 271233Z MAR 07
FM AMEMBASSY BERLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7657
INFO RHMFIUU/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHINGTON DC PRIORITYUNCLAS BERLIN 000619 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/AGS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON AMGT OTRA ASEC PARM PREL GM
SUBJECT: BERLIN: COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR GLOBAL 
PARTNERSHIP WORKING GROUP 
 
REF: STATE 36139 
 
¶1. (SBU) Embassy welcomes and grants country clearance to 
Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary Andrew Semmel, Foreign 
Affairs Officer David L. Evans, Senior Policy Advisor Gerald 
Stacy, and William F. Menold, Jr., to participate in the 
Global Partnership Working Group and Nonproliferation 
Directors Working Group meetings, from March 28-April 2, 
¶2007. 
 
¶2. (SBU) The control officer for this visit will be Global 
Affairs Officer Richard Crandell, who can be reached at 
office telephone 49(30)8305-2309, fax 49-30-8305-2339, home 
phone 49(30)2300-4475, mobile phone 49 (0) 174-945-4720 and 
email CrandellR@state.gov. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Per reftel, Post confirmed your reservations at the 
Hilton Berlin.  Post will assist with ground transportation 
for the meetings.  Crandell will meet you on March 29 and 30 
at your hotel at 08:45 both days with Embassy transportation. 
 Post also understands that all delegation members hold Top 
Secret security clearances. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
¶4. (U) Neither Post nor German authorities have any 
information that could affect the safety and security of your 
visit to Germany. 
 
¶5. (U) The Department of State assesses the risk in German 
cities with a U.S. diplomatic presence as high for 
transnational terrorism and low to medium for criminal 
activity.  The Mission Germany Regional Security staff stays 
up to date on all terrorism and crime-related issues within 
Germany and evaluates how these issues might affect both 
official and private Americans either living or visiting 
Germany. 
 
¶6. (U) Sporadic incidents of violence occur throughout 
various areas of Germany that are linked to right-wing 
extremist groups, targeting immigrant and refugee 
communities.  Left-wing groups are also active throughout 
Germany staging large protests, normally without violence. 
Protesters rarely cause property damage, but there have also 
been isolated cases of arson against American interests.  The 
recent trend of anti-globalization related protests and 
demonstrations seen throughout Europe is present in Germany 
as well.  These demonstrations have turned violent in the 
past in some European countries. 
 
¶7. (U) While there have been no recent significant domestic 
terrorist attacks, Germany continues to be a potential venue 
for transnational terrorism.  A heightening of the Middle 
East confrontation, U.S. arrest and jailing of Middle East 
terrorists, or a serious incident between the U.S. and a 
terrorist-supporting nation could change the terrorist threat 
assessment at short notice.  These and other indictors 
continue to be closely monitored by U.S. officials.  The 
arrest of key Usama bin Laden (UBL) supporters, the discovery 
that the lead cell for the September 11th attacks was located 
in Germany, the ongoing terrorist trials currently taking 
place, along with the German law enforcement community 
continuing to make arrests of suspected terrorists in all 
parts of Germany, adds credence to concerns about possible 
UBL initiatives in Germany. 
 
¶8. (U) Visitors to Germany should practice the same 
common-sense personal security practices that are an everyday 
part of life in U.S. cities.  German law enforcement agencies 
are professional and extremely supportive to the U.S. 
government and all of our concerns. 
 
¶9. (U) The countrywide police emergency telephone number is 
¶110.  The fire department and ambulance service may be 
reached at telephone 112.  The U.S. embassy in Berlin reports 
current threat information for American citizens at 
030-832-9233. 
 
¶10. (U) Assessment updates are available from mission-wide 
Regional Security Offices in Berlin at 49-30-8305-1400, 
Frankfurt at 49-69-7535-2444, or Munich at 49-89-2888-625. 
KOENIG