07CARACAS173
VENEZUELA -- INVESTMENT CLIMATE STATEMENT (PART
Fri Jan 26 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Caracas
VZCZCXRO9488
RR RUEHAO RUEHCD RUEHGA RUEHGD RUEHGR RUEHHA RUEHHO RUEHMC RUEHNG
RUEHNL RUEHQU RUEHRD RUEHRG RUEHRS RUEHTM RUEHVC
DE RUEHCV #0173/01 0261212
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 261212Z JAN 07
FM AMEMBASSY CARACAS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7599
INFO RUEHWH/WESTERN HEMISPHERIC AFFAIRS DIPL POSTS
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY
RUEHRC/DEPT OF AGRICULTURE USD FAS
RUCPCIM/CIMS NTDB WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 10 CARACAS 000173 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/IDFD/OIA, WHA/AND 
STATE PASS TO USTR 
COMMERCE FOR 4431/MAC/WH/MCAMERON 
TREASURY FOR KLINGENSMITH AND NGRANT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EINV EFIN KTDB STR OPIC VE
SUBJECT: VENEZUELA -- INVESTMENT CLIMATE STATEMENT (PART 
1/2) 
 
REF: 06 SECSTATE 178303 
 
--------------------------------- 
Â¶A. Openness to Foreign Investment 
--------------------------------- 
 
Venezuela officially encourages foreign investment and 
provides equal treatment to local and foreign companies, 
though the actual environment is in fact considerably less 
welcoming.  On January 10 of 2007, President Chavez announced 
that the government would nationalize companies in the 
electricity, telecommunications and petroleum sectors as well 
as re-write the country's commercial code.  As of this 
writing, it seems likely that firms and shareholders will be 
compensated to some degree for their expropriated assets. 
Capital repatriation is allowed (subject to exchange control 
restrictions described below) and there are few formal 
restrictions on investments except for several sectors that 
are reserved to the State or Venezuelan nationals such as oil 
production, and power generation (with some exceptions). 
 
The Venezuelan economy grew by 9.4 percent in 2005 and 10.3 
percent in 2006, driven largely by a huge increase in 
government expenditures as a result of the continued oil 
bonanza.  The official inflation rate reached 17 percent 
during 2006 due to higher consumer demand and excess money 
supply and many in the private sector argue that actual 
inflation is higher, still. 
 
Statements by President Hugo Chavez and other Venezuelan 
officials about the need to adopt a new non-capitalist 
economic model (what Chavez calls "Socialism of the 21st 
Century"), an aggressive adoption of urban and rural "land 
reform" at the state and national levels, the takeover of 
"idle" industrial plants, the passage of legislation which 
has expanded the Supreme Court, with the subsequent 
appointment of judges on what observers consider a political 
basis rather than merit, and sudden unilateral increase by 
the Government of Venezuela in petroleum royalty rates for 
strategic associations have been negative developments. 
 
On January 10, 2007, President Chavez announced that 
Venezuela would "nationalize" previously privatized companies 
and take control of as yet undefined "strategic sectors," 
including telecommunications and electricity.  In general, 
the Venezuelan government has sought to promote an increasing 
state presence in areas of the economy previously left to 
private enterprise.  The most prominent is its "Mercal" chain 
of food stores aimed at low income Venezuelans, which is 
supplied by state purchases of commodities.  Estimates are 
that approximately 47 percent of the sale and distribution of 
basic food products were sold through the Mercal program, 
benefiting over 15 million Venezuelans in 2006.   Other areas 
that the Venezuelan state is reentering include civil 
aviation, telecommunications, cement production, paper 
manufacturing, and sugar refining. 
 
In early 2003, President Chavez created an Exchange 
Administration Board (CADIVI) to regulate the purchase and 
sale of foreign currency and limit capital flight.  The 
Central Bank liquidates CADIVI-approved requests for 
exchange.  Initially, CADIVI was unable to process foreign 
currency requests efficiently and the Venezuelan Central Bank 
was only supplying currency to about 15-20 percent of 
approved authorizations.  Over time, the system has improved, 
and in 2006 CADIVI authorized a total of USD $27.4 billion. 
Of this amount, 61.4 percent was for imports, followed by 
repatriation of capital (6.1 percent), private debt service 
(4.9 percent), and travel services through credit cards (4.5 
percent).  CADIVI also authorized to make payments through 
the Latin American Association for the Integration (ALADI) 
for USD 5.3 billion.  CADIVI is currently also accepting 
currency requests in Euros.  While CADIVI appears to more 
efficiently process requests for capital and consumer 
imports, it is less efficient processing requests for 
repatriation of profits, royalty payments, and payments for 
services.  A number of goods were removed from the list of 
imports eligible for foreign exchange in 2006 in an effort to 
reduce imports and promote import substitution.  A recent 
decree allows for the import of capital equipment, parts, and 
accessories free of duties and value added tax. 
 
A Foreign Exchange Crime Law, published in the Venezuelan 
 
CARACAS 00000173  002 OF 010 
 
 
Official Gazette No. 38,272 on September 14, 2005, 
established criminal penalties and fines for transactions 
made outside the official foreign exchange process, 
reinforcing the foreign exchange control regime. 
 
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) has declined precipitously in 
Venezuela from USD 3 billion in 2005 to only USD 75 million 
as of the third quarter of 2006.  There are a number of 
projects under development or in pre-engineering stages, 
mainly in oil and gas or large infrastructure projects, 
though the proposed "nationalization" of energy sectors may 
stifle further development.  The type of contractual 
relationship an oil company has with the state oil 
corporation PDVSA varies widely, depending on the nature of 
the underlying project.  As regards to the latter, the 
preferred venture scheme has become sovereign deals or 
contracts between state corporations.  Power, several road 
and railroad projects and the expansion of some production 
facilities for basic industry seem to be the main areas where 
there are projects in the pipeline.  However, most of these 
projects have very little if any private participation at all. 
 
As a member of the Andean Community, Venezuela accepted the 
application of the Andean Decisions, although examples can be 
found of non-compliance.  In May 2006, President Chavez 
announced that Venezuela would leave the Andean Community and 
join MERCOSUR.  The terms of accession to MERCOSUR have yet 
to be fully negotiated.  Most Andean Community norms and 
obligations have remained in place, pending their replacement 
by new local laws. 
 
-------------------------- 
A.a. The 1999 Constitution 
-------------------------- 
 
The Venezuelan Constitution of 1999 treats private capital 
investment as a means of promoting the development of the 
national economy.  Chavez has announced that the Constitution 
will be revised in 2007 and may include sweeping changes to 
current laws governing private enterprise.   Article No. 299 
of the current Constitution recognizes private enterprise as 
a factor for creating sources of employment and local added 
value, as well as raising the standard of living of the 
population, within a framework of free competition.  The 
Constitution reserves certain strategic sectors for the 
State, such as oil activity and hydropower generation. 
 
Article 301 of the Constitution adopts international 
standards for the treatment of private capital, with equal 
treatment of local and foreign capital. 
 
--------------------------------- 
A.b. Legal Framework: Decree 2095 
--------------------------------- 
 
Decree 2095 (1992) establishes the legal framework for 
foreign investment in Venezuela.  This Decree implemented 
Andean Pact Decisions 291 and 292 and significantly expanded 
foreign investment opportunities in Venezuela by lifting most 
restrictions on foreign participation in the economy.  Most 
sectors of Venezuela's economy, except those specifically 
noted, are open to foreign participation.  Article 13 of the 
Decree explicitly guarantees that foreign investors will have 
the same rights and obligations as national investors "except 
as provided for in special laws and limitations contained in 
this Decree." 
 
Under Decree 2095, foreign investors need only register with 
the Superintendent of Foreign Investment (SIEX) within 60 
days of the date a new investment is made.  (The exception to 
this general rule is the Security and Defense Law, which 
provides that foreigners cannot own property in certain 
border regions or near military installations and basic 
industries without written authorization of the President 
through the Ministry of Defense.)  Foreign companies may 
generally open offices in Venezuela without prior 
authorization from SIEX as long as they do not engage in 
certain sales or business activities that would require 
registration.  No prior authorization is required for 
technical assistance, transfer of technology, or 
trademark-use agreements, provided they are not contrary to 
existing legal provisions.  Shares of foreign companies may 
be sold publicly. 
 
CARACAS 00000173  003 OF 010 
 
 
 
Decree 2095 also guarantees foreign investors the right to 
repatriate 100 percent of profits and capital, including 
proceeds from the sale of shares or liquidation of the 
company, and allows for unrestricted reinvestment of profits. 
Foreign exchange is, however, still subject to government 
exchange controls. 
 
Joint ventures and wholly owned subsidiaries of foreign 
companies are treated in the same way as Venezuelan firms. 
Only registration of the venture with SIEX is required. 
Decree 2095 imposes no limits on the amount of dividends, 
reinvestment, or repatriation.  (The foreign exchange regime, 
however, has significantly affected such transfers.) 
 
---------------------------------- 
A.c. Limitations under Decree 2095 
---------------------------------- 
 
Decree 2095 reserves three areas of economic activity to 
"national companies": television, newspapers, and 
professional services that are regulated by national laws.  A 
"national company" (as defined in Article 1 of Andean Pact 
Decision 291) is a company in which Venezuelan nationals hold 
more than 80 percent of the equity.  Foreign capital is 
therefore restricted to a maximum of 19.9 percent in 
enterprises engaged in radio, television, Spanish-language 
newspapers, and professional services subject to licensing 
legislation (e.g., law, architecture, engineering, medicine, 
veterinary medicine, dentistry, economics, public accounting, 
psychology, pharmacy, and management).  Foreign professionals 
are free to work in Venezuela without restriction, but must 
first revalidate their title at a Venezuelan university. 
This is not required for consulting services under contract 
for a specific project.  The Investment Promotion and 
Protection Law of October 1999 maintained these exceptions 
and reserved sectors. 
 
---------------------------------- 
A.d. Areas Covered by Special Laws 
---------------------------------- 
 
Sectors that are regulated by "special laws" that supplement 
the Constitution include hydrocarbons, natural gas, power, 
iron ore, mining, telecommunications, broadcasting, banking, 
mortgages, and insurance. 
 
----------------- 
A.e. Hydrocarbons 
----------------- 
 
VenezuelaQ,s vast reserves make oil and gas its leading 
sector for attracting foreign investment.  However, foreign 
investment is restricted in the petroleum sector and may be 
restricted in the gas sector, depending on the outcome of 
proposed changes to the Constitution.  The 2001 Hydrocarbons 
Law reserves exploration and production, as well as the 
"gathering" and initial transportation and storage of 
hydrocarbons to the state.  Under this regime, primary 
activities must be carried out directly by the state, by a 
100 percent state-owned company such as Petroleos de 
Venezuela (PDVSA), or by a joint venture company with more 
than 50 percent of the shares held by the state.  The 2001 
law does, however, leave new refining ventures open to 
private investment as well as commercialization activities, 
under a license and permit regime. 
 
The Hydrocarbons Law mandated an increase in royalty payments 
from 16.67 percent to 30 percent, with the possibility of a 
reduction to 20 percent for heavy crude projects.  It also 
stipulated that any arbitration proceedings would henceforth 
be in domestic not international venues. 
 
Over the last two years the national government has made a 
number of changes in royalty, tax policies and contracts 
(aimed at increasing Government of Venezuela revenues and 
control of the sector) that have substantially increased 
uncertainty for companies operating in Venezuela.  The 
Hydrocarbons Law did not specifically grandfather contracts 
executed under earlier legislation:  i.e., the 33 operating 
service contracts awarded for "marginal" or inactive 
oilfields in three rounds in the 1990's; the exploration and 
production profit-sharing agreements awarded in 1996; and the 
 
CARACAS 00000173  004 OF 010 
 
 
four so-called "Strategic Associations," joint ventures 
formed in the 1990's to extract and upgrade Venezuela's 
extra heavy oil.   The Venezuelan Government argued in 2001 
that no such provision was necessary because retroactive 
application of legislative provisions is forbidden by 
constitutional mandate.  In October 2004, the Government 
unilaterally eliminated a nine-year royalty holiday ceded to 
the Strategic Associations, arguing that this was allowable 
under earlier hydrocarbons legislation.  The government has 
announced that it wishes to convert the Strategic 
Associations to joint ventures under PDVSA control.  It is 
currently in negotiations with the member companies to that 
end. 
 
The government informed companies with operating contracts in 
early 2005 that they must migrate the contracts to joint 
ventures that conform to the 2001 Hydrocarbons Law.  The 
government threatened to seize fields operating under the 
services contracts on December 31, 2005 if oil companies did 
not sign transition agreements to migrate their contracts. 
Sixteen oil companies signed memorandum of understanding 
converting their contracts to joint ventures on March 31. 
Two companies, ENI and Total, did not sign a MOU and PDVSA 
took control of their fields. 
 
The oil sector suffered two years of negative growth in 2002 
and 2003 with a 14.2 percent reduction in real oil GDP in 
2002 and 1.9 percent reduction in real oil GDP in 2003.  The 
sharp decrease was due to a two-month national strike from 
December 2002-February 2003 that brought production to a 
complete halt.  In response, the Chavez Government dismissed 
over 18,000 striking employees, many in management positions, 
of which only a small percentage have been rehired.  Real oil 
GDP increased by 11.6 percent in 2004 and by 2.6 percent in 
Â¶2005. 
 
The Chavez administration has played a price hawk role to 
maintain high prices in OPEC.  It has also begun promoting 
the regional development and integration of state energy 
companies under the name of "Petroamerica."  Petroamerica has 
three components: Petrosur comprising the Southern Cone, 
Petrocaribe comprising the Caribbean nations, and Petroandina 
comprising the Andean nations.  The stated purpose of the 
strategy is to diversify Venezuela's export market. 
 
PDVSA's 2006-2012 Strategic Plan calls for the assessment 
and certification of the extra heavy crude oil reserves in 
the Orinoco oil tar belt (Faja).  Memoranda of Understanding 
have been signed with various state-owned oil companies to 
certify 27 blocks with the participation of state oil 
companies from signatory countries.  Investment under the 
strategic plan is supposed to reach USD $56 billion between 
2005-2012, of which 70 percent will come from PDVSA and the 
rest from the private sector. 
 
The GOV is repositioning itself as the main oil operator in 
country, cornering private investors, both domestic and 
foreign, and testing their willingness and capability to 
adapt to new conditions.  The PDVSA business plan 2006-2012 
seems to leave very little room for additional private 
investment in the oil sector, while favoring entrance of 
state-owned oil companies.  The GOV is attempting to 
diversify its portfolio of oil clients and investors, and to 
be less dependent on the U.S. 
 
---------------- 
A.f. Natural Gas 
---------------- 
 
Venezuela has vast untapped natural gas reserves, estimated 
as the eighth largest in the world, and is promoting greater 
use of natural gas domestically as a clean and more 
cost-efficient energy source.  Venezuela would like to take 
advantage of its reserves and geographic location to export 
natural gas to regional markets, including the United States. 
 The 1999 Gaseous Hydrocarbons Law offers more liberal terms 
than are available to petroleum investors, and Venezuela's 
government has sought foreign investment to develop offshore 
natural gas deposits near the Orinoco delta. 
 
The 1999 Gaseous Hydrocarbons Law opened the entire natural 
gas sector to private investment, both domestic and foreign. 
The law created a licensing system for exploration and 
 
CARACAS 00000173  005 OF 010 
 
 
production of Venezuela's non-associated natural gas reserves 
regulated by the Ministry of Energy and Mines.  Natural gas 
that is produced in association with crude oil production 
remains subject to the Hydrocarbons Law.  The state retains 
ownership of all natural gas "in situ", but PDVSA involvement 
is not required for gas development projects.  Complete 
vertical integration of the gas business from wellhead to 
consumer is prohibited. 
 
In 2001, Venezuela held its first commercial auction of 
concessions for natural gas not associated with petroleum 
production and successfully awarded six of eleven onshore 
areas it offered to bidders.   In 2002 and 2004, the 
government licensed three exploration and development blocks 
in the "Deltana Platform," located in waters contiguous to 
Venezuela's boundary with Trinidad and Tobago.   In 2005, 
Venezuela auctioned blocks within Rafael Urdaneta and Deltana 
Platform.   Talks continue over the development of the 
Mariscal Sucre offshore natural gas project, which would 
involve the development of an LNG facility in Guiria in the 
Paria Peninsula.  Venezuela also recently signed an agreement 
with Colombia that envisions the construction of a natural 
gas pipeline, which initially would bring Colombian gas to 
Venezuela but which could later be expanded to send 
Venezuelan gas to Central America.   In November 2005, 
Venezuela signed an agreement with Argentina to study the 
feasibility of building a 6,000 km gas line.  Finally, more 
private investor interest is anticipated for future gas 
rounds as Venezuela focuses on export oriented natural gas 
projects and promising off-shore exploration areas. 
 
------------------- 
A.g. Electric Power 
------------------- 
 
Electric power production requires intensive investments in 
all stages - generation, transmission, and distribution.  In 
Venezuela, the area that is most in need of investment is 
generation, since approximately 70 percent of country's 
generation capacity is concentrated in hydro stations located 
in a single river basin.  The 2000 to 2002 drought raised 
serious concerns and highlighted the need to increase and 
balance generation to mitigate the consequences of droughts 
and grid deficiencies.  Investments in hydropower generation 
continue however, with the incorporation of Caruachi, a 2,280 
MW dam, and plans to build Tocoma, which will supply an 
additional 2,160 MW to the system. 
 
Although approximately 98 percent of the national territory 
receives electric service, transmission is an area that also 
requires intensive capital investments.  Venezuela's 
transmission assets were developed between the 1960's and 
80's.  While maintenance has generally been adequate, 
population growth has outpaced upgrades creating transmission 
bottlenecks particularly in the central region of the country. 
 
A legal framework has also been crafted to regulate the 
sector.  Its implementation, however, has been stalled mainly 
over concerns about the ability of CADAFE (the national power 
utility) to un-bundle activities and honor contracts.  CADAFE 
is involved in generation, transmission, and distribution of 
electricity and is often accused of having serious management 
issues and very high non-technical (commercial) losses. 
 
The Government has an aggressive plan to supplement 
hydroelectricity generation with thermal generation units, 
many of U.S. origin.  As a result, turbines now rank fifth 
among the leading U.S. exports to Venezuela this year.  The 
Venezuelan Government has also announced its intention to 
revamp the national electricity grid with new high-voltage 
transmission lines. 
 
----------- 
A.h. Mining 
----------- 
 
The mining law of 1999 consolidates the provisions of the 
1945 mining law with subsequent mining decrees and encourages 
greater private sector participation in mining activities. 
The mining law created the National Institute for Geology and 
Mining (INGEOMIN), which serves as a national information 
center to gather and disseminate technical and scientific 
data for the mining industry.  The law established an 
 
CARACAS 00000173  006 OF 010 
 
 
inter-ministerial commission to coordinate the mining 
sector's development between the Ministries of Energy and 
Mines (now the Ministry of Heavy Industry and Mining), 
Environment, Defense, Finance, and Planning.  It also called 
for "one-stop shopping" to be created within that commission 
to expedite concession authorization procedures. 
 
The 1999 law maintained the basic concession terms of the 
1945 law.  Venezuela's concessions remain mineral-specific, 
and have a maximum 20-year authorization, which can be 
extended for an additional 20 years.  The law lengthened 
slightly the exploration period from 3 years to 4 years, and 
the development period from 4 to 7 years. 
 
The mining law also changed the mining sector's tax 
structure.  The 1945 mining law required a small one-time 
exploration tax: a surface tax of 40 centavos per hectare for 
alluvial deposits and one Bolivar per hectare on veins and 
strata deposits and a layered royalty rate.  The surface tax 
could not be adjusted for inflation because a fixed amount 
was written into the 1945 law and over time has become 
negligible. 
 
The legalization of small and medium size mining operations 
has been viewed as a positive step toward the modernization 
of the sector and as a way to enforce environmental standards 
often violated by illegal small miners.  The law, 
nevertheless, has been criticized for its high and variable 
royalties.  A critical issue is a provision of Title VII that 
allows an exploitation tax of anywhere between 1 percent and 
3 percent. 
 
Individual mining firms have faced significant problems, and 
government officials have made comments that a generalized 
review of existing mining contracts may take place. 
 
----------------------- 
A.i. Telecommunications 
----------------------- 
 
President Chavez signed the Organic Telecommunications Law in 
2000, replacing the antiquated 1940s-era law and setting the 
stage for significant levels of new investment in the sector. 
 The new law, coupled with a national telecommunications plan 
developed by the National Telecommunications Commission 
(CONATEL) and the November 2000 expiration of the monopoly 
held by CANTV on basic telephone services, created a 
favorable climate for telecommunications investors.  However, 
in January 2007, President Chavez announced that Venezuela 
would "nationalize" CANTV, which has cooled the climate for 
investment in Venezuela. 
 
Venezuela received USD $771 million in investments in the 
telecommunications sector in 2005 and investment continued at 
a similar pace in 2006. 
 
Venezuela has one of the leading wireless telephony markets 
in the region.  Three major companies share the market: 
Movilnet (41.6 percent), Movistar (44.7 percent), and Digitel 
(12.1 percent).  Movilnet is owned by CANTV, Movistar is 
owned by the Spanish Group, Telef"nica, and Digitel is owned 
by TIM, an Italian company. 
 
EDELCA, a national utility involved in power generation and 
transmission and subsidiary of state-owned industrial giant, 
Corporacion Venezolana de Guayana (CVG), has formed a 
telecommunications company, CVG Telecom, using its existing 
fiber-optic capabilities and rights of access.  According to 
the government, EDELCA's fiber optic capacity covers 
approximately 70 percent of its grid and is interconnected to 
grids in Colombia and Brazil.  CONATEL, the Venezuelan 
regulatory authority, has given approval to CVG Telecom to 
provide telecommunication services directly to customers and 
CVG Telecom is already doing so in the Southern region of the 
country. 
 
------------ 
A.j. Banking 
------------ 
 
A 1994 Banking Law (Gazette No. 4641 of 1993) opened 
Venezuela's banking and financial services sectors to 100 
percent foreign ownership.  Foreign banks may enter the 
 
CARACAS 00000173  007 OF 010 
 
 
Venezuelan market in one of three ways: acquisition of shares 
of existing commercial banks or other financial institutions; 
creation of a new bank or other financial institution 
wholly-owned by foreign banks or investors; establishment of 
a branch of a foreign bank or financial institution.  In 
2001, President Chavez passed a new Banking Law as part of 
the package of enabling laws.  This law regulates all banks 
with the exception of four state-owned banks. 
 
Another important development for the banking industry is the 
Venezuelan government's new Treasury Bank created to 
centralize public sector resources, largely held in private 
financial institutions.  The Treasury Bank was created by the 
Venezuelan government as a universal bank (one that is not 
limited in the types of services and products that it can 
offer) to act as the financial agent for the government, to 
pay the debt service (domestic and external debt), conduct 
foreign trade operations, receive income taxes, and serve as 
the government's cashier. 
 
Applications for entry into the banking sector are submitted 
to the Bank Superintendency, which must seek an opinion from 
the Central Bank before granting authorization.  The 
government can take into account "economic and financial 
conditions, general and local" (Article 11 of the Banking 
Law) and insist on reciprocity (Article 106 of the Banking 
Law) when deciding on an application for entry, but it has 
generally not used those powers. 
 
Total bank assets increased from USD $40.1 billion at the end 
of 2005 to USD $63.5 billion in October 2006. Since late 
1996, twenty banks have received authorization to become 
universal banks.  Citibank and Stanford Bank are the only 
U.S. banks with operating branches in Venezuela.  Citibank is 
the fifteenth largest bank with around USD $1,123 million in 
assets and Stanford Bank is the thirty-first largest with USD 
214 million in assets. 
 
In 2001 a Merger Law was passed, aimed at strengthening the 
financial sector by allowing stronger banks to acquire weaker 
institutions.  Since the law was passed, 14 mergers have 
occurred reducing the number of small banks by twenty.  By 
November 2006, the Venezuelan financial system consisted of 
22 universal banks; 14 commercial banks; 3 development banks, 
4 investment banks; 2 mortgage banks; 1 leasing company; 3 
savings and loan associations; 2 money market funds; 4 
special law-regulated banks.  Of the 55 financial 
institutions, 45 are private and 10 are owned by the state. 
 
The banking system is increasingly required to direct credit 
to borrowers in accordance with government requirements such 
as the imposition of a minimum amount of lending to be made 
to housing (10 percent), agriculture (16 percent), 
micro-business (3 percent), and tourism (2.5 percent).  The 
Venezuelan Central Bank started to apply interest rate 
regulations at the end of April 2005, by which a maximum and 
a minimum levels were set for the banking system lending and 
deposit interest rates. 
 
-------------- 
A.k. Insurance 
-------------- 
 
Venezuela's insurance and reinsurance sector was opened to 
100 percent foreign ownership in 1994.  A subsequent decree 
passed on November 2001 (Official Gazette No. 5.553) 
establishes rules for contracts as the basis for insurance 
activity, detailing rights and obligations to guarantee 
equilibrium and protect customers.  Foreign investors may 
acquire shares of an existing insurance or reinsurance 
company or create an entirely new company.  Applications for 
entry into the sector are submitted to the Insurance 
Superintendency for authorization.  Foreign insurance 
companies are prohibited from offering insurance contracts 
fulfilled outside of Venezuela, unless the premiums become 
part of the net worth of an insurance company operating 
within Venezuela. 
 
------------------ 
A.l. Privatization 
------------------ 
 
The GOV has a Privatization Law (Gazette No. 5199 of 1997), 
 
CARACAS 00000173  008 OF 010 
 
 
which allows for the privatization of public assets.  A 
number of assets were bundled and earmarked for privatization 
in the early and mid 90s.  From 1990-1998 FIV, the Investment 
Fund of Venezuela, the entity in charge of selling the assets 
and later renamed the Economic and Social Development Bank 
(BANDES), privatized over 40 entities and generated cash 
receipts of nearly USD $4.8 billion.  Foreign investors 
purchased stakes in the telecommunications, electricity, 
steel, sugar refining, tourism, dairy, cement, and aviation 
sectors.  However, President Chavez announced in early 
January of 2007 that he plans to undo a number of the 
privatizations, singling out the electricity sector and the 
national telecommunications company (CANTV). 
 
The Chavez Administration has shifted its policy away from 
selling a large portfolio of assets toward forming strategic 
alliances, particularly in the form of contracts with 
state-owned enterprises of other countries.  Participation in 
strategic associations regarding state owned entities is 
coordinated and administered by BANDES.  The Government of 
Venezuela has created new state enterprises in aviation and 
telecommunicationQ*areas from which the state had previously 
exited. 
 
-------------------------------- 
A.2. Conversion and Transfer Policies 
-------------------------------- 
 
Foreign investors in capital markets and foreign direct 
investment projects are guaranteed the right to repatriate 
dividends and capital under the Constitution.  However, the 
Law Governing the Foreign Exchange System (Gazette No. 4897 
of 1995) permits the executive branch to intervene in the 
foreign exchange market "when national interests so dictate." 
 After a steep decline in the value of the national currency 
(the Bolivar) following a two-month general strike that 
brought oil production to a near standstill, the Central Bank 
of Venezuela halted trade in Bolivars on January 22, 2003. 
President Chavez announced the creation of an Exchange 
Administration Board (CADIVI) on February 5, 2003 to regulate 
the purchase and sale of foreign currency.  During much of 
2003, CADIVI was unable to process requests for authorization 
of foreign exchange in an efficient and timely manner and 
only supplied USD $3.6 billion or approximately two monthsQ, 
worth of transactions.  There has been significant 
improvement over time.  In 2006 CADIVI authorized a total of 
USD $27.4 billion in foreign exchange requests and the 
Venezuelan Central Bank liquidated USD $26.1 billion.  CADIVI 
is currently also accepting currency requests in Euros. 
 
Decree 2095 guarantees foreign investors the right to 
repatriate 100 percent of profits and capital, including 
proceeds from the sale of shares or liquidation of the 
company, and allows for unrestricted reinvestment of profits. 
 Problems with coordinating the timing of access to dollars, 
approval of import permits and licenses, and contracting the 
shipments have led to numerous delays and cancelled 
shipments. 
 
A new Foreign Exchange Crime Law was published in the 
Venezuelan Official Gazette No. 38,272 on September 14, 2005, 
which establishes criminal penalties and fines for 
transactions made outside the office foreign exchange 
process, reinforcing the foreign exchange control regime. 
Exchange control authorities have repeatedly said that the 
exchange control system will be eased but will remain in 
place permanently.  The 2007 national budget recently passed 
by the National Assembly does not anticipate any currency 
devaluations from the current parity of 2,150 Bolivars per 
USD $1.  Nonetheless, some local economists expect 
devaluation in 2007 due to the increasing disparity between 
official and parallel market rates.  As of January 2007, the 
official rate was 95 percent overvalued as compared to the 
parallel rate. 
 
----------------------------------- 
A.3. Expropriation and Compensation 
----------------------------------- 
 
There have been several cases, which raise significant issues 
of expropriation and/or serious impairment of the value of 
foreign investments in the Venezuelan state.  One case 
relates to INTESA, a joint venture formed between Science 
 
CARACAS 00000173  009 OF 010 
 
 
Applications International Corporation (SAIC), a U.S. 
company, and VenezuelaQ,s national oil corporation PDVSA, to 
provide information technology services to PDVSA.  PDVSA 
provided INTESA with a five-year service contract that it 
decided not to renew in 2002.  INTESA continued to provide 
services under a provisional agreement while the parties 
discussed termination of the joint venture.  The national 
strike then intervened in December 2002.   The national 
government took over INTESA, claiming the firm had not 
allowed non-striking PDVSA personnel to restart operations by 
denying access to key control systems.  SAIC's interest had 
been insured by the Overseas Private Investment Corporation 
(OPIC) which determined in July 2004 that an expropriation 
had occurred.  It paid compensation to SAIC and has in turn 
sought repayment from PDVSA. 
 
President Chavez, the National Land Institute, and state 
governments have ordered land seized without regard for due 
process.  In April of 2005, the Venezuelan National Assembly 
revised Venezuela's 2001 land law.  The revision reinstated 
an article in the 2001 law that allowed the takeover of land 
without court approval, a provision the Supreme Court had 
declared unconstitutional in 2002.  The revised law calls for 
the redistribution of "unproductive" land, although it fails 
to establish productivity standards.  The Venezuelan 
Government calls many of its seizures "rescues" of federal 
property rather than "expropriations," thereby justifying its 
non-payment of compensation.  The government has installed 
state-sponsored cooperatives on properties under dispute and 
even on properties whose owners have won court decisions. 
 
A 1998 land census found that 60 percent of all Venezuelan 
farmland was owned by less than 1 percent of the population. 
The census also noted that over 80 percent of the farmland 
redistributed during a 1960 land reform had returned to large 
landowners. 
 
The Venezuelan government stepped up its campaign to 
expropriate land during 2006 in both urban and rural areas. 
In addition to the highly-publicized attempt to expropriate 
the Valle Arriba and Country Club golf courses in Caracas 
(currently being challenged in the courts), hundreds of 
"idle" homes and buildings in Venezuela are in various stages 
of expropriation.  In addition, hundreds more are being 
occupied by illegal squatters with little government 
interference.  Many rural land owners report invasions by 
government sanctioned groups and government resolution of 
these disputes is spotty, at best.  State governments have 
also been known to expropriate idle manufacturing and 
processing plants to setup worker cooperatives, though in 
most cases companies have been able to settle with the 
government and obtain some compensation. 
 
----------------------- 
A.4. Dispute Settlement 
----------------------- 
 
Venezuela's legal system is accessible to foreign entities 
seeking to resolve investment disputes.  While the legal 
system is often slow, inefficient, and has been accused of 
corruption openly politicized, foreign entities have not 
generally been discriminated against in legal proceedings. 
While not common, Venezuelan law allows the filing of 
criminal charges in some commercial disputes. 
 
Decree 2095 allows for the arbitration of disputes as 
"provided by domestic law." The Commercial Arbitration Law 
(Gazette No. 36,430 of 1998) eliminated the previous 
requirement for judicial approval of arbitration. 
Arbitration agreements involving national or international 
firms can be automatically binding. 
 
The Commercial Arbitration Law also allows state enterprises 
to subject themselves to arbitration in contracts with 
private commercial entities, but requires that they first 
obtain the approval of the "competent statutory body," as 
well as the "written authorization" of the responsible 
minister.  In the case of PDVSA, for example, the Ministry of 
Energy and Mines issued a blanket written authorization in 
1998, which allows the company to enter into such arbitration 
agreements, as it deems convenient or necessary.  However, 
the 2001 Hydrocarbons Law prohibits PDVSA from entering into 
agreements providing for international arbitration. 
 
CARACAS 00000173  010 OF 010 
 
 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
A.5. Performance Requirements and Incentives 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
In any enterprise with more than 10 workers, foreign 
employees are restricted to 10 percent of the work force and 
Venezuelan law limits foreign employee salaries to 20 percent 
of the payroll.  The state oil company, PDVSA, seeks to 
maximize local content and hiring in its negotiations with 
foreign investors. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
A.6. Right to Private Ownership and Establishment 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
There are no legal limits on foreign ownership, except as 
noted in Decree 2095 and in "special laws" (see above). 
 
 
CONTINUED IN SEPTEL: VENEZUELA -- INVESTMENT CLIMATE 
STATEMENT (PART 2/2). 
 
 
BROWNFIELD