07HARARE242
COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR POLITICAL OFFICERS SIKO AND
Fri Mar 23 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Harare
VZCZCXYZ0002
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHSB #0242/01 0820705
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 230705Z MAR 07
FM AMEMBASSY HARARE
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1290
INFO RUEHSA/AMEMBASSY PRETORIA PRIORITY 5226UNCLAS HARARE 000242 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OTRA ZI
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR POLITICAL OFFICERS SIKO AND 
VARANO 
 
REF: SECSTATE 36722 
 
¶1. Embassy Harare grants country clearance and warmly 
welcomes 
the visit of political officers John Siko and Kerry Varano 
for 
consultations with Embassy officials from March 25 to 30. 
Embassy 
acknowledges that travelers hold top secret clearances. 
 
¶2. The Embassy has confirmed your reservation for Harare's 
Meikles 
hotel (corner of Jason Moyo and Third Street 
in downtown Harare; tel 263-4-707-721; fax 263-4-707-753). 
Non-smoking rooms are available upon request.  The cost of 
the room is USD $171.36 (government rate) per night which 
includes breakfast and tourist levy.  Payment for hotel must 
be made in foreign currency. 
 
¶3. Based on the current economic situation in the country, 
using a credit card could significantly increase your 
costs.  Hotel payment must be made in U.S. cash or 
travelers checks.  U.S. travelers checks are difficult to 
use except to pay hotel bills.  Personal checks may be 
cashed at the Embassy cashier only for local currency and 
at the official exchange rate.  Personal checks cannot be 
cashed at the Embassy for U.S. currency.  Post recommends 
that travelers bring enough U.S. currency to cover 
anticipated needs in Zimbabwe. 
 
¶4. Control Officer for the visit will be Political officer 
Mathew Gerard who can be reached during work hours at 
263-3-250-593 extension 209; home at 263-4-496-778; and 
cell phone at 263-(0)11-876-098;or via email at 
gerardm@state.gov. 
  An Embassy Driver will meet and assist at the airport. 
 
¶5. Post strongly urges leaving Embassy Harare's telephone 
number with family and business associates before departing 
for Zimbabwe so that you can be quickly located in the 
event of an emergency.  The Embassy telephone number is 
263-4-250-593.  Marine Security Guard Post extension is 
¶260. 
 
¶6. Several recent visitors transiting Johannesburg to 
Harare have had items stolen from their luggage at 
Johannesburg International Airport.  Please ensure that 
your luggage is locked and hand-carry valuable items. 
 
¶7. Malaria is prevalent throughout Zimbabwe, except in 
Harare.  We strongly recommend the use of malaria 
prophylaxes and adjunctive measures when traveling outside 
of Harare. 
 
¶8. The exchange rate is currently $250 Zim dollars to $1 
USD, however this rate is subject to frequent change. 
 
¶9. There is a non-waivable USD 30.00 per person departure 
tax, payable at the airport upon leaving Zimbabwe in exact 
change only.  (Note: the Zimbabwean Government recently 
began levying a USD 30.00 fee for US visitors in Zimbabwe, 
but airport authorities have been instructed to waive this 
fee for travelers with US diplomatic and official 
passports. End note.) 
 
¶10. Harare is designated a high crime post by the 
Department of State.  The Regional Security Officer (RSO) 
is required to brief all TDY visitors staying more than one 
week as soon as possible after their arrival at post. 
While Harare is a clean and pleasant city, street crime is 
a serious problem, particularly in tourist areas.  Visitors 
have found it safer not to carry valuables, but rather to 
store them in hotel safety deposit boxes or safe rooms. 
Walking alone or at night downtown is not recommended as 
attacks have taken place on public streets and parks.  The 
RSO recommends leaving all important documents (passports, 
plane tickets, etc.) in a hotel safe, and not wearing any 
jewelry on the street.  In addition, visitors should avoid 
hanging a camera around their necks, carrying a protruding 
wallet, and carry or showing large amounts of money in 
public.  We urge visitors to use the same security 
precautions they would exercise in any urban area.  Avoid 
any large gatherings, demonstrations or political rallies 
in both rural and urban areas.  Occupied farms are also to 
be avoided at all times. 
 
¶11. Road safety/automobile travel: While traveling in 
vehicles, doors should be kept locked and windows rolled 
up.  Car-jackings are common in Harare, and diplomatic 
vehicles and personnel are not immune to these attacks by 
armed thieves.  Highway bandits are active on roads leading 
to border areas. 
 
 
¶12. As per Secstate 286036, TDYers must coordinate the 
transport of official unclassified portable computers that 
will be used within the USG controlled access facilities 
with the RSO and ISSO. 
SCHULTZ