07JAKARTA390
USITC ANTIDUMPING INVESTIGATION ON POLYESTER STAPLE FIBER
Wed Feb 14 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Jakarta
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHJA #0390/01 0450117
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 140117Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3266
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDCUNCLAS JAKARTA 000390 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EB/TPP/MTA AND EAP/MTS 
COMMERCE FOR USITC LMSCHLITT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD ECON ID
SUBJECT: USITC ANTIDUMPING INVESTIGATION ON POLYESTER STAPLE FIBER 
FROM CHINA 
 
REF: STATE 6567 
 
¶1.  Summary: This cable responds to reftel request for Indonesia 
industry-wide information related to certain polyester staple fiber. 
 End Summary. 
 
 
¶2.  Post obtained information and data contained in para 4 through 
the Indonesian Synthetic Fiber Production Association (ISFPA) and 
through publicly available material on the internet.  According to 
ISFPA representatives, of the five companies referred to in reftel, 
PT. Tiejin is the only producing polyester staple fiber in 
Indonesia.  However, ISFPA admits that it is not familiar with the 
other four companies listed in reftel. ISFPA claims that the data 
and information contained in para 4 are representative of the entire 
polyester staple fiber industry in Indonesia. 
 
¶3.  In response to our request, Indonesia's Ministry of Trade (MOT) 
also promised to provide information related to Indonesia's 
polyester staple fiber industry.  However, recent floods affecting 
70 percent of Jakarta have delayed their efforts. According to 
Indonesia Ministry of Trade (MOT) Directorate of Trade Defense 
Official Freddi Josep Palawi, the MOT will be able to provide some 
limited information by February 14.  Palawi also noted the following 
information about the five companies referred to in reftel: PT. 
Global Fiberindo claims it has returned its questionnaire to USITC; 
PT. Triyudia Busanamas and PT. Glove Perdana Garment apparently have 
ceased operations or no longer produce polyester staple fiber; and 
PT. Teijin Indonesia Fiber Corp. is still in the process of 
responding to the questionnaire.  Should we receive further 
information from the MOT, we will forward it immediately to the 
USITC point of contact's email address listed in reftel. 
 
¶4.  According to ISFPA, Indonesia is one of the world's 10 largest 
producers of synthetic fiber, with total capacity of 1,102,311.3 
thousand pounds of polyester staple fiber, 1,818,813.7 thousand 
pounds of polyester filament yarn, and 66,138.7 thousand pounds of 
nylon filament yarn.  There are 14 major companies that produce 
these products for domestic and foreign consumption in Indonesian: 
 
-- PT. Indonesia Toray Synthetics (Toray), established in 1974, 
operates with technical support from Toray Japan. Toray started to 
manufacture nylon filament yarn in 1973 as the pioneer company 
producing nylon filament yarn in Indonesia.  A year later in 1974, 
the company also pioneered the manufacturing of polyester staple 
fiber in Indonesia.  In 1990, Toray expanded its production 
capability to manufacturing polyester filament yarn.  Toray produces 
for both the Indonesian domestic market and exports to Japan, 
Thailand, Taiwan, Iran, Ethiopia, Philippines, Latin America, 
Australia and South Africa.  Toray's current production capacity per 
annum is 146,827.9 thousand pounds of polyester staple fiber; 
33,069.3 thousand pounds of polyester filament yarn; and 35,714.9 
thousand pounds of nylon filament yarn.  The company is located at 
Summitmas II Building, 3/F, Jl. Jend. Sudirman 61-62, Jakarta 12069, 
Indonesia and its factory is at Jl. Mohammad Toha Pasar Baru, 
Tangerang 15112, Indonesia. 
 
-- PT. Kukuh Manunggal Fiber Industries (Kumafiber), established in 
1976,   Established in 1976, Kumafiber began trial production in 
Indonesia in 1976 with only 70 pounds per day of polyester staple 
fiber.  Running at full capacity, the factory can currently produce 
40,234.4 thousands of pounds of polyester staple fiber for cotton 
and rayon blends per year for both domestic and export markets.  The 
products are made using Japanese machineries with pure terephthalic 
(PTA) and mono ethylene glycol (MEG) as its main raw materials. 
Kumafiber is located at Jl. M.H. Thamrin Cikokol, Tangerang, 
Indonesia, tel: +62 21 5575-3491, fax: +62 21 554-8665. 
 
-- PT. Teijin Indonesia Fiber Corporation (Tifico) is a Joint 
Venture company (Teijin Limited Japan 65%, Tomen Corporation Japan 
13.4%, and local Indonesian shareholders 18.6%).  Established in 
1973, the company has produced polyester synthetic fiber (filament 
yarn and staple fiber) for textile raw material since 1980.  In 1987 
Tifico expanded its production to include polyester staple fiber of 
189,101.5 thousand pounds per year and polyester filament yarn at 
168,984.3 thousand pounds per year.  Tifico is located at Jl. Raya 
¶M. H. Thamrin, Tangerang, Indonesia.  Tel: +62 21 53121531 Fax: +62 
21 5398466. 
 
-- PT.Susila Indah Fiber Industries (Sulindafin), established in 
1978, is one of the leading players in Indonesia's polyester and 
nylon industries.  With a continuous polymerization plant, as well 
as a batch polymerization plant, Sulindafin produces a wide range of 
polyester chips including semi dull, full dull, bright, super 
bright, cationic, flame retardant and differential shrinkage with a 
capacity of 220 ton/day.  These chips are processed into flat and 
textured yarns for knitting, weaving and industrial applications. 
Using machineries from Zimmer, Reiter Scrag & Barmag of Europe and 
Teijin Seiki & Murata of Japan, the company also produce variety of 
specialty and performance yarns including micro, bi shrinkage, 
 
moisture absorbent, anti bacteria and flame retardant.  Sulindafin 
produce polyester staple fiber both for spinning, as well as for 
non-woven applications and colored fiber for the carpet industry. 
Sulindafin's production capacity is 160,093.7 thousand pounds per 
annum each for polyester textured yarns (for knitting and weaving 
applications, denier 50, 75, 100, 150, 200, 225, 300, 450 & 600, 
filaments 34 to 288, luster semi dull, full dull and bright, torque 
normal, low and zero, intermingle non intermingle, soft intermingle 
+50 ptm, and hard intermingle + 100ptm), polyester flat filament 
yarns (for knitting and weaving applications, denier 75 and 150, 
filaments 36 to 96, luster semi dull and bright, cross section 
round) and polyester staple fiber (for spinning applications, denier 
1.3 and 1.7, cut length 38, 44 & 51 mm, luster semi dull). 
 
-- PT. Polychem Indonesia (Polychem) is a leading polyester and 
polyester-related chemical producer in Indonesia. Polychem is the 
only mono ethylene glycol and exthoxylate producer in Indonesia. 
Polychem's extoxylate facility is built to cater to growing demand 
for surfactant products as well as to create synergies with its mono 
ethylene glycol facility.  In 2004, Polychem started producing 
Hollow Conjugated Fiber, extending its product range to support the 
growing polyester industry in Indonesia.  It employs a process 
technology licensed by Scientific Design Co. Inc., USA, and has an 
installed capacity of 63,934.1 thousand pounds per annum.  The 
company's head office is located at Wisma Diners Club 7th Floor, Jl. 
Jendral Sudirman Kav. 34 Jakarta 10220, Indonesia.  Tel:  +62 21 
5709292, fax: +62 21 5727868 with manufacturing facility located in 
Tangerang, Karawang and Merak. 
 
--  PT.Vastex Prima Industries (Vastex), established in 1978, 
produces polyester filament yarn with production capacity of 
30,864.7 thousand pounds per annum for both domestic and export 
markets.  The polyester filament yarn output are raw white and dope 
dyed black, grade A, made from polyester chip.  Vastex is located in 
Jl. Rumah Sakit No.7, Rancasari, Bandung 40631, West Java, 
Indonesia.  Tel: +62 22 780-1000, fax: +62 22 780-3455. 
 
-- PT.Polysindo Eka Perkasa (Polysindo) produces polyester staple 
fiber, polyester filament yarn, polyester chips and polyester 
textured yarn.  The company's head office is located at Sentra Mulia 
Bldg, 10th floor, Jl. Rasuna Said Kav. X.6 No. 8, Jakarta 12940, 
Indonesia.  Tel: +62 21 252-2414, fax. +62 21 522-9380, while its 
factories are located in Karawang and Bandung, West Java. 
 
-- PT.Panasia Indosytec (Panasia) has a production capacity of 
58,202 thousand pounds per annum.  Panasia's products include: 1) 
100% virgin polyester fiber (product range: 1.4D/38MM, 51 MM, and 
0.8 D/ 38 MM).  This is commonly used as raw material in the 
spinning for spun yarn; 2) polyester stapler fiber: solid, 
siliconised and regular (6D/51mm, 64 mm15D/51mm, 64 mm12D/51mm and 
64 mm). The product is made from a mixture of 100% virgin polyester 
chip and recycled polyester material.  Dinier range: 75/36F/2, 
100/36F/2, 150/36F/1, 150/48F/1, 150/48F/2, 150/96F/1, 150/96F/2. 
Panasia is located at Jl. Garuda 153/74 Bandung  40184, West Java, 
Indonesia.  Tel: +62 22 603-4123, fax: +62 22 6031643. 
 
-- PT. Indorama Synthetics (Indorama produces premium quality raw 
materials, mainly polyester based, for the global textile & 
packaging industries, exporting primarily to Europe & North America, 
South America, Australia and Middle East.  Indorama's products 
include polyester filament yarns, polyester staple fiber, polyester 
chips, and PET bottle grade resins, with production capacity at 
577,611 thousand pounds per annum.  The Polyester Division employs 
state-of-the-art technologies from global technology and equipment 
suppliers including DuPont (USA), Zimmer & Barmag (Germany), Toyobo, 
Teijin Seiki & Murata (Japan).  Indorama claims to be the only 
company in Indonesia with a completely computerized and automated 
polyester yarn package handling and testing system, matching 
standards set at DuPont's newest plant in the USA. Indorama's 
polyester products include partially oriented yarns, draw textured 
yarns, flat yarns, polyester staple fiber, and textile grade chips. 
The company is located at Jl. H.R. Rasuna Said Blok X-1, Kav. 1-2, 
Jakarta 12950, Indonesia.  Tel: +62 21 526-1555, fax: +62 21 
526-1501 with two factories located in Purwakarta and Bandung, West 
Java. 
 
-- PT. SK Keris (Keris), established in 1991 as a joint venture 
company between Korean SK Group and Indonesian Batik Keris Group, 
produces polyester filament yarn (PFY), Chip, and PET Resin.  Keris' 
headquarters and factory are located in Serpong-Tangerang.  Keris 
commenced commercial production in 1993 with PFY capacity of 66,789 
thousand pounds per annum.  At present the company has capacity to 
produce 341,992 PFY thousand pounds per annum. 
 
-- PT. Poly Fiber Industry (PFI) is an extensive fully integrated 
polyester polymerization chip and yarn manufacturing facility based 
in Bandung.  The plant features continuous production of polyester 
polymer using Pure Terephthalic Acid (PTA) and Ethylene Glycol (EG) 
with annual production capacity of 193,124.9 thousand pounds in 
 
 
polyester filament yarn and polyester textured yarn.  The company is 
located at Jl. Raya Rancaekek km 19, No. 28, Cipacing, Kabupaten 
Sumedang, Bandung, West Java.  Tel: +62 22 779-8888, fax: +62 22 
779-8268. 
 
-- PT. Central Filatama Mills/Central Georgette Nusantara (Central) 
produces polyester filament yarn and polyester textured yarn. 
Located at Jl. Cibaligo Km. 1.7, Cimahi 40535, Bandung, Indonesia. 
Tel: +62 22 604-0909, fax: +62 22 603-1906. 
 
-- PT. Mutu Gading Tekstil (Mutu), established in 1996, has a 
current polyester production capacity of 28,571.9 thousand pounds 
per annum.  Its products include polyester textured yarn, polyester 
filament fully oriented yarn, cationic dyeable textured yarn, 
shrinkage peach skin yarn and high module low shrinkage yarn. 
Mutu's factory is located at Jl. Solo - Purwodadi Km.11, Godangrejo, 
Karanganyar 57773, Central Java, Indonesia.  Mutu's headquarter is 
located at Wisma 46 Kota BNI, 12/F, Suite 1208, Jl. Jend. Sudirman 
Kav. 1, Jakarta, Indonesia.  Tel/fax: +62 21 572-2110/572-2107. 
 
-- PT. Kahatex (Kahatex), established in 1979, has grown to a large 
textile complex sprawling over manufacturing sites at Cijerah, 
Bandung and Ranca-ekek with an area of about 150 hectares.   The 
company is fully integrated from fibers, to spinning mills, to 
fabrics.  It manufactures garments, sweaters, socks, and blankets 
for international buyers.  Currently the company is a major supplier 
for Indonesia's textile sector.  Kahatex is located at KM 23, 
Jl.Raya Rancaekek, Sumedang, West Java, Indonesia.  Tel: +62 22 
779-8060, fax: +62 22 779-8063. 
PASCOE