07KHARTOUM1387
MEDIA REACTION: AL-WASILA VISIT TO WASHINGTON
Tue Sep 04 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXYZ0003
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHKH #1387 2471058
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 041058Z SEP 07
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8394UNCLAS KHARTOUM 001387 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/SPG, AF/PD, IIP/G/AF, RRU-AF, SE NATSIOS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPAO OIIP UN SU
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: AL-WASILA VISIT TO WASHINGTON 
 
 
¶1.  (U) SUMMARY:  The Sudanese press closely reported on the August 
27-30 visit to Washington by Sudan's State Minister at the Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs, Samani Al-Wasila.  Claiming that this visit was 
the first of its kind in over a decade, most papers included a daily 
update of every stage of the visit.  Several papers speculated that 
Wasila's visit would eventually lead to, if not immediately result 
in, the lifting of U.S. sanctions on Sudan, the release of Sudanese 
detainees in Guantanamo (including Al-Jazeera cameraman Sami 
Al-Haj), and Sudan's removal from the list of state sponsors of 
terror.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (U) On August 25, the Sudanese press reported that Al-Wasila had 
departed to Washington.  "Al-Wan," a newspaper affiliated with the 
Popular Congress Party, reported that preparations for the visit 
were ongoing for the last month and that there was an atmosphere of 
cautious optimism surrounding this visit. 
 
¶3.  (U) On August 29, "Al-Sahafa" reported that Wasila discussed a 
number of issues including U.S.-Sudanese bilateral relations, the 
situation in Darfur, and Sudanese citizens detained in Guantanamo. 
Wasila reportedly warned U.S. officials that a number of countries 
want to divide Sudan.  He said "if there is any group in the United 
States or anywhere else that wants to divide Sudan, we tell them 
that it is going to be a difficult mission because the division of 
Sudan will lead to the division of 56 other African countries." 
 
¶4. (U) On August 30, the opening story in the independent 
"Al-Sudani" stated that the Government of Sudan expressed its 
optimism about the delegation's visit, and its hope for a 
breakthrough in bilateral relations.  MFA official spokesman Ali 
Al-Saddiq stated that differences between Sudan and Washington go 
back to the beginning of the 1980's, and that the global environment 
has changed greatly since then.  Al-Saddiq added that U.S. economic 
sanctions and the listing of Sudan as a state sponsor of terrorism 
are the main factors that contributed to the deterioration of 
bilateral relations.  He voiced skepticism towards U.S. promises, 
saying "they promise, but do not fulfill their promises."  He added 
that the Government of Sudan will not grant any concessions to the 
U.S., and stated that the time for directing relations through the 
media has passed. 
 
¶5. (U) "Al-Sudani" also presented two "expert opinions."  Dr. 
Ibrahim Mirghani, dean of the faculty of Strategic Studies and 
Political Sciences at Al-Azhari University, ruled out the 
possibility of a dramatic improvement in Sudanese-American 
relations.  He alleged that every time the Government of Sudan tries 
to normalize its relations, the U.S. imposes new conditions on 
Sudan.  Conversely, political analyst Yousif Al-Sayed stated that he 
expects a breakthrough in relations between the two countries. 
However, he stated that U.S. foreign policy is influenced by the 
"Zionist lobby" which directs the American government to "issue 
decisions against the Government of Sudan." 
 
¶6.  (U) On September 2, the pro-government "Al-Rai Al-Aam gave 
prominent coverage to Wasila's visit with the following three 
headlines:  "Washington thanks the [Sudanese] government for 
dismantling extremist groups;" "Natsios will visit Khartoum in the 
coming days;" and "The U.S. moves toward lifting Sudan from the list 
of [state sponsors] of terrorism."  According to the daily, 
"Credible sources in Washington stated that George W. Bush has begun 
to seriously consider lifting economic sanctions on Sudan after the 
deployment of UN troops to Darfur this coming October."  It went on 
to state that Washington has granted permission to let the Sudanese 
Charge' d'Affaires in Washington, John Leuth Ukec, visit two 
Sudanese detainees in Guantanamo, and that two of the nine detainees 
will soon be released. 
 
¶7.  (U) The article in "Al-Rai Al-Aam" further reported that Wasila 
found his meetings "honest, positive, and beneficial."  He added 
that "[This visit] will reflect positively on the relationship 
between the two countries."  Wasila also stated that the talks 
"touched upon all lingering issues between the two countries."  The 
daily cited "credible sources" as saying that Washington was 
specifically interested in construction on the new U.S. Embassy in 
Khartoum, and conveyed that it is annoyed that Sudanese authorities 
have obstructed containers of building material from entering Sudan. 
 
 
¶8.  (U) COMMENT. The Sudanese media's focus on Wasila's visit 
revealed many unrealistic expectations.  Many reports and 
commentaries expected nothing less than the release of detainees, 
the lifting of sanctions, and the removal of Sudan from the list of 
state sponsors of terrorism.  We continue to try to manage 
expectations and respond where necessary to outright distortions of 
the truth.  END COMMENT. 
 
FERNANDEZ