07KIGALI728
GRANTS ADMINISTRATION AND SUPPORT FOR PUBLIC
Tue Aug 14 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kigali
VZCZCXYZ0012
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHLGB #0728 2261529
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 141529Z AUG 07
FM AMEMBASSY KIGALI
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 4500UNCLAS KIGALI 000728 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR R/PPR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KICA KPAO OIIP AMGT
SUBJECT: GRANTS ADMINISTRATION AND SUPPORT FOR PUBLIC 
DIPLOMACY PROGRAMS 
 
REF: SECSTATE 105588 
 
¶1. Summary.  Post welcomes the Department's solicitation of 
information on the administrative burden of administering 
grants and the level of support being provided by ICASS 
service providers for PD operations in the field.  PAS enjoys 
strong support at post from ICASS service providers; those 
gaps in service that do exist are not unique to PAS though 
they are sometimes exacerbated by the particular demands 
placed on service providers by PAS programs and activities. 
PAS grants are modest both in terms of the number of awards 
made in any given year and the dollar value of those awards. 
Post's grants portfolio has, however, grown in recent years 
as a result of the addition of programs funded through 
Washington (e.g., G/TIP).  Additional training opportunities 
for both Locally Engaged Staff (LES), eligible family 
members, and American officers working outside of PAS would 
contribute immensely to improved management and oversight of 
grants at post.  End Summary. 
 
 
¶2. SUPPORT FROM ICASS SERVICE PROVIDERS: PAS Kigali receives 
strong support from and enjoys a collegial working 
relationship with post's ICASS service providers.  Service 
provision in the past suffered as a result of extended 
staffing shortages within the mission but has improved 
steadily over the past 18 months.  Gaps in service provision 
that do arise generally are the direct result of the 
particular nature of PAS programs and activities. For 
instance, because local postal services and Internet 
penetration are limited, PAS continues to hand deliver 
invitations and publications to contacts.  In the past, the 
Embassy's motorpool lacked sufficient driver/vehicle capacity 
to support the distribution needs of PAS.  As a result, PAS 
was frequently required to provide a staff member to serve as 
driver.  The creation of an additional motorpool driver 
position recently and increased GSO awareness of the issue 
has greatly reduced the reliance on PAS to furnish a driver. 
 
¶3. MANAGEMENT BURDEN OF GRANT AWARDS: 
 
a) The volume of grants has increased in the past five years, 
but has fluctuated greatly because of the inconsistent nature 
of funding from sources outside of post's PD allotment.  For 
instance, in FY2006 post received $110,000 in funding for 
grants from G/TIP; in FY2007 post has thus far received 
$20,000 for one grant under the Ambassador's Refugee Fund. 
The establishment of a CDC office has also added marginally 
to the increased grants management workload.  The volume of 
PD grantmaking will double in the next year as the result of 
reprogramming of $100,000 in PEPFAR funds to establish a 
grants program for HIV/AIDS-related activities. 
 
b) The PAO is the only grants officer at post.  He signs 
grants for CDC and other State elements at post. 
 
c) Staffing levels are adequate; training levels are not. 
 
d) The majority of grants at post continue to be related to 
mission public diplomacy objectives. 
 
e) Training opportunities for American direct-hires, LES, and 
EFMs should be expanded.  Given the frequency with which 
political and economic officers are involved in grants at 
post awarded through G/TIP, PRM, and others, an overview of 
the grants process and potential sources of funding should be 
incorporated into the ECON/POL Tradecraft Course.  Economic 
and political officers should also be encouraged to obtain a 
grants warrant prior to arrival at post.  Regional training 
opportunities should also be expanded, especially for LES and 
EFMs.  Currently there are no LES or EFMs at post who have 
completed grants training. 
ARIETTI