07MADRID634
UNDEF: CLUB DE MADRID PROMOTES ARAB DEMOCRATIC
Wed Apr 04 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Madrid
VZCZCXYZ0002
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMD #0634/01 0941558
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 041558Z APR 07
FM AMEMBASSY MADRID
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2224
INFO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 0336UNCLAS MADRID 000634 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
IO/RHS FOR RACHEL LEATHAM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID KDEM KPAO PGOV PREL UN NGO OIIP
SUBJECT: UNDEF: CLUB DE MADRID PROMOTES ARAB DEMOCRATIC 
DIALOGUE 
 
REF: STATE 19781 
 
¶1. (U)  SUMMARY:  The Spain-based NGO Club de Madrid is using 
UN Democracy Fund (UNDEF) funding to help fund a project 
aimed at promoting freedom of association in several key Arab 
nations, the "Dialogue on Democratic Values in the Arab 
World."  The Club de Madrid is pleased with its relationship 
and interactions with UNDEF and has been amazed with the 
ability of the fund to vet and approve 125 grants in its 
first year.  The Club de Madrid has already completed one 
UNDEF-funded leadership visit to Morocco and will complete 
the second, to Jordan, before the end of April.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (U)  Poloff met with Milburn Line, Program Officer at the 
Club de Madrid, to discuss the Club's UNDEF-funded project, 
"Dialogue on Democratic Values in the Arab World", on March 
¶30.  The Club de Madrid is a five-year-old governance NGO 
whose members (currently 66 strong) are former heads of state 
or heads of government of democratic nations, by invitation 
only.  Notable members include former President Bill Clinton, 
former Prime Minister Kim Campbell (Canada), former President 
Felipe Gonzalez (Spain) and former President Mary Robinson 
(Ireland).  While founded in 2002, the Club has really only 
had operational capacity for the past three years.  Line said 
that the high profile of the Club's members makes it a great 
tool for emphasizing multilateral consensus on important 
issues such as the need for increased freedoms in the Arab 
world. 
 
//PROJECT OVERVIEW// 
 
¶3. (U)  Line told Poloff that the dialogue project is 
primarily funded by the European Commission (EC) and that 
UNDEF funding accounts for 20 percent of the total project 
budget.  The two-year project identified six target nations 
in the Arab world to which Club members would travel for 
discussions with high-ranking government officials, civil 
society leaders and other stakeholders in an effort to 
promote freedom of association in these nations.  The Club is 
using the 2007 UNDEF funding for programs in two target 
nations, Morocco and Jordan, while the EC funding will pay 
for work in Bahrain in 2007 and in Egypt, Saudi Arabia and 
Tunisia in 2008.  Line said the plan was to build momentum in 
more moderate nations in 2007 before tackling the tougher 
states in 2008.  The Club contracts with local partners in 
each of the target nations for assistance with logistics, 
programming and contacts, but it principally capitalizes on 
the political cachet of its members and its connections in 
the Madrid diplomatic corps to gain audiences with 
high-ranking officials. 
 
¶4. (U)  The goal of the project is to establish the dialogue 
on freedom of association within each target nation and then 
attempt to parlay these initial dialogues with the key 
nations into a future joint dialogue among these countries, 
which could be subsequently expanded to include other 
interested Arab nations.  The Club counts on its fairly 
high-profile membership to provide the necessary access for 
serious dialogue at the decision-making level of these 
governments. 
 
//MARCH 1 PROJECT LAUNCH// 
 
¶5. (U)  The Club de Madrid only officially launched the 
dialogue project with a kickoff planning meeting February 
14-15 in Cairo, so Line said it was a little early for 
concrete results.  Former Prime Minister of Sudan Sadig Al 
Mahdi led the meeting, along with local partners, the Bahrain 
Centre for National Studies, the Center for Strategic Studies 
at the University of Jordan, and Moroccan NGO Maroc 2020.  Al 
Mahdi then announced the project by writing a column in As 
Sharq Al Awsat, the most widely read daily newspaper in the 
Arab world, that discussed the lack of freedom of association 
in the Arab world. 
 
//TRIP TO MOROCCO// 
 
¶6. (U)  Three other former heads of government, Abdul-Kareem 
Al-Eryani (Yemen), Felipe Gonzalez (Spain), and Petre Roman 
(Romania) led the Club's first survey mission to Morocco 
March 13-16, 2007.  With the assistance of Maroc 2020, they 
met a large variety of government and civil society including 
ministers and female Members of Parliament.  The mission 
focused on learning about recent democratic reforms in 
Morocco as well as identifying remaining challenges.  The 
Club plans to return to Morocco in June 2007 to continue work. 
 
//JORDAN TRIP IN APRIL// 
 
¶7. (U)  Line said that the next country the Club will survey 
is Jordan, April 16-19, and they expect to be received by the 
Prime Minister and the Minister of Justice.  That delegation 
will be led by Al Mahdi, Kjell Magne Bondevik (Norway), and 
Valdis Birkaus (Latvia). 
 
//PLEASED WITH UNDEF// 
 
¶8. (SBU)  Line noted that UNDEF funding is only just now 
coming through, but he added that compared with requesting 
funds from the European Community, the UNDEF process was 
simple.  He also praised the web-based proposal mechanism, 
saying that it was easy to use.  He offered that the Club had 
applied for funding from DRL for this project as well but had 
not heard back in the end.  He further offered that perhaps 
this was just as well, as U.S.-funded projects have tended to 
arouse greater suspicions in the Arab world than UN and 
European endeavors. 
 
//ON SCHEDULE, ON BUDGET// 
 
¶9. (U)  Line told Poloff that the Club's project remained on 
schedule and on budget to address all six target nations 
within the two-year timeframe and to complete UNDEF-funded 
work in Morocco and Jordan within the first year. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Visit Embassy Madrid's Classified Website; 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/eur/madrid/ 
------------------------------------------ 
Aguirre