07MOSCOW2074
EXTRANCHECK: PRE-LICENSE CHECK: PERM MOTOR
Mon May 07 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Moscow
VZCZCXYZ0016
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMO #2074/01 1270833
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 070833Z MAY 07
FM AMEMBASSY MOSCOW
TO RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC PRIORITY
INFO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9953
RHMFIUU/US CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS MOSCOW 002074 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USDOC FOR 532/OEA/MHAMES/LRITTER 
USDOC FOR 3150/USFCS/OIO/CEENIS/MCOSTA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BEXP ETRD ETTC RS
SUBJECT: EXTRANCHECK: PRE-LICENSE CHECK: PERM MOTOR 
FACTORY, PERM, RUSSIA, LICENSE NO. D371295 
 
REFTEL: USDOC 01270 
 
¶1. Unauthorized disclosure of the information provided 
below is prohibited by Section 12C of the Export 
Administration Act. 
 
¶2. Reftel requested a Pre-license check to determine 
the legitimacy and reliability of the end-user, Perm 
Motor Factory, Perm, Russia. The company is listed on 
BIS license application D371295 as the ultimate 
consignee of ITC-6080C low noise preamplified 
hydrophone. These items are controlled for national 
security reasons under ECCN 6A001. The licensee is 
International Transducer Corp., 869 Ward Drive, Santa 
Barbara, CA 93111.  NOTE: Research conducted by FSN 
Shipitsina indicated that the end user listed in the 
cable was inaccurate.  A request for contact 
information provided a new point of contact, and FSN 
Shipitsina was able to schedule the check. END NOTE. 
 
¶3. On April 25, 2007, Export Control Attache Donald 
Pearce and FSN Natalya Shipitsina conducted the 
requested pre-license check at the offices of Tento 
Group Company (Tento), M.Gorkogo st., 9, Perm, Russia. 
The export control team met with Yuriy Kozlov, General 
Director. 
 
¶4. Tento was founded in 1992 from the decentralization 
of a government enterprise involved in the export of 
materials such as wood and metals.  The 
decentralization lead to a drop in business, so the 
new company expanded into the importation and 
installation of telecommunications equipment, as there 
was no competition in this area at the time.  Tento 
installed some of Russia's first Nortel PBX commercial 
telephone systems for clients in Perm.  Tento is 
currently an official distributor for Nortel, Cisco 
Systems, APC, NARA and other communications products, 
and uses the profits from the telecom business to fund 
research and development of new products.  The company 
employs around 100 in four smaller subsidiary 
companies, and hopes to have around 210 employees by 
the end of the year and 500 in five years.  Tento is 
planning on moving from its current offices to a newly 
designed office complex in downtown Perm upon 
completion of construction. 
 
¶5. The equipment in reftel will be used in a 
monitoring system for submerged and subterranean 
pipelines utilized in the oil and gas industry. 
Currently, an organization like GazAvia, the aviation 
arm of Russian energy company Gazprom, conducts aerial 
surveillance of the lines using traditional 
helicopters flying at an altitude of around 150 
meters.  Due to the challenging terrain and depth of 
the pipelines, the current system has a false alarm 
rate of around 80%.  Tento is designing a system that 
combines sensors in the pipes with an unmanned aerial 
vehicle (UAV) for the air surveillance platform, 
allowing for a more accurate and much more cost- 
effective solution.  The hydrophone would be able to 
detect faults using a known sound signature, which 
would be analyzed by a software system being developed 
for the project.  The system can also be used in 
environmental monitoring and safety related 
operations.  The company is also exploring options to 
configure the system for use in hydroelectric plants 
and for mine safety. 
 
¶6. Ten specialists will have access to the device 
while it is being incorporated into the system.  The 
system will be marketed to companies such as Lukoil, 
who is partnering in the research and development. 
Construction of the device will take place at a 
facility purchased by Tento from the Perm Scientific- 
Industrial Machine Making Company (Russian acronym 
PNPPK), part of the Perm Motor Factory, located in 
Perm. The factory is a closed facility, with high 
security and limited access for non-employees. 
 
¶7. On April 25, 2007 ECO Pearce and FSN Shipitsina met 
with Andrey A. Ploskov, Marketing and Sales Director 
at the offices of the Perm Scientific-Industrial 
Machine Making Company, 25th of October Street #106, 
Perm Russia.  Mr. Ploskov confirmed the above-stated 
information regarding the Tento Group project.  Mr. 
Ploskov stated that a tour of the facility could be 
 
arranged, however due to security regulations at the 
company, a 45 day lead time for security clearances 
would be required. 
 
¶8. Recommendations: Post recommends Tento Group, Perm, 
Russia, as reliable recipients of sensitive U.S. 
origin commodities. It is requested that post be 
notified of final disposition of the application, and 
of any shipments for this organization in order to 
conduct appropriate FCS follow-up and statistical 
reporting. 
(FCS MOSCOW/ DLUTTER /DPEARCE) 
BURNS