07USUNNEWYORK1207
DECEMBER MIDDLE EAST BRIEFING: PRAISE FOR PARIS,
Fri Dec 21 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO8465
PP RUEHBZ RUEHROV
DE RUCNDT #1207/01 3552332
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 212332Z DEC 07
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3411
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 USUN NEW YORK 001207 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPAL IS
SUBJECT: DECEMBER MIDDLE EAST BRIEFING: PRAISE FOR PARIS, 
CALL FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF ROADMAP 
 
 
¶1. (U) Summary:  UN Under Secretary-General for Political 
Affairs Lynn Pascoe delivered the monthly briefing on the 
Middle East to the Security Council on December 21.  Pascoe 
praised the Paris donors' conference but said the goal now is 
to generate "real momentum on all aspects of the peace 
process."  Pascoe described the current impasse in Lebanon as 
"dangerous and unsustainable" and urged all Lebanese leaders 
to seek a solution that enables presidential elections to 
take place immediately.   During informal consultations, most 
Council members welcomed the Paris conference but identified 
continued Palestinian attacks on Israel from Gaza and ongoing 
settlement activity by the Israelis as real threats to the 
process launched in Annapolis.  Most delegations called on 
the Lebanese to hold elections and criticized Israeli 
overflights of Lebanon.  Russian DPR Dolgov said Russia is 
engaged in talks with both parties about a "possible" Moscow 
conference, and reported that Russia is seeking to convene 
both Israel and Syria in an effort to promote a comprehensive 
peace.  The Council concluded by adopting a brief press 
statement proposed by the French on the Paris donors' 
conference (text in para 7).   End Summary. 
 
Pascoe Presents Update 
---------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) Under Secretary-General for Political Affairs Lynn 
Pascoe delivered the monthly briefing on the Middle East in a 
public briefing of the UN Security Council December 21. 
Pascoe said the next few months are critical for the renewed 
peace process between Israel and the Palestinians.  Solid 
progress will be essential in the bilateral negotiations.  He 
said that donors must follow through on their commendable 
Paris commitments, and the parties must act to fulfill their 
responsibilities, so that a new climate of confidence, 
security and physical mobility is established.  Pascoe urged 
all Lebanese leaders to seek a solution that enables 
presidential elections to take place immediately.  While 
condemning rocket and mortar attacks from Gaza into Israel, 
Pascoe also said Israel needed to freeze settlement activity, 
and expressed concern about the humanitarian situation in 
Gaza, aggravated by the ongoing closure of the crossing 
points.  While publicly calling for the Lebanese to move 
immediately to Presidential elections, Pascoe also cited an 
increase in Israeli air violations of UNSCR 1701 and 
regretted that Israel has not yet provided requested 
technical strike data on cluster munitions. 
 
¶3. (U) Invited to speak privately to Council members, Pascoe 
recalled a feeling of optimism at the Paris conference, 
saying that more money was raised than was expected.  But he 
reported a "strong feeling of frustration" on the impasse in 
Lebanon and said the failure to hold Presidential elections 
had fostered a "poisoned environment."  He called on the 
Council to keep an eye on the situation. 
 
Council Comments:  Ambassador Khalilzad,s Intervention 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶4. (U) Following Pascoe's formal presentation, Amb Khalilzad 
spoke of the three types of efforts underway in pursuit of 
the two-state solution.  First, the Israelis and Palestinians 
held two follow-up meetings to Annapolis, including at the 
Paris Donors Conference where $7.4 billion was pledged. 
Khalilzad urged everyone to deliver on their commitments. 
Second, he spoke of the need for the international community 
to support the development of the Palestinian private sector 
and build Palestinian capacity.  Third, Amb Khalilzad brought 
to the attention of all President Bush,s scheduled visit to 
the Middle East from January 8-16.  On Lebanon, Khalilzad 
spoke of U.S. concerns that the Lebanese have been unable to 
exercise their democratic right to elect a president.  He 
said, "We urge the minority within the opposition in Lebanon 
who are blocking the elections, and those outside Lebanon who 
support it, particularly Syria, to cease their demands to 
bring about an election via unconstitutional measures."  He 
also said the Council should be prepared to consider 
additional measures to support the legitimate government of 
Lebanon. 
 
Other Delegations Comment 
------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (U) All delegations praised the Annapolis Conference and 
the Paris Donor Conference.  They focused on Roadmap 
obligations, including a freeze on settlements and a 
cessation of terrorist attacks against Israel.  Delegations 
also urged Israel to do more on freedom of movement and 
access.  While delivering a generally balanced statment, 
Qatari PR Nasser also lamented Israel's "policy of siege and 
starvation" in violation of international law.  Many 
delegations also cited the need to restore Palestinian unity. 
 
USUN NEW Y 00001207  002 OF 002 
 
 
 Russian DPR Dolgov, while confirming Russian support for 
President Abbas, said Russia is "absolutely convinced" that 
no agreement between Israel and the PA can be implemented 
without restoration of Palestinian unity. 
 
¶6. (U) Dolgov also said Russia is working with the parties on 
a possible Moscow conference.  The goal of an international 
meeting remains on the Russian desk.  He reported that Russia 
is thinking about how to arrange bilateral talks between 
Israel and Syria in support of a comprehensive solution to 
the Arab-Israeli conflict.  Qatar and China said that they 
looked forward to the upcoming Middle East conference in 
Moscow.  Qatari PR Nasser characterized the Moscow conference 
as "promising" and added that he "hopes that it is a real 
beginning." 
 
Discussion of Press Statement 
----------------------------- 
 
¶7. (U) The French proposed a draft press statement on the 
donors' conference in Paris.  Russia, China, Qatar, and 
Indonesia sought a reference to UNSC resolution 1515, which 
endorsed the Roadmap.  USUN recalled that in Annapolis the 
parties had agreed to direct negotiations on the 
implementation of the Roadmap, and urged the Council to 
respect the parties' preference and limit the Council's 
comment to the Paris conference.  The Council agreed and 
adopted the following statement: 
 
¶8. (U) Draft Press Statement: The situation in the Middle East 
 
The members of the Security Council welcome the international 
donors, conference for the Palestinian State held in Paris 
on 17th December which has provided a strong international 
signal of support to the Palestinian people and the 
Palestinian Authority and which constitutes an important step 
in a broader process aiming at the realization of the vision 
of two states living side by side in peace and security; 
 
The members of the Security Council thank all participants 
for their pledges, urge a rapid disbursement of these 
pledges, based on equitable burden-sharing among all donors 
and call upon all those states and international 
organizations in a position to do so to assist in the 
development of the Palestinian economy, to maximize the 
resources available to the Palestinian Authority, and to 
contribute to the Palestinian institution-building programme 
in preparation for statehood. 
 
The members of the Security Council reaffirm their commitment 
to a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle East 
based on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 
(1973) as well as the other relevant Security Council 
resolutions. 
Khalilzad