07WELLINGTON695
CLARK GOVERNMENT ANNOUNCES COMPREHENSIVE PLAN TO
Mon Sep 24 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Wellington
VZCZCXRO2216
PP RUEHHM RUEHLN RUEHMA RUEHPB RUEHPOD
DE RUEHWL #0695/01 2672039
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 242039Z SEP 07
FM AMEMBASSY WELLINGTON
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4726
INFO RUEHZN/ENVIRONMENT SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COLLECTIVE
RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA 4962
RUEHPB/AMEMBASSY PORT MORESBY 0684
RUEHSV/AMEMBASSY SUVA 0647
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO 0655
RHHMUNA/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 WELLINGTON 000695 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EAP/ANP AND OES 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV ETRD PREL NZ KGHG
SUBJECT: CLARK GOVERNMENT ANNOUNCES COMPREHENSIVE PLAN TO 
TACKLE CLIMATE CHANGE IN NEW ZEALAND 
 
 
WELLINGTON 00000695  001.4 OF 003 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary.  Prime Minister Helen Clark announced on 
September 20 her government's plan to significantly reduce 
New Zealand's greenhouse gas emissions.  This comprehensive 
plan would establish an Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS) 
designed to impose prices to limit greenhouse gas emissions. 
The ETS program would be phased-in over the next six years 
and is intended to halve New Zealand's level of 2007 
emissions by 2040.  The coin of the ETS realm would be a New 
Zealand Unit (NZU), which would float in value on 
international markets.  This announcement appears timed to 
enhance the stature the Labour Government, which recently has 
been lagging the opposition National Party in the polls. 
National Party MPs and some smaller party representatives 
have tentatively endorsed the proposed plan.  Media reports 
since the announcement suggest the battle is on between those 
want to debate the details concerning the implementation and 
economic impact of the plan now versus those who would prefer 
to resolve the realities of ETS after the election.  End 
Summary. 
 
The Announcement 
---------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) On September 20, PM Helen Clark announced at a 
Wellington press conference an initiative aimed at addressing 
climate change through an emissions trading scheme designed 
to reduce New Zealand's contribution to greenhouse gases. 
Clark kicked off the press conference with an upbeat speech 
explaining that the purpose of the initiative was to not only 
meet New Zealand's commitments under the Kyoto Protocol, but 
also protect New Zealand markets and its reputation as a 
world leader in environmental practices and policies.  The 
goal, according to Clark, is to halve the level of New 
Zealand's 2007 emissions by the year 2040 with a minimum of 
economic impact, and to eventually make New Zealand 
completely carbon-neutral.  Clark claimed that her plan would 
reduce the growth of New Zealand's GDP by only 0.1 percent 
between 2005 and 2010.  The Minister Responsible for Climate 
Change David Parker and the Minister of Agriculture and 
Forestry Jim Anderton followed Clark's comments with power 
point presentations and details of the plan. 
 
Plan Details 
------------ 
 
¶3.  (U) According to the speakers, ETS would eventually cover 
all sectors of the New Zealand economy and is designed to 
reduce the emission of all six greenhouse gases addressed 
under the Kyoto Protocol (carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous 
oxide, hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons, and sulfur 
hexafluoride).  ETS would have a phased-in approach, designed 
to allow the government and various economic sectors time to 
prepare for implementation. 
 
¶4.  (U) The sectors affected and the timetable for 
implementation are as follows: 
 
-- Forestry (includes deforestation of pre-1990 forest land 
and reforestation post-1989): January 2008 
 
-- Liquid fossil fuels (mainly transport): January 2009 
 
-- Stationary energy (mainly coal, gas and geothermal 
energy): January 2010 
 
-- Industrial processes (non-energy) emissions: January 2013 
 
-- Agriculture (including pastoral and arable farming and 
horticulture): 2013 
 
-- Waste: 2013 
 
¶5.  (U) According to the speakers, applying ETS to the 
agricultural sector, which generates 49% of all domestic 
greenhouse gas emissions, would be the most challenging part 
of the plan ) hence, that sector has the longest delay in 
implementation (2013). 
 
¶6. (U) The ETS unit of trade would be a New Zealand Unit 
(NZU) issued by the GNZ, and it would hold the same value as 
one Kyoto Unit (KU) which value will be determined in 
international trading markets.  All New Zealand participants 
would be required to spend one NZU or one KU to cover each 
 
WELLINGTON 00000695  002.4 OF 003 
 
 
metric ton of emissions per year.  Participants could hold, 
carry over and trade NZUs domestically and internationally. 
The GNZ would, from time to time and as needed, sell NZUs at 
auction. 
 
¶7.  (U) ETS does not include a domestic cap on emissions but 
New Zealand will be subject to whatever cap is imposed under 
the Kyoto Protocol.  If no Kyoto cap is imposed, then a 
domestic cap would be considered. 
 
¶8.  (U) Compliance under ETS would occur largely through self 
reporting.  However, there would be a central ETS registry 
with roving inspectors to verify compliance.  The exact 
location of the ETS administrative framework within the GNZ 
has not yet been proposed. 
 
¶9.  (U) The government announced its intent to apply emission 
obligations as far "upstream" as possible, to facilitate 
administration of the plan.  For example, obligations would 
be imposed on fuel companies rather than motorists, and on 
food processors and cooperatives rather than individual 
farmers.  However, the government admitted that the cost of 
compliance would inevitably trickle down to consumers. 
 
¶10.  (U) In conjunction with ETS, the speakers announced that 
the government proposes to commit 175 million New Zealand 
Dollars (NZD) over the next five years in support of land 
management and climate change initiatives.  The lion's share 
of that investment would go to agriculture and forestry, and 
would include projects for R&D, technology transfer, farmer 
education, emission monitoring and reporting, irrigation, 
reforestation, and erosion prevention. 
 
Media Reaction 
-------------- 
 
¶11.  (U) Newspaper headlines on September 21 predicted rising 
fuel and electricity prices as a result of ETS, forecasting 
an increase in fuel prices of .04 to .06 NZD per liter by 
2009 and a 5% to 10% jump in electricity costs by 2010.  In 
response, Parker dismissed the cited price increases as 
trivial and called them a "deal" for the public.  Parker 
added that the government's initiative would help make New 
Zealand a world leader in the use of electric cars, a program 
which the government would also like to roll out. (Note: 
There have reportedly been discussions between the GNZ and 
Japanese auto manufacturers. End note.) Concerning increased 
electric rates, Finance Minister Michael Cullen promised more 
details before the elections but commented that there was no 
need to rush, as electrical generation would not fall under 
ETS until 2010. 
 
Opposition Reaction 
------------------- 
 
¶12.  (U) Some opposition National Party MPs and smaller party 
representatives have tentatively endorsed the measure in 
principle.  While the government's initiative toward reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions seems to have broad support, 
discussions reported in the media suggest that the battle 
will now be fought between those will push for more details 
concerning the implementation and economic impact of the plan 
now and those who would prefer to resolve the realities of 
ETS after the election. 
 
What's Next 
----------- 
 
¶13.  (U) The GNZ is conducting a series of ETS workshops and 
informational meetings thoughout the country in October. 
Clark said that legislation to implement ETS will be 
submitted to parliament toward the end of the year. 
 
¶14.  (SBU) Comment.  The release of the Clark government's 
plan to address global climate change was well-orchestrated, 
well-prepared and well-executed.  The hundreds of attendees 
each received a large stack of glossy publications explaining 
ETS and the reasoning behind it -- possibly enough to require 
several NZUs if the initiative were in effect now.  The 
government's failed 2005 attempt to launch a similar scheme 
has not been forgotten, but media commentary suggests that 
the public mood now accepts climate change as an issue 
requiring action (and sacrifice), and so far the suggested 
 
WELLINGTON 00000695  003.4 OF 003 
 
 
price tag is modest.  It appears that Clark (who until 
recently has had great instincts in judging changing public 
opinion) intended to bolster her party's poor showing in 
recent polls with this dramatic initiative and enlist public 
enthusiasm for a plan that will, in the months to come, be 
dissected and scrutinized.  Clark shrewdly included an 
implementation timetable that commences after the election. 
Nevertheless, in the year leading up to the election, ETS is 
likely to become the subject of further media commentary and 
political debate.  End Comment. 
 
¶15.  (U) More information concerning ETS can be found at: 
www.climatechange.govt.nz. 
MCCORMICK