08AITTAIPEI964
TAIWAN: RESULT OF BLUE LANTERN PRE-LICENSE CHECK
Thu Jul 03 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0964 1850742
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 030742Z JUL 08
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 9394UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000964 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/TC, PM/DTCC, ISN/ECC 
 
PM/DTCC FOR BLUE LANTERN COORDINATOR PETER SABATINI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC KOMC TW
SUBJECT: TAIWAN: RESULT OF BLUE LANTERN PRE-LICENSE CHECK 
05-050105965 
 
REF: STATE 62236 
 
¶1. (SBU) Per reftel request, AIT/T conducted telephone interviews 
and a site visit with the foreign consignee Super Wong Industrial 
Company (Super Wong).  While AIT/T's findings confirmed  the bona 
fides of the consignee, it appears Super Wong may have previously 
received the subject technology and item which did not have proper 
authorizations, if such authorizations were required in 2002. 
 
¶2. (SBU) On June 30, AIT/T met with Mr. Scott Wong (Chinese name is 
Ping Hsun WENG), Managing Director, and Ms. May LIOU(wife of Scott 
Wong), President of Super Wong.  This meeting was arranged as a 
follow-up to telephone interviews of Ms. Liou and Mr. Wong, on June 
24 and 27, respectively. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Super Wong originally received an order from Advance 
Products International, LLC (Advance Products) and technical 
drawings for molded plastic rings in 2002.  Super Wong used the 
technical specifications to manufacture the rings through Jia Ding 
Precision Industrial Co., Ltd. (formerly called Da Shiang Steel Mold 
Co., Ltd.), a subcontractor located in Taichung, Taiwan.  Until late 
2003 - early 2004, Super Wong made the rings using locally sourced 
metal inserts.  Since late 2003 - early 2004, Advance Products has 
been providing the metal inserts for the plastic ring production. 
Advance Product cited poor metal quality for the switch. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) When asked if he knew the end-use of the rings, Mr. Wong 
stated that he really did not.  He stated that he vaguely remembers 
Advance Products saying that the rings would be used for a munitions 
item but did took it more as a joke since Advance Products made the 
statement informally and no paperwork followed on restrictions 
related to handling of munitions items. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Mr. Wong stated that Super Wong is a trading company in 
mold design (20% of the business) and making molded products (80% of 
the business).  Super Wong subcontracts all production work to 
Taiwan and Chinese companies.  Currently, 20% of the work is 
subcontracted to companies in Taiwan and 80% to companies in China. 
He stated that Super Wong products are for commercial uses (e.g. 
remote control casing) and medical devises.  He stated that he has 
no experience in dealing with military items and has no business 
relationship with governments, foreign or domestic. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Mr. Wong was asked whether he understood the rationale 
behind the non-disclosure agreement that he signed with Advance 
Products.  He responded that he did not pay much attention to the 
agreement since he received the technical drawings several years ago 
(which were revised three times since the first receipt in 2002) and 
assumed that it was a new paperwork requirement by Advance Products. 
 AIT/T asked if Super Wong's subcontractor could have released the 
drawings to others.  Mr. Wong said that that is highly unlikely, 
since, as far as the local subcontractor is concerned, the rings 
were low-value commercial plastic rings.  (Note: Super Wong's 
signatory on the non-disclosure agreement is Ping Hsun Weng (i.e. 
Scott Wong), not Dung Shu Way, as indicated in reftel.) 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Super Wong is an 18 year-old company founded by Mr. Wong 
and Ms. Liou.  When it started, it had 15 employees.  It currently 
has four employees.  It is co-located with two other companies owned 
by the husband-wife team; Super May Industrial Co. and Caladon 
Technology Co., Ltd.  Super May made shopping cart wheels but has 
not been in operation for several years.  Caladon is in the same 
line of work as Super Wong but it has a profit sharing arrangement 
with sales representatives in the United States.  Caladon has a 
sales office in California. 
 
¶8. (SBU) AIT/T obtained a copy of the technical drawings received by 
Super Wong in 2002 and subsequent changes to the drawings.  Please 
let Mi-Yong Kim, EXBS Advisor, know if PM/DDTC wishes to receive 
copies. 
 
 
 
 
YOUNG