08AITTAIPEI193
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Tue Feb 12 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0193/01 0431010
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 121010Z FEB 08
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8108
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 7831
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 9094UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000193 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused February 
6-12 news coverage on the island's weather and traffic conditions 
during the six-day Lunar New Year holidays, on the March 
presidential poll and on the UN referenda.  In terms of editorials 
and commentaries, an editorial in the pro-independence "Taiwan News" 
urged Washington policymakers to push authoritarian China to respect 
fundamental values of human rights and democracy and not to suppress 
Taiwan's UN referenda.  An editorial in the pro-independence, 
English-language "Taipei Times" also criticized China's "amoral" 
foreign business policy and said "China's trade policy and lack of 
transparency in the arms trade will feed wars in countries all over 
the world, especially in resource-rich regions in Southeast Asia and 
Africa."  End summary. 
 
A) "U.S. Should Back Democratic Values" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" [circulation: 
20,000] editorialized (2/12): 
 
"As the world's leading democratic power, the United States of 
America should support global efforts to push the authoritarian 
People's Republic of China to respect fundamental values of human 
rights and democracy in the world community for both moral and 
practical reasons. ... In this regard, the meek request made 
February 7 by U.S. Deputy Secretary of State John Negroponte urging 
Beijing that it 'should not try to deprive Taiwan of all of its 
political space' is grossly weak-kneed compared to his repeated 
blistering criticisms of the U.N. referendum, which was put on the 
March 22 ballot not by Chen's fiat but by signatures by 2.72 million 
citizens or nearly 16 percent of eligible voters in Taiwan. 
 
"The degeneration of the U.S. from defending human rights into a 
helpmate for Beijing's anti-democratic inquisition is directly 
related to Washington's decision to reply to the September 11, 2001 
terrorist attacks by launching an illegal war in Iraq and an 
ill-conceived 'war on terror' through flagrant violations of human 
rights including torture instead of addressing the roots of the 
crises which have generated terrorism.  For the sake of avoiding 
'distractions' from its Iraqi morass, the right-wing Republican 
administration of U.S. President George W. Bush has taken the PRC's 
side in pushing to suppress the DPP government for its efforts, 
including the 'U.N. for Taiwan' referendum, to defend Taiwan's 
actual existing sovereignty from explicit negation in international 
organizations, including the U.N. itself, and is putting at risk 
both the survival of one of Asia's most genuine democracies and the 
future prospects for the development of democracy in China itself. 
 
"This moral disaster will ultimately turn into a geopolitical 
debacle.  As the PRC is praised by Washington as a 'responsible 
stake-holder' despite its suppression of democracy at home and 
support of equally authoritarian allies abroad, other world 
democratic powers will be encouraged to 'engage' and appease Beijing 
without any hesitation. ...  If Washington policymakers think that 
the world will be a better place without a democratic Taiwan and 
after East and Southeast Asia is turned into a neo-authoritarian 
theme park under Beijing's management, we sincerely suggest they 
think again." 
 
B)  "Beijing's Deadly Trade Policy" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] editorialized (2/12): 
 
"... Worrying as this may be, the ongoing military buildup is not 
China's greatest threat to the international community -- but its 
amoral foreign business policy is. ...  Although partner countries 
welcome Beijing's policy of not interfering with their internal 
affairs and not making business conditional on respect for human 
rights, many fail to see that the practice will hurt international 
security in the long run. From Sudan to Myanmar, China's 
indifference to human rights violations in countries that provide it 
with natural resources has led to grave abuses and fed wars. In 
Sudan, violence now threatens to spill into neighboring countries 
and disrupt regional order. ... 
 
"Beyond bad business practice, Beijing's behavior also undermines 
international efforts to prevent Tehran from successfully developing 
nuclear weapons. By weakening the effect of the sanctions, Beijing 
makes it likelier that states like Israel, which feels threatened by 
the specter of a nuclear Iran, will act preemptively and open a 
Pandora's Box of conflict in the Persian Gulf, with repercussions on 
a regional -- and global -- scale. ...  This is where the nexus of 
China's military growth and its irresponsible business policies 
possibly creates the greatest threat. Led by their domestic 
military-industrial complex, modernizing military powers begin to 
produce their own weapons. After a certain period, the 
military-industrial complex reaches a point where it needs to export 
weapons to finance its growth and continue to meet the demands of 
government. There is no reason why China would not go down that path 
 
and, in time, become a major arms exporter. 
 
"Left unchecked, China's trade policy and lack of transparency in 
the arms trade will feed wars in countries all over the world -- 
especially in resource-rich regions in Southeast Asia and Africa -- 
that cannot afford to purchase Western weapons or, because of their 
conduct, are barred from doing so. Non-state groups like al-Qaeda, 
and conceivably Hezbollah, would also have better access to more 
modern and deadlier weapons made in China.  For the sake of fair 
trade, international security and the countless lives at stake, the 
world must unequivocally tell Beijing that powers worthy of respect 
must act responsibly in every sector." 
 
YOUNG