08AITTAIPEI1268
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Mon Aug 25 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0003
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1268 2380945
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 250945Z AUG 08
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9834
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 8558
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0005UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001268 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused their 
August 23-25 news coverage on the investigation into former 
President Chen Shui-bian's money laundering case; on Taiwan 
Taekwondo athlete Su Li-wen's show of sportsmanship by sustaining 
injuries in a competition and fighting up to the last minute; and on 
U.S. Democratic presidential candidate Barack Obama's selection of 
Senator Joseph Biden as his vice presidential running mate.  Local 
media also paid close attention to Chen Chih-chung, Chen Shui-bian's 
son, and his wife Huang Jui-ching's whereabouts in the United States 
and speculated on whether the couple would return to Taiwan.  [Ed. 
Note: they have since returned.] 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, an editorial in the 
pro-unification "United Daily News" discussed the development of 
cross-Strait relations in the wake of Beijing Olympics.  The article 
urged Beijing to change itself in terms of its image in cross-Strait 
relations, its thinking and inner cultivation so as to move toward 
the state of real 'co-existence' with Taiwan.  A "United Daily News" 
analysis discussed President Ma Ying-jeou's strategy in terms of 
Washington-Beijing-Taipei ties after having been office for 100 
days.  The article said Ma is hoping to put Taiwan in an 
indispensible position in such a strategic triangle.  End summary. 
 
A) "Cross-Strait Relations in the Wake of Beijing Olympics" 
 
The pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 400,000] 
editorialized (8/24): 
 
"... In the wake of the Beijing Olympics, the major variable 
affecting the relations across the Taiwan Strait will be the race 
between the two sides in term of their 'political systems'; such a 
situation already existed before the Beijing Olympics, and it will 
do so after the Beijing Olympics.  Mainland China is an autocracy, 
while Taiwan is a democracy.  What is referred to here [in the 
article] is exactly the interaction between these two political 
systems.  Such interaction can be moral competition indicating that 
'democracy excels totalitarian authority' on the one hand, and it 
can be a contest over efficiency, showing that 'autocracy outrivals 
democracy.' ...  Beijing's autocracy can carry off an Olympic Games 
that everyone marvels at, but the goal it pursues ought to be an 
ultimate state where democracy will [prevail] and replace autocracy. 
... 
 
"Before the Beijing Olympics, the landmark of Beijing was the 
Forbidden City, but after the Olympics, Beijing's landmark is the 
Bird's Nest.  This is not only a change in its image but also a 
change in its way of thinking, which should also give impetus to 
changes in terms of its inner cultivation in the future.  In the 
wake of the 2008 Olympics, the Beijing authorities should encounter 
changes in terms of its image in cross-Strait relations, in 
thinking, and in its inner cultivation and truly move toward a state 
of 'co-existence and win-win situation' [with Taiwan]." 
 
B) "Ma Ying-jeou's Style of Washington-Beijing-Taipei Strategy 
Taking Shape" 
 
Journalist Stella Wang said in the pro-unification "United Daily 
News" [circulation: 400,000] (8/25): 
 
"... Previously, the strategic triangular relationship among 
Washington, Beijing and Taipei has constantly been in a dilemma 
where one aspect is being taken care of while the other is missing. 
Now that Washington-Taipei ties have become stabilized again, 
President Ma Ying-jeou quickly attended to cross-Strait relations by 
tossing off issues regarding offering landing visas [to Chinese 
tourists] and the building of a bridge between Kinmen and China's 
city of Xiamen (Amoy) -- a move aimed at creating an ambiance of 
peace, reconciliation and cooperation across the Taiwan Strait. 
Having assumed office for 100 days, Ma is hoping to put Taiwan in an 
indispensible position in the triangle formed by the United States, 
China and Taiwan and in the meantime setting the tone for his 
cross-Strait policy. 
 
"While extending a goodwill gesture [to Beijing], Ma should also 
firmly demonstrate Taiwan's determination in defending itself, which 
must not become a kind of lip service but should be concretely 
showcased in [the government's] national defense budget and arms 
procurement items.  More importantly, Taiwan's national troops must 
truly feel Ma's enthusiasm and determination in attaching great 
importance to the island's national defense, and the small-sized but 
powerful new national troops will be [Taiwan's] strongest reliance 
for peace talks across the Taiwan Strait." 
 
WANG