08BERLIN1524
MEDIA REACTION: Indonesia, Economic, MEPP, U.S., Russia,
Mon Nov 10 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Berlin
R 101147Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY BERLIN
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 2604
INFO WHITE HOUSE WASHINGTON DC
SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
DIA WASHINGTON DC
CIA WASHINGTON DC
DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
FRG COLLECTIVE
AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 
AMEMBASSY LONDON 
AMEMBASSY PARIS 
AMEMBASSY ROME 
USMISSION USNATO 
USMISSION USOSCE 
HQ USAFE RAMSTEIN AB GE
HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE//J5 DIRECTORATE (MC)//
CDRUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GE
UDITDUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GEUNCLAS BERLIN 001524 
 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/PAPD, EUR/PPA, EUR/AGS, INR/EUC, INR/P, 
SECDEF FOR USDP/ISA/DSAA, DIA FOR DC-4A 
 
VIENNA FOR CSBM, CSCE, PAA 
 
"PERISHABLE INFORMATION -- DO NOT SERVICE" 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO GM
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: Indonesia, Economic, MEPP, U.S., Russia, 
U.S.-Spain, Congo 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary 
¶2.   (Indonesia)   Execution Of Terrorists 
¶3.   (Economic)   Financial Crisis, Chinese Economic Program 
¶4.   (MEPP)   Peace Process 
¶5.   (U.S.)   Aftermath Of U.S. Elections 
¶6.   (Russia)  Foreign Policy, Accident On Nuclear Submarine 
¶7.   (U.S.-Spain)   Relations 
¶8.   (Africa)   Congo 
 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary 
 
Editorials focused on the events in Hesse and the protest against a 
shipment of nuclear waste.  The announcement of Hesse's SPD leader 
not to run again as frontrunner in the upcoming state parliament 
elections is also the main story in today's press.  ZDF-TV's early 
evening newscast Heute opened with a story on the protests against a 
nuclear waste shipment in Lower Saxony and ARD-TV's early evening 
newscast Tagesschau opened with a report on the anniversary of the 
Kristallnacht. 
 
¶2.   (Indonesia)   Execution Of Terrorists 
 
According to Sueddeutsche Zeitung, "the Indonesian government 
allowed the attackers to give interviews and to spread their 
ideology that was full of hatred.  The government in Jakarta was 
interested in allowing the attackers to show the face of evil to the 
people in order to win the people's support in this fight against 
terrorists.  And all of a sudden everyone thought that the death 
penalty was appropriate.  Indonesia's example shows that the 'war on 
terror' is the most successful when it is being waged with the means 
of democracy and with the support of the people by the state 
demonstrating in a resolute and fair way that it has the monopoly to 
use force, with public, quick and apolitical trials without torture, 
without criticized pretrial detention, and without bending the law. 
Maybe Indonesia has demonstrated to the world the best example of 
how to deal with terrorists." 
 
Tagesspiegel and Frankfurter Rundschau opined: "The few hundred 
sympathizers for the terrorists overshadow the view that almost all 
Indonesians reject terror.  They think...that the Bali bombers 
received their fair punishment.  But apart from the highest possible 
punishment, we can congratulate Indonesia.  A well-equipped 
anti-terror unit is hunting terrorists, its tough laws are working, 
and the justice authorities take tough actions.  Experts agree: the 
terror structures in Indonesia have been destroyed to such an extent 
that an attack like the one in Bali is no longer possible--and the 
people support this tough policy." 
 
¶3.   (Economic)   Financial Crisis, Chinese Economic Program 
 
Handelsblatt editorialized: "The absence of the 'President' of the 
Euro group, Jean-Paul Juncker, at the financial summit in Washington 
is exemplary.  It shows to what extent claim and reality in European 
politics differ.  The EU now wants to show the United States what it 
is able to do.  Without false modesty we have heard from the 
European capitals that the global financial market is an America 
patient and it is up to Europe to supply the cure.  But if the EU 
were really serious, it would first of all overcome its own teething 
troubles.  It should bundle its forces and transfer power to a 
strong negotiating leader.  Instead, five European leaders will 
represent Europe at the financial summit in Washington, while EU 
leader Barroso is allowed to sit at the side table.  But the 
Europeans will be able to teach others a lesson in a credible way 
only if they are able to function  well as a team.  The global 
financial crisis has weakened the U.S. superpower, but the EU must 
still prove that it is able to take advantage of it." 
 
In view of Financial Times Deutschland, "the Europeans travel to 
Washington with strong self-confidence and even greater 
expectations.  According to the European will, the meeting in 
Washington is to give the impetus for the adoption of rules that 
will take into account the lessons from the financial crisis and 
make the world fit for the 21st century.  This self-confidence is 
justified.  But despite a convincing European presentation in the 
first round, it could now be faced with some setbacks in Washington. 
 During the G-20 meeting in Sao Paulo, the European representatives 
met with resistance with their proposals from the U.S. and the 
threshold countries.  If the threshold countries implement their 
views, this would mean the end of the special position of the 
Europeans, Americans, and Japanese.  But the EU countries should not 
shy away from conflicts with Americans and the threshold countries. 
The European concept to demand stricter rules and greater oversight 
over financial capitalism is the only convincing answer to the 
current situation." 
 
According to Handelsblatt, "China has now given itself the best 
recommendation for its participation in the financial summit with 
the adoption of its economic stimulus program.  China could not have 
expressed more obviously that it has a great interest in avoiding a 
deep recession of the global economy, and that it wants to have a 
considerable say in the restructuring of the global financial 
architecture.  The Chinese have now made 'advance payments,' and 
they are likely to present immediately the bill for their role in 
the global economy to the Europeans and Americans.  Those who take 
over global responsibility also want to have a say in global 
decisions.  For China, the times are over when it sat at the side 
table of the G-8 meetings." 
 
¶4.   (MEPP)   Peace Process 
 
Berliner Zeitung observed: "Over the weekend, Hamas cancelled its 
participation in the peace talks.  We could now say that the 
Islamists do not give a damn about the desperate situation of the 
people from Gaza.  Despite the drastic reduction of missile attacks 
on Israel, their situation is deteriorating day by day.  During the 
talks, Hamas should also approve an extension of President Abbas's 
term.  The Egyptians, but also the members of the Middle East 
quartet, already approved such an extension.  It is true that 
Secretary Rice buried the Annapolis process over the weekend. But 
all participants also agreed on a new summit in Moscow early next 
year, but before, there should be elections in the Palestinian 
territory.  This summit has now been scheduled without showing 
consideration for the election and whether a Hamas politician could 
be the next Palestinian president." 
 
¶5.   (U.S.)   Aftermath Of U.S. Elections 
 
Financial Times Deutschland opined: "Like a rubber doll with which 
children tend to play, everyone wants to bend and shape 
President-elect Obama according to his own views.  This increasing 
pressure makes clear one thing: the coming president will soon have 
to show his true colors in foreign policy, probably earlier than he 
would like.  But for everyone who hopes for a turnabout after eight 
years of George W. Bush, this moment will certainly result in a 
disappointment.  Even if he wanted to, Obama could not pursue a 
totally different policy towards Iraq, Iran or Russia.  Of course, 
he could send signals such as the closure of Guantnamo, but those 
in Europe who pin their hopes on profound changes must show patience 
and should not overburden Obama with expectations.  All indications 
are that the new president will demonstrate a different style in 
foreign policy and will ask the partner countries for greater 
cooperation.  This is a beginning but more cannot be expected right 
now." 
 
¶6.   (Russia)  Foreign Policy, Accident On Nuclear Submarine 
 
Sueddeutsche Zeitung judged: "The West can't figure President 
Medvedev out.  This is bad because a stage is emerging in which 
important issues need to be resolved with Russia's support.  But, 
what does Medvedev want?  The dilemma of the Kremlin leader, and the 
West should understand this, is that former president Putin still 
has a say.  Rarely before has the authority of a Russian state 
leader been standing on such a shaky ground.  Medvedev still does 
not have the power base which all his predecessors had before coming 
to power.  That is why his foreign policy messages are primarily 
domestic messages, for the greatest pressure comes from home.  His 
goals are ambitious, but now of all times, the financial crisis is 
hitting the country and restricts the scope of action which the 
president really needed.  But  this also offers a chance for the 
West's relations with Russia: for the planned partnership agreement 
with the EU, but also for relations with the new U.S. government. 
Moscow, but also Brussels and Washington, should keep this in mind. 
In the era of globalization, no one is able to help oneself on its 
own.  This also includes the self-confident new Russia." 
 
Frankfurter Rundschau opined: "Dimitri Medvedev now has a chance to 
repair something, his predecessor was incapable of doing.  When the 
'Kursk' sank in 2000, Vladimir Putin allowed several days to pass 
before he made a statement on it and turned to the relatives of the 
victims.  President Medvedev would now have the chance to deal in a 
human way with the tragedy.  He must see to it that the state takes 
responsibility for accidents in the military, compensates relatives 
in an appropriate way, and does is not remain silent about the 
reasons for the drama." 
 
In the view of Tagesspiegel, "the chain of accidents of Russian 
submarines is pointing to a big structural problem: over the past 
decades, Russia has invested much too little in the technical 
modernization of its military.  Former President Putin tried for 
years to revive Russia as a major power, but while, during Soviet 
times, the spending on the military made up 20 to 25 percent of the 
GDP, Putin only spend less than three percent.  Until today, claim 
and reality greatly differ.  What remains is a major power rhetoric, 
and a great deal of unresolved technical problems." 
 
¶7.   (U.S.-Spain)   Relations 
 
Under the headline: "Amigos," Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung argued: 
"Another winner of the U.S. elections is Spain's Prime Minister 
Zapatero.  He has not outlived 10 U.S. presidents such as Fidel 
Castro but he has outlived one: President Bush.  The fact that Spain 
and the United States, which pull the same strings from Afghanistan 
to the Balkans, will soon have friendly relations again is good 
news.  The number 8 in the global economy deserves a seat among the 
big nations.  But if Zapatero wants to cooperate with Obama in Latin 
America, a greater distance to Castro and his epigones would 
certainly be useful." 
 
Berliner Zeitung observed: "Despite a the understandable diplomatic 
success for Spain, we must say that the financial summit in 
Washington will not focus on 'fondling' the Spanish soul.  Spain has 
become a relevant global actor because the Banco de Espana has been 
an example of how an oversight agency can meet its duties.  If the 
rest of the world had followed the Spanish example, we would not 
have an international financial crisis today and not a financial 
summit either.  The world can learn from Spain.  Spain's diplomats 
will take the opportunity to improve the shattered Spanish-U.S. 
relations.  Barack Obama already promised a meeting with Zapatero. 
More good news." 
 
¶8.   (Africa)   Congo 
 
Under the headline "Empty Promises In Congo," S|ddeutsche comments: 
"Eastern Congo exceeds all negative prejudices there are about 
Africa: War, refugees, greed, violence.  The euphoria about the 
democratic elections two years ago has passed a long time ago.... 
And the international community?  It stood by and watched for too 
long.  It praised itself for funding and militarily securing the 
elections.  But nobody really cared about what came afterwards. 
 
Even UN peacekeepers made a bad impression because of illegal gold 
trade and rape, not honest service for the people.  Eastern Congo 
does not need more peacekeepers, but it needs capable ones.  Above 
all, the international community must expert diplomatic and 
financial pressure to stop this war." 
 
Tagesspiegel describes the Congo as the "sick heart" of Africa and 
warns that "those who want the military to create peace will fail" 
like in Somalia.  "The catastrophic Somalia adventure of the United 
States fifteen years ago should be a warning to the Europeans and 
the United Nations.  Those who send soldiers into a conflict must be 
sure that they will eventually be successful.  Under the current 
conditions, this is currently not possible in the Congo, the sick 
heart of Africa.  In it current condition, the Congo cannot 
survive." 
 
 
TIMKEN