08BERLIN1695
German Out-Of-Area Deployment Update
Fri Dec 19 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Berlin
VZCZCXRO1022
PP RUEHAG RUEHAST RUEHDA RUEHDF RUEHFL RUEHIK RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHLN
RUEHLZ RUEHNP RUEHPOD RUEHROV RUEHSK RUEHSR RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHRL #1695/01 3541520
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 191520Z DEC 08
FM AMEMBASSY BERLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2900
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE
RHMFISS/CDRUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GE
RHMFIUU/HQ USAFE RAMSTEIN AB GE
RHMFISS/HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RUEHRL/USDAO BERLIN GEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 BERLIN 001695 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MOPS PREL MARR NATO EUN GM AF SU KV BK LE GG ET
SUBJECT: German Out-Of-Area Deployment Update 
 
REF: A) Berlin 1664 
 B) Berlin 1604 
 C) Berlin 1549 
 D) Berlin 1413 
 E) Berlin 1387 
 F) Berlin 1045 
 G) Berlin 0620 
 
¶1. (SBU) As of December 3, Germany had 7,200 military personnel in 
out-of-area deployments (compared to 6,700 in July), plus 2,500 on 
stand-by for the NATO Response Force (NRF) and an additional 1,000 
on stand-by for the EU's Battle Groups.  All armed military 
out-of-area (OOA) deployments, with the exception of those in 
support of UN observer missions, require parliamentary approval.  A 
2005 Deployment Law regulates the parliamentary process, allowing 
expedited procedures only for non-controversial deployments.  What 
follows is a brief run-down on Germany's current OOA deployments. 
(Note: OOA deployments are defined as deployments outside Germany's 
territory where the German military could become part of an armed 
conflict.  End Note.) 
 
------------------ 
The Deployment Law 
------------------ 
 
¶2. (SBU) According to a landmark 1994 Constitutional Court decision 
and a subsequent 2005 Deployment Law, the Bundestag must pre-approve 
the deployment of any German armed forces outside of Germany.  The 
Deployment Law does provide for urgent armed deployments to go 
forward without the prior approval of the Bundestag, but most German 
officials view this exception as applicable only in the most exigent 
of circumstances, e.g. when there is literally no time to obtain 
Bundestag approval between the outbreak of a crisis and the need to 
respond militarily.  Even in these circumstances, the Deployment Law 
requires the government to seek Bundestag approval as soon as 
possible.  If approval is not granted, the deployment must be 
terminated. 
 
¶3. (SBU) In a decision that is likely to make it even more 
cumbersome for the government to deploy German armed forces 
overseas, the German Constitutional Court ruled May 7 that the 
government's decision to allow German air crews to participate in 
the NATO AWACS mission in Turkey in 2003, on the eve of the war in 
Iraq, without first seeking approval of the Bundestag, was 
unconstitutional.  The Court dismissed the assertion of the 
then-Social Democratic/Green coalition government that the AWACS 
deployment was just a "routine," unarmed reconnaissance mission, 
holding that there were "tangible, factual indicators" that the 
German AWACS air crews could have been drawn into armed conflict. 
The Court reaffirmed the Bundeswehr as a "parliamentary army," 
underscoring that the German Basic Law (Constitution) "entrusted the 
decision about peace and war to the German Bundestag as the 
representative body of the people."  The Court emphasized that when 
in doubt about whether it is necessary to obtain Bundestag approval, 
the government should err on the side of seeking parliamentary 
permission. (See Ref G for further reporting and analysis on this 
Constitutional Court decision.) 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶4. (SBU) The Bundeswehr currently has 3,530 military personnel 
(approximately the same as in July) operating under ISAF in 
Afghanistan.  These personnel are deployed under mandate approved by 
the Bundestag on October 17, 2008, which will run until December 
¶2009.  This means the mandate will not come up for renewal until 
after the scheduled parliamentary elections in September 2009 and 
after the new Bundestag is seated.  The mandate authorizes the 
German government to deploy up to 4,500 military personnel, 1,000 
more than the 2007 mandate.  The mandate also includes language that 
puts the deployment of German radio operators in the southern 
province of Kandahar on firmer legal grounds.  (For further 
information on the current ISAF mandate and the political debate 
concerning its approval, see refs D and E.) 
 
¶5. (SBU) Germany has been active in ISAF since the operation's 
inception in January 2002, and was the first country to volunteer to 
lead an ISAF Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) outside of Kabul. 
Germany currently commands ISAF's northern region (RC-North), where 
it leads two of the five PRTs (Kunduz and Feyzabad) as well as the 
Forward Support Base in Mazar-e-Sharif.  On February 23, 2008 
Germany inaugurated a Provincial Advisory Team (PAT), a mini-PRT in 
 
BERLIN 00001695  002 OF 006 
 
 
Takhar province.  At the November 26-27 RC-North Chiefs of Defense 
Conference (ref B), Germany announced that it was considerably 
expanding the PAT to some 45 soldiers and civilians, up from the 
original team of 25, comprised of only military personnel. 
 
¶6. (SBU) The Bundeswehr has taken on, or has committed to take on, a 
number of additional tasks in recent months: 
 
-- Germany took over the Regional Command-North Quick Reaction Force 
(QRF) company (consisting of about 200 troops) on July 1.  Since 
then, the ISAF Combined Joint Statement of Requirements (CJSOR) has 
been revised to increase the QRF requirement to a battalion-size 
unit (about 600 troops).  It appears that Germany will assume most 
of the responsibility for providing the additional troops, but 
Norway and Latvia may also contribute a company of soldiers.  While 
the entire QRF has traditionally been based in Mazar-e-Sharif, the 
tentative plans are for the battalion to be deployed in a 
decentralized fashion, with two companies in Mazar-e-Sharif, one 
company in Kunduz and one in Maimana.  With its take-over of the 
QRF, Germany for the first time has a force that can be quickly 
deployed around the country on short notice and that is authorized 
to conduct combat missions.  Up to now, the Bundeswehr has been 
focused almost solely on stabilization and force protection 
missions.  German officials point out that the primary mission of 
the QRF is to respond to emergencies in RC-North, but they also have 
said that Germany will come to the aid of Allies (i.e., outside 
RC-North) when required.  Such exceptions are explicitly allowed by 
the ISAF mandate (see para 10 below). 
 
-- Germany is tripling the number of troops (from 100 to 300) 
devoted to the training of the Afghan National Army (ANA).  Besides 
fielding additional Operational Mentoring and Liaison Teams (OMLTs), 
Germany is expanding a drivers and mechanics school in Kabul into a 
logisticians' training center.  Germany had been planning to 
establish an infantry training center in Mazar-e-Sharif, but since 
such a school will be set up in Helmand Province, the Germans have 
decided instead to pursue the establishment of a combat engineering 
school instead (see ref B for more details on German plans). 
 
-- Germany has increased the number of military policemen devoted to 
the training of the Afghan National Police (ANP) in Mazar-e Sharif 
from 30 to 45. 
 
¶7. (SBU) The German government supports COMISAF's request for NATO 
AWACS and was hoping to incorporate the authorization for the 
participation of German aircrews in the latest ISAF mandate.  Those 
plans were dashed when France blocked a NATO decision giving the 
green light for planning the mission.  Therefore, the government 
will have to seek a stand-alone mandate on AWACS later, if and when 
there is a NATO decision authorizing the mission.  (For further 
detail on the political debate about the possible AWACS mission, see 
ref F.) 
 
¶8. (SBU) Germany currently provides Operational Mentoring and 
Liaison Teams (OMLTs) for ANA maneuver units based in Mazar-e-Sharif 
and Feyzabad.  It also contributes to two multinational OMLTs -- one 
for the HQ of the 209th Corps and the other for the HQ of the 1st 
Brigade of the 209th Corps.  Both HQs are located in Mazar-e-Sharif. 
 At the November 26-27 RC-North CHODs Conference, Germany agreed to 
transfer responsibility for the maneuver Kandak in Mazar-e-Sharif to 
Sweden in 2009, so that the German OMLT can be used to assume 
responsibility of a Combat Service Support (CSS) Kandak from the 
U.S. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Germany plans to contribute five additional OMLTs as a new 
ANA brigade (2nd Brigade, 209th Corps) and its subordinate 
battalions are fielded in the north over the next year.  Germany is 
already in the process of building garrisons for the new brigade in 
the north.  Germany has also starting thinking about how to 
accommodate the possible deployment of a third brigade in Region 
North as part of the enlargement of the ANA to 134,000. 
 
¶10. (SBU) The German ISAF mandate defines their area of operations 
as the northern region and Kabul.  Nevertheless, an exception in the 
mandate allows for temporary, limited deployments to other parts of 
the country on a case-by-case basis if deemed "absolutely necessary" 
to the overall ISAF mission. 
 
¶11. (SBU) In the fall of 2007 and again in May 2008, Defense 
Minister Jung approved the temporary deployment of a small number of 
Bundeswehr soldiers outside the north to provide medical and 
intelligence support to combat operations against insurgents in 
Region West.  None of the German soldiers, however, were directly 
 
BERLIN 00001695  003 OF 006 
 
 
involved in combat operations.  For the May 2008 operation, German 
members of the multinational OMLT for the 209th Corps HQ were part 
of a group authorized to deploy, the first time that German OMLT 
members were allowed to deploy outside the north (albeit for a Corps 
HQ and not a fighting unit).  MOD has thus far not allowed German 
OMLTs assigned to infantry ANA battalions to deploy outside the 
north. 
 
¶12. (SBU) Meanwhile, the ISAF mandate allows German Tornado 
reconnaissance aircraft to operate throughout Afghanistan, but 
restricts the resulting information from being distributed outside 
of ISAF channels.  The information can only be passed to OEF in 
instances where doing so directly supports ISAF operations.  Since 
the end of January 2008, Germany has provided an additional two 
C-160 Transall aircraft in Afghanistan to ISAF, for a total of 
eight. 
 
¶13. (SBU) The decree issued by Afghan President Karzai in late 
November, temporarily transferring the Gormach District of Badghis 
Province in RC-West to Faryab Province in RC-North, led some German 
parliamentarians to express outrage at what they viewed as a 
unilateral move to enlarge Germany's area of responsibility. 
Defense Minister Jung reacted initially by suggesting that a new 
Bundestag mandate would be required to accommodate this change. 
However, it appears that the government has since decided that this 
will not be necessary. 
 
¶14. (U) Germany expects to spend 688.1 million Euros on its ISAF 
deployment from October 2008 to December 2009. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Operation Enduring Freedom (OEF) 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶15. (SBU) The 2008 OEF mandate, approved by the Bundestag on 
November 14, significantly reduced the geographic area in which the 
Bundeswehr is allowed to operate under OEF.  South and Central Asia 
(including Afghanistan), the Arabian peninsula and Northeast Africa 
were removed from the mandate, leaving just the Horn of Africa and 
surrounding waters.  Moreover, the overall troop ceiling was cut 
from 1,400 to 800 and the controversial authorization to deploy up 
to 100 German Special Forces (KSK) was eliminated.  This means that 
Germany's participation in OEF is now restricted solely to maritime 
operations.  German military forces will not longer have the ability 
to participate in combat operations under OEF in Afghanistan.  The 
mandate was extended for 13 months (rather than the normal 12) so 
that it will not come up for debate and renewal until after the 
September 2009 parliamentary elections and the new Bundestag is 
seated. 
 
¶16. (SBU) While these changes may be symbolically important, they 
had no practical effect on current German contributions to OEF 
operations in Afghanistan or elsewhere.  The Germans have reportedly 
not deployed the KSK under OEF since 2002-03, which was one of the 
arguments used by OEF skeptics to push for eliminating this part of 
the parliamentary mandate.  In preparation for its assumption of 
command of OEF Task Force 150 in January, Germany has deployed one 
frigate (the Mecklenburg-Vorpommern) and some 510 sailors to the 
Horn of Africa.  This constitutes a significant increase in the 
German presence since the fall, when Germany had only 90 under OEF. 
German navy ships deployed under OEF still are not authorized to 
conduct counter-piracy operations, beyond providing emergency help 
to stop the take-over of a ship by pirates.  However, the 
parliamentary mandate for the Bundeswehr's participation in the EU 
"Atalanta" Operation provides the option of temporarily reassigning 
German OEF ships to the EU so they can carry out counter-piracy 
tasks. 
 
¶17. (SBU) Despite the removal of the controversial KSK element from 
the OEF mandate, a notable number of Social Democratic (SPD) 
parliamentarians (25 out of the 222-member caucus) defied their 
party leadership and voted against the mandate.  The upward trend in 
SPD opposition reflects first and foremost that the OEF brand name 
in Germany has been badly maligned in recent years.  It also 
reflects the growing sentiment among left-of-center political forces 
that seven years after 9/11, it is time to "regularize" OEF and have 
it mandated through a UNSCR, rather than continuing to base it on 
the self-defense provisions of Article 51 of the UN Charter.  (See 
ref C for further reporting on the passage of this year's OEF 
mandate.) 
 
¶18. (U) The German government expects to spend 48 million Euros on 
its participation in OEF from November 2008 - December 2009. 
 
BERLIN 00001695  004 OF 006 
 
 
 
------------------- 
Kosovo Force (KFOR) 
------------------- 
 
¶19. (SBU) Germany currently has 2,670 military personnel (compared 
to 2,240 in July) in KFOR, far below the authorized troop ceiling of 
8,500 military personnel.  There is a German Operational Reserve 
Force (ORF) battalion on stand-by in Germany to reinforce KFOR as 
necessary.  The mandate is extended automatically each year unless 
there is a change to the UNSC Resolution framework for the Kosovo 
Force.  Germany formally recognized Kosovo's independence on 
February 20 in a letter from President Koehler.  The government made 
clear that it still considers UNSCR 1244 as the legal basis for 
KFOR, a position that all parties in the Bundestag, except the small 
Left Party (roughly 12% support nationally), support. 
 
----------------------------------- 
European Union Force (EUFOR) Bosnia 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶20. (SBU) Germany currently has around 120 soldiers (approximately 
the same as in July) in Bosnia as part of the EU's Operation 
"Althea."  Most of the German soldiers are deployed as liaison and 
observer teams.  The mandate, last amended December 1, 2007, allows 
the deployment of up to 2,400 military personnel.  This operation 
extends automatically unless there is a change to its underlying 
UNSC resolution.  In 2007, Germany reduced its military presence in 
Bosnia by more than 700 military personnel in coordination with 
other allies.  Germany is relying more on home-based reserve forces 
and less on deployed troops to provide the necessary security 
support for the implementation of reform measures mandated by the 
Dayton Peace agreement. 
 
¶21. (SBU) While some Allies have been pressing to end the EU 
deployment, arguing that there are no longer any military objectives 
to achieve, Germany supports EUFOR remaining in place until the 
Office of the High Representative closes down and transitions to a 
EU Special Representative.  German Defense Minister Jung expressed 
this view publicly during an October 28 visit to Bosnia. 
 
¶22. (U) Germany expects to spend 158 million Euros per year on EUFOR 
Bosnia. 
 
------------------------------------- 
European Union Counter-Piracy Mission 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶23. (U) On December 19, the Bundestag approved a parliamentary 
mandate for the Bundeswehr's participation in the EU counter-piracy 
"Atalanta" operation off the Horn of Africa.  The mandate authorizes 
the German navy to perform the full spectrum of tasks authorized 
under the EU Joint Decision, including the use of force to end acts 
of piracy and to do "opposed" boardings.  The mandate also gives the 
German navy authority to sink pirate ships if necessary.  There are 
no national caveats.  Germany has dedicated one frigate with a 
200-man crew to the operation, which will include two 10-man 
boarding teams consisting of highly trained German SEAL members 
(Kampfschwimmer). 
 
¶24. (SBU) The mandate has a troop ceiling of 1,400 so that other 
German naval ships which happen to be in the region on other 
operations (i.e., a Standing NATO Maritime Group or OEF's Task Force 
150) can be brought under the EU mission temporarily to carry out 
counter-piracy missions as required.  While the area of operation 
extends up to 500 nautical miles from the Somalian coast and its 
neighboring states, the mandate does not authorize the pursuit of 
pirates on land.  The mandate expires December 15, 2009.  (See ref A 
for further information on the piracy mandate.) 
 
¶25. (U) The government expects to spend 45 million Euros on this 
deployment over the next year. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶26. (SBU) Germany gave up command of UNIFIL's naval component in 
March 2008, but still has 220 military personnel deployed (compared 
to 460 in July).  The current mandate, authorizing up to 1,400 
military personnel, was extended on September 17, 2008.  On February 
29, Germany handed over the command of UNIFIL's naval component to 
EUROMARFOR, a joint, non-permanent fleet including Portugal, Spain, 
 
BERLIN 00001695  005 OF 006 
 
 
France and Italy.  An Italian officer assumed command. 
 
¶27. (U) Germany expects to spend 89.6 million Euros over the next 
year on its UNIFIL contributions. 
 
------------------------ 
Sudan (UNAMID and UNMIS) 
------------------------ 
 
¶28. (SBU) Germany currently has 41 military observers taking part in 
the UN Mission in Sudan (UNMIS).  These observers monitor the 
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement.  The parliament 
imposed a caveat barring military observers from going to Darfur 
without prior consultation with the Bundestag Foreign Relations 
Committee's chairman and ranking members.  The mandate, which was 
extended for an additional year on September 17, 2008, allows for 
the participation of up to 75 German military observers. 
Germany spends approximately 1.4 million Euros per year for its 
support to UNMIS. 
 
¶29. (SBU) In November 2007, the Bundestag replaced its old AMIS 
mandate, with a new mandate supporting the UN/AU hybrid mission in 
Darfur (UN Assistance Mission in Darfur, UNAMID).  This mandate was 
extended on September 17, 2008.  It authorizes the Bundeswehr to 
deploy transport aircraft and up to 200 troops in support of the 
UN/AU hybrid mission. 
 
¶30. (U) Germany spends approximately 2 million Euros per year for 
its support to UNAMID. 
 
---------------- 
Georgia (UNOMIG) 
---------------- 
 
¶31. (SBU) Germany has been part of the UN Observer Mission in the 
Abkhazian region of Georgia (UNOMIG) since 1998 and currently has 12 
personnel stationed there, most of whom are medical personnel and 
military observers.  To meet a UN request for additional medical 
personnel, the German cabinet decided in August 2007 to raise the 
personnel ceiling for this mission from 13 to 20. 
 
----------------------- 
OSCE Mission to Georgia 
----------------------- 
 
¶32. (SBU) Germany has been a contributor to the OSCE's mission in 
the South Ossetian region of Georgia since the operation's beginning 
in 1992.  There are currently two Bundeswehr military observers 
participating in the OSCE mission.  They were among the 20 
additional OSCE military observers rapidly deployed to the region in 
August 2008 following the Russian-Georgian conflict.  They were 
intended to reinforce and support the long-standing contingent of 
eight OSCE military observers.  The German cabinet authorized the 
MOD on August 28, 2008 to deploy up to a total of 15 Bundeswehr 
personnel under the OSCE mission, in support of OSCE plans to deploy 
a total of 100 additional military observers. 
 
----------------------- 
Other minor deployments 
----------------------- 
 
¶33. (SBU) One military observer serves in the United Nations Mission 
in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE).  One German military observer is 
seconded to the United Nation Assistance Mission in Afghanistan 
(UNAMA).  The Bundeswehr has seconded 41 military personnel to 
Strategic Medical Evacuation (STRATAIRMEDEVAC), for which no 
parliamentary mandate is required, since it is not an armed 
deployment and the stand-by aircraft are stationed in Germany. 
 
----------------------- 
Other force commitments 
----------------------- 
 
¶34. (SBU) The Bundeswehr currently has 2,500 soldiers committed for 
the twelfth rotation of the NATO Response Force (NRF).  There are 
currently 1,000 Bundeswehr soldiers assigned to EU Battle Groups in 
the second half of 2008. 
 
------------------------- 
Bundeswehr transformation 
------------------------- 
 
¶35. (SBU) The Bundeswehr is currently undergoing a transformation 
 
BERLIN 00001695  006 OF 006 
 
 
process, the goal of which is to be able to send up to 14,000 
soldiers to as many as five different theaters for stabilization 
missions by 2010.  The Bundeswehr will be reduced from its 
pre-transformation level of 270,000 to a final strength of 250,000 
(162,300 Army, 62,700 Air Force and 25,000 Navy).  The new 
Bundeswehr will be composed of three different groups: 35,000 for 
intervention forces, 70,000 for stabilization forces and 147,000 for 
support forces. 
 
¶36. (SBU) Part of the Bundeswehr's transformation is a comprehensive 
rebasing program, which is also intended to be completed by 2010. 
Moreover, transformation includes the procurement of new equipment 
to fill capability gaps, mainly in the fields of strategic air lift, 
network centric warfare and armored vehicles.  Due to limited 
funding (Germany spends just 1.3 percent of its GDP on defense, with 
few prospects of significant increases in the future) and defense 
industry delays (mainly EADS), the equipment side of the 
transformation is behind schedule. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
Total Expenditure for Out-of-Area Deployments 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶37. (U) According to a German government report released in October, 
Germany spent 10.6 billion Euros on out-of-area deployments during 
the period 1992-2007. 
A break-down by fiscal year, in millions of Euros: 
 
FY 1992     39.6 
FY 1993    213.8 
FY 1994     83.5 
FY 1995    131.1 
FY 1996    285.6 
FY 1997    254.8 
FY 1998    182.6 
FY 1999    553.9 
FY 2000  1,076.1 
FY 2001  1,191.8 
FY 2002  1,502.1 
FY 2003  1,352.8 
FY 2004  1,052.3 
FY 2005    884.3 
FY 2006    893.8 
FY 2007    910.7