08BRASILIA1262
REQUEST BY U.S. MISSION BRAZIL TO PARTICIPATE IN RHYTHM
Mon Sep 22 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Brasilia
VZCZCXRO8704
OO RUEHRG
DE RUEHBR #1262/01 2662027
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 222027Z SEP 08
FM AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2490
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULO PRIORITY 2768
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO PRIORITY 6627
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE PRIORITY 8474UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRASILIA 001262 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR ECA ROBERT KEITH AND COLOMBIA BARROSSE; WHA/PDA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SCUL KPAO HO
SUBJECT: REQUEST BY U.S. MISSION BRAZIL TO PARTICIPATE IN RHYTHM 
ROAD-AMERICAN MUSIC ABROAD PROGRAM. 
 
REF: STATE 090853 
 
¶1.  PROGRAM DESCRIPTION, INCLUDING OBJECTIVES AND NATURE OF EVENTS: 
U.S. Mission Brazil is very interested in programming a Rhythm Road 
quartet for musical performances, workshops, and educational 
outreach as part of our continuing efforts to promote mutual 
understanding and cross-cultural awareness.  This program would be 
used to strengthen Post's efforts to implement "The U.S.-Brazil 
Joint Action Plan to Eliminate Racial and Ethnic Discrimination and 
Promote Equality," signed by Secretary Rice last March, and would 
compliment our focus on disadvantaged communities in Brazil's North 
and Northeast.  The Mission would use this opportunity to reach 
Afro-Brazilian and indigenous communities, particularly at-risk 
youth, as well as other populations suffering from economic and/or 
geographic isolation or marginalization.  Post would also use its 
excellent partnership with the Association of State Secretaries of 
Education (CONSED), developed through CONSED's assistance in 
implementing the Youth Ambassador program, to bring the group to 
play in public school settings in disadvantaged communities 
throughout Brazil. 
 
¶2.  When USG officials met recently with Brazilian officials to 
discuss implementation of the Joint Action Plan on racial equality, 
one of five themes chosen by the government of Brazil was culture. 
If the music style chosen for this program has roots in 
African-American culture and/or the musicians work with 
Afro-Brazilian communities, this program would serve to further this 
key bilateral initiative.  The Mission has recently focused more of 
its attention toward the country's North and Northeast regions, 
where there is greater poverty, unemployment, and health problems, 
growing crime rates, and weaker infrastructure.  Reaching out to 
these areas through musical exchange would allow post to strengthen 
our relationships with local officials, community leaders, and 
youth, thereby supporting Post's North-Northeast Strategy. 
 
¶3.  The program would support our Mission Strategic Plan (MSP) goal 
of "Promoting International Understanding," which emphasizes 
outreach out to underserved areas and non-elite audiences.  As Post 
would encourage media coverage of all Rhythm Road events, we expect 
the program would increase public awareness of American culture and 
history, leading to more accurate and favorable portrayals of U.S. 
policies in key foreign media.  Finally, we hope this program would 
result in enduring partnerships between U.S. and Brazilian musicians 
and institutions. 
 
¶4.  PREFERRED MUSIC STYLE:  Urban or hip-hop music is preferred, as 
this currently has the greatest appeal among Brazilian youth, 
although post would consider other styles as well. 
 
¶5.  POSSIBLE VENUE CITIES, INSTITUTIONS AND AUDIENCES:  Audiences at 
each post could include students, particularly from public schools, 
journalists, elected officials, NGO representatives, local artists, 
and/or academics. 
 
¶A.  MANAUS, AMAZONAS:  Indigenous and economically disadvantaged 
groups, including youth.  There are numerous music groups and 
audiences in the city of Manaus and the State of Amazonas.  Possible 
venues include the Manaus Opera House, the Ponta Negra (beach) 
performance stage, other outdoor venues, public schools, and/or one 
of 12 local universities.  The local Bi-National Center, who is 
currently hosting an English Language Fellow until 2010, is a 
consistently strong partner for youth and cultural programs.  Manaus 
has a busy cultural scene, including a number of music and theatre 
festivals and clubs.  Post would also seek to partner with the 
Governor's office, with which we have a strong working 
relationship. 
 
¶B.  BELEM, PARA:  Indigenous and economically disadvantaged groups, 
including youth.  There are numerous children's, youth, and adult 
music groups in disadvantaged communities in the city of Belm and 
the State of Par who would be excellent partners and audiences. 
Post has been approached repeatedly regarding musical cooperation 
here, including by the State Secretary for Culture.  Possible venues 
include the Belm Opera House, the Carlos Gomes Cultural Foundation, 
outdoor public performance venues, public schools, and/or one of 
three local universities anxious to work with Americans.  The local 
Bi-National Center, who will host an English Language Fellow 
beginning in March, is a good partner with a strong cultural program 
and three branch campuses in remote communities comprised largely of 
Amazonian indigenous populations.  Post would like to establish and 
strengthen music-based connections between this geographically 
isolated region and U.S. musicians and institutions. 
 
¶C.  NORTHEAST CITIES:  We propose venues in these four cities: 
Recife, Joco Pessoa, Natal, and Fortaleza.  In Recife, there are at 
least five associations that promote hip-hop events.  As in the 
other cities, this genre is very strong in marginalized 
neighborhoods.  Likely partners might be these associations plus the 
 
BRASILIA 00001262  002 OF 002 
 
 
Mayor's office, which promotes hip-hop during Carnaval. In May 2007, 
the Metropolitan Hip-Hop Association promoted a week-long seminar 
that discussed issues such as education, racial equality, and social 
inclusion, as well as focusing on hip-hop as a form of social 
expression. In Joco Pessoa, there are two associations that promote 
street dance, hip-hop, and several other genres of music.  One of 
those, Tribu Ethnos, is a likely partner.  In Natal, there several 
hip-hop associations, with one major an umbrella association that 
promotes seminars on social inclusion using hip-hop, rap, and break 
dancing as forms of expression.  In Fortaleza, the Central Unica de 
Favelas organization, which promotes social inclusion among 
disadvantaged youth, would welcome a hip-hop dance troupe to 
highlight hip-hop as an art form and form of expression.  The 
Mayor's office is also very active in promoting hip-hop events. 
 
¶D.  BELO HORIZONTE, MINAS GERAIS:  Post would attempt to schedule 
this program to coincide with a planned "USA Fair" in March or April 
¶2009.  The three-day USA Fair outreach event will be held in the 
center of a large shopping mall.  The set-up will include various 
information booths and an enclosed mini-auditorium for presentations 
about studying in the U.S., doing business with the U.S., visas, 
learning English, etc.  The musicians could play either at the fair 
site or as a side event at a nearby location.  Belo Horizonte is 
also home to a popular favela (slum) based radio station with a 
professional studio where mayoral candidates recently held a debate. 
 Post would try to arrange for an interview and a live concert to be 
broadcast by this station.  Post would also bring the group to 
public schools in Belo Horizonte through the municipal international 
relations and education departments, with whom it already partners 
to improve English language teaching in public schools.  Post would 
also have the group appear at the Bi-National center, and would work 
with the State Secretary of Culture to arrange other concerts, as 
well as master classes. 
 
¶6.  TIME FRAME:  January-July 2009.  March or April is ideal. 
Programming in February would be difficult due to Carnaval-related 
events and school and work holidays. 
 
¶7.  SECURITY:  In accordance with the Regional Security Offices, 
Post will take all necessary security precautions, especially in 
urban areas such as Rio and Sao Paulo. 
 
¶8.  LANGUAGE REQUIREMENTS:  Post will work with local partners to 
provide required translation.  Post would greatly appreciate ECA 
and/or JALC assistance in covering translation costs.  Post also 
greatly appreciates prior copies of any related publications or 
materials for translation. 
 
¶9.  POST CONTACT INFORMATION:  APO Caroline Schneider, Tel: 
55-61-3312-7530; Cell: 55-61-9674-8002; Fax: 55-61-3323-1972; 
schneidercm@state.gov.  FSN Cultural Affairs Specialist Marcia 
Mizuno, Tel: 55-61-3312-7371; Cell: 55-61-9674-8005; Fax: 
55-61-3323-1972; mizunoms@state.gov. 
 
¶10.  FUNDING:  ECA, through Jazz at Lincoln Center (JALC), will 
cover international travel costs and an honorarium for each 
musician.  Post is responsible for in-country travel, staging, and 
per diem for all days the quartet is in country, however, due to the 
extensive length and travel distances of this program, we estimate 
per diem expenses around US$21,000 and in-country travel costs 
around US$7,000.  Post would therefore greatly appreciate ECA and/or 
JALC assistance in covering some of these expenses. 
 
KUBISKE