08DUBLIN416
IRISH ECONOMIC DOLDRUMS: THE GOVERNMENT'S RESPONSE.
Tue Jul 15 00:00:00 +0200 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Dublin
VZCZCXRO7189
PP RUEHAG RUEHROV
DE RUEHDL #0416/01 1971050
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 151050Z JUL 08
FM AMEMBASSY DUBLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9330
INFO RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 DUBLIN 000416 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/15/2018 
TAGS: ECON EFIN EINV PREL EI
SUBJECT: IRISH ECONOMIC DOLDRUMS: THE GOVERNMENT'S RESPONSE. 
 
Classified By: PEO Chief Ted Pierce.  Reasons 1.4 (b/d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: The Irish government's announcement that 
public finances have deteriorated rapidly has prompted a 
mid-year re-think on the government's budget.  Driven by a 
construction-led downturn in the broader economy, the 
government will cut public spending this year by USD 660 
million and next year by USD 1.5 billion.  Our government 
contacts contend that the Irish economy will rebound after 
2009 and that there is no plan to scale back significantly on 
capital spending.  That said, at least one official admitted 
that the faster "global external factors" correct, the faster 
Ireland's economy will pull out of the doldrums.  There is a 
lot of commentary here about what went wrong with the economy 
and what Ireland has to show for its Celtic Tiger days. 
Whether Ireland settles in to "normal" mature economy growth 
rates or something better may depend on the government's 
appetite for bold policy action.  End summary. 
 
Tax Receipts Down... 
-------------------- 
 
¶2. (C) On July 2, the Irish government announced that tax 
receipts were almost USD 2.25 billion below forecasts.  The 
shortfall prompted the government to step up their borrowing 
program (three times more than planned) and to cut spending 
by USD 660 million this year and another USD 1.5 billion next 
year.  Tax receipts fell due to a steep fall in fixed 
investment this year of 15 percent, led by a virtual collapse 
in construction activity.  Pat McArdle, chief economist at 
Ulster Bank, told us that there are 20-25,000 unsold housing 
units on the market.  The government is now forecasting 
economic growth of 0.5 percent this year.  However, the 
forecast is for 2.25 percent growth in 2009 and then 4 
percent in 2010. 
 
...So Spending Cut 
------------------ 
 
¶3. (C) The government's spending cuts will come from several 
sources.  The government will, among other things, pare back 
the public sector payroll by three percent (which may require 
up to 5000 job losses), cut spending on health and education, 
and cancel pay increases for Ministers, senior civil 
servants, and judges.  Robert Watt, Assistant Secretary at 
the Ministry of Finance and former Managing Director of 
Indecon (a leading economic think tank), said that the cuts 
were aimed at coming in under the three percent budget 
deficit limit as laid out in the EU's Stability and Growth 
Pact.  He said that absent further unexpected deterioration 
in the economy, these cuts would achieve that goal. 
 
Still, Challenges Remain 
------------------------ 
 
¶4. (C) Irish government officials told us that the Irish 
economy is fundamentally sound but that the pick-up in growth 
after 2008 is not a sure thing.  Kevin Cardiff, Second 
Secretary General at the Department of Finance, said that 
construction numbers are very disappointing and there doesn't 
seem to be anything (e.g. consumer spending) that looks 
capable of enabling the economy to bounce back in the short 
term.  He added that Prime Minister Brian Cowen remains 
focused on containing public sector spending -- in particular 
wage growth -- but gave the impression that this was very 
much an uphill battle.  Cardiff said that inflation is a bit 
of a worry but not because of the headline rate.  Rather, it 
is eroding Irish competitiveness with its trading partners 
and will impact exports. 
 
¶5. (C) Watt said that the government is laying the groundwork 
now for "sustainable growth" when the global economy picks 
up.  Government policymakers have agreed to maintain capital 
investment expenditures, cutting only "non-essential" 
projects.  He admitted that the government's forecasts for 
growth depended on a number of external assumptions, among 
them: that the euro depreciates against the dollar and pound; 
that the U.S. and European economies grow faster; and that 
the oil price stabilizes or falls.  He agreed that if some or 
all of these did not occur, then the economy could be in for 
a longer lull than expected. 
 
¶6. (C) Watt noted that, while the banks are taking a beating 
on the stock market, they have little exposure to sub-prime 
loans and they are adequately capitalized to withstand a 
downturn.  A contact at the financial regulator confirmed 
this view.  However, market watchers here worry that some of 
the bigger real-estate developers will go bust and negatively 
impact the banks' balance sheets.  One contact told us of a 
developer who unsuccessfully tried to make his loan payments 
in the form of unsold and vacant apartments. 
 
Time for Creativity? 
 
DUBLIN 00000416  002 OF 002 
 
 
-------------------- 
 
¶7. (C) Nevertheless, Watt remains bullish long-term on the 
Irish economy, especially if the government enacts the right 
policies.  He said that there is a mood "at the top of 
government" that this crisis is an ideal time to be 
"innovative" and tackle some big issues.  For example, he 
said that if the on-going Social Partnership talks do not 
result in a deal, then "maybe it's time to find a new model." 
 (Note: the Social Partnership is the triennial agreement 
between the government, employers, and the trade unions on 
such issues as taxes and wage rates, among other things.  The 
intent of these deals is to make markets more predictable, to 
generally limit industrial actions and wage growth, and to 
settle on an agreed stance on taxes.  End Note).  He also 
said that the government will "hold firm" on public sector 
wages and will institute a hiring freeze. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶8. (C) Many Irish are asking, "What went wrong?", and some 
complain that the signature outcome of the Celtic Tiger days 
is increased prices on everything from houses to Guinness. 
This, of course, is a vast oversimplification, but Watt 
admitted that the government could have done more while the 
coffers were full.  The economy will undoubtedly recover. 
But does the economy settle in at growth levels akin to those 
of other mature OECD economies or can Ireland re-invent 
itself again and sustain above-average GDP growth?  The 
answer to this question may depend on how bold the senior 
government leadership chooses to be.  A key first test will 
be whether the government holds the line on public sector pay 
and spending within the context of the Social Partnership 
talks. 
FOLEY