08DUBLIN20
2007 ANNUAL OSAC CRIME AND SAFETY REPORT.
Mon Jan 14 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Dublin
VZCZCXYZ0004
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDL #0020/01 0140854
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 140854Z JAN 08
FM AMEMBASSY DUBLIN
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 8832UNCLAS DUBLIN 000020 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR DS/DSS/ITA, DS/DSS/OSAC, DS/IP/EUR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC APER AMGT EI
 
SUBJECT: 2007 ANNUAL OSAC CRIME AND SAFETY REPORT. 
 
REF: 07 STATE 168473 
 
(U) Dublin's Annual Overseas Security Advisory Council (OSAC) Crime 
and Safety Report - 2007. 
 
¶I.    Overall Crime and Safety: 
 
¶1. (U) Although official Police reports for 2007 will not be 
available until later in the year, RSO police contacts have reported 
that crime overall in Ireland has risen over the last twelve months. 
 There has been an increase in activities by organized criminal 
groups in Ireland.  Preliminary reports state that Homicides in 
Ireland have increased 20% in 2007, with the majority of these 
involving organized crime groups, although some innocent bystanders 
have been fatally injured as a result.  Drug related offences have 
increased 25% from 2006. 
 
¶2. (U) Violent crime involving American tourists is rare. There were 
about five to six muggings /street robberies, on average, per month 
reported to the Embassy by U.S. citizens.  American tourists tend to 
become victims of crime when they drop normal security practices due 
to their misconception that there is little crime in Ireland.  In 
general, Americans tend to be victims of larceny and pick pocketing 
in the busy downtown area of Dublin.  Some Americans have been 
caught up in fraud scams involving ATM bank machines, credit cards 
and the Internet. Vehicle burglaries are not uncommon with criminals 
targeting American tourists using rental cars at popular tourist 
destinations.  Residential burglaries are common in Irish cities 
with criminals focusing on the more affluent areas. 
 
¶3. (U) In 2007, American Citizen Services (ACS) has had to replace, 
on average, 27 lost or stolen passports per month.  Most of the 
stolen passports were taken when purses or jackets were snatched. 
Anti-American sentiment is rare, and there has been a fall-off in 
the numbers of protesters the Embassy has seen in the last twelve 
months. It should be noted that some Irish citizens are against the 
current U.S. War on Terrorism and the U.S. presence in Iraq, and 
entering into political discussions in public places should be 
avoided. 
 
II.   Political Violence: 
 
¶4. (U) There have been no terrorist incidents in the Republic of 
Ireland in 2007. The (National Police) Garda Siochana continues to 
view counter terrorism as a priority issue. 
 
III. Post Specific Concerns: 
 
¶5. (U) Driving in Ireland is on the left-hand side of the road, 
which sometimes causes problems for American drivers. This 
difficulty is compounded by narrow, winding roads. If 
planning to drive in Ireland, begin slowly so you become comfortable 
and knowledgeable about your environment and vehicle, and plan your 
routes before setting out.  Also be aware that local drivers will 
pass, both legally and 
illegally, and at inopportune times.  It is common practice for the 
car being passed to move on to the hard shoulder on the left side of 
the road.  In 2007 there has been a major clamp-down on road traffic 
laws in Ireland which has seen a decrease in road deaths here.  The 
new penalty point system, which was introduced in 2006, has created 
awareness among motorists and has helped curb offences.  Random 
breath testing has been increased and arrests for driving under the 
influence have increased 300% in 2007.  The Irish Government is 
moving to a zero tolerance when it comes to drinking and driving. 
 
¶6. (U) There are no other post-specific concerns. 
 
IV.   Police Response: 
 
¶7. (U) The National Police (Garda Siochana) is a well trained, 
professional national police force of approximately 12,500 sworn 
officers.  There is a shortage of manpower, while the Irish 
Government is working on increasing manpower to 15,000 officers by 
the latter end of 2008.  The National Police also started in 2006 a 
Reserve Police Force of 900 individuals, to help with community 
policing. It is working to increase the reserve police to 1,500 
officers by the latter end of 2008.  The National Police are 
responsible for law enforcement throughout the Republic of Ireland. 
 
 
¶8. (U) Support for foreigners who are the victims of crime is 
excellent with a well-established victim support unit.  Emergency 
notification of the National Police or other emergency services is 
as follows:  24 hour emergency service (police, fire, ambulance, 
coast guard): Tel 999, or 112, The Garda Siochana Headquarters is in 
Dublin and can be contacted at 01-666-0000. 
 
¶9. (U) Women's Aid: toll free 1-800-341-900 or in Dublin at 
01-868-4721, e-mail - info@womensaid.ie or for more information log 
onto www.womensaid.ie.  Tourist Victim Support can be reached at 
01-478-5295 or can be e-mailed info@itas.ie.  More information can 
be found on their website www.itas.ie.  For assistance during 
incidents of arrest or harassment, Americans should contact the 
Embassy's American Citizen Services at 01-668-8777, ext 2400 
 
¶V.    Medical Emergencies: 
 
¶10. (U) In a medical emergency call 999 or 112, the emergency phone 
number and the operator will dispatch an ambulance anywhere in 
Ireland.  The Ambulance Service will take Patients to the closest 
suitable hospital.  There are six 24-hour-service hospitals in 
Dublin with a bed capacity of approximately 3000.  Emergency room 
services tend to be oversubscribed; patients can expect waits up to 
12 hours before being seen. Its not uncommon for persons treated in 
an emergency room to spend up to four days in the emergency room or 
surrounding hallway, waiting for a hospital room Children needing 
hospital attention should be taken to one of the three children's 
hospitals in the Dublin area: Tallaght, Our Lady's Hospital for Sick 
Children (Crumlin), and Children's Hospital Temple Street.  Outside 
of Dublin, most major cities have a hospital; please consult with 
emergency services to locate the nearest medical facilities. 
 
¶11. (U) Each of the hospitals mentioned above have physicians and 
specialists on duty with more on call. Disease control specialists 
can be contacted through the Community Health Division of the 
Department of Health, 01-635-4252.  Medical supplies are readily 
available through local suppliers who can be found in the yellow 
pages.  The Blood Transfusion Service Board, 01-432-2800, is a 
government agency and can handle any requirement.  Response time for 
air medical evacuation is approximately 4-6 hours. The closest 
commercial evacuation service is the Heathrow Ambulance Service 
located at Heathrow International Airport in London and can be 
contacted at 0044-181-897-6185. 
 
VI.   Security Tips: 
 
¶12. (U) Like any other European country, Ireland has its share of 
crime problems.  As one might expect, Crime tends to be more 
concentrated in the larger cities, such as Dublin, Limerick or Cork. 
 However, regardless of location, Americans visiting Ireland should 
maintain the same level of awareness and institute the same security 
practices prudent while visiting any large city.  Items of value 
should not be left in vehicles in plain view, day or night. 
Criminals often watch unsuspecting tourists place valuables in their 
vehicle trunks at popular tourist sites and then break in after the 
individuals have moved away from the car. 
 
¶13. (U) Questions can be directed to the Regional Security Officer, 
Terry L. Cobble, at 011-353-1-630-6215.