08HARARE186
TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT (TIP) - ZIMBABWE
Mon Mar 10 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Harare
VZCZCXYZ0019
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHSB #0186/01 0701529
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 101529Z MAR 08
FM AMEMBASSY HARARE
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2558UNCLAS HARARE 000186 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
AF/S DESK OFFICER S. HILL 
G/TIP FOR R. YOUSEY 
NSC FOR SENIOR AFRICA DIRECTOR B. PITTMAN 
USAID FOR L.DOBBINS AND E. LOKEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB KCRM KFRD KWMN PHUM PREF SMIG ZI ASEC
SUBJECT: TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT (TIP) - ZIMBABWE 
 
REF: STATE 02731 
 
THIS CABLE IS SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED -- PROTECT 
ACCORDINGLY. 
 
Â¶1. (U) The following is Embassy Harare's response to 
questions posed to Post in reftel. 
 
-------- 
OVERVIEW 
-------- 
 
-- 27 A. (SBU) Zimbabwe is a country of origin, transit, and 
destination for internationally trafficked men, women and 
children. Women and children are trafficked for labor and 
sexual exploitation along the borders with the four 
surrounding countries. There have been reports of 
Zimbabweans, especially young men and boys, providing labor 
for months in South Africa without pay before their employers 
report them to authorities for deportation. Many Zimbabweans 
suffering labor exploitation in surrounding countries do not 
report the offense to authorities out of fear of deportation. 
There have been reports of young women and girls being lured 
to the People's Republic of China, Egypt, the United Kingdom, 
and Canada under false pretenses for commercial sexual 
exploitation. Men, women and children from the Democratic 
Republic of Congo, Malawi, Mozambique and Zambia are 
trafficked through Zimbabwe en route to South Africa. A small 
number of South African girls are trafficked to Zimbabwe for 
forced domestic labor. Trafficking also occurs within the 
country's borders. Young men and women and children in rural 
areas are trafficked to farms for agricultural labor and 
domestic servitude or to cities and towns for commercial 
sexual exploitation and domestic servitude. 
 
(SBU) There are no reliable statistics on the trafficking 
problem in Zimbabwe. Most information on trafficking comes 
from anecdotal reporting supplied by the nongovernmental 
organizations (NGOs) and international organizations (IOs) 
providing assistance to victims and vulnerable populations. 
The International Organization for Migration (IOM) and UNICEF 
are currently conducting a study expected to be completed in 
April on child trafficking in Zimbabwe to gauge the scale of 
the problem and identify target areas for anti-trafficking 
programs. IOM also expects to complete a five-country 
(Zimbabwe, Zambia, Angola, Namibia and Botswana) regional 
study on trafficking in July. In October 2007, the Ministry 
of Public Service, Labor and Social Welfare in collaboration 
with the International Labor Organization (ILO), United 
Nations Development Program (UNDP), United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), 
UNICEF and IOM launched a multi-year program on the 
Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labor in Zimbabwe. 
This program will address child labor issues and the 
implementation of ILO Convention 182, including identifying 
the worst forms of child labor in Zimbabwe and implementing 
activities pertaining to the prevention of child labor, 
protection of working children, rehabilitation of victims and 
income generating measures. The three above mentioned efforts 
were supposed to have been completed in 2007; however, 
negotiations with the government over permits delayed the 
start dates. 
 
-- 27 B. (SBU) The trafficking problem in the country is 
worsening as more of the population is made vulnerable by 
declining socio-economic conditions. During the reporting 
period, there have been reports that illegal migration of 
Zimbabweans to surrounding countries has increased 
significantly -- putting more Zimbabweans at risk for 
exploitation. Although the government continues to show some 
political will and interest in combating trafficking, a 
severe lack of resources and a recent three-month strike by 
prosecutors and magistrates has constrained its ability to 
address the trafficking problem in practice. The government's 
most notable achievements during the reporting period 
included the following: 
 
-- In January, the government announced that a memorandum of 
understanding had been signed with the South African 
Government (SAG) for a joint project aimed at regularizing 
the status of illegal Zimbabwean migrant farm workers in the 
Limpopo Province in South Africa along the border with 
Zimbabwe. Once the agreement is finalized, a Labor Center 
will be opened at the Beitbridge Reception Center in 
Beitbridge, Zimbabwe on the border with South Africa. The 
Labor Center will match Zimbabwean farm workers with South 
African farms in need of labor and ensure that proper 
employment conditions exist. In the beginning, the pilot 
program will be confined to the Limpopo Province and will be 
extended to other sectors and areas in South Africa depending 
on its success. 
 
-- The government also allocated land to IOM to establish a 
reception center for Zimbabweans deported from Botswana to 
Plumtree, Zimbabwe, which is due to open in April, 2008. IOM 
anticipates that this second reception center in Zimbabwe 
will help identify additional trafficking victims. 
 
-- In July 2007, President Mugabe announced plans to ratify 
the UN Trafficking Protocol. 
 
(SBU) Women and young girls are the most at-risk group for 
trafficking. The use of child labor, especially as farm 
workers or domestic servants, is common in Zimbabwe, often 
with the complicity of family members. The Child Protection 
Society, a local child welfare NGO, reported that an 
increasing number of children were leaving school because 
their families could not afford rising school fees. Girls 
were more likely than boys to drop out because they were more 
readily employable as domestic workers. The South Africa 
Women's Institute of Migration Affairs (SAWIMA), a South 
Africa-based NGO, reported a rising number of Zimbabwean 
children who could no longer afford school fees were entering 
South Africa illegally where they ended up as child labor 
working for little or no pay. In many cases, the children 
traded sex with guides or truck drivers to be smuggled across 
the border. The Girl Child Network, a local child welfare 
NGO, reported that young Zimbabwean girls were recruited into 
brothels in Plumtree, Zimbabwe located near the border with 
Botswana. The Progressive Teachers' Union of Zimbabwe (PTUZ) 
reported that at least 25,000 Zimbabwean teachers had left 
the country in recent years to seek better opportunities. 
Many find employment as teachers in surrounding countries; 
however, others were forced into jobs on farms and in 
factories for little or no pay. There also have been reports 
of employers withholding their documentation under the 
pretext of regularizing their status. Zimbabweans often 
accept this abuse rather than report the offence to 
authorities and risk deportation. 
 
(SBU) According to anecdotal reports, traffickers are 
typically independent business people who are part of small 
networks of local criminal groups that facilitate trafficking 
within Zimbabwe, as well as into South Africa or other 
surrounding countries. In many cases, a trafficker approaches 
a potential victim with the offer of a lucrative job in 
another part of the country or in a neighboring country. 
Traffickers often transport victims covertly across borders 
at unrecognized border crossing points or bribe an 
immigration officer for entry. Many young men and boys are 
exploited by guides when they attempt to cross the border 
illegally into South Africa or another neighboring country to 
find work. 
 
-- 27 C. (SBU) The government established in 2006 an 
inter-ministerial taskforce on trafficking, which includes 
representatives from the Ministries of Home Affairs, Justice, 
Information, Parliamentarian Affairs, Foreign Affairs, and 
Public Service, Labor and Social Welfare. Under the Ministry 
of Home Affairs, the Victim Friendly Unit (VFU) of the 
Zimbabwe Republic Police (ZRP) deals with children's and 
sexual abuse cases, and has the lead on investigation and 
tracking of trafficking cases and the referral of victims to 
support services. The Interpol National Central Bureau (NCB) 
Zimbabwe office has a "Human Trafficking Desk" staffed by ZRP 
detectives who coordinate Zimbabwe's involvement in 
international trafficking investigations. The Department of 
Immigration (in the Ministry of Home Affairs) monitors 
borders and ports of entry for possible traffickers and 
victims. The Department of Social Welfare (in the Ministry of 
Public Service, Labor and Social Welfare) also has several 
programs for vulnerable children. The Ministry of Information 
collaborates on awareness campaigns funded by NGOs and IOs. 
 
-- 27 D. (SBU) A severe lack of financial resources and 
hyperinflationary conditions limit the government's ability 
to address the trafficking problem in practice. Police lack 
the resources, including manpower and fuel, to properly 
investigate trafficking cases. A three-month strike by 
prosecutors and magistrates throughout the country further 
strained an already overwhelmed judicial system in which 
pre-trial detainees can wait prolonged periods before 
receiving a hearing in court. The Department of Social 
Welfare lacks the necessary funding to properly assist 
victims; however, it routinely refers victims to NGOs and IOs 
for such services. 
 
-- 27 E. (SBU) The government does not have the resources to 
systematically monitor its anti-trafficking efforts and 
periodically make available, publicly or privately and 
directly or through regional/international organizations, 
assessments of its anti-trafficking efforts. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION OF TRAFFICKERS 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
-- 28 A. (SBU) Zimbabwean law does not specifically prohibit 
trafficking. Trafficking-related crimes are currently 
addressed under other legislation, primarily the Criminal Law 
(Codification and Reform) Act, the Immigration Act and the 
Labor Relations Amendment Act. These laws criminalize 
transporting people across the border for sex, corruption of 
children and allowing children to reside in or to frequent a 
brothel, allowing children to consort with or be employed by 
prostitutes, and forgery of travel documents. In addition, 
the Criminal Law Act prohibits abduction and the pledging of 
a female. The constitution and labor law provide that no one 
may be held in slavery or servitude or be made to perform 
forced or compulsory labor. Zimbabwean legal experts consider 
these laws sufficient to cover both internal and external 
forms of trafficking for sexual exploitation. Additionally, a 
victim can bring a civil suit against a trafficker under 
current law. The Criminal Procedure and Evidence Act provides 
for victim restitution and compensation. The government 
reported last year that it had drafted comprehensive 
trafficking legislation; however, the draft has not been made 
available for review nor introduced in Parliament. 
 
-- 28 B. (SBU) In terms of sexual exploitation offenses, the 
Criminal Law Act provides for the following: 
 
-- Procuring another person for unlawful sexual conduct, or 
to become a prostitute whether inside or outside Zimbabwe, or 
to leave his or her usual place of residence to become an 
inmate or frequent a brothel is punishable by a fine, a 
maximum imprisonment of two years (10 years if the person 
procured is under 16 years of age), or both. 
 
-- Coercing or inducing another person to engage in unlawful 
sexual conduct with another person by threat or intimidation 
is punishable by a fine, a maximum imprisonment of five 
years, or both. 
 
-- Detaining a person in a brothel or any other premises with 
the intention that the detained person should engage in 
unlawful sexual conduct is punishable by a fine, a maximum 
imprisonment of one year, or both. 
 
-- Allowing a person under 16 years of age to knowingly enter 
an establishment for the purpose of engaging in unlawful 
sexual conduct is punishable by a fine, a maximum 
imprisonment of seven years, or both. If the person is below 
the age of 12, the act is punishable by a fine, a maximum 
imprisonment of 10 years, or both. 
 
-- A parent allowing a child under 18 years of age to become 
a prostitute is punishable by a fine, a maximum imprisonment 
of 10 years, or both. 
 
-- Living off or facilitating prostitution is punishable by a 
fine, a maximum imprisonment of two years, or both. 
 
-- Solicitation of another person for prostitution is 
punishable by a fine, a maximum imprisonment of six months, 
or both. 
 
-- Sexual intercourse or performing indecent acts with a 
person under 16 years of age is punishable by a fine, a 
maximum imprisonment of 10 years, or both. 
 
-- Pledging a female person for a forced marriage or to 
compensate for the death of a relative, or any debt or 
obligation, is punishable by a fine, a maximum imprisonment 
of two years, or both. Any party to the marriage or 
arrangement may be charged as an accomplice. 
 
-- Forgery of a public document or corruptly using a false 
document is punishable by a fine, a maximum imprisonment of 
20 years, or both. 
 
-- 28 C. (SBU) In terms of labor trafficking offenses, the 
Labor Relations Amendment Act provides for the following: 
 
-- Failure of an employer to protect employees' right to fair 
labor standards (including to pay any employee a wage lower 
than a prescribed minimum, to require an employee to work 
more than the maximum hours permitted by law, or to require 
any employee to work under any conditions or situation which 
are below prescribed standards) is punishable by a fine, a 
maximum imprisonment of two years, or both. 
 
-- Forced labor is punishable by a fine, two years 
imprisonment, or both. 
 
-- Employment of a person under 15 years of age (unless as an 
apprentice who is over 13 years of age) is punishable by a 
fine, two years imprisonment, or both. 
 
(SBU) The Labor Relations Amendment Act does not specifically 
include provisions for criminal punishment of labor 
recruiters who engage in recruitment of laborers using 
knowingly fraudulent or deceptive offers; for employers or 
labor agents who confiscate workers' passports or travel 
documents, switch contracts without the worker's consent as a 
means to keep the worker in a state of service, or withhold 
payment of salaries as means of keeping the worker in a state 
of service. However, prosecutors may be able to use the fair 
labor standards provisions in the Labor Relations Amendment 
Act to pursue cases involving such activities. 
 
(SBU) Zimbabwe does not have specific laws that criminalize 
the acts of labor recruiters who recruit laborers using 
knowingly fraudulent or deceptive offers or impose on 
recruited laborers inappropriately high or illegal fees or 
commissions that create a debt bondage condition for the 
laborer. The constitution and labor law, however, provide 
that no one may be held in slavery or servitude or be made to 
perform forced or compulsory labor. There have not been 
reports of convictions for labor trafficking offenses during 
the reporting period. 
 
-- 28 D. (SBU) Rape and aggravated indecent assault are 
punishable by life imprisonment. Incarceration is mandatory 
for convictions for rape or forcible sexual assault, but 
there is no minimum penalty. The media frequently reports on 
rape cases and convictions. Sentences usually vary from four 
years to fifteen years, depending on the circumstances of the 
crime. 
 
-- 28 E. (SBU) Prostitution and the activities of brothel 
owner/operator, clients, pimps and enforcers are criminalized 
(as defined in the Criminal Law Act.) During the year, there 
have been several media reports regarding concerted efforts 
by police to halt prostitution throughout the country. Police 
arrested both prostitutes and clients. 
 
-- 28 F. (SBU) The government did not prosecute any human 
trafficking offenders during the reporting period; however, 
three new cases involving four victims were identified and 
brought under investigation. In one case, a 29-year-old 
Zimbabwean woman was recruited by a trafficker with the 
promise of a job in South Africa. The two crossed into South 
Africa illegally at which time the trafficker seized her 
national ID card and physically abused and raped her. After 
arrest and deportation by South African authorities, the 
victim reported her case to a protection officer at the IOM 
Reception Center in Beitbridge, Zimbabwe who then alerted the 
ZRP. ZRP officers contacted South African police who arrested 
the trafficker. The trafficker remains in custody in South 
Africa on charges of violation of migration laws and the 
sexual offences act. A court case is pending. 
 
(SBU) In the second case, a trafficker promised two young 
Zimbabwean women (17- and 18-years-old) jobs in Mozambique. 
The trafficker traveled with the victims and convinced a 
border official to allow them to enter the country without 
proper travel documents. The trafficker then forced the 
victims to work in a flea market. The trafficker refused to 
pay them for a month and used physical and psychological 
abuse to keep them from leaving. After a month, the victims 
escaped to Zimbabwe. A journalist who had attended IOM 
training on trafficking interviewed the victims and referred 
them to IOM who contact the Interpol National Central Bureau 
(NCB) Zimbabwe office. The Interpol NCB office referred the 
case to the ZRP's Victim Friendly Unit (VFU). Police arrested 
the trafficker and an investigation is ongoing. 
 
(SBU) In the third case, in February 2007, a 15-year-old 
Zimbabwean girl was sent by her maternal grandmother (who 
could not afford to raise her) to live with a family friend 
in South Africa. The girl's father was dead and her mother 
was in jail. The girl paid a taxi driver to smuggle her into 
South Africa and take her to Johannesburg. Upon arrival, the 
family friend introduced her to a Nigerian man who promised 
to arrange for her to go to the United Kingdom for school. In 
March 2007, the girl met the Nigerian at the airport where he 
gave her a fake Botswanan passport and tickets and explained 
she would be met by a contact upon her arrival. She was 
detained by South African immigration for possessing forged 
travel documents and turned over to South African police who 
placed her in a children's shelter. Sometime later, the 
Nigerian came to the shelter and tried to take the girl 
claiming to be her father. The girl told a social worker the 
Nigerian was not her father. The social worker alerted police 
and contacted IOM South Africa. The girl is still in South 
Africa while Zimbabwean authorities are arranging for other 
family members to care for her. An investigation is ongoing. 
 
(SBU) None of the investigations or cases reported in the 
2007 TIP Report has come to completion. Resource constraints 
at the ZRP and judiciary remain a severe hindrance. Police 
lack human, financial and other resources to conduct proper 
investigations. It is not unusual for a detainee to remain in 
remand custody for several years before his/her case is heard 
in court. Additionally, the backlog of cases in the courts 
was made worse by a three-month strike by magistrates, 
prosecutors and court staff. According to the Ministry of 
Justice, the woman convicted in 2006 for procuring a person 
for the purposes of prostitution is currently serving a 48 
month jail sentence. 
 
-- 28 G. (SBU) The government does not provide its own 
specialized training on trafficking; however, government 
officials attended 10 IOM training workshops that focused on 
trafficking and how to recognize trafficking victims during 
the reporting period. There were four training sessions 
specifically for law enforcement, including ZRP, VFU, 
magistrates, prosecutors and immigration. There were three 
sessions specifically for health and social welfare workers, 
including officials from Ministry of Health and Child Welfare 
and Department of Social Welfare. IOM also conducted three 
training sessions for local law enforcement and health and 
social welfare workers in several areas known to be problem 
trafficking areas. 
 
-- 28 H. (SBU) The government does cooperate with other 
governments in the investigation and prosecution of cases. 
During the reporting period, Interpol NCB Zimbabwe office 
cooperated on international trafficking investigations with 
Interpol NCB offices in Malawi, Mozambique, South Africa, 
United Kingdom and Zambia. 
 
-- 28 I. (SBU) The Zimbabwe Extradition Act permits the 
extradition of nationals, and the government has extradition 
treaties with countries in the region. There have not been 
reports of trafficking-related extraditions or requests of 
extradition from Zimbabwe to other countries during the 
reporting period. 
 
-- 28 J. (SBU) There was no evidence of government 
involvement in or tolerance of trafficking, on a local or 
institutional level. 
 
-- 28 K. (SBU) Not applicable per response to question J 
above. 
 
-- 28 L. (SBU) There have not been reported cases involving 
Zimbabwean nationals deployed abroad as part of a 
peacekeeping or other similar mission who engaged in or 
facilitated severe forms of trafficking or who exploited 
trafficking victims. 
 
-- 28 M. (SBU) The country is not identified as a source or 
destination for child sex tourism. The country's sexual 
crimes laws do have extraterritorial coverage.  There are no 
reports of any prosecutions or convictions under the 
extraterritorial provisions. 
 
------------------------------------- 
PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS 
------------------------------------- 
 
-- 29 A. (SBU) Foreign victims of trafficking can receive 
relief from deportation while receiving victim support 
services and while their cases are being investigated. The 
Chief of Immigration may offer a temporary employment permit 
at his discretion. 
 
-- 29 B. (SBU) Zimbabwe does have victim care facilities 
which are accessible to trafficking victims, including 
foreign victims. The country does not have specialized 
facilities dedicated to helping victims of trafficking; 
however, IOM, Girl Child Network, Oasis Trust, Musasa Project 
and Save the Children Norway have developed specialized 
services to assist trafficking victims in their 
shelters/assistance programs. These services include shelter, 
medical and psychological assistance, reintegration and 
livelihood activities, and legal counseling. Funding for 
these services/programs comes from international donors. The 
government primarily depends on NGOs and IOs to provide 
trafficking victims these services. 
 
-- 29 C. (SBU) The government does not have the resources to 
provide funding to foreign or domestic NGOs for trafficking 
victim services. However, the government routinely refers 
potential victims to NGOs and IOs for assistance. 
Additionally, the government allocated land to IOM to 
establish a reception center for Zimbabweans deported from 
Botswana to Plumtree, Zimbabwe which is due to open in April. 
IOM anticipates that this second reception center in Zimbabwe 
will help identify additional trafficking victims. 
 
-- 29 D. (SBU) The Department of Immigration requires all 
deportees received from South Africa to attend an IOM 
briefing on safe migration, which includes a discussion of 
trafficking. This system will also be implemented at the new 
IOM Reception Center set to open in Plumtree, Zimbabwe. The 
ZRP, Department of Social Welfare and Department of 
Immigration do have a mechanism for referring victims of 
trafficking to victim support; however, at this time the 
government primarily depends on NGOs and IOs working with 
vulnerable populations and victims to identify trafficking 
victims and alert authorities. During the reporting period, 
four new trafficking victims were identified by IOs or NGOs. 
 
-- 29 E. (SBU) Not applicable -- Zimbabwe does not have 
legalized prostitution. 
 
-- 29 F. (SBU) The rights of trafficking victims are 
respected. Once identified as a trafficking victim, the 
government usually referred the victim to an NGO or IO for 
assistance in an expeditious manner. 
 
-- 29 G. (SBU) The government encourages victims to assist in 
the investigation and prosecution of traffickers; however, 
the lack of resources impedes the ability of the police to 
pursue many cases. The four victims identified during the 
reporting period are cooperating with the investigations. 
Victims may file a civil suit or seek legal action against 
traffickers. The Criminal Procedure and Evidence Act provides 
for victim restitution and compensation. The law does not 
preclude witnesses or victims in a court case against a 
former employer from seeking other employment or leaving the 
country. 
 
-- 29 H. (SBU) The Ministry of Public Service, Labor and 
Social Welfare directly operates programs in three districts 
to provide orphans and vulnerable children with basic food 
assistance, support for school fees, counseling for 
victimized children, HIV/AIDS education and medical 
assistance.  The government also manages a small number of 
children's homes for vulnerable and orphaned children. 
However, all such government services are overwhelmed and 
under-funded. The government primarily depends on NGOs and 
IOs to provide shelter services. Several NGOs, including 
Child Protection Services, Girl Child Network and Save the 
Children Norway, also manage children's shelters. IOM, Musasa 
Project and Oasis Trust offer shelter services and support to 
adult trafficking victims. In most cases, the shelter, health 
care, counseling and reintegration services are paid for by 
the NGOs and IOs. During the reporting period, these groups 
provided assistance to at least 10 potential trafficking 
victims. 
 
(SBU) The Ministry of Public Service, Labor and Social 
Welfare and UNICEF have agreements with 21 NGOs to advance 
the National Action Plan for Orphans and Vulnerable Children 
(OVC), designed to ensure that orphans and vulnerable 
children were able to access education, food, health services 
and birth registrations and were protected from abuse and 
exploitation. During the reporting period, UNICEF reported 
that the NGOs involved in the program had reached 100,000 OVC 
with comprehensive support and protection. Additionally, the 
Department of Social Welfare (under the Ministry of Public 
Service, Labor and Social Welfare) works closely with IOM and 
Save the Children Norway to provide protection for children 
deported from South Africa received at the IOM Reception 
Center in Beitbridge, Zimbabwe. IOM anticipates that the new 
reception center in Plumtree, Zimbabwe will offer similar 
services. Additionally, the district council of Beitbridge 
has a dedicated child protection officer and convenes a child 
protection committee. 
 
-- 29 I. (SBU) The government does not provide its own 
specialized training on trafficking; however, government 
officials attended 10 IOM training workshops that focused on 
trafficking and how to recognize trafficking victims during 
the reporting period. The country's embassies were not 
involved in any of the new cases identified during this 
reporting period. However, the Interpol NCB Zimbabwe office, 
the Department of Immigration and the Department of Social 
Welfare were in contact with South African authorities to 
coordinate victim assistance and investigations in ongoing 
cases during the reporting period. 
 
-- 29 J. (SBU) The government primarily relies on IOM and 
other NGOs and IOs to provide assistance, such as medical 
aid, shelter or financial help, to its nationals who are 
repatriated as victims of trafficking. 
 
-- 29 K. (SBU) IOM, UNICEF, Save the Children Norway and Save 
the Children UK work with a network of local NGOs to support 
trafficking victims. NGOs include Connect (training for 
counselors of abuse victims), Corridors of Hope (HIV/AIDS 
education and counseling), Childline (children's crisis 
hotline), Streets Ahead (counseling and shelter for 
children), Girl Child Network (shelter, skills building and 
counseling for abused girls), Oasis Trust and Musasa Project 
(shelter and counseling for domestic abuse and trafficking 
victims), and The Center (counseling for HIV/AIDS patients.) 
These groups reported that they generally received good 
cooperation from local authorities, but that the level of 
cooperation often depended on the location. In some areas, 
officials were difficult to work with because they did not 
understand trafficking or denied any problem existed. In 
other areas, officials were very cooperative and eager to 
receive training and other assistance in building capacity. 
In cases involving children, the Department of Social 
Welfare, Ministry of Health and Children and local child 
protection committees were involved in placing the child with 
family or finding a suitable solution. The government 
generally ensured that victims received adequate care from 
service providers. 
 
----------- 
PREVENTION 
----------- 
 
-- 30 A. (SBU) The government, including senior officials at 
law enforcement, immigration and social welfare agencies, 
acknowledges that trafficking is a problem in the country. 
Senior government officials frequently speak out publicly 
about the dangers of trafficking, illegal migration, 
prostitution and exploitative labor conditions. In July 2007, 
President Mugabe announced plans to ratify the UN Trafficking 
Protocol. In January, the government announced the signing of 
an MOU with South Africa to regularize Zimbabwe migrant farm 
laborers working illegally in South Africa. 
 
-- 30 B. (SBU) The state-run media continues to print and air 
messages about the dangers of illegal migration and that warn 
the public about false employment scams, underage and forced 
marriages, prostitution and exploitative labor conditions. 
During the year, an IOM anti-trafficking radio campaign aired 
in five languages on all four government-controlled radio 
stations, which broadcast the public service announcement 
eight times per day during the peak migration periods. The 
government radio stations are a primary source of information 
throughout the country, especially in the rural areas. 
 
-- 30 C. (SBU) The government generally has a good working 
relationship with international organizations and NGOs on 
trafficking-related issues. There were some delays in 
receiving permission/permits to conduct trafficking-related 
studies/activities, but these activities were ultimately 
allowed to proceed. Unlike in previous years, there have not 
been reports of government harassment of NGOs working on the 
trafficking issue. 
 
-- 30 D. (SBU) The Department of Immigration does not 
currently have the ability to systematically monitor the 
growing number of illegal migrants deported from South 
Africa, Botswana and Zambia to effectively identify emerging 
trafficking patterns. Immigration officials do screen for 
potential victims; however, the government primarily depends 
on IOM protection officers and in-take procedures to identify 
victims. 
 
-- 30 E. (SBU) The government has an inter-ministerial 
taskforce on trafficking made up of senior government 
officials; however, it still lacks a multi-agency operational 
working group that can effectively combat the trafficking 
problem in practice. The head of the inter-ministerial 
taskforce is a senior official in the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs. In terms of specific cases, the Interpol NCB 
Zimbabwe office is the point of contact for cases requiring 
international cooperation, and the VFU of the ZRP serves as 
the lead for cases of involving internal trafficking. The 
government does have a public corruption commission, but it 
is under-funded, politicized and has yet to register any 
notable accomplishments. 
 
-- 30 F. (SBU) The government does not have a national plan 
of action to address trafficking in persons. IOM is currently 
organizing all the NGOs and IOs that work on trafficking to 
complete a resource and gap assessment exercise before 
approaching the government to form a stakeholders working 
group. 
 
-- 30 G: (SBU) The state-run media continues to print and air 
messages about the dangers of illegal migration and that warn 
the public about false employment scams, underage and forced 
marriages, prostitution and exploitative labor conditions. 
During the year, an IOM anti-trafficking radio campaign aired 
in five languages on all four government-controlled radio 
stations, which broadcast the public service announcement 
eight times per day during the peak migration periods. The 
government radio stations are a primary source of information 
throughout the country, especially in the rural areas. These 
awareness materials and radio spots include government and 
IOM contact details for victims to call for assistance or 
information. 
 
-- 30 H. (U) Not applicable. 
 
-- 30 I. (SBU) Post does not have any information on measures 
the government has adopted to ensure that its nationals who 
are deployed abroad as part of a peacekeeping or other 
similar mission do not engage in or facilitate severe forms 
of trafficking or exploit victims of such trafficking. 
 
------------------- 
CONTACT INFORMATION 
------------------- 
 
Â¶2. (U) Post point of contact for trafficking in persons is 
Scott C. Higgins; office phone 263-4-250-593, extension 321; 
fax 263-4-253-000; e-mail HigginsSC@state.gov. The estimated 
hours spent per officer in preparation of this report are as 
follows: PolOff 40 hours, PolAsst 5 hours, PolChief 1 hour 
review, DCM 1 hour review, AMB 1 hour review. 
 
MCGEE