08MADRID43
MANUEL PIZARRO TO RUN AS MARIANO RAJOY'S NUMBER
Wed Jan 16 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Madrid
VZCZCXYZ0018
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMD #0043 0161221
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 161221Z JAN 08
FM AMEMBASSY MADRID
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 4074UNCLAS MADRID 000043 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV ECON SP
SUBJECT: MANUEL PIZARRO TO RUN AS MARIANO RAJOY'S NUMBER 
TWO ON THE PP MADRID PARLIAMENTARY LIST 
 
 
Â¶1. The opposition conservative PP leader, Mariano Rajoy, 
announced on 1/15/08 that the former head of energy utility 
Endesa, Manuel Pizarro, would occupy the number two spot on 
the PP's Madrid parliamentary list.  Rajoy has the number one 
spot on the list.  Should the PP win, Pizarro would likely 
take Second Vice President and Finance Minister Solbes' job. 
Pizarro has been close to the PP for many years and is a 
friend of Jose Maria Aznar's.  He reportedly turned down a 
chance to join Aznar's government in 1996 in order to 
concentrate on business.  From 2005 to 2007, he defended 
energy giant Endesa against a hostile takeover bid from Gas 
Natural that the socialist government favored. He was 
partially successful in that Gas Natural eventually bowed out 
of the contest to buy Endesa.  In the end, Germany's Eon (the 
company favored by Pizarro) was able to acquire some of 
Endesa's assets, but the Zapatero government was able to 
ensure that major parts of the company remained in the hands 
of Spanish construction firm Acciona and an Italian utility 
(Enel).  Pizarro is 56 years old and a graduate of University 
Complutense de Madrid.  At the age of 29, he became a "State 
Lawyer" (Abogado del Estado), which is a prestigious 
merit-based position.  Pizarro is also a member of the Royal 
Academy of Economic and Financial Sciences.  The former head 
of Endesa is wealthy.  Upon leaving the company in 2007, he 
received euros 12 million after having been paid over euros 3 
million in 2006. 
 
2 Comment: Spanish commentators are having a field day with 
the announcement.  Most observers think that Rajoy has come 
up with a winner with this recruit to the PP cause for two 
reasons.  First, whatever people think of Pizarro's politics, 
he is widely respected for his professionalism and tenacity. 
Although he is not an academic economist, many people think 
he is a worthy opponent to Zapatero's Madrid number two 
socialist parliamentary candidate, the widely respected 
Second Vice President and Finance Minister Pedro Solbes.  The 
Pizarro pick is a sign that the PP intends to emphasize 
economics more during the election campaign.  Second, picking 
Pizarro gives Rajoy cover not to pick Madrid Mayor Alberto 
Ruiz Gallardon as his number two, something that many 
commentators thought was likely.  The PP in Madrid is divided 
between supporters of Autonomous Community of Madrid 
President Esperanza Aguirre and Madrid Mayor Gallardon.  Had 
Gallardon been chosen to run as number two, this would have 
opened up fissures with Aguirre.  In terms of the general 
election battle, the Pizarro pick signals that the PP is 
gearing up for a bare-knuckle fight.  Pizarro proved to be a 
no holds-barred opponent and critic of the socialist 
government during the Endesa takeover battle.  More of the 
same can be expected from Pizarro during the coming weeks. 
 
AGUIRRE