08MANAGUA1331
NICARAGUA: TOURISM OFFICIAL PAINTS A ROSY PICTURE
Fri Oct 31 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0001
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #1331/01 3052152
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 312152Z OCT 08
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3323
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS MANAGUA 001331 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
USDOC FOR 4332/ITA/MAC/WH/MSIEGELMAN 
3134/ITA/USFCS/OIO/WH/MKESHISHIAN/BARTHUR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EIND EINV ECON NU
SUBJECT: NICARAGUA: TOURISM OFFICIAL PAINTS A ROSY PICTURE 
 
REF: MANAGUA 122 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) Mario Salinas, President of the Nicaraguan Tourism 
Institute (INTUR), predicted that the tourism industry will grow 11% 
in 2008, which would be higher than the 6% growth rate in 2007.  To 
ensure this growth, INTUR, the GON's tourism promotion agency, is 
participating in more international tourism fairs to promote 
Nicaraguan tourism.  Salinas reports that he has approved new hotels 
and beach resorts, is trying to attract more cruise ships to local 
ports, and is providing technical assistance to diversify 
Nicaragua's tourism sector.  However, some industry insiders note 
that sales for many tourism entrepreneurs have dropped by 15-20% 
during the first half of 2008.  They point out the growing negative 
perception of Nicaragua internationally is scaring off tourists and 
investors.  The cautious optimism that industry representatives had 
for Nicaragua's tourism sector in 2008 has changed to serious 
concern about keeping their businesses alive.  End Summary. 
 
SALINAS PREDICTS HIGHER GROWTH IN 2008 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) On September 18, Mario Salinas, President of INTUR, presented 
a mid-year assessment of Nicaragua's tourism sector to local 
entrepreneurs.  Salinas predicted that tourism would grow 11% in 
2008, a considerable jump when compared to 6% growth rate in 2007. 
Salinas reported that 413,111 tourists visited Nicaragua during the 
first half of 2008, an increase of 7% over the first half of 2007. 
He estimated that 900,000 tourists would visit Nicaragua in 2008, 
assuming the usual bump during the November and December high 
season, and predicted that Nicaragua would earn a total of $290 
million for the year. 
 
¶3. (U) In 2007, tourism contributed $255.1 million to national 
income; 510 new businesses were formed and 869 jobs were created. 
Salinas asserted that growth in 2008 would result in 1,271 new 
companies and almost 2,000 new jobs. 
 
SALINAS SHARES PLANS TO BOOST SECTOR 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶4. (U) Salinas reassured his audience that the GON was working 
diligently to grow the tourism industry.  This year, INTUR 
participated in tourism fairs in Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, 
Panama, Germany, Spain, and Venezuela, and will also attend a fair 
in London in November.  He said INTUR has increased its promotion 
activities in the United States and Canada -- Nicaragua's most 
important tourist markets -- but is also targeting Central America 
and Venezuela, two markets with potential. 
 
¶5. (U) With regard to new investments in tourism developments, 
Salinas stated that he had approved 13 hotels and beach resorts 
during the first half of 2008.  He expects to approve 10 more 
projects before the end of the year.  These 10 new investments will 
add 622 rooms and create 360 jobs.  He said he is negotiating with 
Carnival Cruise Lines and Royal Caribbean Cruise Lines to dock more 
frequently at the ports of Corinto and San Juan del Sur. 
Additionally, INTUR is providing technical assistance and limited 
financial support to help local companies diversify Nicaragua's 
tourism industry so that it includes ecotourism, agro-tourism, 
rivers, nature trails, and historical sites. 
 
 
INDUSTRY SKPETICISM 
------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Alfredo Gutierrez, President of the Nicaraguan Association 
of Tourism Operators (ANTUR), questioned the validity of INTUR's 
data, pointing out that it is poorly prepared and does not 
distinguish between family visits, business travel, missionary 
groups, and leisure travel.  While the main hotels in Managua may be 
full, Gutierrez says they are not full of tourists.  Most travelers 
come to Nicaragua to conduct business, visit family, and/or 
participate in community service or international development 
projects.  Gutierrez reported that the tourism operators and 
businesses that cater to recreational or leisure travel are not 
doing well: sales are down 15-20% so far in 2008 when compared to 
¶2007. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Note: Post conducted its own informal survey on the status 
of the industry by talking to our contacts in Nicaragua's four 
primary tourist destinations: Granada, Leon, San Juan Del Sur in 
Rivas municipality, and the Barcelo-Montelimar Hotel in San Rafael 
del Sur municipality.  Owners and managers of restaurants and hotels 
consistently told us that, when compared to 2007, sales had declined 
by 15-20% during the first half of the year.  Some are cautiously 
optimistic that sales would pick up before the end of the year; 
others are hoping that they will break even and keep their 
businesses alive.  More than one U.S. investor has informed us that 
he is leaving the sector, citing poor market conditions and lack of 
government cooperation as causes. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Gutierrez criticizes the GON for not allocating sufficient 
resources to promote Nicaragua as an international tourist 
destination.  INTUR's current promotion budget is a paltry $1 
million, paling in comparison to Nicaragua's neighbors: Costa Rica 
($12 million), El Salvador ($10 million), Guatemala ($14 million), 
and Panama ($40 million). 
 
SCARE TACTICS 
------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) Raul Calvet, president of a tourism and real estate 
services firm, stated the GON's image is scaring away tourists and 
investors.  He noted that he has lost at least three multimillion 
dollar projects from U.S. investors this year as a result of 
ideologically-charged rhetoric coming from senior GON officials, 
especially President Ortega, against the United States, capitalism, 
and free trade.  This is coupled with the government's deliberate 
policy of developing closer ties with Iran, Cuba, Venezuela, and 
Russia.  He said that he takes several calls each week from 
potential tourists and investors from the U.S. and Canada to 
reassure them that Nicaragua is a safe place to travel, and to argue 
that the GON welcomes foreigners and their businesses.  He added 
that senior government officials appear not to understand the impact 
that their rhetoric and misguided policies have on Nicaragua's image 
and development. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) The cautious optimism that industry representatives had 
voiced for Nicaragua's tourism sector earlier this year (reftel) has 
changed to serious concern about keeping their businesses alive.  No 
one in the industry expects the GON will take the necessary steps to 
resolve the sector's problems - i.e., to maintain a welcoming 
international image, promote Nicaragua as a tourist destination, and 
improve infrastructure, i.e., roads, power, and water.  Industry 
experts believe that Salinas, who privately owns a business that 
operates in the sector that he himself manages for the government, 
understands their concerns.  They do not believe, however, that 
other government officials, including President Ortega, believe the 
sector deserves more attention than it is already getting.  End 
Comment. 
 
CALLAHAN