08OTTAWA833
LIBERALS LAUNCH "GREEN SHIFT" CARBON TAX
Fri Jun 20 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ottawa
VZCZCXRO4543
PP RUEHGA RUEHHA RUEHMT RUEHQU RUEHVC
DE RUEHOT #0833/01 1721622
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 201622Z JUN 08
FM AMEMBASSY OTTAWA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8068
INFO RUCNCAN/ALL CANADIAN POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 OTTAWA 000833 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV SENV ENERG CA
SUBJECT: LIBERALS LAUNCH "GREEN SHIFT" CARBON TAX 
 
¶1. (U) Summary.  Liberal leader Stephane Dion rolled-out his 
long-awaited carbon tax in a splashy launch on Parliament Hill on 
June 19 to a cheering, and highly partisan, crowd, kicking off a 
summer campaign to sell the plan to Canadians.  The "Green Shift" 
Plan will be the centerpiece of the Liberal campaign in the next 
election and represents a significant political gamble.  Dion has 
essentially staked his leadership on it.  Although a bold gesture on 
climate change will appeal to many Canadians, Dion's ability to sell 
it effectively is questioned even by many within his own party and 
the Conservatives have the advantage of the simpler message that the 
tax is a job and wallet killer. Both Liberals and Conservatives 
believe that the carbon tax issue will be their winning ticket in 
the next election.  One of them is wrong.  End summary 
 
¶2. (U) The timing of Dion's announcement, on the second to last day 
of the spring parliamentary sitting, reportedly owed less to 
environmental symbolism than to Liberal nervousness last week over 
the communications plan and the leader's ability to articulate it. 
Senior Liberals reportedly feared that fumbled messaging would doom 
the complex Plan.  The Plan was immediately ridiculed by Dion's 
political opponents who are setting up to make a carbon tax the 
defining issue of the next election campaign.  In a sign of the 
no-holds-barred opposition Dion can expect in coming months, the New 
Democratic Party (NDP) deliberately forced an impromptu procedural 
vote in the Commons that caused automatic bells summoning members to 
vote to ring throughout half of Dion's forty-five minute televised 
speech.  Nonetheless, although occasionally struggling in English, 
Dion gave probably his best speech since becoming Liberal leader. 
He is clearly passionate about the issue and it is a good fit for 
him, as well as having the advantage of shifting the focus from him 
personally to policy where he is more comfortable. 
 
A FUNDAMENTAL TAX SHIFT 
 
¶3. (U) The 48-page plan entitled "The Green Shift: Building a 
Canadian Economy for the 21st Century, " is unexpectedly heavy on 
economics, as was Dion's speech, which amounted more to a budget 
presentation than to a political stump speech.  Dion deliberately 
portrayed his plan less as a carbon tax than as a fundamental shift 
or "fiscal reform" of the Canadian tax system, dovetailing the Green 
Shift with a Liberal anti-poverty plan announced earlier this 
spring.  Rather than paying more, Dion stated, Canadians would pay 
differently.  Dion insisted that Canadians are ahead of their 
politicians, are looking for leadership on climate change, and are 
"ready to do the right thing" for the environment and for the 
economy.  He dismissed naysayers whom he said had told him that 
putting a price on carbon was good policy but bad politics.  Saying 
that he is "utterly convinced" of the need to take action on climate 
change, he declared that "the Liberal Party must do this because 
others will not." 
 
A FOUR YEAR PLAN 
 
¶4. (U) The carbon tax would be applied at the wholesale level on all 
fossil fuels based on their level of emissions.  In the first year 
after the plan's enactment, the tax would be set at $10 per ton of 
"greenhouse gas emissions," rising to $40 per ton in the fourth 
year.  (Comment: While unspecified, we presume the plan would target 
CO2 equivalent emissions over the fuel's production and combustion 
life cycle. End comment)  Consumers would also pay carbon taxes at 
the point of sale for some products, apparently in acknowledgement 
that purveyors will pass along to consumers whatever taxes they pay 
Qthat purveyors will pass along to consumers whatever taxes they pay 
at the wholesale level.  By the fourth year of the plan, consumers 
would pay taxes of 7 cents per liter for diesel, 11.3 cents per 
liter for light fuel oil, 12.4 cents per liter for heavy fuel oil, 
and 10.2 cents per liter for kerosene, for example, and taxes would 
also apply to propane, natural gas, and coal. 
 
¶5. (U) Curiously, the plan would not impose carbon taxes at the pump 
for gasoline, because the federal government already collects an 
excise tax of 10 cents per liter on gasoline sales (the equivalent, 
according to the plan, of $42 per ton of GHG emissions).  Overall, 
the Green Shift's carbon taxes should bring the government $15.3 
billion in the plan's fourth year, which would be offset by over $15 
billion in personal and corporate tax cuts and other benefits for 
lower income groups, seniors, and rural and northern Canada 
residents. 
 
¶6. (U) Green Shift does contain two other elements that would 
promote greater efficiencies: an accelerated capital cost allowance 
(accelerated depreciation, essentially) for green technologies, and 
better incentives (in the form of tax credits) for private R&D. 
While the details remain to be fleshed out, the plan suggests that 
additional measures to boost home retrofits, greater use of 
energy-efficient appliances and vehicles, and other low-carbon 
practices will be forthcoming. 
 
WAR OF WORDS 
 
¶7. (U) Now that the Plan is in the public arena, the battle to win 
over voters and a skeptical media can begin in earnest.  PM Harper 
 
OTTAWA 00000833  002 OF 002 
 
 
wasted no time, attacking the Plan as "crazy economics," and arguing 
that Dion could not be believed when he rejected a carbon tax during 
his Liberal leadership bid in 2006, and he should not be believed 
now.  Reprising the tag line of recent Conservative anti-Dion attack 
ads, Harper alleged that the Liberal carbon tax was a "Tax on 
Everything," an unprecedented revenue grab imposed on Canadians 
already struggling with high energy costs.  For their part, the NDP, 
who are competing for the same center-left voters as the Liberals, 
lambasted the Plan for its lack of targets and limits on GHG 
emissions.  They dismissed it as an attack on ordinary Canadians 
rather than on corporate polluters, and little more than a tax 
"shell-game" that would not "get the job done" on climate change. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Comment:  The roll-out of the Green Shift Plan is a relief 
to Liberals who can now begin to answer Conservative attack ads that 
preceded the launch. However, the Plan's complexity is a major 
challenge, given Canadians' anxiety over the economy and rising fuel 
prices.  Moreover, it is not readily apparent how the Green Shift 
would make a significant impact on consumer behavior and there 
appear to be a number of internal inconsistencies.  At the level of 
the individual consumer, the biggest continuing decision is over 
driving, and the pump price of gasoline would not change, according 
to the plan, dampening its impact on gasoline consumption.  And 
while the plan postulates that tax reductions and benefits for low 
income and rural dwellers would cushion the impact of carbon taxes, 
the most likely impact of the plan on the average Canadian is higher 
prices for energy, the consumption of which in Canada's often harsh 
climactic conditions and huge geographic expanse, has so far proven 
to be relatively price inelastic. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Continued comment:  The Liberals must also square their 
Plan with the provinces, including British Columbia and Quebec, 
which are about to impose their own carbon taxes.  That the twin 
strongholds of Liberal support -- Atlantic Canada and Ontario -- are 
among the heaviest consumers of home heating oil and already face 
some of the country's highest hydro bills will also not go 
unnoticed.  Additionally, the tax shifts -- while significant for 
low income earners -- are relatively modest for the middle class 
which will carry the freight for higher energy taxes.  In the end, 
however, some Canadians will like the Plan and others will not, and 
much will depend on which party has the best spin, making its 
ultimate impact on the political climate uncertain.  End Comment 
 
WILKINS