08SANAA1563
AMEMB SANAA 9/21 DAILY SITREP
Sun Sep 21 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Sanaa
P 210809Z SEP 08
FM AMEMBASSY SANAA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0336UNCLAS SANAA 001563 
 
OP CENTER, NEA/FO, NEA/ARP, M, AND NEA/SCA/EX 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PTER YM
SUBJECT: AMEMB SANAA 9/21 DAILY SITREP 
 
¶1. Security: On 9/20 we moved several personnel out of 
potentially vulnerable residences.  In addition, we are 
coordinating with host nation security forces to increase 
security at our cluster housing locations.  Septel to follow. 
 Post One's security equipment upgrade should be completed by 
the end of the day.  Work continues on a alternate screening 
location to process both LES (who will return to work on 
Tuesday 9/23) and consular appointments. 
 
¶2. Consular: Due to our current inability to use the regular 
pedestrian access gate, the Consular Section currently is 
able to provide services only to approximately twenty 
individuals per day, with priority given to American Citizen 
Services. 
 
¶3. Media: International media requests have tapered off.  PD 
is continuing to follow the issues and respond to requests 
from the local media. 
 
¶4. TDY Assistance: A TDY ARSO arrives from Muscat today at 
16h00 from Muscat. 
 
¶5. Attack Victims: A ROYG soldier injured in the attack died 
last night.  LegAtt obtained permission from the ROYG to 
document the cause of death of Amcit victim Susan el-Baneh so 
that her body can be released to her family for burial in 
Yemen. 
 
¶6. ROYG Contacts: According to the Yemeni press, President 
Saleh is traveling to Saudi Arabia today to meet with the 
king. 
 
SECHE