08STATE134463
THANK YOU MESSAGES FROM ASSISTANT SECRETARY WELCH
Wed Dec 24 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #4463 3591925
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 241911Z DEC 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY BEIRUT IMMEDIATE 0000UNCLAS STATE 134463 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPDC PREL LE
SUBJECT: THANK YOU MESSAGES FROM ASSISTANT SECRETARY WELCH 
 
¶1. (U) Please deliver the following messages from Assistant 
Secretary Welch to the specified Lebanese officials as soon 
as possible.  The Department of State does not plan to 
release the text of these messages, but has no objection if 
the addressed officials wish to do so.  There will no signed 
originals. 
 
¶2. (U) Text of message to Foreign Minister Fawzi Salloukh: 
 
Dear Mr. Minister: 
 
      After 31 years of diplomatic service to my country, I 
am retiring from the U.S. Department of State.  I have 
decided to change course and pursue other interests. 
 
      Thank you for your partnership in the bilateral 
initiatives we have tackled together.  Lebanon has 
accomplished a great deal since 2005 and I am proud of the 
strides we have made in strengthening the cooperation between 
the United States and Lebanon, especially with regard to the 
Lebanese Armed Forces.  I hope our countries continue to 
broaden and deepen relations in an effort to achieve our 
shared vision of a better world. 
 
Best wishes for every future success. 
 
Sincerely, 
¶C. David Welch 
 
¶3. (U) Text of message to Defense Minister Michel Murr: 
 
Dear Mr. Minister: 
 
      After 31 years of diplomatic service to my country, I 
am retiring from the U.S. Department of State.  I have 
decided to change course and pursue other interests. 
 
      Thank you for your partnership and friendship.  Lebanon 
has accomplished a great deal since 2005 and I am proud of 
the strides we have made in strengthening the cooperation 
between the United States and Lebanon, especially with regard 
to the Lebanese Armed Forces.  I hope our countries continue 
to broaden and deepen relations in an effort to achieve our 
shared vision of a better world. 
 
Best wishes for every future success. 
 
Sincerely, 
¶C. David Welch 
 
¶4. (U) Text of message to Information Minister Tarek Mitri: 
 
Dear Mr. Minister: 
 
      After 31 years of diplomatic service to my country, I 
am retiring from the U.S. Department of State.  I have 
decided to change course and pursue other interests. 
 
      I hope our countries continue to broaden and deepen 
relations in an effort to achieve our shared vision of a 
better world.  You have been a good friend and a proud 
Lebanese patriot. 
 
Best wishes for every future success. 
 
Sincerely, 
¶C. David Welch 
 
¶5. (U) Text of message to Finance Minister Mohammad Chatah: 
 
Dear Mr. Minister: 
 
      As you know, I am retiring from the U.S. Department of 
State.  I have decided to change course and pursue other 
interests. 
 
      Thank you for your partnership in the issues we have 
tackled together over the years.  Lebanon has made many 
important strides since 2005 and I look forward to its 
continued progress and success in the years to come.   I am 
proud of the steps we have taken to strengthen the 
cooperation between the United States and Lebanon, and hope 
our countries continue to broaden and deepen relations in an 
effort to achieve our shared vision of a better world.  You 
and I have worked together on very delicate issues.  I 
consider you a strong and proud advocate of a free Lebanon. 
You will always have a friend in me. 
 
Best wishes for every future success. 
 
Sincerely, 
¶C. David Welch 
 
¶6. (U) Text of message to Prime Minister Fuad Siniora: 
 
Dear Mr. Prime Minister: 
 
      After 31 years of diplomatic service, it is time for me 
to retire from the U.S. Department of State.  I have decided 
to change course and pursue other interests. 
 
      Thank you for your leadership.  Lebanon is stronger 
today because of you, and because of all Lebanese patriots. 
Lebanon has made many important strides since 2005 and I look 
forward to its continued progress and success in the years to 
come. 
 
      I commend your leadership and dedication in the face of 
many challenges and am proud of the steps we have taken to 
strengthen the cooperation between the United States and 
Lebanon, and hope our countries continue to broaden and 
deepen relations in an effort to achieve our shared vision of 
a better world. 
 
      Most of all, I will always be a friend to you and your 
country.  Best wishes for every future success. 
 
Sincerely, 
¶C. David Welch 
 
¶7. (U) Text of message to President Michel Sleiman: 
 
Dear Mr. President: 
 
      After 31 years of diplomatic service to my country 
pursuing our most pressing regional and global issues, I am 
retiring from the U.S. Department of State. 
 
      Lebanon has made many important strides since 2005.  I 
look forward to its continued progress and success in the 
years to come. 
 
      I applaud your strong leadership and am proud of the 
steps we have taken to strengthen the cooperation between the 
United States and Lebanon, and hope our countries continue to 
broaden and deepen relations in an effort to achieve our 
shared vision of a better world. 
 
Best wishes for every future success. 
 
Sincerely, 
¶C. David Welch 
 
¶8. (U) Text of message to MP Walid Jumblatt: 
 
Dear Mr. Jumblatt: 
 
      As you know, I am retiring from the U.S. Department of 
State.  I have decided to change course and pursue other 
interests. 
 
      Thank you for your partnership and dedication over the 
years in the many issues we have tackled together.  Lebanon 
has made many important strides since 2005 and I look forward 
to its continued progress and success as a sovereign, stable, 
democratic and independent nation.   I am proud of the steps 
we have taken to strengthen the cooperation between the 
United States and Lebanon, and hope our countries continue to 
broaden and deepen relations in the years to come. 
 
      We have known each other for many years, a friendship I 
am certain will continue.  Best wishes for every future 
success. 
 
Sincerely, 
¶C. David Welch 
 
¶9. (U) Text of message to MP Marwan Hamadeh: 
 
Dear Mr. Hamadeh: 
 
      My dear friend, it has come time for me to move on. 
After 31 years of diplomatic service to my country and great 
success in pursuing our most pressing regional and global 
issues, I am retiring from the U.S. Department of State.  I 
have decided to change course and pursue other interests. 
 
      Thank you for your partnership and dedication over the 
years in the many issues we have tackled together.  Lebanon 
has made many important strides since 2005 and I look forward 
to its continued progress and success as a sovereign, stable, 
democratic and independent nation. 
 
      I am proud of the steps we have taken to strengthen the 
cooperation between the United States and Lebanon, and hope 
our countries continue to broaden and deepen relations in the 
years to come. 
 
      Best wishes for every future success.  I will always be 
your friend, and a friend to Lebanon. 
 
Sincerely, 
¶C. David Welch 
 
¶10. (U) Text of message to MP Saad Hariri: 
 
Dear Mr. Hariri: 
 
      I am retiring from the U.S. Department of State.  I 
have decided to change course and pursue other interests. 
 
      Thank you for your partnership and leadership in the 
cause of building a strong, sovereign, democratic, and 
independent Lebanon.  Lebanon has undergone a remarkable 
series of changes since the tragic events of February 14, 
2005 and I am hopeful about Lebanon's future. 
 
      You are a proud symbol of all Lebanon's strengths, 
hopes, and dreams.  I look forward to watching your continued 
progress and success. 
 
      I am proud of the steps we have taken to strengthen the 
cooperation between the United States and Lebanon, and hope 
our countries continue to broaden and deepen relations in the 
years to come.  Together we can realize your father's goals. 
 
      I will always be your friend, and a friend to Lebanon. 
Best wishes for every future success. 
 
Sincerely, 
¶C. David Welch 
 
¶11. (U) Text of message to Speaker of Parliament Nabih Berri: 
 
Dear Mr. Speaker: 
 
      I am retiring from the U.S. Department of State.  I 
have decided to change course and pursue other interests. 
 
      I hope our countries continue to broaden and deepen 
relations in an effort to achieve our shared vision of a 
better world.  At vital times, you have put Lebanon's 
interests above all else. 
 
      I would like to thank you for all the time we spent 
together, during difficult circumstances, trying to find 
solutions.  Best wishes for every future success. 
 
Sincerely, 
¶C. David Welch 
 
¶12. (U) Text of message to Lebanese Forces leader Samir 
Geagea: 
 
Dear Dr. Geagea: 
 
      After 31 years of diplomatic service, I am retiring 
from the U.S. Department of State.  I have decided to change 
course and pursue other interests. 
 
      Thank you for your partnership and leadership in the 
cause of building a strong, sovereign, democratic, and 
independent Lebanon.  Lebanon has undergone a remarkable 
series of changes since 2005 and I am hopeful about Lebanon's 
future. 
 
      I look forward to watching your continued progress and 
success.  I am proud of the steps we have taken to strengthen 
the cooperation between the United States and Lebanon, and 
hope our countries continue to broaden and deepen relations 
in the years to come. 
 
      I will always be a friend to a free Lebanon; I will 
always be your friend.  Best wishes for every future success. 
 
 
Sincerely, 
¶C. David Welch 
 
¶13. (U) Text of message to former President Amine Gemayel: 
 
Dear Mr. President: 
 
      Long ago, I worked with you as a new President.  Now, 
after 31 years of diplomatic service to my country, I am 
retiring from the U.S. Department of State.  I have decided 
to change course and pursue other interests. 
 
      Thank you for your partnership and leadership in the 
cause of building a strong, sovereign, democratic, and 
independent Lebanon. 
 
      You and your family have been leaders for a free 
Lebanon.  Sadly, you have paid a price no one should have to 
bear. 
 
      Lebanon has undergone a remarkable series of changes 
since 2005 and I am hopeful about Lebanon's future.   I look 
forward to watching your continued progress and success.  I 
am proud of the steps we have taken to strengthen the 
cooperation between the United States and Lebanon, and hope 
our countries continue to broaden and deepen relations in the 
years to come. 
 
Best wishes for every future success. 
 
Sincerely, 
¶C. David Welch 
 
¶14. (U) Text of message to MP Nayla Mouawad: 
 
Dear Mrs. Mouawad: 
 
     After 31 years of diplomatic service to my country, I am 
retiring from the U.S. Department of State.  I have decided 
to change course and pursue other interests. 
 
Thank you for your partnership and leadership in the cause of 
building a strong, sovereign, democratic, and independent 
Lebanon.  Lebanon has undergone a remarkable series of 
changes since 2005 and I am hopeful about Lebanon's future. 
I look forward to watching your continued progress and 
success.  I am proud of the steps we have taken to strengthen 
the cooperation between the United States and Lebanon, and 
hope our countries continue to broaden and deepen relations 
in the years to come. 
 
Best wishes for every future success. 
 
Sincerely, 
¶C. David Welch 
RICE