08STATE134444
ENTRY INTO FORCE NOTE FOR PROTOCOLS TO
Wed Dec 24 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0003
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #4444 3591811
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 241758Z DEC 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 0000UNCLAS STATE 134444 
 
SIPDIS 
MOSCOW FOR POL-MIL AND DTRO-M 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: RS
SUBJECT: ENTRY INTO FORCE NOTE FOR PROTOCOLS TO 
U.S.-RUSSIA  CTR UMBRELLA AGREEMENT 
 
¶1.  This is an action request; please see para 3 for action. 
 
¶2.  Background: On June 16, 2006, then-Ambassador William 
Burns and Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Sergey Kislyak 
signed a protocol extending the U.S.-Russia Cooperative 
Threat Reduction (CTR) Umbrella Agreement (formal title: 
Agreement between the Russian Federation and the United 
States of America concerning the Safe and Secure 
Transportation, Storage and Destruction of Weapons and the 
Prevention of Weapons Proliferation).  On July 2, 2008, the 
Russian Federation Duma ratified the 2006 Extension Protocol 
and the 1999 Extension Protocol to the CTR Umbrella 
Agreement.  On August 15, 2008, the Department of 
International Security and Disarmament of the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation passed to Embassy 
Moscow the note at paragraph 4, indicating as a result of 
Russian Duma ratification on July 2, 2008, that the Russian 
Federation is prepared for entry into force of the 
aforementioned extension protocol, and its 1999 predecessor. 
 
¶3.  Action request:  Post is requested to present, under 
cover of a diplomatic note, the text at para 4 to appropriate 
host government officials.  Post is requested to confirm this 
action and pass a scanned copy of the outgoing Embassy note 
to Lois Allder, L/T, at allderll@state.gov.  Post assistance 
is appreciated. 
 
¶4.  Text of diplomatic note for presentation: 
 
The Embassy of the United States of America presents its 
compliments to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian 
Federation and, referring to the Ministry's note No 6995/DVBR 
dated August 15, 2008, wishes to inform the Ministry that the 
United States of America has completed all applicable 
procedures required for entry into force of the Protocol to 
the Agreement between the Russian Federation and the United 
States of America concerning the Safe and Secure 
Transportation, Storage and Destruction of Weapons and the 
Prevention of Weapons Proliferation signed at Moscow and 
Washington on June 15 and 16, 1999 (the 1999 Protocol) and 
the Protocol to the Agreement between the Russian Federation 
and the United States of America concerning the Safe and 
Secure Transportation, Storage and Destruction of Weapons and 
the Prevention of Weapons Proliferation signed at Moscow and 
Washington signed at Moscow on June 16, 2006 (the 2006 
Protocol).  Both protocols pertain to the Agreement between 
the Russian Federation and the United States of America 
concerning the Safe and Secure Transportation, Storage and 
Destruction of Weapons and the Prevention of Weapons 
Proliferation of June 17, 1992. 
 
The Embassy confirms that the 1999 Protocol, in accordance 
with Article 7 thereof, and the 2006 Protocol, in accordance 
with Article 3 thereof, have entered into force upon 
presentation of this note. 
 
The Embassy of the United States of America avails itself of 
this opportunity to renew to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
of Georgia the assurances of its highest consideration. 
 
¶5. Text of incoming Russian diplomatic note: 
No. 6995/DVBR 
August 15, 2008 
Moscow 
 
      The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian 
Federation presents its compliments to the Embassy of the 
United States of America and, referring to the Protocol to 
the Agreement between the Russian Federation and the United 
States of America concerning the Safe and Secure 
Transportation, Storage and Destruction of Weapons and the 
Prevention of Weapons Proliferation signed at Moscow and 
Washington on June 15 and 16, 1999 (the 1999 Protocol) and 
the Protocol to the Agreement between the Russian Federation 
and the United States of America concerning the Safe and 
Secure Transportation, Storage and Destruction of Weapons and 
the Prevention of Weapons Proliferation signed at Moscow and 
Washington of June 17, 1992 signed at Moscow on June 16, 2006 
(the 2006 Protocol), has the honor to provide notification 
that the Russian side has fulfilled the national procedures 
required for their entry into force. 
 
      The Ministry presumes that the 1999 Protocol, in 
accordance with Article 7 thereof, will enter into force on 
the date of the notification in reply by the U.S. side that 
it has fulfilled the required national procedures, and the 
2006 Protocol, in accordance with Article 3 thereof, will 
enter into force on the date of the Russian side,s receipt 
of the relevant notification. 
 
      The Ministry avails itself of this opportunity to renew 
to the Embassy the assurances of its high consideration 
 
/stamp of the RF MFA/ 
RICE