08STATE63757
INSTRUCTIONS FOR STATEMENT IN UN SECURITY COUNCIL
Fri Jun 13 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0001
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #3757 1650154
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O P 130145Z JUN 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 2189
INFO UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHUNV/USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA PRIORITY 3358UNCLAS STATE 063757 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNSC IR
SUBJECT: INSTRUCTIONS FOR STATEMENT IN UN SECURITY COUNCIL 
MEETING ON IRAN SANCTIONS JUNE 13 
 
 
¶1. Mission should draw on the following in making a 
statement in the June 13 meeting of the UN Security Council 
at which Iran sanctions will be discussed. 
 
¶2. Begin Text. 
 
Three months ago, this Council adopted Resolution 1803 to 
impose additional sanctions on Iran.  These sanctions, as 
well as those adopted earlier by the Council in 
Resolutions 1737 and 1747, are designed to discourage and 
halt Iran's pursuit of technologies that would provide 
it with a nuclear weapons capability.  With that in mind, 
I would like to make five points. 
 
First, we welcome the report of the Committee Chairman and 
are pleased to note the important activities being pursued 
by the Committee.  We welcome the fact that many states 
have submitted the reports required by those resolutions 
and we encourage all states that have not yet done so to 
provide their reports to the Committee as soon as 
possible.  We also reiterate this Council's call upon all 
states to exercise vigilance over the activities of 
financial institutions in their territories with all banks 
domiciled in Iran, in particular with Bank Melli and Bank 
Saderat, and their branches and subsidiaries abroad. 
 
Second, we note with great concern the 26 May 2008 report 
of the Director General of the IAEA concerning Iran's 
continuing non-compliance with Resolutions 1737, 1747 and 
¶1803.  Most disturbing is that Iran continues to defy the 
UN Security Council and has not suspended its uranium 
enrichment- and heavy water-related activities.  Instead, 
Iran has expanded its installation and operation of new 
centrifuges and is testing advanced centrifuge designs 
using nuclear material.  Iran has also continued the 
construction of a new IR-40 reactor. 
 
Third, long-outstanding questions about Iran's past 
nuclear activities, including those that indicate Iran's 
effort to develop a nuclear warhead, remain unanswered. 
IAEA Director General El Baradei stated clearly that Iran 
must provide "substantive explanations" for these 
activities, and that it is essential that Iran provide all 
requested information, clarifications, and access outlined 
in the report without further delay. 
 
Fourth, we expect Iran to comply with its international 
obligations concerning its nuclear activities, including 
the full and verifiable suspension of its 
proliferation-sensitive nuclear activities and full 
cooperation with the International Atomic Energy Agency, 
and to implement the Additional Protocol.  Only through 
all of these steps can Iran begin to establish confidence 
that the nature of its nuclear program is exclusively 
peaceful.  Iran must provide to the IAEA full disclosure of 
any weapons-related work and allow the IAEA to verify that any 
such work 
has ceased. 
 
Fifth, we affirm the dual track strategy on this issue, 
which is reinforced by the updated P5+1 package that will 
be delivered to Iran in the near term and reiterate our 
belief that a mutually satisfactory, negotiated solution 
remains open to Iran.  At the same time, all Member States 
must implement robustly their obligations under UN 
Security Council Resolutions 1737, 1747 and 1803, as well 
as other pertinent resolutions.  This Council should stand 
ready, in accordance with its stated intention in 
Resolution 1803, to supplement those sanctions with 
additional measures. 
 
End Text. 
RICE