08STATE2476
OSCE PERMANENT COUNCIL:  RESPONSE TO INCOMING
Wed Jan 09 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO7979
RR RUEHAST RUEHFL RUEHLA RUEHMRE RUEHPOD RUEHROV RUEHSR
DE RUEHC #2476/01 0091621
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 091619Z JAN 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUEHVEN/USMISSION USOSCE 7260
INFO ORG FOR SECURITY CO OP IN EUR COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 STATE 002476 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL OSCE PHUM CFED FI
SUBJECT: OSCE PERMANENT COUNCIL:  RESPONSE TO INCOMING 
CIO, FINNISH FM KANERVA 
 
 
Â¶1. Post is authorized to present the following statement at 
the January 10 Special Permanent Council meeting in Vienna. 
 
Begin text: 
 
We are honored to welcome Foreign Minister Ilkka Kanerva to 
the Permanent Council as the Chairman in Office for 2008. 
The United States fully supports the objectives that you have 
set out in your intervention.  I can assure you that my 
country will do everything it can to support you in reaching 
these goals and strengthening the OSCE.  These are 
challenging times for the OSCE, but we see Finland as 
uniquely suited to deal with them. 
 
Your message that participating States need to focus more on 
the implementation of existing commitments is especially 
timely.  All of our hard work over the years will be for 
naught if we do not put those Ministerial and Permanent 
Council decisions into practice.  As Undersecretary Burns 
noted in his intervention at the Madrid Ministerial, we are 
especially concerned that fundamental human rights 
commitments at the heart of this organization's identity and 
purpose are being ignored or, in many cases, actively 
questioned. 
 
Of particular importance are the commitments dealing with the 
human dimension, especially on elections.  We have said it 
before and we will say it again ) OSCE election monitoring 
must not be undermined in any way.  Moreover, those 
commitments that help ensure free and fair elections, such as 
freedom of speech and the right to peaceful assembly, must 
also be respected.  For this reason, we support an active 
discussion of such commitments during meetings of the Human 
Dimension Committee, and in special events Finland will 
organize during the course of the year. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we encourage your active engagement to help 
resolve the protracted conflicts.  We applaud your imminent 
trip to Moldova and believe that Terhi Hakala, the Head of 
Mission in Georgia, will remain a visible symbol of your 
active involvement in the Caucasus.  We urge all parties 
concerned to support an increase in the number of monitors 
for South Ossetia as soon as possible and again call for a 
monitoring post at Didi Gupta and international monitoring of 
the Roki Tunnel to halt the illicit flow of armed groups, 
weapons, and ammunition into the region. 
 
Your Chairmanship will face some immediate challenges. 
 
The OSCE will have to deal with the impact of Russia's 
decision to cease implementation of its obligations under the 
CFE Treaty.  Russia has said it will no longer accept 
inspections; it did not participate in the Annual Exchange of 
Information on December 14 in Vienna.  The U.S. and its NATO 
Allies have engaged intensively for the last several months 
in a serious dialogue with Russia to address the issues it 
has raised while taking account of the concerns of all 30 
States Parties to the CFE Treaty, including issues relating 
to Russia,s commitments on Moldova and Georgia.  Actions by 
NATO countries have been scrupulously consistent with the 
letter and the spirit of the Treaty.  By contrast, Russia,s 
unilateral actions have the potential of undermining the 
viability of the CFE regime.  We hope that Russia will 
reverse its decision on "suspension" and resume 
implementation of its Treaty obligations. 
 
I fear that all too soon in your Chairmanship we may also 
have to come to grips with challenges to a continued OSCE 
role in Kosovo.  Over the past eight years, the OSCE Mission 
in Kosovo has played an essential role in supporting peace 
and democracy.  The United States particularly values the 
work the mission is doing to monitor and report on the 
welfare and security of Kosovo's minority populations and to 
promote ethnic reconciliation.  OMiK's work, however, remains 
unfinished.  We regret that two participating States last 
month insisted on a month-to-month renewal of the Mission 
mandate rather than joining consensus to renew the mandate 
for the full year, and that they have threatened its closure 
in the event Kosovo declares independence.  Such 
short-sightedness could impair the Mission's effectiveness 
and its ability to retain qualified staff.  We hope the Chair 
can convince all participating States of the need for the 
OSCE to remain engaged in Kosovo regardless of how the status 
process is resolved.  If OMiK is forced to close its doors in 
Kosovo, we urge all efforts be made to ensure a proper 
closeout period that allows a successor organization to take 
on OMiK's key Ahtisaari-related functions, as well as 
 
STATE 00002476  002 OF 002 
 
 
allowing OMiK's valued staff to transition to new employment 
 
Mr. Minister, the United States will also look to you, as 
Chairman in Office, to move our Organization forward toward 
new horizons.  We consider the decision made at Madrid, 
tasking the Secretary General to examine the potential of 
greater OSCE engagement with Afghanistan, as one of the most 
important of that Ministerial.  It addresses an issue which 
has a direct impact on security throughout the OSCE region. 
We look forward to receiving the Secretary General's 
assessments for border work by the OSCE involving 
Afghanistan, and will support you, Mr. Chairman, in your 
efforts to make this a reality. 
 
The Organization,s work in Central Asia, especially in the 
area of policing, counternarcotics, customs reform, and 
border security, is critical to improving the daily lives of 
Central Asians and the security of the Europe.  We look 
forward to your leadership in strengthening the 
Organization,s work in this critical region across all three 
dimensions and will support your efforts to do so. 
 
Finally, the United States regrets that, despite the hard 
work of the Finnish Chair of the Advisory Committee on 
Management and Finance, the OSCE has not yet approved its 
budget for 2008.  We look forward to working with the Finnish 
Chairmanship to bring the budget discussion to a quick and 
successful conclusion that appropriately reflects the 
relative importance of the Secretariat, the Institutions and 
the Field Missions. 
 
This is an ambitious and sometimes contentious agenda.  We 
wish you and your mission here the best of luck.  Please be 
assured of the full support of the United States as you move 
forward. 
 
Thank you. 
 
End Text. 
RICE