08STATE124112
GUIDANCE: MIDDLE EAST BRIEFING, NOVEMBER 25
Sun Nov 23 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0003
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #4112 3282249
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 232242Z NOV 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000UNCLAS STATE 124112 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNSC PREL LE IS SY
SUBJECT: GUIDANCE: MIDDLE EAST BRIEFING, NOVEMBER 25 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action message.  USUN is authorized to 
draw from points in para 2 below during the Middle East 
Briefing scheduled for November 25. 
 
¶2. (U) Talking points. 
 
-- I would like to thank Under Secretary-General Pascoe 
for his briefing on the situation in the Middle East. 
There are two major points that share equal importance for 
the Council's consideration today. 
 
-- First, we should take note of the positive and forward- 
looking nature of the November 9 briefing by the 
Palestinian and Israeli negotiators for the Quartet in 
Sharm el Sheikh.  The parties are to be commended for 
their clear affirmation of their commitment to the process 
launched at Annapolis and to ongoing, bilateral 
negotiations that address all the core issues.  The 
framework for negotiating a final resolution of the 
conflict is before us: determined, professional talks 
between the parties; consistent yet constructive 
international engagement; and a vigorous effort to improve 
conditions on the ground.  The distance to peace has 
narrowed even if an agreement has not yet been reached. 
 
-- Israel and the Palestinians have expressed common 
aspirations.  They have underscored their commitment to 
reaching a comprehensive agreement on all issues, without 
exception, as agreed at Annapolis.  They have pledged to 
continue their bilateral and, confidential negotiations 
until this goal is achieved, even during times of 
political transition.  They have attested the negotiating 
structure is effective and productive and they intend to 
keep it in place. 
 
-- Based on this, the parties requested the continued 
support of the international community, including respect 
for the mutually-agreed principles of their bilateral 
dialogue and for the confidential nature of the 
negotiations, and that third parties should not intervene 
in the negotiations absent the joint request of both 
parties.  Taking into account the substantial nature of 
the negotiations and the potential for further progress, 
we remain committed to the irreversibility of the 
negotiations. 
 
-- We urge our international partners, particularly those 
in the region, to demonstrate their commitment to peace by 
providing political and economic assistance to the 
legitimate Palestinian government, which has taken 
significant steps to reform its security services and 
increase accountability and transparency within its 
governing institutions. 
 
-- As a member of the Quartet, the UN also has an 
important role to play.  It must take an even-handed 
approach, encouraging both parties to take the necessary 
steps to make progress.  The UN cannot be seen to favor 
one side over the other. 
 
-- Secondly, and of similar importance for Council 
members, is our mutual concern for the welfare of the 
innocent people of Gaza and in the towns and cities of 
southern Israel.  As the largest single-state contributor 
of aid to the Palestinian people, the United States is 
committed to seeing humanitarian aid get through. 
 
-- The U.S. calls for an immediate halt in rocket attacks 
against civilian communities in Israel, and attacks 
against commercial crossings that are preventing the 
import of crucial humanitarian supplies and basic 
commodities, without which the people of Gaza will 
continue to suffer. 
 
-- We urge an end to violence and for the Government of 
Israel to allow fuel, humanitarian shipments, and 
humanitarian aid workers entry into Gaza as expeditiously 
as possible. 
 
-- Egyptian efforts to promote calm in Gaza and southern 
Israel are laudable, and we continue to urge both sides to 
adhere to their commitments in this regard.  At the same 
time, it is critical the international community upholds 
the Quartet principles -- renunciation of violence, 
recognition of Israel, and acceptance of previous 
agreements between the parties.  Respect for PLO 
commitments are also critical in this regard. 
 
-- The Council should not lose sight of the root cause for 
the current situation.  While the vast majority of the 
people of Gaza simply want to get on with their lives, 
Hamas and other groups continue to instigate violence by 
their surreptitious construction of tunnels from Gaza into 
Israeli territory of the type used before to kidnap and 
kill Israeli soldiers, their indiscriminate rocket attacks 
on Israel, and their attacks on established humanitarian 
aid crossing points.  It should not come as a surprise 
that this increase in disruptive terrorist violence comes 
at a time when the peace negotiators have reaffirmed their 
commitment in the face of adversity.  This is a pattern 
the Council has seen time and again as terrorists seek to 
instigate a crisis to derail efforts for peace. 
 
-- I wish to touch briefly on two other matters.  First, 
we have seen in recent days two extraordinary gestures by 
Israeli and Palestinian leaders that should not go 
un-remarked.  During the recent General Assembly session 
on a "Culture of Peace" Israeli President Peres made a 
special point to reach out directly to Saudi King 
Abdullah, signaling Israeli openness to elements of the 
Arab Peace initiative of 2002.  Then last week, the 
Palestinian Authority  took out advertisements in the 
Israeli press calling directly on the Israeli people to 
embrace that same Arab Peace Initiative.  These steps are 
consistent with an expansion of diplomatic efforts toward 
comprehensive peace in the region.  We applaud and 
encourage creative, determined efforts of this nature, 
which have succeeded in building peace in the past and can 
do so again. 
 
-- Finally, just a short word on Lebanon, which we 
normally discuss in the context of these briefings but 
will take up this afternoon in a full discussion of the 
Secretary General's report on UN Security Council 
resolution 1701.  For now, let me say only that we 
strongly support the report's clear expression of the 
importance of Hizballah disarmament, as the Secretary 
General also recently highlighted in his report on UNSCR 
¶1559. 
 
End talking points. 
RICE