08STATE98089
AFGHANISTAN: GUIDANCE FOR UNSC RENEWAL OF THE
Sat Sep 13 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #8089 2570104
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 130056Z SEP 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO ALL NATO POST COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD IMMEDIATE 0000
RUEHBUL/AMEMBASSY KABUL IMMEDIATE 0000
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO IMMEDIATE 0000
RUEHVEN/USMISSION USOSCE IMMEDIATE 0000
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS IMMEDIATEUNCLAS STATE 098089 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNSC PREL ISAF AF
SUBJECT: AFGHANISTAN: GUIDANCE FOR UNSC RENEWAL OF THE 
ISAF MANDATE 
 
¶1. The Department instructs USUN to support UNSC adoption 
of the Italian draft resolution (para 4) renewing the 
International Security Assistance Force's (ISAF) mandate 
in Afghanistan.  The Department also refers USUN to the 
following guidance in negotiating the final text of the 
resolution.  USUN should seek additional guidance should 
there be substantial changes to the resolution in para 4 
with the exception of those issues discussed in paras 2 
and 3 below. 
 
Redlines 
--------- 
 
¶2. The operative paragraphs should not change from the 
current draft, thus leaving the ISAF mandate unchanged 
from the previous 12 months.  The Department cannot 
support Russian efforts to include language regarding 
anti-narcotics efforts in an operative paragraph.  We 
believe that the current references to counter-narcotics 
efforts as reflected in PPs 6, 8, and 14 are sufficient in 
the context of the ISAF mandate.  A further role for ISAF 
in counter-narcotics activities would need to be approved 
in advance by ISAF contributing countries.  Any further 
reference to counter-narcotics efforts can only be general 
in nature. 
 
¶3.  The Department cannot accept language that singles out 
ISAF or other international forces as the cause of 
civilian casualties, or that fails to put the issue of 
civilian casualties in its proper context, particularly in 
light of continuing Taliban actions that intentionally 
increase the number of civilian casualties.  The 
resolution may reference the Council's concern and its 
desire for all concerned to take steps to ensure 
protection of civilians.  The resolution may reference the 
Council's concern and its desire to protect civilians. We 
prefer the current formulations regarding civilian 
casualties in PPs 12 and 13, but can accept the following 
language: 
 
PP 12 Reiterating its serious concern with the number of 
civilian casualties and reiterating its call for all 
feasible steps to be taken to ensure the protection of 
civilians, and for international humanitarian and human 
rights law to be upheld, and taking note of the recent 
statements of the Afghan authorities in this regard. 
 
PP13 Calling on ISAF and other international forces to 
continue their robust efforts to minimize the risk of 
civilian casualties, notably by the continuous review of 
tactics and procedures, and to conduct after-action 
reviews in cooperation with the Afghan Government in cases 
where civilian casualties have reportedly occurred, and in 
this regard encourages international forces to 
investigate, in full cooperation with Afghan government 
authorities, military operations that may have caused 
civilian casualties. 
 
¶4. Begin resolution text: 
 
The Security Council, 
 
PP1 Reaffirming its previous resolutions on Afghanistan, 
in particular its resolutions 1386 (2001), 1510 (2003), 
1776 (2007) and 1806 (2008), 
 
 
PP2 Reaffirming also its resolutions 1267 (1999), 1368 
(2001) and 1373 (2001), and reiterating its support for 
international efforts to root out terrorism in accordance 
with the Charter of the United Nations, 
 
PP3 Recalling its resolutions 1265 (1999), 1296 (2000), 
1674 (2006), and 1738 (2006) on the protection of 
civilians in armed conflict, its resolutions 1325 (2000) 
and 1820 (2008) on women and peace and security, and its 
resolution 1612 (2005) on children and armed conflict, 
 
PP4 Reaffirming its strong commitment to the sovereignty, 
independence, territorial integrity and national unity of 
Afghanistan, 
 
PP5 Recognizing that the responsibility for providing 
security and law and order throughout the country resides 
with the Afghan Authorities and welcoming the cooperation 
of the Afghan Government with the International Security 
Assistance Force (ISAF), 
 
PP6 Recognizing once again the interconnected nature of 
the challenges in Afghanistan, reaffirming that 
sustainable progress on security, governance and 
development, as well as the cross-cutting issue of 
counter-narcotics is mutually reinforcing and welcoming 
the continuing efforts of the Afghan Government and the 
international community to address these challenges 
through a comprehensive approach, 
 
PP7 Stressing the central and impartial role that the 
United Nations continues to play in promoting peace and 
stability in Afghanistan by leading the efforts of the 
international community, noting, in this context, the 
synergies in the objectives of UNAMA and of the 
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF), and 
stressing the need for strengthened cooperation, 
coordination and mutual support, taking due account of 
their respective designated responsibilities, 
 
PP8 Expressing its strong concern about the security 
situation in Afghanistan, in particular the increased 
violent and terrorist activities by the Taliban, Al-Qaida, 
illegally armed groups, criminals and those involved in 
the narcotics trade, and the increasingly strong links 
between terrorism activities and illicit drugs, resulting 
in threats to the local population, including children, 
national security forces and international military and 
civilian personnel, 
 
PP9 Expressing also its concern over the harmful 
consequences of violent and terrorist activities by the 
Taliban, Al-Qaida and other extremist groups on the 
capacity of the Afghan Government to guarantee the rule of 
law, to provide security and basic services to the Afghan 
people, and to ensure the improvement and protection of 
their human rights and fundamental freedoms, 
 
PP10 Reiterating its support for the continuing endeavors 
by the Afghan Government, with the assistance of the 
international community, including ISAF and the Operation 
Enduring Freedom (OEF) coalition, to improve the security 
situation and to continue to address the threat posed by 
the Taliban, Al-Qaida and other extremist groups, and 
stressing in this context the need for sustained 
international efforts, including those of ISAF and the OEF 
coalition, 
 
PP11 Condemning in the strongest terms all attacks, 
including Improvised Explosive Device (IED) attacks, 
suicide attacks and abductions, targeting civilians and 
Afghan and international forces and their deleterious 
effect on the stabilization, reconstruction and 
development efforts in Afghanistan, and condemning further 
the use by the Taliban and other extremist groups of 
civilians as human shields, 
 
PP12 Expressing its concern about all civilian casualties, 
and reiterating its call for all feasible steps to be 
taken to ensure the protection of civilian life and for 
international humanitarian and human rights law to be 
upheld, 
 
PP13 Recognizing the robust efforts taken by ISAF and 
other international forces to minimize the risk of 
civilian casualties, notably the continuous review of 
tactics and procedures and the conduct of after-action 
reviews in cooperation with the Afghan Government in cases 
where civilian casualties have reportedly occurred, 
 
PP14 Stressing the need for further progress in security 
sector reform, including further strengthening of the 
Afghan National Army and Police, disbandment of illegal 
armed groups, justice sector reform and counter narcotics, 
 
PP15 Stressing in this context the importance of further 
progress in the reconstruction and reform of the prison 
sector in Afghanistan, in order to improve the respect for 
the rule of law and human rights therein, 
 
 
PP16 Reiterating its call on all Afghan parties and groups 
to engage constructively in peaceful political dialogue 
within the framework of the Afghan Constitution and in the 
socio-economic development of the country, and to avoid 
resorting to violence including through the use of illegal 
armed groups, 
 
PP17 Recalling the leading role that the Afghan 
Authorities will play for the organization of the next 
elections, and stressing the importance of the assistance 
to be provided by ISAF in securing the conduct of such 
elections, 
 
PP18 Recognizing the importance of the contribution of 
neighbouring and regional partners for the stabilization 
of Afghanistan, and stressing the need to advance regional 
cooperation as an effective means to promote security, 
governance and development in Afghanistan, 
 
PP19 Welcoming the continued coordination between ISAF 
and the OEF coalition, and the cooperation established 
between ISAF and the European Union presence in 
Afghanistan, particular its police mission (EUPOL, 
Afghanistan), 
 
PP20 Expressing its appreciation for the leadership 
provided by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), 
and for the contributions of many nations to ISAF and to 
the OEF coalition, including its maritime interdiction 
component, 
 
PP21 Determining that the situation in Afghanistan still 
constitutes a threat to international peace and security, 
 
PP23 Determined to ensure the full implementation of the 
mandate of ISAF, in coordination with the Afghan 
Government, 
 
PP24 Acting for these reasons under Chapter VII of the 
Charter of the United Nations, 
 
¶1. Decides to extend the authorization of the 
International Security Assistance Force, as defined in 
resolution 1386 (2001) and 1510 (2003), for a period of 
twelve months beyond 13 October 2008; 
 
¶2. Authorizes the Member States participating in ISAF to 
take all necessary measures to fulfill its mandate; 
 
¶3. Recognizes the need to further strengthen ISAF to meet 
all its operational requirements, and in this regard calls 
upon Member States to contribute personnel, equipment and 
other resources to ISAF, and to make contributions to the 
Trust Fund established pursuant to resolution 1386 (2001); 
 
¶4. Stresses the importance of increasing, in a 
comprehensive framework, the functionality, 
professionalism and accountability of the Afghan security 
sector, encourages ISAF and other partners to sustain 
their efforts, as resources permit, to train, mentor and 
empower the Afghan national security forces, in particular 
the Afghan National Police, in order to accelerate 
progress towards the goal of self-sufficient and 
ethnically balanced Afghan security forces providing 
security and ensuring the rule of law throughout the 
country, and welcomes in this context the progress 
achieved by the Afghan Authorities towards assuming lead 
security responsibility for Kabul, and stresses the 
importance of supporting the planned expansion of the 
Afghan National Army; 
 
¶5. Calls upon ISAF to continue to work in close 
consultation with the Afghan Government and the Special 
Representative of the Secretary General as well as with 
the OEF coalition in the implementation of the force 
mandate; 
 
¶6. Requests the leadership of ISAF to keep the Security 
Council regularly informed, through the Secretary-General, 
on the implementation of its mandate, including through 
the provision of quarterly reports; 
 
¶7. Decides to remain actively seized of this matter. 
 
End text. 
RICE