08STATE106306
USUN INSTRUCTION: CIRCULATE SUDAN PANEL OF
Fri Oct 03 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #6306 2772146
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O R 032141Z OCT 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO RUEHKH/AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM 0000UNCLAS STATE 106306 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KTFN PGOV PHUM PREL PTER SU UNSC
SUBJECT: USUN INSTRUCTION: CIRCULATE SUDAN PANEL OF 
EXPERTS RESOLUTION 
 
¶1. This is an action request.  USUN is instructed to 
circulate the resolution (text in para 2) that will extend 
the mandate of the current UNSC Sudan Sanctions Committee's 
Panel of Experts (POE).  The POE's mandate expires 15 October. 
 
------------------ 
TEXT OF RESOLUTION 
------------------ 
¶2. The Security Council, 
 
Recalling its previous resolutions concerning the situation 
in Sudan, in particular resolutions 1779 (2007) of 28 
September 2007, 1769 (2007) of 31 July 2007, 1713 (2006) of 
29 September 2006, 1672 (2006) of 25 April 2006, 1665 (2006) 
of 29 March 2006, 1651 (2005) of 21 December 2005, 1591 
(2005) of 29 March 2005, and 1556 (2004) of 30 July 2004, and 
the statements of its President concerning Sudan, 
 
Stressing again its firm commitment to the cause of peace 
throughout Sudan, full implementation of the Comprehensive 
Peace Agreement of 9 January 2005, full implementation of the 
framework agreed between the parties for a resolution of the 
conflict in Darfur (the Darfur Peace Agreement), and an end 
to the violence and atrocities in Darfur, 
 
Reiterating its belief in the basis provided by the Darfur 
Peace Agreement for a lasting political solution and 
sustained security in Darfur, deploring that the Agreement 
has not been fully implemented by the signatories and not 
signed by all parties to the conflict in Darfur, 
 
Noting with strong concern the ongoing violence, impunity, 
and consequent deterioration of the humanitarian situation, 
and reiterating its deep concern about the security of 
civilians and humanitarian aid workers and about humanitarian 
access to populations in need, and calling upon all parties 
in Darfur to cease offensive actions immediately and to 
refrain from further violent attacks, underscoring that the 
25 August 2008 attack on Kalma internally displaced persons 
camp by Government of Sudan forces is unacceptable, 
 
Demanding that there should be no aerial bombings and an end 
to the use in such attacks of aircraft with United Nations 
markings or painted white to resemble humanitarian operators, 
strongly urging all parties to the conflict to cooperate with 
the UN/AU-led Darfur Peace Process under Chief Mediator 
Djibril Bassole, and demanding that the parties to the 
conflict exercise restraint and cease military action, 
 
Commending the efforts of, and reiterating its full support 
for the African Union, the Secretary-General, the joint AU/UN 
Chief Mediator, and the leaders of the region to promote 
peace and stability in Darfur, looking forward to the full 
and rapid deployment of the AU/UN Mission in Darfur (UNAMID), 
and expressing strong support for the political process under 
AU/UN-led mediation, 
 
Recalling the 13 April 2007 midterm briefing of the Panel of 
Experts appointed by the Secretary-General pursuant to 
paragraph 3 (b) of resolution 1591 (2005) and extended by 
resolutions 1651 (2005), 1665 (2006), 1713 (2006), and 1779 
(2007), and taking note of the Panel's final report presented 
to the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591 
(2005) and currently under consideration, and expressing its 
intent to study the Panel's recommendations further and to 
consider appropriate next steps, 
 
Emphasizing the need to respect the provisions of the Charter 
concerning privileges and immunities, and the Convention on 
the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations, as 
applicable to United Nations operations and persons engaged 
in such operations, 
 
Reaffirming its commitment to the sovereignty, unity, 
independence and territorial integrity of Sudan, and 
recalling the importance of the principles of good 
neighbourliness, non-interference and cooperation in the 
relations among States in the region, 
 
Determining that the situation in Sudan continues to 
constitute a threat to international peace and security in 
the region, 
 
Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, 
 
¶1. Decides to extend until 15 October 2009 the mandate of the 
current Panel of Experts, originally appointed pursuant to 
resolution 1591 (2005) and previously extended by resolutions 
1651 (2005), 1665 (2006), 1713 (2006), and 1779 (2007) and 
requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary 
administrative measures; 
 
¶2. Requests the Panel of Experts to provide no later than 29 
March 2009 a midterm briefing on its work and no later than 
90 days after adoption of this resolution an interim report 
to the Committee established pursuant to paragraph 3 (a) of 
resolution 1591 (2005) and a final report no later than 30 
days prior to termination of its mandate to the Council with 
its finding and recommendations; 
 
¶3. Requests the Panel of Experts to coordinate its activities 
as appropriate with the operations of the African 
Union/United Nations Hybrid operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and 
with UN/AU-led efforts to promote the political process in 
Darfur under the leadership of Chief Mediator Djibril Bassole 
and, in this context, further requests the Panel to assess in 
its interim and final reports progress towards reducing 
violations by all parties of the measures imposed by 
paragraphs 7 and 8 of resolution 1556 (2004) and paragraph 7 
of resolution 1591 (2005), and progress towards reducing 
impediments to the political process; 
 
¶4. Urges all States, relevant United Nations bodies, the 
African Union, and other interested parties, to cooperate 
fully with the Committee and the Panel of Experts, in 
particular by supplying any information at their disposal on 
implementation of the measures imposed by resolution 1591 
(2005) and resolution 1556 (2004); 
 
¶5. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter. 
 
END TEXT 
 
---------------- 
POINT OF CONTACT 
---------------- 
¶3. Department POC is Jean T Clark (clarkjt@state.sgov.gov; 
202.736.7736) in IO/PSC. 
 
¶4. Department appreciates Mission's efforts. 
RICE