08STATE11495
TALKING POINTS FOR FEBRUARY 5 SYG BRIEFING ON HIS
Mon Feb 04 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #1495 0352351
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O P 042349Z FEB 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0457
INFO UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS STATE 011495 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNSC PREL PHUM CG KE SO SU XA XW ZF
SUBJECT: TALKING POINTS FOR FEBRUARY 5 SYG BRIEFING ON HIS 
AFRICA TRIP 
 
 
Â¶1.  USUN is instructed to draw from the following points for 
the Security Council's February 5 briefing from Secretary 
General Ban Ki-Moon on his recent trip to the AU Summit and 
Kenya 
 
Begin points: 
 
-- The United States thanks the Secretary-General for his 
very informative briefing on his visit to the AU Summit in 
Addis Ababa and his trip to Kenya.  Africa continues to be of 
the highest priority for the United States, and we greatly 
appreciate the Secretary-General's hands-on leadership on 
these issues. 
 
-- The U.S. is committed to security, democracy, human 
rights, and development for the people of Africa - working 
through both bi-lateral relations and through regional and 
sub-regional organizations.  With that in mind, today I would 
like to focus on the situations in Chad, Sudan, Kenya, and 
Somalia. 
 
-- The United States joins the African Union (AU) in 
condemning the attempt by armed rebels, entering from outside 
the country, to seize power in Chad. 
 
-- We are also extremely disturbed by numerous reports of 
Sudanese support for the rebel forces.  We call on the 
Sudanese government to adhere to its international 
commitments and to end any support it may be providing to the 
rebels.  We urge all parties to stop fighting, protect 
non-combatants, and to pursue peaceful means of resolving 
their differences. 
 
(IF THE SECRETARY GENERAL BRIEFS ON NEW AGREEMENT BY 
GOVERNMENT OF SUDAN AND BASHIR) 
 
-- Turning to Sudan, we welcome the agreement on UNAMID 
deployment by President Bashir and the Government of Sudan 
with troop contributing countries, and we hope that it will 
be implemented as soon as possible.  Action is what counts. 
 
(End point if SYG briefs on new agreement.) 
 
-- The United States remains deeply concerned by the slow 
deployment of UNAMID.  We strongly deplore all threats 
against and attacks on UNAMID by any party.  An attack on 
UNAMID, such as that by the Sudanese Armed Forces on 7 
January, must not be repeated.  The Government of Sudan must 
agree formally to the full UN/AU list of troop contributing 
countries for UNAMID, agree to a Status of Forces Agreement 
with the UN and AU, grant night flight clearances, allow 
access to necessary land and water, and grant timely visas to 
UNAMID and its personnel. 
 
-- The Security Council must continue to pressure the 
Government of Sudan to refrain from impeding UNAMID's 
deployment.  We call on all members to abide by the existing 
arms embargo.  We also call on the UN and AU to name a joint 
Senior Negotiator who can assist all of the parties to reach 
a negotiated settlement of their conflict.  Darfur peace 
talks must be re-energized because only negotiations can 
bring about a peaceful solution. 
 
-- On Kenya, the United States was pleased that the Secretary 
General visited Nairobi to meet with President Kibaki and 
opposition leader Raila Odinga to express the UN's full 
support of former Secretary General Kofi Annan's efforts to 
broker a political agreement between the two.  The United 
States deplores the violence that continues to grip Kenya. 
We call on both sides to urge restraint among their 
supporters.  We are pleased the parties have agreed on an 
agenda to begin national reconciliation. 
 
-- On Somalia, we welcome the recent deployment of a brigade 
of peacekeepers from Burundi to the African Union Mission 
there.  We call on all AU missions that have promised to 
deploy peacekeepers to do so immediately and we urge the 
donor community to give generously to this worthy mission. 
 
-- We look forward to our continued cooperation with the UN, 
the AU, the many sub-regional organizations and NGOs, and the 
international community for continued progress in Africa. 
 
end points. 
RICE