08TRIPOLI336
LIBYA PREPARED TO FINALIZE - BUT NOT SIGN - A TIFA
Tue Apr 22 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tripoli
VZCZCXRO4583
OO RUEHTRO
DE RUEHTRO #0336/01 1131319
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O P 221319Z APR 08
FM AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3367
INFO RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHINGTON DC
RUEHTRO/AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI 3871UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TRIPOLI 000336 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PLEASE PASS TO USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL ECON ELAB LY
SUBJECT: LIBYA PREPARED TO FINALIZE - BUT NOT SIGN - A TIFA 
 
REF: MILLER-BURKHEAD EMAIL 4/20/2008 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: The Minister of Economy-equivalent said the 
GOL has resolved two key internal debates related to a Trade and 
Investment Framework Agreement (TIFA) and is prepared to 
finalize the accord with the U.S., provided a final face-to-face 
meeting of technical experts - an important political exercise, 
from its perspective - occurs.  While the GOL is prepared to 
finalize the text of the agreement, it will not be in a position 
to sign the agreement so long as Section 1083 (the so-called 
Lautenberg Amendment) of the U.S. 2008 National Defense 
Authorization Act applies to Libya.  Separately, the GOL is 
continuing internal deliberations on how to implement a radical 
privatization and economic reform agenda recently proposed by 
Muammar al-Qadhafi amid concerns the measures could exacerbate 
inflation and unemployment.  End summary. 
 
GOL READY TO FINALIZE TIFA, BUT WANTS FINAL FACE-TO-FACE MEETING 
OF EXPERTS 
 
¶2. (SBU) The CDA met with Secretary of the General People's 
Committee for Economy and Trade (Minister of Economy-equivalent) 
Dr. Ali Abdullah Essawi on April 17 to discuss next steps on 
finalizing a U.S.-Libya Trade Investment Framework Agreement 
(TIFA).  Reiterating points made in an earlier meeting with 
Emboffs by Dia Hammuda, Director of the Ministry's Foreign 
Cooperation Office, Essawi stressed that while much progress has 
been made via email correspondence, from the GOL's perspective a 
face-to-face meeting between technical experts to review and 
finalize the language was necessary.  An agreement of this kind 
represented an important political commitment; an in-person 
meeting to discuss the document was a significant and 
appropriate part of the process. (Note: Essawi's position 
reflects the Libyan perspective that the political intent behind 
an agreement is as important as the language of the document 
itself.  End note.) 
 
¶3. (SBU) Two issues were identified in Emboffs' earlier meeting 
to discuss the TIFA: 1) whether the GOL wanted the agreeement to 
come into effect upon signing or upon notification of 
ratification by the respective parties, and; 2) language for 
labor provisions in the agreement that had to be provided by the 
GOL's Labor Ministry-equivalent.  Essawi told CDA the GOL had 
decided it would prefer that the agreement come into effect 
after notification of ratification.  The Ministry of Economy had 
also received the language for the labor provisions, which would 
be forwarded to USTR this week via email.  Essawi suggested that 
the technical experts try to meet sometime in May or June to 
finalize the document.  Foreign Cooperation Office Director 
Hammuda will lead the GOL's delegation.  (Note: The technical 
experts' meeting may help avoid GOL proposals for changes to the 
text of the agreement on the eve of signing, as occurred in 
January 2008 with a US-Libyan Science and Technology Agreement. 
End note.) 
 
LIBYA WON'T SIGN AGREEMENT UNDER SHADOW OF LAUTENBERG AMENDMENT 
 
¶4. (SBU) Essawi made it clear that while the GOL is prepared to 
finalize language for a TIFA, it would not be in a position to 
sign the agreement so long as Section 1083 (the so-called 
Lautenberg Amendment) of the U.S. 2008 National Defense 
Authorization Act applied to Libya. (Note: The Lautenberg 
Amendment potentially facilitates attachment of Libyan 
government assets to satisfy damages awarded by U.S. courts in 
terrorism-related cases.  The GOL has taken significant measures 
to insulate its assets from potential seizure, to include 
divestiture of investments in U.S. financial markets by its 
sovereign wealth fund.  End note.)  Citing an Arabic expression, 
Essawi said signing a TIFA in the shadow of the Lautenberg 
Amendment would be just "ink on paper", mocking the intent of 
expanded economic and commercial ties. 
 
GOVERNMENT WORKING TO IMPLEMENT QADHAFI'S VISION ... 
 
¶5. (SBU) Responding to the CDA's question about implementation 
of economic reforms and radical privatization advocated by 
leader Muammar al-Qadhafi in a key speech on March 2, Essawi 
said the goals are to dramatically reduce the government's role 
in regulating economic activity while more efficiently 
distributing Libya's oil wealth to its people.  The government 
believes radical reforms, to include ending subsidies for 
foodstuffs and commodities, as well as regulation of utilities, 
will encourage more rapid economic reform and privatization. 
Essawi is a member of two (the economic activities committee and 
the wealth distribution committee) of the five cabinet-level 
committees charged with implementing Qadhafi's vision.  He 
indicated that the implementing committees' consultations were 
to be concluded by September, with final recommendations 
expected by year's end. 
 
 
TRIPOLI 00000336  002 OF 002 
 
 
... BUT IS CONCERNED ABOUT INFLATION, UNEMPLOYMENT 
 
¶6. (SBU) Essawi conceded that achieving a balance between ending 
government subsidies and maintaining a politically palatable 
daily standard of living was "very difficult".  Expressing 
concern that the measures could prompt inflation and greater 
unemployment, he carefully noted that Qadhafi's proposal that 
each family receive direct allotments of 5,000 Libyan dinar 
(about $4,200) per month was "an idea" for oil wealth 
distribution, and suggested that other forms of compensation 
such as shares in government funds might be an alternative. 
(Note: Qadhafi proposed eliminating virtually all state 
subsidies and radical privatization, to include the education 
and health care systems, in exchange for providing direct 
stipends to citizens, from which they would ostensibly pay for 
and collectively manage everything themselves.  End note.) 
Essawi put the overall unemployment rate in Libya at 17 percent 
and the unemployment rate among "youth" aged 18-34 at 25 
percent.  (Note: A 2004 World Bank estimate put the overall 
unemployment rate at 30 percent.  End note.)  Growing the 
economy and creating jobs were key priorities, he said, noting 
that one-third of Libya's population is under the age of 18. 
(Note: The CIA's World FactBook estimates that 33.2 percent of 
Libya's citizens are under the age of 14.  End note.) 
 
¶7. (SBU) Comment: A sophisticated, forthcoming interlocutor, 
Essawi drew a clear line between potential signing of a TIFA and 
waiving application of the Lautenberg Amendment.  His concerns 
about possible inflationary and unemployment pressures related 
to implementation of Qadhafi's privatization and economic reform 
scheme echo what we've heard from other contacts.  End comment. 
STEVENS