08USUNNEWYORK941
SRSG KAI EIDE BRIEFS THE SECURITY COUNCIL ON
Wed Oct 15 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO6627
OO RUEHPW RUEHTRO
DE RUCNDT #0941/01 2892329
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 152329Z OCT 08
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5119
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 USUN NEW YORK 000941 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV UNSC AF
SUBJECT: SRSG KAI EIDE BRIEFS THE SECURITY COUNCIL ON 
AFGHANISTAN 
 
¶1. (U) Summary: SRSG and head of the UN Assistance Mission to 
Afghanistan (UNAMA) Kai Eide briefed the Security Council on 
October 14, leading off a nearly four-hour meeting on 
Afghanistan.  Eide cautioned against "doom and gloom" 
statements and said there were promising trends in the 
conflict.  He also said that the UN,s relationship with ISAF 
was better than it was a half-year ago.  Eide,s caution 
against overly negative statements was strongly supported by 
the U.S. and allies in the Council.  Generally, countries 
gave nuanced views of the situation in Afghanistan - 
deploring violence and expressing concern regarding civilian 
casualties, but noting as well recent positive trends and the 
need to stay the course.  Many also emphasized good 
governance and development as equally important as security. 
In his concluding remarks to the Council, Eide said he 
welcomed the broad consensus to support UNAMA and to redouble 
commitments to assist Afghanistan.  He noted that Council 
members had voted to give UNAMA a generous mandate, but that 
the General Assembly was more reluctant to give UNAMA equally 
generous resources.  End summary. 
 
SRSG EIDE,S INTERVENTION 
 
¶2. (U) Eide began by saying that because of the deteriorating 
security situation, the international community has been 
"distracted from the commitments undertaken in Paris."  He 
cautioned against "doom and gloom" statements, and said there 
were three areas of positive trends: an improved relationship 
between Afghanistan and Pakistan, recent changes in the 
Afghanistan government, and a decrease in the overall 
production of drugs.  Eide also noted that UNAMA,s 
relationship with ISAF was better than it was half a year 
ago.  He underscored the importance of a "clear and 
independent United Nations voice" on human rights issues, and 
added that civil-military cooperation has led to an 
"integrated approach under civilian lead."  Regarding the 
notion of an integrated and comprehensive approach, Eide 
warned against allocating civilian resources only in conflict 
provinces and in support of military operations.  Success of 
the Afghanistan National Development Strategy requires a 
"balanced and equitable distribution of resources," said Eide. 
 
¶3. (U) Eide listed eight tasks achievable within six months 
for UNAMA and the international community: 1) to agree with 
donors on specific criteria to measure aid effectiveness; 2) 
to establish a database to allow the Afghan government and 
the UN to track resources, whether spent through PRTs, 
development agencies or NGOs; 3) to set up a mechanism for 
joint audits; 4) to strengthen Government institutions 
against corruption; 5) to agree on a plan for "what kind of 
police we want"; 6) to implement the Afghanistan Social 
Outreach Programme; 7) to develop a design for agricultural 
reform; and 8) to solidify the Afghanistan/Pakistan 
relationship in a wider, confidence-building regional 
framework.  He concluded by welcoming the Council,s broad 
consensus to support UNAMA and to redouble commitments to 
assist Afghanistan.  He pointedly noted that Council members 
had voted to give UNAMA a generous mandate, but that the 
General Assembly was more reluctant to give UNAMA equally 
generous resources. 
 
COUNCIL MEMBERS REACT 
 
¶4. (U) Council members reiterated similar themes: concern 
regarding the security situation and civilian casualties, and 
broad support for Eide and UNAMA.  Italy emphasized the 
importance of the Pakistan/Afghanistan relationship, and 
noted it would likely seek a Ministerial on this issue when 
it assumes the G8 Presidency next year.  Belgium, Indonesia, 
the UK, France and others emphasized the importance of 
development and good governance as key pillars along with 
security.  The U.S. and France also reiterated their 
unwavering commitment to Afghanistan, and agreed with Eide,s 
caution against "gloom and doom" statements.  Russia 
cautioned against any reconciliation with high-level 
extremists, and urged ISAF to focus more on counter-narcotics 
efforts.  China emphasized upcoming elections, and along with 
Libya urged greater focus on national reconciliation. 
 
AFGHANISTAN, ISAF CONTRIBUTORS, NEIGHBORS REACT 
 
¶5. (U) Afghanistan PermRep Zahir Tanin forcefully agreed with 
Eide,s admonition against overly negative statements.  He 
also supported Eide,s idea of a "political surge" to refocus 
attention on political/civilian efforts.  Japan, the 
Netherlands, Germany and Norway emphasized the importance of 
following up on commitments made at the Paris Conference, and 
underscored their countries, continued involvement in 
Afghanistan.  Pakistan gave an extended intervention 
defending its internal actions to combat extremists, and 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000941  002 OF 002 
 
 
accused the UN of a "myopic" view of the cross-border issue. 
The Pakistan government is following a "holistic strategy 
against extremism and terrorism, employing political dialogue 
and socio-economic measures, but retaining the option to use 
force..."  Iran and India implicitly criticized Pakistan,s 
decision to use political dialogues.  Iran stated "the recent 
increase in insecurity in Afghanistan well suggests that the 
attempts made to appease some extremist and terrorist groups 
by certain countries have been counterproductive and have 
only emboldened them." 
 
CIVILIAN CASUALTIES 
 
¶6. (SBU) All countries expressed concern regarding civilian 
casualties, although most also noted that these came largely 
because of asymmetric attacks by the Taliban and al-Qaida. 
Russia, South Africa and Indonesia were less vocal on this 
issue than during the negotiations extending the mandate of 
ISAF, and called for respect of international humanitarian 
and human rights law.  Libya was harshest in its criticism of 
ISAF, while the Afghanistan PermRep said blame should be on 
the Taliban, not ISAF.  India expressed its concern regarding 
efforts to accord terrorists "parity with the forces of 
order."  Furthermore, India said civilian casualties were 
distressing, but that "ultimate responsibility for such 
casualties must be laid at the door of the Taliban, al-Qaida, 
and those who support and empower them."  (Comment: India's 
statement was filled with similar indirect references to 
Pakistan.  End comment) 
Wolff