09ABIDJAN391
IVOIRIAN GOVERNMENT RESPONSE TO TIER 2 WATCH LIST
Fri Jun 26 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Abidjan
P 261302Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY ABIDJAN
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5218
INFO ECOWAS COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS ABIDJAN 000391 
 
 
STATE FOR G/TIP - VZEITLIN, DRL-KGILBRIDE, AF/RSA - LMUNCY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KTIP PGOV PHUM PREL SOCI IV
SUBJECT: IVOIRIAN GOVERNMENT RESPONSE TO TIER 2 WATCH LIST 
RANKING 
 
REF: STATE 60547 
 
¶1.  (U)  SUMMARY: Embassy has informed the Ministry of Family 
that Cote d'Ivoire will face sanctions in 2011 if the country 
continues to remain on Tier 2 Watch List status. 
Representatives of both the Ministry of Family and the 
National Committee to Fight Trafficking told Poloff that they 
are hampered by a lack of resources.  The Deputy Director of 
the Ministry of Family's Anti-Trafficking Unit will raise the 
importance of prosecuting traffickers with justice officials 
and will suggest appointment of a judge as a focal point on 
trafficking at the Ministry of Justice.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (U)  Poloff met with four members of the National 
Committee to Fight Trafficking on June 23 to explain Cote 
d'Ivoire's ranking in the 2009 Trafficking in Persons (TIP) 
Report.  Herve Kouadio Kra, Deputy Director of the 
Anti-Trafficking Unit in the Ministry of Family, expressed 
concern about the possibility of U.S. sanctions if Cote 
d'Ivoire does not improve its Tier 2 Watch List status.  He 
stated that the Ministry of Family has few resources, no 
vehicles, and very little tangible means to expand its 
current activities, which mostly focus on training government 
officials (particularly security and defense forces) on ways 
to prevent trafficking. 
 
¶3.  (U)  Kra and the other National Committee members 
welcomed U.S. assistance to help fight the trafficking 
problem.  They explained that they are heavily dependent on 
donor contributions for much of their activities and are 
severely limited by budgetary constraints, especially given 
the government's all-consuming preoccupation with preparing 
to hold elections and putting an end to the political crisis 
that has been ongoing since 2002.  Kra also cited budgetary 
constraints as a reason why the Ministry of Family has not 
been able to provide more assistance to victims of sex 
trafficking, which the Ministry also views as a problem in 
Cote d'Ivoire. 
 
¶4.  (U)  With regard to prosecuting traffickers, Kra said 
that Ministry of Family officials have little sway with the 
Ministry of Justice, but promised to raise the issue in 
National Committee discussions with justice officials.  He 
said he would also mention the idea of appointing one 
magistrate as the focal point for trafficking within the 
Ministry of Justice, which he felt would help raise awareness 
of the trafficking problem among prosecuting judges. 
 
¶5.  (U)  COMMENT:  Although National Committee members agreed 
that ideally, the Government of Cote d'Ivoire should be 
increasing its financial contribution to fight trafficking 
(even by small amounts) every year, the reality is that these 
civil servants must make do with whatever money their office 
receives from the Ministry of Economy and Finance.  Since 
current funds given to the National Committee are never 
enough to cover even very basic activities, Ministry of 
Family officials will continue to seek out donor partners 
willing to finance anti-TIP projects for the foreseeable 
future.  END COMMENT 
 
 
NESBITT