09ADANA81
SE TURKEY SECURITY INCIDENTS: DECEMBER 21-27, 2009
Tue Dec 29 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
VZCZCXRO7204
RR RUEHDA
DE RUEHDA #0081/01 3631444
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 291444Z DEC 09
FM AMCONSUL ADANA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4822
INFO RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 1364
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 1128
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 1431UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ADANA 000081 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR DS/IP/EUR, DS/IP/ITA, INR AND EUR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PTER PINR CASC TU
SUBJECT: SE TURKEY SECURITY INCIDENTS: DECEMBER 21-27, 2009 
 
¶1. The following security incidents for the period of December 
21-27, 2009, were compiled by the security assistant at 
Consulate Adana from RSO sources, to include Turkish security 
contacts, government officials and media. The RSO uses the 
information to determine the security situation and trends of 
violence and crime throughout Turkey. The RSO shares the 
information with the country team and visas viper coordinator. 
Note that this week's cable includes information from as early 
as November 23, due to the temporary lapse in our weekly 
reporting. 
 
¶2. Military operations against the Kurdistan Workers' Party 
(PKK) as reported by the Turkish General Staff: 
 
¶A. Weapons, ammunition, and equipment seized: 
 
Mardin - 12.24.09: 400 grams of C-4, and a hand grenade made of 
5 kg of ammonium nitrate. 
 
Hakkari - 12.24.09: 1 anti-personnel landmine (VS-50). 
 
Mardin - 12.20.09: 600 grams of A-4 plastic explosive, 2 
electric fuses, 15 meters of cable and logistical equipment. 
 
Van - 12.17.09: 5 rounds of mortar ammunition, 16 rounds of 
Biksi machine gun ammunition (7.62 mm). 
 
Diyarbakir - 12.16.09: An IED made of mortar ammunition. 
 
Van - 12.13.09: 1 Kalashnikov rifle, 1 magazine, 9 rounds of 
bullets and 7 kilograms of hashish. 
 
Siirt - 12.11.09: 1 RPG-7 rocket launcher and 2 rounds of RPG-7 
ammunition. 
 
Bitlis - 12.11.09: 2 kilograms of ammonium nitrate, 110 
kilograms of food. 
 
Mus - 12.10.09: 14 rounds of Kalashnikov rifle, 2 magazines, 15 
meters of electric cable, 20 kilograms of ammonium nitrate, food 
and logistical equipment. 
 
Sirnak - 12.04.09: 1 pen designed to conceal an assassination 
rifle, 6 rounds of bullets, 2 hand grenades, 4 hunting bullets, 
1 voice recorder, food and logistical material. In a separate 
operation on the same day, security forces recovered 1 M-16 
infantry rifle, 1 sniper rifle (Kannas), 1 wireless radio, and 
ammunition. 
 
Siirt - 12.01.09: A booby-trapped IED. 
 
Gaziantep - 12.04.09: A booby-trapped IED. 
 
Sirnak - 11.30.09: An IED and 1 rocket launcher. 
 
Sirnak - 11.30.09: 2 Kalashnikov rifles, 6 magazines, 154 rounds 
of ammunition, 2 hand grenades, food and logistical equipment. 
 
Sirnak - 11.26.09: 1 pistol, 4 magazines, 86 rounds of 
ammunition, 1 pair of binoculars, 2 cell phone memory cards, and 
logistical equipment. 
 
Batman - 11.26.09: 1 hand grenade, an IED made of 50 grams of 
C-4 and 4 electric fuses. 
 
¶B. PKK members captured or surrendered: 
 
Siirt - 12.25.09: 1 PKK member surrendered. 
 
Van - 12.17.09: 1 PKK member surrendered. 
 
Sirnak - 12.17.09: 4 PKK members surrendered. 
 
Hakkari - 12.14.09: 1 PKK member surrendered. 
 
Tunceli - 12.11.09: 1 PKK member surrendered. 
 
Sirnak - 12.09.09: 9 PKK members surrendered. 
 
Sanliurfa - 12.08.09: 1 PKK member arrested. 
 
Hakkari - 12.06.09: 2 PKK members surrendered. 
 
Sirnak - 12.04.09: 2 PKK members killed. 
 
Sirnak - 11.30.09: 1 PKK member was killed. 
 
¶C. PKK attacks: 
 
Hakkari - 12.14.09: Military patrol team attacked by a group of 
 
ADANA 00000081  002 OF 004 
 
 
PKK member with long-range rifles; no injuries reported. 
 
Hakkari - 12.11.09: 3 security personnel wounded in a clash. 
 
Mardin - 12.09.09: PKK members attacked the Beyazsubasi Gendarme 
Station with long-range rifles; no injuries reported. 
 
Batman - 12.09.09: PKK members set construction equipment on 
fire. 
 
Tunceli - 12.09.09: PKK members stole 6 rifles from hunters in 
the region. 
 
Batman - 12.07.09: PKK members attacked the Besiri Gendarme 
Station with 3 hand grenades and Kalasnikov rifles; 2 soldiers 
injured. 
 
Van - 12.06.09: A booby-trapped explosive damaged a military 
vehicle. 
 
Hakkari - 12.06.09: PKK members attacked a military patrol team 
with long-range rifles; no injuries reported. 
 
Diyarbakir - 12.05.09: A shepherd was wounded in an IED blast. 
 
Mardin - 12.04.09: 1 soldier was killed and 1 wounded in a 
clash. 
 
Sirnak - 12.01.09: 1 soldier was wounded in an IED blast. 
 
Siirt - 11.30.09: A civilian was wounded in an IED blast. 
 
¶3. Media reports related to PKK and pro-Kurdish organizations 
 
¶A. Anti-PKK operations: 
 
Turkish Armed Forces (TAF) anti-PKK operations in SE Turkey 
continue in Hakkari, Sirnak, Siirt, Mardin, Van, Batman, 
Diyarbakir and Gaziantep. 
 
¶N. Iraq - 12.27.09: TAF artillery teams bombed Zap region; no 
casualties reported. 
 
¶B. Arrests: 
 
Mus - 12.27.09: Security forces arrested 4 people on the charge 
of "making propaganda for the PKK." 
 
Sirnak - 12.27.09: Security forces arrested 17 people on the 
charges of "membership in an outlawed organization" and "making 
propaganda for the PKK." 
 
Van - 12.26.09: Security forces arrested 11 people on the 
charges of "making propaganda for the PKK" and "damaging public 
property." Over the last month, security forces detained 34 
people in the same area on the suspicion of terrorism. 
 
Mardin - 12.25.09: Security forces arrested 14 people on the 
charge of "carrying out illegal action on behalf of the PKK." 
Separately, security forces arrested 18 people on the charge of 
"making propaganda for the PKK". 
 
Van - 12.25.09: 8 university students were sentenced to a 
cumulative 50 years in prison on the charge of "membership in 
the PKK." 
 
Sanliurfa - 12.24.09: Security forces arrested 4 people on the 
charges of "making propaganda for the PKK" and "damaging public 
property." 
 
Bitlis - 12.24.09: Security forces arrested 3 on the charge of 
"making propaganda for the PKK." 
 
Sirnak - 12.24.09: According to reports, 1,358 children have 
been investigated under the suspicion of terrorism between 2005 
and 2009. 
 
Bitlis - 12.23.09: Security forces arrested 3 people on the 
charges of "assisting and harboring the PKK," and "chanting 
illegal slogan in favor of the PKK." 
 
Sanliurfa - 12.23.09: Security forces arrested a student on the 
charges of "carrying out illegal action on behalf of the PKK," 
and "instigating hatred and animosity." 15 DTP (Democratic 
Society Party) members were sentenced to 1-2 years in prison on 
the charge of "violating restrictions on marches and 
demonstrations." 
 
Diyarbakir - 12.22.09: Security forces arrested 5 people on the 
charge of "assisting and harboring the PKK." 
 
ADANA 00000081  003 OF 004 
 
 
 
Diyarbakir and Batman - 12.22.09: Security forces detained 10 
people on the suspicion of terrorism. 5 were later arrested on 
the charge of "extortion on behalf of the PKK." 
 
Mardin - 12.21.09: Security forces detained 7 people in an 
operation against the PKK's youth branch, YDG-M. 
 
Tunceli - 12.21.09: Security forces arrested 3 people who joined 
in Molotov cocktail attacks. 
 
Sanliurfa - 12.21.09: DTP Deputy Mayor of Ceylanpinar was 
sentenced to a year in prison on the charge of "making 
propaganda for the PKK." 
 
Hakkari - 12.21.09: Security forces detained 3 people on the 
suspicion of terrorism. 
 
Sanliurfa - 12.20.09: Security forces arrested 9 people on the 
charges of "making propaganda for the PKK," and "membership in 
the PKK." 
 
Mardin - 12.19.09: Security forces arrested 2 PKK members who 
were in preparations to carry out a bomb attack. An explosive 
device made of 685 grams of A-4, 3 hand grenades, 2 more kg of 
A-4, 2 electric fuses and logistical equipment were seized in 
the operation. 
 
Mus - 12.15.09 through 12.27.09: Security forces detained 39 PKK 
sympathizers on the suspicion of terrorism and arrested 14 on 
the charge of "making propaganda for the PKK" following a series 
of violent protests. 2 PKK supporters were killed during a 
protest on December 15. 
 
¶C. Other media stories about PKK: 
 
N.Iraq - 12.26.09: According to KCK reports. 216 attacks, 
including 49 air-strikes have been launched by Turkish Armed 
Forces (TSK) in the last 11 months. 94 PKK members and 128 
soldiers were killed in clashes. 
 
12.26.09 - Pro-PKK web site ANF reported that 49 Kurdish 
smugglers were killed by Iranian or Turkish troops since July 
¶2009. 
 
Diyarbakir - 12.25.09: The Kurdish mayor of Diyarbakir could be 
prosecuted for expletive-laden statements he made in response to 
an operation targeting alleged Kurdish militants that resulted 
in the detention of 35 people, the head of Parliament's 
Constitution Commission said Friday. 
 
SE Turkey - 12.24.09 through 12.27.09: Security forces detained 
36 people in simultaneous operations in several provinces 
against the Kurdish Democratic Confederation (KCK), an 
organization that allegedly functions as the urban arm of the 
PKK. Eight detainees were reportedly released on Friday night. 
The Diyarbakir Chief Prosecutor's Office initiated a series of 
operations on Wednesday in 11 provinces, including Ankara, 
Istanbul, Izmir, Diyarbakir, Siirt, Hakkari, Tunceli, Batman, 
Sanliurfa, Sirnak and Van. 
Police clashed with stone-throwing Kurdish demonstrators 
protesting the recent arrest of 23 Kurds on charges of links to 
the PKK. The 23 - charged late Friday - were among 36 people 
detained in a nationwide crackdown on people suspected of links 
to the PKK. Those charged include seven mayors. PKK supporters 
attacked with stones and Molotov Cocktails and security forces 
responded with tear gas, pressurized water and batons. Details 
of security related security incidents follows: 
 
Sirnak - Demonstrations reported in three districts, including 
the Cizre-Silopi highway which they blocked with burning trash 
barrels. At least 3 minors detained. 
 
Batman - PKK supporters stoned the Turkish Telecom building and 
threw Molotov cocktails. 
 
Bingol - A civilian vehicle was set on fire. 
 
Mus - Unidentified people attacked 2 municipal buses with 
stones, breaking all windows. 
 
Siirt - PKK supporters attacked an AK Party's District building 
with Molotov cocktails. 
 
Sanliurfa - Almost 60 PKK supporters clashed with security 
forces. 
 
Hakkari - 10 people, including 3 security officers were wounded. 
Police opened fire in the air. A civilian vehicle was stoned, 
and at least 10 demonstrators detained. A group of PKK 
 
ADANA 00000081  004 OF 004 
 
 
supporters attacked the Security Directorate's building with 
Molotov cocktails. A police armored vehicle was attacked with a 
Molotov cocktail. Tension is still running high in the city. 
 
Diyarbakir - Almost 3000 Kurds staged a sit-in to denounce the 
arrests and anti-KCK operations. Protesters chanted slogans in 
favor of PKK and Ocalan. Police clashed with PKK supporters 
blocking roads in Baglar District. 
 
Sanliurfa - PKK supporters attacked a police station in Suruc 
District with a sound bomb; no injuries reported. 
 
Adana - A vehicle was set on fire by PKK supporters. 
 
Malatya - Unidentified people wrote "PKK" on some civilian 
vehicles. 
 
¶4. Media reports on significant crime or security incidents: 
 
Mersin University - 12.25.09: A group of ultra-nationalist 
students attacked leftist and Kurdish students, injuring one. 
 
Diyarbakir - 12.24.09: Security forces stormed the Human Rights 
Association building and confiscated documents. 
 
Diyarbakir - 12.22.09: Security forces detained 3 people who 
threatened the Priest of Meryamana Church. 
 
Kahramanmaras - 12.18.09: A sound bomb exploded near the 
ultra-rightist Great Unity Party (BBP) headquarters; no injuries 
reported. 
 
¶5. Illegal immigrant arrests: 
 
12.01.09 through 12.26.09: Security forces captured and deported 
593 illegal immigrants from: Edirne, Hatay, Sanliurfa, Mardin, 
Aegean Coast, Gaziantep, Hakkari, Manisa, Sakarya, Istanbul, 
Aydin, Balikesir, Kilis, Sirnak, Kayseri, Igdir, Adana, 
Canakkale, Erzurum, Konya, Kayseri, Van, Mugla  and the borders 
of Syria, Iran, Iraq and Greece. 8 Turks assisting them were 
also detained in the operations. 
 
¶6. Counter-narcotic/organized crime operations: 
 
Diyarbakir - 12.25.09: Security forces arrested 3 people and 
seized 285 grams of hashish and 42 units of ecstasy pills. 
 
Gaziantep - 12.25.09: Security forces confiscated 3 kilograms of 
heroin and 1 kilogram of hashish and detained 4 village guards. 
 
Elazig - 12.24.09: Security forces seized 62 kilograms of 
hashish. 
 
Gaziantep - 12.24.09: Security forces seized 11,000 pills and 
detained 4 people. 
 
Van - 12.23.09: Security forces arrested 5 people in 
anti-organized crime operation. 
 
Osmaniye - 12.23.09: Security forces detained 48 people in 
anti-narcotic and organized crime operations. 300 grams of 
hashish also seized. 
 
Diyarbakir - 12.21.09: Security forces arrested 14 people and 
seized 300 grams of hashish in 8 separate operations conducted 
in the last 8 days. 
 
Hatay - 12.17.09: Security forces seized 57 kilograms of hashish 
and detained 1 person. 
 
Sirnak - 12.23.09: Security forces detained 30 people in an 
anti-organized-crime operation. 
DARNELL