09AITTAIPEI85
MEDIA REACTION: OBAMA'S INAUGURATION
Wed Jan 21 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0006
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0085/01 0211000
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 211000Z JAN 09
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0791
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 8889
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0341UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000085 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: OBAMA'S INAUGURATION 
 
¶1. Summary:  January 21, Taiwan's major Chinese-language and 
English-language dailies gave significant news and editorial 
coverage to the inauguration of U.S. President Barack Obama Tuesday. 
 Almost all papers devoted their first few pages to Obama's taking 
the helm as the United States' 44th president and the challenges 
facing him and his administration.  News coverage also focused on 
the pre-trial hearings in former President Chen Shui-bian's legal 
cases and the consumption vouchers recently issued to all citizens 
and legal permanent residents on the island.  The pro-unification 
"United Daily News" front-paged the results of its opinion survey, 
which showed that 54 percent of those polled said they have a 
favorable impression of Obama, the first African-American U.S. 
president. 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, an editorial in the 
pro-independence "Liberty Times" criticized China's white paper on 
its national defense in 2008 and what it characterized as the Ma 
Ying-jeou Administration's excessive tilt toward China.  The article 
said that the precondition set in China's white paper for future 
cross-Strait relations is akin to Ma posing a difficult problem for 
Obama to maintain peace and stability in the Western Pacific.  A 
"Liberty Times" news analysis also chimed in by saying that China is 
accelerating its pace in building forces to counterbalance the 
United States, which will exacerbate the already imbalanced and 
adverse situation across the Taiwan Strait.  A separate "Liberty 
Times" column urged Obama to tolerate diversified cultures in the 
world and not to use "U.S. interests" or "U.S. values" as its one 
and only standard.  A column in the mass-circulation "Apple Daily" 
said the clash between Israel and the Arab world is the first 
challenge that Obama will face after taking office.  A separate 
"Apple Daily" op-ed piece discussed Washington-Beijing-Taipei 
relations in the Obama era and said that economically "symbiotic" 
relations will become the principal axis for future U.S.-China 
relations.  An editorial in the centrist, KMT-leaning "China Times" 
predicted that the next four years will be an era that will test 
Obama most relentlessly.  A separate "China Times" column said Obama 
has the greatest opportunity to lead Americans through crises and 
create a miracle for the United States.  End summary. 
 
A) "Ma Ying-jeou Poses a Difficult Problem for Barack Obama" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 700,000] 
editorialized (1/21): 
 
"... Following the Ma Ying-jeou Administration's 'proactive 
achievements,' not only has Taiwan's economy been quickly locked 
into [that of] China's, but the Taiwan Strait has also gradually 
become an inland sea of China.  Is it possible that, under China's 
1992 Consensus, Taiwan's clinging to China in terms of its economy 
and national defense is the 'grand plan' that President Ma had made 
in pursuit of ultimate unification?  Given Ma's efforts to 'lower 
threats and to convert enemies into friends,' it will not take long 
and will probably be as easy as turning one's hand over if China 
wants to unify with Taiwan by peaceful means or force.  Should that 
really happen, drastic changes will befall the Taiwan Strait, which 
will have a huge impact on neighboring countries.  One can say that 
the so-called 'major, active changes in the cross-Strait situation' 
as depicted in China's [white paper on national defense for 2008] 
are tantamount to President Ma posing a difficult problem for Barack 
Obama in terms of maintaining peace, security and prosperity in the 
Western Pacific." 
 
B) "Stopping U.S. Arms Sales to Taiwan Is China's Top Goal" 
 
Journalist Su Yung-yao said in an analysis in the pro-independence 
"Liberty Times" [circulation: 700,000] (1/21): 
 
"In addition to the wars being fought in the Middle East, what the 
Bush Administration left to President Barack Obama is the financial 
storm that has swept the globe.  For the Obama Administration, which 
faces [the need to] reorganize [the U.S.] national strength, its 
initial focus of administrative performance certainly will not fall 
in the Asia-Pacific area.  Given that China is accelerating its pace 
in building forces to counterbalance the United States, this will 
surely exacerbate the already imbalanced and adverse situation 
across the Taiwan Strait. ...  Over the past eight years, even 
though there were ups and downs in U.S.-Taiwan relations, both the 
quality and quantity of [U.S.] arms sales [to Taiwan] reached a 
certain peak.  In the wake of power transfers happening both in 
Taiwan and the United States, the Obama Administration, at its 
initial stage, will not be able to put its attention on the Taiwan 
Strait.  Adding to this the Ma Administration's excessive tilt 
toward China, the United States and China will no longer form an 
equilateral triangle with Taiwan as in the past. 
 
"Former AIT Board Chairman Richard Bush said in a seminar held 
during his recent visit to Taiwan that 'Taiwan needs to handle the 
sovereignty issue very carefully."  His implication was that during 
the [current] stage, when the United States is fully occupied with 
things it needs to attend to, the rapid integration between the two 
sides of the Taiwan Strait has caused concern for those Americans 
who have been paying long-term attention to cross-Strait issues.  On 
Beijing's part, seizing the right opportunity to strengthen its 
united front efforts against Taiwan is akin to making an 
advantageous first chess move for the future development of 
U.S.-China-Taiwan relations.  By rights, Taiwan should await more 
favorable opportunities to seek more support for itself, including 
engaging proactively in communication with the new U.S. 
Administration, rather than acting in concert with the pace set by 
Beijing and thus turning the cross-Strait status quo into an 
irreversible situation. ..." 
 
C) "Dreams of a President and Dreams of a Nation" 
 
The "Free Talk" column in the pro-independence "Liberty Times" 
[circulation: 700,000] wrote (1/21): 
 
"... In order to create a new 'Obama era,' Barack Obama needs to 
transform his 'road to dreams' into a dream that is shared commonly 
among the American people.  All the more, he should tolerate diverse 
cultures, or further different identities that clash with each other 
in this world, rather than seeing the 'U.S. interests' or 'U.S. 
values' as the sole criterion.  In this way he will be able to lead 
the world into the future.  Obama's challenges have just begun the 
day when he assumed office. ..." 
 
D) "Obama and Hamas" 
 
Columnist Antonio Chiang wrote in his column in the mass-circulation 
"Apple Daily" [circulation: 520,000] (1/21): 
 
"Before Barack Obama was inaugurated, Hamas announced a ceasefire, 
and Israel decided to withdraw [from Gaza]; as a result, Gaza 
civilians in distress were able to have a breather for the moment. 
Such a move gave the new U.S. president a big face. ... 
 
"The United States is Israel's most important ally.  Without the 
support and aid of the United States, Israel would be isolated 
internationally.  [Former U.S. Presidents] Bill Clinton and Bush 
Junior were friendly with Israel, and Arab countries criticized the 
United States for showing undue favor toward Israel.  Obama calls 
for change, and the Arab world has great expectations for him.  The 
clash between Israel and the Arab world will be the first touchstone 
for [Obama]. ... 
 
"The conflict between Israel and Palestine has had an impact on the 
Middle East, including Iran, Iraq, Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Jordan, and 
the Gulf countries as well as the whole Muslim world, and it weighs 
immeasurably on the United States' national interests.  The 
ceasefire in Gaza is the first test for Obama.  If Hamas launches 
rockets at Israel again, Obama's honeymoon will be over earlier than 
expected." 
 
E) "U.S.-China-Taiwan Relations in the Obama Era" 
 
Yin Hui-min, a U.S.-based freelance commentator, opined in the 
mass-circulation "Apple Daily" [circulation: 520,000] (1/21): 
 
"... No matter how sympathetic Barack Obama is with the situation of 
unemployed workers in the United States, economically 'symbiotic' 
relations will become the principal axis in the U.S.-China 
relations, and it will be the prevailing reality for the future 
U.S.-China and U.S.-Taiwan relations. ...  Now that Obama has 
appointed Hillary Clinton as his Secretary of State, who is going to 
lead the diplomatic crew of the former Clinton Administration, it 
appears that the U.S.-China relations will continue on the pragmatic 
path of putting its emphasis on business. ...   What is worrisome 
now is not the guideline of 'business first, politics later' 
advocated by Ma Ying-jeou or the united front conspiracy of Hu 
Jintao, but the marginalization of the DPP on Taiwan's political 
stage after it has sunk into becoming a party of slogans." 
 
F) "The United States Has Officially Entered the Era of Obama" 
 
The centrist, KMT-leaning "China Times" [circulation: 150,000] 
editorialized (1/21): 
 
"... The victory of Barack Obama not only had an epoch-making 
significance for the United States but was also an encouragement for 
the entire world.  All the more, the hegemony image of the United 
States has made a turn -- [a person] originally born of an 
disadvantaged minority is able to become a state leader via 
democratic procedures is a strong inspiration for the ethnic 
minorities in the world or those who believe the U.S.'s hegemony 
only oppresses the weak with its sheer strength.  For the United 
States, even though it bid farewell to the former Bush 
Administration while welcoming the new Obama Administration, it 
still needs to heal the wounds of the problems left behind, among 
which the war on terrorism is the one that has left the deepest 
scars. ... 
 
"For Obama, his real test will be the first 100 days in office, 
which normally decides a president's place in history. ...  The 
following four years will be the era of Obama, but the era that is 
about to unfold will also be one that will test him most 
relentlessly." 
 
G) "The Break of Dawn in the United States" 
 
Columnist Lin Po-wen wrote in his column in the centrist, 
KMT-leaning "China Times" [circulation: 150,000] (1/21): 
 
"... Among the various challenges that Barack Obama will face after 
taking office, none will be easily resolved.  The three severest 
challenges facing him are economic recovery, national health care 
reform, and troop withdrawal from Iraq plus reorganizing the war in 
Afghanistan.  It not only will require a great deal of mental power 
and wisdom but will also take a great amount of time to resolve such 
daunting problems.  Luckily, the American people have faith and 
patience in Obama.  This is the greatest advantage that Obama 
enjoys. ... 
 
"As many as two or three million people gathered in Washington, D. 
¶C. in an attempt to dip into the joy of renewing the old and be the 
witnesses to as well as participants in history.  The United States 
is entering a brand new era and is ready to stride forward from the 
dark valley to the peak at the break of dawn." 
 
YOUNG