09AMMAN410
IFRC:  MONITORING AND EVALUATION ASSESSMENT
Mon Feb 16 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Amman
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHAM #0410 0471112
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 161112Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY AMMAN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4464
INFO RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 0705UNCLAS AMMAN 000410 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PRM/ANE, GENEVA FOR RMA 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREF EAID UNHCR IZ JO
SUBJECT:  IFRC:  MONITORING AND EVALUATION ASSESSMENT 
COOPERATIVE AGREEMENT SPRMCO08VC048 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  RefCoord met with Ahmed Gizo, Regional Director 
for the International Federation of Red Cross and Red 
Crescent Organizations (IFRC) in Amman on January 26, 2009 to 
discuss IFRC's work, under PRM-funded agreement, with the 
Jordanian Red Crescent (JRC) primary health clinics in 
Jordan.  IFRC implements its health care programs through JRC 
and was working to improve management controls, and 
facilities within the organization.  Gizo said that JRC 
showed weakness in financial management, as well as in 
control and monitoring of projects and resources.  According 
to Gizo, the professional JRC staff had insufficient control 
of the activities of volunteers and professionals, such as 
private doctors who worked in cooperation with the JRC.  IFRC 
was working with JRC to correct these shortcomings, but JRC 
was not yet prepared to monitor and control projects without 
IFRC intervention. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Gizo explained that JRC professional staff was not 
sufficiently rigorous in their management controls to allow 
them to implement refugee assistance projects without IFRC 
guidance.  Accountants and program managers were hired by JRC 
and trained/supervised by IFRC to monitor the progress of the 
projects and to report irregularities to JRC leadership.  At 
every level of project management, IFRC worked in cooperation 
with JRC, taking a supervisory role when appropriate.  For 
example, invoices for medical supplies were collected by JRC 
staff and double checked by IFRC before IFRC comptrollers 
reimbursed JRC field operations. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Although Gizo found no evidence of wrongdoing in 
JRC's operations, he said that the lack of effective 
management controls opened the door to possible abuse or 
mistakes.  IFRC took steps to ensure that donor funds were 
properly managed and accounted for by monitoring all JRC 
operations.  IFRC information technology staff was working 
with JRC to create accounting procedures and to include JRC 
medical service statistics in the beneficiary information 
system (BIS), which is the UNHCR database used to track 
treatment and medication given Iraqi patients.  IFRC was also 
working to integrate JRC data into the Jordanian national 
health information system.  Gizo hoped that use of these two 
databases would allow JRC to more consistently monitor 
resources and services.  Gizo said that JRC leadership 
appeared to be willing to accept IFRC assistance, but that 
the process required IFRC to provide close supervision of JRC 
staff. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) In his assessment of JRC work, Gizo said the branch 
offices throughout Jordan were strong, with good, well- 
trained employees.  Gizo saw considerable advantage in 
working with JRC's local network of volunteers and in calling 
on the local knowledge of the heads of offices outside of 
Amman.  Gizo gave local JRC offices high grades when 
administering core Red Crescent activities such as first-aid 
training, emergency response, and distribution of short-term 
material assistance.  He said that offices outside Amman were 
most effective when responding autonomously to local 
emergencies.  Gizo said that Iraqi patients reported 
satisfaction with JRC medical staff and clinics. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Comment:  In subsequent conversations with the 
French and German Red Cross offices in Jordan (to be reported 
septel), RefCoord learned that IFRC was looking into serious 
allegations of fraudulent billing and other misconduct by JRC 
staff.  The European Union Humanitarian Organization, ECHO 
took these allegations seriously and planned to end its 
relationship with JRC after 2008-2009 projects are completed. 
Gizo made no mention of these allegations.  Although none of 
the allegations against JRC have become formal 
investigations, RefCoord can not recommend that PRM partners 
seek sub-agreements with JRC that put USG resources or 
funding into the JRC management system.  In future evaluation 
of IFRC-Jordan health care programs, RefCoord will closely 
examine management and financial control systems.  End 
comment. 
 
Visit AmmanQs Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/amman 
 
BEECROFT