09BAGHDAD2849
INVESTMENT CONFERENCE GENERATES POSITIVE MEDIA COVERAGE IN
Fri Oct 23 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXYZ0004
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHGB #2849/01 2961351
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 231351Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 5206UNCLAS BAGHDAD 002849 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINVECON KPAO PREL IZ
SUBJECT:  INVESTMENT CONFERENCE GENERATES POSITIVE MEDIA COVERAGE IN 
IRAQ 
 
¶1. SUMMARY:  The U.S.-Iraq Business and Investment Conference 
(USBIC) in Washington was headline news throughout the week of 
October 19 in Iraq.  Arabic-language papers, Radio Sawa and 
television channels Al-Iraqiya, Al-Hurra, and Al-Sharqiya devoted 
lead coverage to the Prime Minister's visit to Washington, his 
meetings with President Obama, Secretary Clinton and other 
officials, and the conference itself.  Post helped set the positive 
tone and manage expectations through advance publicity, including 
interviews and backgrounders by Mission officers with Iraqi and 
Western media outlets, press releases, and an October 7 joint press 
conference with Coordinator for Assistance Transition Patricia 
Haslach and Dr. Sami al-Araji, Chairman of the Iraqi National 
Investment Commission.   End summary. 
 
¶2. COVERAGE IN ADVANCE OF THE CONFERENCE 
 
TV: Al-Hurra and Al-Hurriya satellite stations both reported on the 
October 7 joint press conference with Dr. Sami al-Araji, Chairman of 
the Iraqi National Investment Commission, and Coordinator for 
Assistance Transition Patricia Haslach, to discuss the USBIC with 
the Iraqi press and Baghdad-based Western Media.  Al-Hurra carried 
comments from Dr. Sami al-Araji Iraqi National Investment Authority, 
Rule of Law Coalition MP Sami Al-Askari, Minister of Planning Ali 
Baban and economist Bassem Jamil.  MP Al-Askari hailed the 
conference as "a large and important investment event that can push 
the investment process in Iraq forward."  Jamil noted the need for 
Iraq's investment law to be amended "as Iraq's oil wealth alone 
cannot attract investors." 
 
PRINT: Haslach was interviewed in government-run daily As-Sabah on 
challenges and opportunities in the Iraqi economy.  She stressed 
said the economy is improving but still needs to develop 
administrative structures and undergo institutional reforms to 
create the conditions to attract investors. 
RADIO: Radio Sawa and Radio Iraq Hurr both reported on the October 7 
press conference. The Iraqi commercial attache in Washington, Hassan 
al-Shuan Hassan, was interviewed on Sawa and noted the 12 economic 
sectors that the USBIC would focus on. 
 
EDITORIAL: In a commentary in independent daily Az-Zaman entitled 
"The Solution is in Washington," editor Hadi Chelo predicted that 
the USBIC would "reflect Iraq's turn towards the United States 
economically in the absence of interest shown by European and Arab 
countries...So should we expect to be swarmed by major American 
companies in different sectors?  This is not so farfetched given 
Washington's need of new investment sites and that there is nowhere 
like Iraq to realize this potential." 
 
 
¶3. COVERAGE OF OPENING DAY AND MALIKI-OBAMA MEETING 
 
TV and RADIO: On October 20, Al-Sharqiya, Al-Iraqiya, Al-Sumariya, 
Al-Hurriya, and Al-Hurra all reported on Secretary Clinton's meeting 
with PM Nuri al-Maliki and their joint press conference.  On October 
21, most TV and radio outlets focused on President Obama's comments 
after his meeting with PM Maliki.   U.S. Embassy Spokesperson was 
quoted on Al-Iraqiya describing how the U.S. and Iraq were entering 
a new phase in their bilateral relations, through cooperation under 
the Strategic Framework Agreement (SFA). 
 
PRINT: Most Baghdad-based newspapers headlined PM Maliki's opening 
of the conference and his meetings with President Obama and Vice 
President Biden.  Al-Sharq Al-Awsat (Iraq edition) reported in depth 
on Secretary Clinton's opening address. 
 
EDITORIAL: The daily Al-Bayan ran an October 22 editorial entitled 
"Maliki's Visit to America: Purpose and Objectives by Ali Hussein 
Addahloki who wrote: "When Maliki went to the U.S. with a bundle of 
Qinvestment opportunities for American companies in hand, he was 
showing his preference for the best." 
¶4. WESTERN MEDIA COVERAGE 
 
The run-up to the conference, and the USBIC itself, were covered 
widely by Western media, particularly by the Wall Street Journal, 
New York Times, Reuters, and AFP. In Baghdad, interviews with 
Haslach and backgrounders with other Mission officials resulted in 
articles by Reuters, the Wall Street Journal, New York Times and Los 
Angeles Times.  Other key outlets including CNN, Fox News, AFP, AP 
and Time Magazine, attended the October 7 joint press conference in 
Baghdad.  Western Media coverage focused on the steps that Iraq 
needs to take in order successfully to attract U.S. investment, 
including improving its regulatory framework and investment climate, 
and becoming a signatory to international arbitration agreements. 
 
¶5. COMMENT:  The advance publicity arranged in Baghdad helped place 
the USBIC within the context of the SFA and a U.S.-Iraqi economic 
relationship that is becoming deeper and more multi-faceted.  Our 
strategy also helped manage initially unrealistic local expectations 
over defining the success of the conference simply by the number of 
contracts signed.   As a result, local media remained largely 
satisfied and focused more on the broader and more long-term goals 
that the USBIC achieved, which was to introduce Iraqi businesses to 
potential U.S. and international partners, have GOI officials and 
 
businesses hear directly from the private sector about their 
concerns and interests, create long-lasting networks and to showcase 
Iraqi business opportunities in diverse sectors. 
 
Ford