09BAGHDAD62
ACTION REQUEST: U.S. WEAPONS RELEASE TO IRAQ -
Sun Jan 11 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO4101
PP RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #0062/01 0111021
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 111021Z JAN 09
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1171
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHINGTON DC//NSC// PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUMICEA/USCENTCOM INTEL CEN MACDILL AFB FL//CCJ2// PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000062 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IZ MARR MCAP MOPS PGOV PINS PNAT PTER
SUBJECT: ACTION REQUEST: U.S. WEAPONS RELEASE TO IRAQ - 
F-16 AIRCRAFT 
 
REF: LETTER OF REQUEST FOR PRICE AND AVAILABILITY FOR 
     PURCHASE OF THIRTY SIX (36) F-16 AIRCRAFT 
     FROM IRAQI MINISTRY OF DEFENSE DATED 27 AUG 
     2008 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action request, see paragraph 11. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Summary: The Country Team requests the approval for 
the sale of thirty-six (36) F-16 block 50/52 aircraft and 
associated equipment and munitions to the Government of Iraq 
(GOI).  This sale will continue to build the Iraqi Air Force 
(IQAF), under the guidance of Coalition Forces and the Iraqi 
Ministry of Defense, to a level adequate to defend against 
the internal threats that insurgents pose to Iraq's 
indigenous population, as well as IQAF's operational 
capability to deter and defend against external threats to 
GOI's security.  This sale will further enhance 
interoperability with Coalition air forces.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------------------- 
Description of Technology for Release 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) This aircraft system sale would include the 
following technological systems and features: 
 
- APG-68(v)9 radar with synthetic aperture radar is provided 
as standard equipment on the F-16 block 50/52 aircraft. 
 
- Generation III targeting pods provide precise, day/night 
targeting capability to more effectively execute 
counterterrorism operations. 
 
- An internal electronic warfare suite as sold to other F-16 
customers would provide a modern self-defense capability and 
would free up an external centerline station for an 
additional fuel tank while reducing drag. 
 
- The Link-16 secure data-link system will maximize 
interoperability with US and NATO forces. 
 
- GPS/PPS capability is required for inclusion of the 
embedded GPS/INS avionics unit and is also a baseline 
requirement for JDAM. 
 
- IFF with Mode IV will provide the IQAF with the ability to 
operate in a coalition environment and is a theater baseline 
requirement for release of AMRAAM. 
 
- AMRAAM munitions will provide the IQAF with an air-to-air 
defense missile commensurate with the capabilities of the 
block 50/52 F-16 aircraft. 
 
- GBU-31 and GBU-38 JDAM munitions will provide the IQAF with 
the necessary precision guided munitions to more effectively 
combat terrorists in Iraq. 
 
- CBU-130 and CBU-105 wind corrected munitions will provide 
the IQAF with more accurate weapons deliveries against 
terrorism targets. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Rationale for Technology Release 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) The IQAF currently has no inventory of tactical 
fighter aircraft or precision guided munitions capabilities. 
F-16 block 50/52s incorporating modern data links, navigation 
systems, targeting pods, and beyond-visual-range missiles are 
necessary for the GOI to participate in Coalition training, 
exercises and operations, and to operate a modern air defense 
network. This sale will complement the IQAF's existing 
procurement of flight screening and primary trainer aircraft 
in preparation for the F-16 weapon system. The updated 
aircraft will improve Iraq's operational flexibility and 
allow the IQAF to integrate its assets in Coalition 
operations and future bilateral and multilateral exercises. 
Releasing the F-16s to Iraq will also reduce the IQAF need to 
turn to non-U.S. suppliers for its emerging fighter 
requirements, and will further build a U.S.-Iraq 
military-to-military aviation relationship for decades to 
Qmilitary-to-military aviation relationship for decades to 
come. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
Iraq Safeguarding Sensitive Technology 
-------------------------------------- 
 
 
BAGHDAD 00000062  002 OF 003 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) Iraq has demonstrated the intent and ability to 
protect sensitive, classified military technology since 
working with U.S. and Coalition forces.  An Article 505 
agreement (signed by the GOI July 24, 2004) demonstrates 
Iraq's commitment to protect grant defense articles and 
technology similar to our standards.  Additionally, a 
Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) for compliance for the storage, 
security and inventory of all sensitive items of equipment 
and materiel was signed by the Iraqi Ministry of Defense on 
November 18, 2005. MNF-I will continue to train and mentor 
the IQAF in the proper use, protection, and safeguarding of 
sensitive technologies as they continue to demonstrate this 
maturity and intent. MNF-I will also obtain all necessary 
formal agreements with the GOI before transferring any 
sensitive equipment or technology. Lastly, MNF-I will 
continue to carry out a robust Enhanced End Use Monitoring 
(EEUM) program while executing this force modernization 
effort. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
Anticipated Reaction from Neighboring Nations 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) The GOI's request for F-16s has prompted some 
internal opposition from leaders in the country's Kurdish 
region, as well as opposition from neighboring nations in the 
Middle East. While Iraq's military has become more competent, 
the Shia-dominated central government continues to arouse 
suspicion among some sects and to face internal competition 
in a developing political environment. The rapid regeneration 
of Iraqi Security Forces with equipment of U.S. origin such 
as F-16s is also likely to be viewed with concern by other 
countries in the region. The Parliament of Kuwait has openly 
expressed concerns about Iraqi military procurement which are 
likely to increase with this sale. 
 
¶7. However, we assess that this sale will not materially 
affect the military balance of power in the region. Even with 
the F-16 block 50/52 system, Iraq still has a ways to go 
before achieving air power parity with the Gulf States and 
Iran. Iraq's U.S.-allied neighbors, Israel and Saudi Arabia, 
each fly hundreds of modern military aircraft. The Israeli 
Air Force operates F-16s, as do Jordan, Egypt, Turkey, the 
UAE, Oman and Bahrain. Release of this system would move 
Iraq's military capabilities incrementally closer to those if 
its regional neighbors and would be more likely to increase 
the level of stability in the region.  The concerns are to be 
expected and reinforce the need to closely monitor end use of 
the F-16 weapon system, but are not judged sufficient to 
prevent the release of the aircraft. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
Iraq's Political Importance to the Region 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) A stable, democratically-elected Iraqi government, 
capable of protecting its people and sovereignty, and 
remaining at peace with its neighbors is one of the USG's 
highest priorities.  The release and employment of F-16s will 
facilitate progress toward this goal by advancing the Iraqi 
Security Forces' ability to provide security against 
anti-Iraqi forces, while significantly reducing the risk to 
themselves and the population. F-16s will improve the 
capability and interoperability of the IQAF, increase 
deterrence against air attack from potential threats, and 
enhance Iraq's ability to monitor its border regions during 
Qenhance Iraq's ability to monitor its border regions during 
both day and night. The increased capability will allow for a 
greater IQAF role in Coalition training, exercises and 
operations, which will increase Iraq's interoperability with 
the rest of the world's modernized air forces. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Source of Financing and Economic Impact 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) This purchase will be financed by Government of Iraq 
funds.  The cost is pending official price and availability 
data.  We do not envision that approval of this technology 
release will adversely affect either Iraqi or U.S. programmed 
funding.  There is no significant economic impact anticipated 
to be generated by this sale. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Relevant Human Rights Considerations 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶10. (SBU) There are no human rights considerations that 
 
BAGHDAD 00000062  003 OF 003 
 
 
should preclude the release of the defense equipment to the 
Iraqi Armed Forces. 
 
-------------- 
Action Request 
-------------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) We request immediate Washington approval for the 
release of 36 F-16 block 50/52 aircraft to the Government of 
Iraq. 
CROCKER