09BEIRUT1041
ENGAGING THE LEBANESE DIASPORA
Wed Sep 23 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beirut
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHLB #1041/01 2661429
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 231429Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIRUT
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 5745UNCLAS BEIRUT 001041 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BEXP BTIO EAID EINV OEXC PGOV PHUM PREL SCUL
SMIG, TSPL, KMPI, LE 
SUBJECT: ENGAGING THE LEBANESE DIASPORA 
 
REF: STATE 86401 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. The Lebanese diaspora is a large and diverse global 
community with an estimated population of at least twelve 
million, three times that of Lebanon itself.  The bulk of the 
diaspora is centered in the Western hemisphere, with the 
largest population in Latin America.  The remittances from 
this successful community provide some six billion dollars 
per year to the Lebanese economy and have been key to 
rebuilding a nation frequently shattered by strife.  In 
addition to foreign direct investment and business ties, 
diaspora charitable organizations are directly involved in 
 
reconstruction, de-mining and aid programs.  Lebanese living 
overseas also often maintain connections to their religious 
sect and political affiliation, and these ties are most 
pronounced among those residing in the Middle East and North 
Africa. Embassy Beirut is currently involved in several 
projects that mobilize and engage this successful community. 
End summary. 
 
A SUCCESSFUL AND DIVERSE DIASPORA 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  Since the early migrations of the Phoenicians, Lebanon 
has sent a steady stream of emigrants into the diaspora. 
Although modern Lebanese society contains significant 
populations of Christians, Sunnis and Shias, in addition to 
other smaller communities, emigration patterns have not 
affected all communities equally.  Today, the Lebanese 
diaspora may be broadly characterized by the two waves of 
emigration that formed it: forced migration of Christians 
during the Ottoman era and more recent waves of Muslim 
emigrants, who tend to be "earn and return" migrants. 
 
¶3.  In the late 1800s and early 1900s, religious and economic 
persecution led to massive emigration, predominantly by 
Christians, most of whom settled in the United States, Latin 
America, the Caribbean and Africa.  This first wave of 
emigration formed the basis for the prominent Lebanese 
diaspora in the Western hemisphere.  Descendants of Lebanese 
immigrants have served as presidents and prime ministers in 
Latin America and members of Congress in the United States. 
Numerous successful businessmen, entrepreneurs and 
entertainers are also descendants of this generation, and 
they are marked by their full assimilation within their host 
culture.  Using the most conservative estimates and 
definitions for Lebanese diaspora, regional breakdowns are as 
follows: some 8.5 million in Latin America and the Caribbean, 
with nearly 6 million in Brazil alone; another 2.5 million in 
the United States; 300,000 more in Canada; 500,000 in each of 
Europe and Australia/New Zealand; 300,000 in the MENA region; 
100,000 in Africa; and perhaps 10,000 more across all of 
Asia. 
 
¶4.  In the wake of the civil war that wracked Lebanon from 
1975-89, a new wave of emigrants left Lebanon to seek work in 
the MENA region.  These emigrants tend to be "earn and 
return" workers who regularly move across borders as 
opportunities shift.  Skilled Lebanese, including doctors, 
scientists, dentists, lawyers and accountants, are in high 
demand in the Arab world and command much higher salaries 
abroad than at home.  The resulting brain drain undermines 
the local economy as these professionals flee Lebanon's 
corrupt and inept government and limited economic opportunity. 
 
THE TIES THAT BIND: BUSINESSES, BUCKS AND BALLOTS 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶5.  The Lebanese diaspora represents significant wealth, 
vital remittances, and a potentially invaluable resource for 
financial and political involvement.  Even into the second 
and third generations, Lebanese maintain their ties to their 
homeland through business, political and social 
organizations, as well as through on-line forums. 
Remittances, which total some $6 billion annually, contribute 
a staggering 20% of GDP and pass directly into local 
communities and businesses through kinship ties. 
Contributions by wealthy expatriate Lebanese to charities, 
universities, and foreign direct investment are also vital to 
the health of the economy.  Thousands returned to Lebanon to 
vote in the June 2009 parliamentary elections thanks to the 
financial support of local political parties or their 
overseas branches. 
 
¶6.  Several private organizations try to harness the energy 
and resources of Lebanese expatriates to develop Lebanon. 
For example, the Lebanese International Business 
Associations, Network (LIBAN), established in 2000, focuses 
on enabling Lebanese entrepreneurs to succeed in Lebanon. 
The network sponsors programs aimed shoring up Lebanon's 
entrepreneurial base by urging young expatriate Lebanese to 
return home to work in start-up and technology ventures.  The 
Lebanese Emigration Research Center (LERC), an academic 
initiative of Notre Dame University (NDU) Beirut, does 
research and reporting on the diaspora as well as conducting 
outreach programs.  The center is the direct result of NDU,s 
desire to attract Lebanese emigrants, contributions and 
foster research in global identity, ancestral roots and 
genealogical heritage. 
 
¶7.  The Lebanese diaspora also contributes substantially to 
charities involved in social welfare, many of which sprang up 
in the aftermath of the 2006 war.  One example is the 
Lebanese American Alliance, which provides scholarship funds 
for needy Lebanese students to attend the American University 
of Beirut and the University of Balamand.  The alliance also 
donated funds to clinics and hospitals in Lebanon and has 
sent medical supplies valuing more than $5 million. 
Similarly, the Lebanese Information Center provided 
assistance to families in Lebanon facing hardship.  Another 
organization is the American Task Force for Lebanon, which 
raises funds for de-mining and other humanitarian issues. 
Lebanese expatriates also contribute significant funds to 
charities related to their church or mosque. 
 
LEBANESE GOVERNMENT FAILS 
TO TAP THE DIASPORA'S POTENTIAL 
------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  The Lebanese government's initiatives toward the 
diaspora, headed by the foreign ministry, have been sorely 
lacking.  There is no organized government campaign or 
outreach to interface with members of the diaspora, and 
Lebanese expatriates are hindered from obtaining basic 
consular services abroad because Lebanese diplomatic posts 
are seriously underfunded and understaffed.  The government 
has nonetheless made some efforts.  In late December 2008 the 
telecommunications ministry sponsored a conference entitled 
"Telecom for Lebanon - Tapping the Diaspora." The conference 
attracted about 30 expatriate Lebanese telecommunications 
experts who shared their knowledge on telecommunications 
liberalization and discussed the ministry,s policy paper for 
medium and long-term development of the sector.  A committee 
of local and expatriate experts was established to follow up 
on the conference recommendations and to organize similar 
gatherings in the future.  The MEPI-supported Youth Shadow 
Government also has a diaspora outreach office. 
 
DIASPORA PROJECTS AND EMBASSY BEIRUT 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶9.  Embassy Beirut has initiated several projects aimed at 
tapping the potential of the diaspora.  For example, the 
USAID-funded project "Profiling Expatriate Prospects for 
Local Development Partnership" empowers Lebanese 
municipalities by creating a database of Lebanese living 
abroad who are interested in establishing economic 
partnerships with their home villages.  Over 150 emigrants 
have already contributed or are willing to contribute to 
their villages, economic development.  The project will 
spread to cover an additional 115 villages in addition to the 
initial 15 communities supported to date.  Another 
MEPI-assisted program, Teach for Lebanon (TFL), is an 
initiative that aims to keep the country's top graduates at 
home while improving educational levels.  The project 
recruits university graduates to serve as teachers in 
disadvantaged primary schools, thus giving them an 
opportunity to support the disadvantaged while becoming more 
vested in their home communities.  The American non-profit 
Act for Lebanon has also provided funding to TFL. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶10.  The Lebanese diaspora, while enormous and varied, 
reflects the tribal and sectarian nature of Lebanese society. 
 While ties to it, both economic and social, are essential to 
Lebanon's future, the Lebanese government has failed to take 
the initiative in harnessing the diaspora's resources.  While 
the embassy does not have the necessary staff or facilities 
to launch a major outreach to the diaspora, we will continue 
to seek out projects for MEPI and USAID that can leverage the 
potential of the diaspora to develop Lebanon.  With the 
approximately 3-to-1 ratio of Lebanese expatriates to 
resident Lebanese citizens, the potential for foreign direct 
investment, micro-enterprise finance and civil society work 
is enormous.  End comment. 
 
¶11.  In response to reftel request, our point of contact for 
diaspora issues is Derrin R. Smith (Political Section). 
SISON