09CAIRO983
EMBASSY CAIRO RESPONSE TO FY 2009 JULIA TAFT
Sun May 31 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHEG #0983 1510808
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 310808Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 2762UNCLAS CAIRO 000983 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA/ELA, PRM/AFR, PRM FOR LANGE, PRM FOR 
GILMORE, PRM FOR AUSTIN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREF PREL EG
SUBJECT: EMBASSY CAIRO RESPONSE TO FY 2009 JULIA TAFT 
 
REFUGEE FUND 
 
REF: STATE 14280 
 
¶1. (U) Embassy Cairo is pleased to propose the following 
three projects, for funding by the FY 2009 Julia Taft Refugee 
Fund, to assist the refugee communitites in Cairo. The total 
amount of funding for the three projects is USD 19,350.  The 
delivery of refugee assistance in Cairo's urban setting is 
problematic since refugees are spread out over thie metro 
area of approximately 20 million inhabitants.  This leaves 
tremendous gaps in assistance, and the three projects that 
Embassy Cairo selected meet gaps in ongoing local refugee 
programs that are not being effectively addressed by UNHCR, 
other international organizations, or non-governmental 
organizations. Since this is the first time that Embassy 
Cairo has participated in the program, we agreed with PRM's 
Brennan Gilmore to award three projects to spread out the 
assistance and maximize the reach of USG funds to the Cairo 
refugee community. 
 
¶2. (U) The first project for which we recommended funding is 
a youth sports program for Sudanese refugees, which is 
sponsored by the Sudanese Refugee Child Sports Association. 
The Association will rent soccer fields, provide sports 
training, sports equipment, athletic clothing and employ 
security for the venues.  The cost of the project is 25,840 
Egyptian pounds (USD 4,700).  One of the biggest problems 
with Sudanese youth in Cairo is involvement in gang 
activities and alcohol and drug abuse.  The proposed sports 
programs would provide soccer and basketball teams for youth 
aged 6-16.  This programs would funnel youth energies into 
positive activities and encourage the youth to work as a 
team.  The project would give Sudanese youth, who spend most 
of their days on the street, productive activities to fill 
their time and a safe place to meet and discuss relevant 
issues to their community as well as reduce violence among 
the refugees. 
 
¶3. (U) The second project that we recommend funding is the 
Africa and Middle East Refugee Assistance (AMERA) project to 
identify and protect asylum seekers and those that have had 
their refugee files closed and those in prison with direct 
psychosocial services and outreach.  AMERA was established by 
AUC Professor Barbara Harrell-Bond to fill the gap in refugee 
legal support and counseling.  The total project cost is 
190,468 Egyptian pounds (USD 34,630) of which the Julia Taft 
Fund has been asked to contribute 28,000 Egyptian pounds (USD 
5,100), which will fund transportation, interpretation and 
emergency house, health, food and transportation assistance 
for refugees.  The project will result in the development of 
three refugee psychosocial needs assessments, facilitate self 
help groups, and provide training workshops for refugee 
service providers. 
 
¶4. (U) The third project that we selected is Sacred Heart 
Church's "Project Bakhita," which provides English and 
computer vocation training for 500 refugees aged 16-35. 
Total project costs are 97,400 Egyptian pounds (USD 17,710). 
The Julia Taft Fund will provide 52,400 Egyptian pounds (USD 
9,550), which is over 50 percent of the funding for this 
project.  Sacred Heart Church is a Roman Catholic Church and 
the largest provider of education services for the Sudanese 
refugee community.  The project will provide members of the 
African community refugee community the opportunity to 
develop marketable computer skills, and help them create 
livelihoods no matter where they will live in the future.  It 
will give youth aged 18-26, who comprise 78 percent of the 
students in the program, a positive outlet and take them off 
the streets.  It will also give the participants in the 
program access to Internet and e-mail services, which will 
allow them to stay in touch with the home communities in 
Sudan and the Horn of Africa. 
 
¶5. (U) Embassy Cairo appreciates the opportunity to 
participate in PRM's FY 2009 Julia Taft Refugee Fund. 
SCOBEY