09CAIRO2058
EGYPT: INAUGURAL ARAB WORLD FORUM SEEKS SENIOR USG
Thu Oct 29 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHEG #2058 3021333
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 291333Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4027
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC PRIORITYUNCLAS CAIRO 002058 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NEA/ELA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV KISL KIRF EG
SUBJECT: EGYPT: INAUGURAL ARAB WORLD FORUM SEEKS SENIOR USG 
REPRESENTATION 
 
1.Key Points: 
 
--Egypt's International Economic Forum (EIEF) and the international 
consulting group Smadja and Associates will co-host the inaugural 
meeting of the Arab Global Forum on December 7-8, 2009 in 
Washington, D.C. 
 
--The Arab Global Forum is conceived and led by Shafik Gabr, one of 
Egypt's most dynamic and innovative entrepreneurs, and an excellent 
conduit to the Middle East business community.  Post strongly 
recommends participation by senior USG officials as appropriate. 
 
--Senior USG involvement will also be an opportunity to follow up 
President Obama's June 4 message on economic reform and 
entrepreneurship in the region and set the stage for a 2010 White 
House entrepreneurship summit. 
 
¶2. The Arab Global Forum, a partnership between EIEF and Smadja and 
Associates, will take place December 7-8, 2009 in Washington D.C. 
Billed as an opportunity to discuss ways to strengthen American-Arab 
economic and business relations, the forum is expected to attract an 
audience of more than 300 business leaders and policy makers from 
the U.S. and the Middle East. Confirmed speakers include CEOs of 
some of the largest corporations in the U.S. and Middle East as well 
as academic experts from think tanks and universities. 
 
¶3. The forum is organized by EIEF and Smadja and Associates.  Formed 
in 1998, EIEF is an Egyptian NGO led by prominent members of Egypt's 
business community committed to developing and supporting economic 
reform policies in the country.  Gabr serves as the chairman of the 
organization; he is also the founder of Egypt's American Chamber of 
Commerce. Smadja and Associates is a Switzerland-based consulting 
organization with offices in the Middle East and North Africa.  Its 
primary programming activities include planning international 
economic conferences and business summits similar to the December 
global forum. 
 
¶4. Forum organizers seek high-level USG participation in the event 
and have repeatedly contacted us to indicate their desire for a 
senior USG presence. In October, the forum extended invitations to a 
group of 10 administration officials, including VP Biden; 
Secretaries Clinton, Geithner, and Lahood; U/S Hormats; and A/S 
Feltman.  Egypt is preparing to send a high-profile group to attend 
the forum.  Its confirmed attendees include Health Minister Hatem 
El-Gabaly; Abdel Danish, Chairman of Exceed - one of the largest 
outsourcing companies in the Middle East; Mohammed Shafik Gabr, 
President of Artoc Group - a prominent Egyptian investment holding 
company; and Akil Beshir, Chairman of Telecom Egypt - the largest 
provider of fixed line services in the Middle East and Africa. 
Unconfirmed press reports state National Democratic Party Assistant 
Secretary General Gamal Mubarak may attend as well. 
 
¶5. Comment: We view this Washington D.C. event as an excellent 
opportunity to engage the Egyptian and Middle East business 
community and believe that senior USG participation is warranted to 
demonstrate our commitment to a U.S.-Egypt and regional economic 
dialogue.  Six months after President Obama's visit to Egypt, 
business leaders and government officials continue to reach out to 
us to express their strong support for his June 4 speech and to urge 
implementation of his economic-related initiatives.  Senior USG 
representation at this event will be an opportunity to identify, 
address and shape business and economic discussions and demonstrate 
to participants that the USG will work in collaboration with Arab 
business leaders as they pursue economic reform in Egypt and across 
the region. Senior USG involvement will also be an opportunity to 
follow up President Obama's June message on economic reform and 
entrepreneurship in the region and set the stage for a 2010 White 
House entrepreneurship summit. 
 
Scobey