09CHENGDU3
GUIZHOU LOOKS TO CHINA COAST TO RE-EMPLOY PEASANT MIGRANT
Tue Jan 06 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Chengdu
VZCZCXRO0237
RR RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHCN #0003/01 0060649
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 060649Z JAN 09
FM AMCONSUL CHENGDU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3053
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 3719UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CHENGDU 000003 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/CM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SOCI ECON PGOV CH
SUBJECT: GUIZHOU LOOKS TO CHINA COAST TO RE-EMPLOY PEASANT MIGRANT 
WORKERS 
 
REF: 08 CHENGDU 299 
 
CHENGDU 00000003  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. (U) This cable contains sensitive but unclassified 
information - not for distribution on the internet. 
 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) SUMMARY:  Labor officials and researchers say an 
economic upturn in the more prosperous coastal region is the key 
to reducing the swelling number of unemployed migrant laborers 
in southwest China's Guizhou province.  Our contacts in Guizhou 
are skeptical that government-sponsored job training programs or 
direct financial assistance to unemployed migrant laborers will 
significantly increase these workers competitiveness in the 
local job market.  These contacts are equally pessimistic that 
national-level economic assistance programs will noticeably 
change the employment opportunities for migrant laborers.  End 
Summary. 
 
 
 
Banking on Coastal Recovery 
 
--------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) Officials at Guizhou Province's Labor and Social 
Security Bureau told us in late December that the province 
offers only limited job opportunities.  An influx of 500,000 
unemployed peasant migrant workers returning from coastal and 
other provinces will greatly increase pressure on the employment 
market.  As of late November, Guizhou labor officials estimated 
that nearly 166,000 peasant migrant workers had already returned 
home from outside the province, after seeing their salaries 
slashed or losing their factory jobs.  Press reports and 
government officials forecast the trend to continue through late 
January when 400,000 - 500,000 peasant migrant workers will have 
returned to Guizhou because of reduced wages or job loss; the 
total number of returnees may exceed one million (see reftel). 
The Labor Bureau said that in an ordinary year only about 
600,000 workers, both employed and unemployed, return home for 
the Spring Festival holiday, which comes in late January this 
year. 
 
 
 
¶4. (SBU) Beyond the strain on the local job market, the province 
is also likely to feel the loss of remittances that provide half 
the total cash income to people in rural areas of Guizhou 
Province.  Mao Gangqiang, who works for the Research Center for 
Rural Guizhou Governance, highlighted the example of Zunyi 
County, a county subordinate to Guiyang City located north of 
the city center.  There, as much as 40 percent of the population 
works outside the province.  Mao told us that Zunyi peasant 
migrant workers send about 2 billion Renminbi (RMB), or about 
USD 293 million, back to the county each year.  Peasant migrant 
workers from Wuchuan County sent back an average remittance home 
of 3,000 - 4,000 RMB (USD 440 - 586), according to Mao. 
 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) Guizhou labor officials said that the provincial 
government will encourage peasant migrant workers to go outside 
the province after the Spring Festival to find work.  In a 
recent survey of peasant migrant workers who returned to 
Guizhou, 51 percent said they planned to return to the coast to 
find work in the New Year.  The government's challenge will be 
to encourage the 49 percent of respondents who intend to stay in 
the province to find work outside the province.  Sun Qiu, a 
Director at the Guizhou Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 
directly tied the prospects for Guizhou's peasant migrant 
workers to the coastal economic downturn.  She said a long 
period of poor economic growth would likely have a strong 
negative impact on Guizhou peasant migrant workers and lead to 
social unrest. 
 
 
 
Government, Workers Looking to Training... 
 
------------------------------------------ 
 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) Nearly two-thirds of returning peasants said that they 
wanted skills training to help them find a better job in the 
future, according to the Labor Bureau's survey.  An even greater 
 
CHENGDU 00000003  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
percentage of peasants hoped to receive general vocational 
training.  Migrant laborers identified restaurant, textile, and 
food processing-related work as the fields in which they would 
most like to receive training.  Guizhou, as of late-December, 
planned to provide subsidies for worker training.  Most training 
lasts 2 - 4 weeks.  As one example, the Labor Bureau said that a 
returning migrant worker could receive 500 - 800 RMB (USD 73 - 
114) for a 15-day restaurant training course, although officials 
did not explain how this money was dispersed. 
 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) Guizhou is also considering offering longer-term 
training at vocational schools that would last 3-12 months. 
Labor officials told us that tuition at the schools would cost 
1000 RMB.  They also say that peasant migrants from Guizhou can 
receive training in Shenzhen.  Guizhou labor officials say that 
Shenzhen pays for the "first stage" of training, while Guizhou 
pays for 80 percent of the "second stage," although they did not 
elaborate on the content of the first and second stages of 
training. 
 
 
 
¶8. (SBU) Labor officials tout currently available and planned 
training programs as a way to increase the competitiveness of 
Guizhou's migrant laborers.  The officials said that once 
workers obtain a certificate of course completion from one of 
these short-term training courses, they will be better able to 
compete for coastal jobs. 
 
 
 
...But Some Observers See Efforts Falling Short 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
 
 
¶9. (SBU) Mao is skeptical that training will significantly 
alleviate the unemployment problem among migrant laborers.  In 
his opinion, training will not help most returning migrants find 
work.  Huang Yin and Li Li, former employees of a disbanded NGO 
who continue to work with migrant laborers, told us that many 
returning migrants do not expect that training will help them 
land a job.  These three contacts said that Guizhou needs to 
focus on creating jobs in the province.  Mao credited a local 
job fair in Guiyang with helping find 4,000 unspecified jobs to 
returned migrant laborers, but said that more needed to be done 
to provide benefits and services.  He and Sun both said peasant 
worker needed better medical care, pensions, and education. 
They also called for reduced fees and taxes for migrant workers. 
 
 
 
¶10. (SBU) Sun told us that she doubted Guizhou, and the 
returning peasant migrant workers, would receive substantial 
direct benefit the recently announced 4 trillion RMB (USD 586 
billion) stimulus plan.  She felt that Guizhou would not be able 
to compete successfully against other provinces to get funding 
for the kinds of large-scale projects that could become a needed 
source of new jobs.  She also said that she had not heard of any 
plan by the provincial government to offer 100 RMB (USD 15) 
vouchers to low income residents, as was done in Sichuan. 
 
 
 
¶11. (SBU) Comment: It is unclear how Guizhou plans to manage the 
funding of its training programs.  This may lead to the kinds of 
misappropriated funding already reportedly seen in Sichuan.  A 
local newspaper in Sichuan ran a story in late December that 
highlighted provincial efforts to combat fraud in their worker 
training programs.  The Chengdu Shangbao reported that training 
organizations had fraudulently submitted reimbursement requests 
for 4,700 students who did not exist. 
BOUGHNER