09CHENGDU149
US NGOS SUPPORT LIVELIHOOD PROJECTS AMONG ETHNIC TIBETANS
Tue Aug 11 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Chengdu
VZCZCXRO9185
RR RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHCN #0149/01 2230402
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 110402Z AUG 09
FM AMCONSUL CHENGDU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3329
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHC/USAID WASHDC
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 4005UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 CHENGDU 000149 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/CM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON SOCI PGOV CH
SUBJECT: US NGOS SUPPORT LIVELIHOOD PROJECTS AMONG ETHNIC TIBETANS 
AND OTHER MINORITY GROUPS IN NORTHWEST YUNNAN 
 
REF: CHENGDU 197 (2008) 
 
CHENGDU 00000149  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶1.  (U) This cable contains sensitive but unclassified 
information -- not for distribution on the Internet. 
 
 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Summary: Ethnic Tibetans and other minority 
communities benefit from income-boosting and cultural 
preservation projects in northwest Yunnan implemented by U.S. 
NGOs and funded by USAID or private donors.  Northwest Yunnan 
remains the easiest ethnic Tibetan area for international NGOs 
to work in -- the area did not experience the unrest seen in 
other Tibetan areas in March 2008, and local officials there 
remain relatively tolerant of their work.  In a Naxi minority 
community, development of locally cultivated feed and better 
storage has enabled semi-nomadic people to settle down with 
their livestock.  In one Tibetan village, development of local 
Tibetan handicrafts helps protect cultural traditions while 
increasing incomes of vulnerable populations.  In another 
Tibetan village, eco-tourism development has strengthened local 
residents' stake in preserving the natural environment while 
improving livelihoods.  End summary. 
 
 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Congenoff recently visited rural communities in 
northwest Yunnan's Diqing Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture, where 
US-based NGOs Heifer International and The Mountain Institute 
(TMI) currently are carrying out livelihood development projects 
in minority communities.  TMI is a current recipient of USAID 
funding for its work in Tibetan areas.  Heifer has not 
previously applied for USAID funding, but is currently preparing 
a USAID application.  (Note: Tibetans are the largest ethnic 
group in the prefecture; they number more than 110,000, which is 
approximately 30 percent of the total.  The prefecture is also 
home to significant Lisu and Naxi populations, each at more than 
ten percent, with smaller populations of several other groups. 
TMI estimates that approximately half the population lives below 
the official poverty line, and that the majority of these are 
Tibetan.  End note.) 
 
 
 
Heifer International: 
 
Supporting a Naxi minority community in Sanba 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶4.  (SBU) According to its field staff, Heifer has about 30 
on-going projects in Shangri-la County (formerly Zhongdian). 
Heifer's programs in Shangri-la, managed by two full-time Heifer 
staff, encompass most of the minority communities living in the 
county, including Tibetan communities which comprise the largest 
group, as well as Lisu, Naxi, Yi, and others.  Staff accompanied 
Congenoff for a visit to their site in a small Naxi minority 
village near Haba Snow Mountain, about a three hour drive from 
Shangri-la town.  They noted that this is their most successful 
project measured by both increased community involvement and 
higher incomes.  Most of the community of about 500 (54 
households) are engaged in agricultural work, with 
cattle-raising as the primary income source.  The community 
previously led a semi-nomadic lifestyle, following their 
cowherds to grazing areas in the surrounding mountains.  Under 
the new Heifer-supported model, they now cultivate enough grass 
locally and no longer need to graze further afield.  The 
village's elected leader explained that this has resulted in 
better fed and healthier cattle that command a higher market 
price. 
 
 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Additionally, Heifer has worked with the community to 
set up five "self-help groups" that work together on activities 
such as tree planting, learning about traditional culture, 
improving public hygiene, building and maintaining winter feed 
storage, and using technology to work more efficiently.  Heifer 
staff and community members pointed out newly built toilets, 
cattle pens, feed storage facilities, and solar water heaters 
all of which they noted were built  with project support.  The 
Heifer staff reported that they travel regularly to the village 
in order to provide further training to community members. 
However, despite the evident improvement of livelihoods, the 
lack of a road to their community makes access to basic public 
services still difficult.  The nearest health clinic, staffed 
with two doctors, is about an hour away by foot, and there are 
 
CHENGDU 00000149  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
few vehicles in town.  While community members reported that the 
vast majority of their children complete high school, they must 
move to the county seat at Shangri-la and reside in school dorms 
to do so. 
 
 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Heifer's Shangri-la field staff confirmed that the 
county government is supportive of the Naxi village project in 
the context of their official nomad resettlement program 
launched in 2008.  According to online government information, 
the program targets nomads, semi-nomads, various rural 
populations facing relocation for unspecified reasons, and rural 
victims of natural disaster.  In 2008, they settled 286 families 
during the program's first phase.  The second phase, currently 
underway and due for completion by April 2010, aims to settle an 
additional 2,135 households.  Comment: If the Naxi village 
project is typical of the settlement approach, then it arguably 
bodes well for the overall program as implemented in Shangri-la. 
 However, it should be noted that nomad and other rural 
settlement programs often involve policies of much less benefit 
to the communities involved.  For example, some nomad settlement 
programs in Sichuan province involve relocation to new urban 
housing developments that cut the connection to traditional 
livelihoods, while providing little in the way of viable new 
livelihood options.  End comment. 
 
 
 
The Mountain Institute: 
 
Supporting Tibetan Pottery Makers and Eco-tourism 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Local staff at TMI's large and apparently quite active 
office in Shangri-la provided a quick briefing on a range of 
active projects, with primary focus on enterprise and 
eco-tourism development in northwest Yunnan's Tibetan 
communities.  TMI's show-case enterprise development project 
aims to preserve the local Tibetan pottery tradition through 
support of improved craftsmanship and expanding market linkages. 
 Their main project partner, Dangzhen Pichu, is the son of a 
master potter now turned local entrepreneur.  His enterprise, 
established in 2005, sits on the main road 45 minutes north of 
Shangri-la on the road to Deqin, looking down over his home 
village where 60 percent of its 800 residents are full-time 
potters.  Congenoff visited the business site, which includes a 
workshop, dorms for apprentices, and a display/sale area. 
 
 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Dangzhen Pichu said that he received investments 
totaling about 1,600,000 RMB (USD 235,000) from a variety of 
sources, including the United Nations and the Agricultural Bank 
of China.  (He was most likely referring to the UN Environmental 
Program funds that are channeled through The Nature Conservancy, 
which in turn lends money via local cooperatives.)  The county 
government has also helped by building public bathrooms at the 
roadside sales outlet and by government support to secure the 
land on which the business is located.  TMI has focused on 
improving quality of the pottery, developing new 
tourist-oriented products, and increasing access to the 
expanding tourist market in Shangri-la. 
 
 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Danzhen explained that he takes on eight apprentices 
annually, graduates of the local middle school, providing them 
with living space, a monthly stipend of 200 RMB (USD 29), and 
nine months of training.  After completing their apprenticeship, 
the young potters either remain with his enterprise or return to 
work with their respective families.  He also discussed his plan 
for the next 5-8 years.  He currently hires a number of the 
younger people with disabilities from his village and hopes to 
expand this program, establishing a second, more accessible, 
workshop in the village.  He also wants to start training women 
as potters, noting that the local tradition has been that only 
the men do the pottery, leaving the women currently able to earn 
only about half as much as the men in the village. 
 
 
 
¶10.  (SBU) Congenoff also visited Hamagu, a traditional Tibetan 
village of about 200 located a few kilometers from downtown 
Shangri-la and previously supported by TMI in the establishment 
 
CHENGDU 00000149  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
of an eco-tourism capacity.  Under the current USAID-funded 
Tibet Plateau Development Program (TPDP), TMI is providing 
additional training of village-based tourism operators.  During 
a half-day visit to Hamagu, one resident told Congenoff that TMI 
trained him and several others to serve as village-based guides 
for tourists interested in exploring the adjacent Napa Hai 
wetlands nature reserve area and nearby mountain ranges, and 
supported the purchase of several vehicles for shuttling 
visitors in from town.  Additionally, he noted that the TMI 
project assisted with the provision of solar water heaters for 
all of the approximately 40 households, significantly reducing 
their need to cut down nearby forest for fuel.  TMI sources 
confirm that they fund about 70 percent of the solar water 
heater purchases. 
 
 
 
¶11.  (SBU) A separate tour operator in town, a Han businessman 
from Beijing who is also a TMI project partner, collected the 
200 RMB fee and arranged for the village guide to meet 
Congenoff.  The village guide reported a good working 
relationship with the town-based operator, who he said passed 
the guide fee on to him, although he did not specify how it was 
divided between the two.  A portion of the guide fee goes to a 
village environmental protection fund, managed by a village 
committee, he said.  So far, the small scale eco-tourism seems 
not to have disrupted traditional life in the village. 
Cattle-raising and agriculture continue to be the village's 
economic mainstays, while eco-tourism supplements incomes and 
strengthens the community's stake in preserving the surrounding 
environment.  Comment: As Shangri-la continues its rapid 
expansion as a national tourist destination, including the 
addition of several large hotels in recent years and an 
increasing flow of domestic tourism, this balance may be harder 
to sustain.  End comment. 
 
 
 
Ethnic Tibetan Projects in Yunnan 
 
Relatively Free from Interference 
 
---------------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶12.  (SBU) Comment: International NGOs operating in Tibetan 
areas within our district, both within the TAR and Sichuan 
province, have faced significant official obstruction over the 
last year and a half following the March 2008 unrest in Lhasa. 
However, northwestern Yunnan's Diqing Prefecture, where ethnic 
Tibetans are about 30 percent of the population, remains far 
less sensitive than other Tibetan areas. To date, organizations 
operating in northwestern Yunnan, especially those doing 
community development and medical work have encountered far 
fewer difficulties than their counterparts in other areas. 
Heifer International which simply provides livestock on the 
condition the recipients "pass on the gift" and has no 
international staff, still operates without difficulty in the 
Tibetan Autonomous Region. 
BROWN