09CHENGDU168
SW CHINA: BLOGS, TWITTER ALERT PUBLIC TO DISSIDENT'S TRIAL
Wed Aug 26 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Chengdu
VZCZCXRO1047
RR RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHCN #0168/01 2380505
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 260505Z AUG 09
FM AMCONSUL CHENGDU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3367
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 1887
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 4043UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 CHENGDU 000168 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV SOCI CH
SUBJECT: SW CHINA: BLOGS, TWITTER ALERT PUBLIC TO DISSIDENT'S TRIAL 
 
REF: A) CHENGDU 141;  B) CHENGDU 157;  C)  08 CHENGDU 98; 
 
CHENGDU 00000168  001.2 OF 008 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Summary and Comment:  Supporters of  Chengdu 
environmentalist Tan Zuoren, put on trial for incitement to 
overthrow state power on August 12, used blogs and twitter text 
messages to raise public awareness of the case.  Tan's two 
lawyers, both active bloggers, and other supporters put the 
indictment, defense plea and other defense and prosecution 
materials that were presented in open court online (ref A). 
Censors deleted defense and prosecution materials from the web, 
including from search engines.  Meanwhile Tan's supporters 
constantly repost these materials.  The Communist Party 
Propaganda Department's difficulties in erasing public 
materials, including their own accusations against Tan from the 
internet, demonstrate that defending the indefensible -- their 
use of Chinese law to bring purely political prosecutions -- has 
become much harder.  No verdict has been announced in Tan's and 
two other on-going political trials in Sichuan.  Tan's defense 
plea translated in appendix.  End Summary and Comment. 
 
 
 
Blogs and Twitters Raise Public Awareness of Tan Zuoren Case 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU)   The indictment and August 12 trial of Chengdu 
environmentalist Tan Zuoren inspired an internet-based "Set Him 
Free" information campaign and the release online of both the 
indictment and the defense arguments of Tan's attorneys.  Tan's 
supporters in Chengdu and elsewhere posted or copied postings 
from other blogs about the case on many PRC websites often just 
a mouse click ahead of website managers who deleted many of 
them.  Supporters standing outside the Chengdu courtroom used 
their cell phones to post a stream of short messages online 
through Twitter, including what they were hearing about the 
courtroom action, reports of witnesses briefly detained by 
Chengdu police so they could not appear in court, and the short 
statements that Tan's wife and his attorneys made after the 
trial.  Some of the Twitter messages also detailed online 
articles about the case in China or on foreign websites out of 
the reach of PRC censors.  The online search function at 
Twitter.com made it easy to follow this cyber-scene by searching 
on the defendant surname Tan or by subscribing to the comment 
stream of twitterers on the scene. 
 
 
 
Bloggers Post Multiple Blogs and Keep Reposting as Censors Delete 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  Like many Chinese bloggers that the authorities 
consider controversial, Professor Xiao Xinhui of Chengdu's 
Southwest Nationalities University has a dozen or more nearly 
identical blogs.  Xiao has been kept on basic salary but has not 
been allowed to teach since she took part in the large June 4, 
1989 protests in Chengdu.  Chinese blog hosting services vary 
considerably in their standards for deleting materials, so 
postings on some websites stay up much longer than on others. 
On one of her blogs, Xiao posted photographs of the text of the 
Tan indictment and defense plea so that web censors could not 
find the article with their search engines.  Some blog services 
such as sina.com deleted copies of the indictment and defense 
plea while another, sohu.com, did not delete them, but instead 
marked certain entries so that they would not show up on search 
engines.  When the web censor deletes article on a blog at 
sina.com, the blogger gets a polite message "the web manager has 
deleted article X, we regret any inconvenience this causes you." 
 
 
 
Bloggers Keep Bouncing Back 
 
--------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  When a blogger is too persistent, hosting service 
censors will close it down,  but bloggers can simply open 
another blog on the same or another blogging site.  Both of Tan 
Zuoren's lawyers blog.  Tan lawyer Pu Zhiqiang entitles his Sohu 
blog "The Eighth Sohu Blog of Pu Zhiqiang" (see URL 
puzhiqiang8.blog.sohu.com).  Presumably when this one gets 
deleted too, we will see his "Ninth Blog."  The two lawyers have 
been posting on their blogs prosecution evidence against Tan 
such as a list of his articles, mostly published in PRC media, 
that allegedly libel the Party and government, and his public 
statement of January 20, 2009 criticizing the Pengzhou 
petrochemical plant now under construction north of Chengdu. 
 
 
 
Tan Zuoren: Only One of Three Political Trials in Sichuan 
 
CHENGDU 00000168  002.2 OF 008 
 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  The August 12 Tan Zuoren trial was only the second of 
three recent political trials in Sichuan.  In the first two, 
Tan's trial and Huang Qi's trial for possession of state secrets 
in Chengdu on August 6, some Chengdu intellectuals see Sichuan 
authorities as using state security charges to both silence 
local environmental and rights activists and to win the 
acquiescence of higher authorities to the prosecution.  In the 
trial of U.S. permanent resident Yungjun Zhou (aka Zhou Yongjun) 
in Suining on August 21 for a fraud perpetrated outside mainland 
PRC jurisdiction in Hong Kong, fraud charges are apparently a 
pretext to hold a prominent June 4th 1989 activist (ref B). 
Chengdu intellectuals widely believe that Huang Qi and Tan 
Zuoren are being prosecuted for their investigations into shoddy 
school construction that raised the death toll of the May 12, 
2008 earthquake, their support for protests by bereaved parents, 
and their protests against the multi-billion dollar Pengzhou 
petrochemical plant (ref C). 
 
 
 
¶6.  (U) Appendix:  Defense Plea in the Tan Zuoren Case on 
Incitement to Overthrow State Power from the Xiao Xiehui Blog 
 
 
 
BEGIN TRANSLATION 
 
 
 
Defense Plea in the Tan Zuoren Case 
 
 
 
 Xiao Xuehui blog 
 
 
 
August 17, 2009 
 
 
 
[At the request of Ms. Wang Qinghua, [note: the wife of Tan 
Zuoren] the first instance plea of lawyers Xia Lin and Pu 
Zhiqiang has been released.  The two lawyers faced many 
obstacles and put up with humiliation in order to carry out 
their important work with rare perseverance to complete their 
plea, stopping and starting because they were interrupted many 
times.  The first instance plea should have been published as an 
exact copy of the original document.  This is not possible, 
however, because of web filtering and so in order to defeat the 
control of the web, we made technical changes in some of the 
keywords.  This is a very precious legal document. Everyone 
concerned with the case of Tan Zuoren should read it. 
 
 
 
--- Xiao Xuehui made this explanation and requests that this 
document be reposted on other websites.] 
 
 
 
The case of Tan Zuoren Accused of Incitement to Overthrow State 
Power 
 
 
 
Defense Plea 
 
 
 
To the Panel of Judges of the Tan Zuoren case: 
 
 
 
The Beijing Huayi Law Office, which was commissioned according 
to law by the defendant Tan Zuoren, designated the lawyers Xia 
Lin and Pu Zhiqiang to make the first instance plea.  After 
receiving this commission, we reviewed the case files, 
interviewed the defendant, conducted many interviews, and 
conducted many investigations.  We believe that after being 
reviewed by the court, the accusations brought by the 
prosecution against Tan Zuoren cannot be proven.  Based on the 
indictment and evidentiary materials exchanged with the 
prosecution before the trial, we make the following defense: 
 
 
 
¶I.   With regard to the nature of the article "1989: The Last 
 
CHENGDU 00000168  003.2 OF 008 
 
 
Beauty I Witnessed -- the Tiananmen Diary of an Eyewitness" 
written by the defendant Tan Zuoren: 
 
 
 
The prosecution states that "The accused Tan Zuoren is 
dissatisfied with the way the Central Committee of the Chinese 
Communist Party handled the " June X Incident" and the 
conclusions it drew about that incident.  For many years, he has 
been carrying out in many ways "June X" commemorative 
activities.  On May 27, 2007, Tan Zuoren concocted an article 
entitled "1989: The Last Beauty I Witnessed -- the Tiananmen 
Diary of an Eyewitness" and distributed it through the internet 
to the website outside of mainland China's borders "The Torch of 
Liberty" as well as to other websites.  The main points of this 
article provide a distorted account of the "June X Incident" and 
libel the Chinese Communist Party Central Committee's handling 
of it". 
 
 
 
The definition of "libel" in the dictionary is "making something 
out of nothing, saying bad things about a person, damaging a 
person's reputation, slandering someone" (See Modern Chinese 
Language Dictionary, Second Edition, P. 315, published January 
1983.)  The prosecution's charge that the defendant Tan Zuoren 
"made a distorted account and committed libel" is a matter to 
evaluate according to the facts and as to whether the contents 
of Tan Zuoren's article are true. 
 
 
 
The court investigation has already determined that "1989;  The 
Last Beauty I Witnessed -- the Tiananmen Diary of an Eyewitness" 
was written on May 27, 2007 and is his personal response to 
statements about the "June X Incident" by Ma Li, Chairman of the 
Hong Kong Popular Alliance.  The purpose of the article was to 
make the facts clear (see interrogation record). 
 
 
 
However, after Ma Li made that statement, the Vice Chairman of 
the Hong Kong Popular Alliance, Liu Jianghua said that Ma Li's 
statement did not represent the views of the Popular Alliance 
and wanted to apologize on his behalf.  Tan Zuoren wrote this 
article based upon his memories as an eyewitness of the period 
leading up to and following the "June X Incident".  The 
prosecution in its accusation states that Tan Zuoren "made a 
distorted and libelous account" but has not presented evidence 
to support that accusation.  Nor has it in court "made an 
accurate account", so how can Tan Zuoren be accused of writing 
falsehoods? 
 
 
 
According to the indictment, Tan Zuoren has "for many years in 
many ways conducted activities commemorating "June X" but has 
presented no evidence to support this charge.  Moreover, 
according to Tan Zuoren's own account during interrogation in 
court, before the 2007 statement of Ma Li, he had not conducted 
any commemoration of "June X".  So what is the basis of "for 
many years" and what is the basis of "in many ways"? 
 
 
 
The defense believes that this prosecution charge against the 
defendant Tan Zuoren is vague, untrue and not supported by the 
evidence. 
 
 
 
The charge cannot be proved according to law and so should 
clearly be rejected. 
 
 
 
II.   With regard to the prosecution's accusation that Tan 
Zuoren communicated with the "enemy element outside China's 
borders" Wang Dan and suggested that voluntary blood donation 
drives be conducted. 
 
 
 
According to the prosecution's accusation, "Shortly after the 
article was published, the enemy element outside China's borders 
Wang Dan contacted him by e-mail and on several occasions sent 
him propaganda materials about the "June X" incident. 
 
 
 
On June X, 2008, the accused Tan Zuoren together with others in 
 
CHENGDU 00000168  004.2 OF 008 
 
 
Chengdu's Tianfu Square conducted a voluntary blood donation 
drive to commemorate "June X" by donating blood.  Shortly 
thereafter, he was interviewed by the telephone by the media 
outside mainland China's borders "Voice of Hope".  Since 
November 2008, Wang Dan on several occasions sent him materials 
on activities to commemorate the so-called twentieth anniversary 
of the "June X" incident.  On February 10, 2009, the accused Tan 
Zuoren sent Wang Dan an email "Suggestions on the Twentieth 
Anniversary of June X" suggesting that during this year's "June 
X" period conducting so-called "June X Worldwide Chinese 
Voluntary Blood Drives" in order to commemorate the twentieth 
anniversary of "June X". 
 
 
 
With respect to this charge, the defense believes: 
 
 
 
¶1.  Criminal methods of incitement to overthrow state power 
involve the open encouragement of a group of two or more people. 
 The facts presented in this accusation involve a private email 
between Wang Dan and Tan Zuoren.  This is not in accord with the 
open nature of this crime and that the incitement be directed at 
a group of two or more people. 
 
 
 
¶2.  The designation of Wang Dan as an "enemy element outside of 
China's borders" has not been officially announced by the state 
and the defendant is not aware of this.  Moreover, a search of 
PRC criminal law did not turn up a crime of "communicating with 
enemy elements outside of China's borders".  The prosecution has 
already determined that Wang Dan is "an enemy element outside of 
China's borders" and according to the accusation statement, Wang 
Dan took the initiative to send to a mailing list materials on 
"June X".  Considering the political attitudes and behavior of 
the two people involved in the communication, it could be 
claimed that Wang Dan was inciting Tan Zuoren but surely it 
would be nonsense to suppose that the accused Tan Zuoren sought 
to incite Wang Dan.  This is clearly absurd nonsense.  This 
accusation by the prosecution is obviously mistaken. 
 
 
 
III.  With respect to the prosecution charge that Tan Zuoren 
made statements about the May 12th Earthquake. 
 
 
 
The court investigation states that after the May 12 earthquake, 
the accused Tan Zuoren was interviewed several times by media 
from both inside and outside China's borders and on many 
occasions acted as a guide to assist them in their interviews 
and investigations.  These media included Xinhua, Liaowang 
Oriental Weekly, First Financial Daily, Humanity and the 
Biosphere, etc. as well as Hong Kong broadcasters under the Hong 
Kong government.  No matter whether he was interviewed by media 
from inside or outside China's borders, he said the same thing. 
 
 
 
However, the prosecution accusation stresses only that "Tan 
Zuoren on several occasions was interviewed by media from 
outside China's borders, and make statements that severely 
damaged the image of our Party and government" clearly takes 
things out of context to make these activities look suspicious. 
 
 
 
The defense response to these accusations: 
 
 
 
¶1.  The prosecution's accusations are abstract and empty.  The 
prosecution presented 22 articles that total several tens of 
thousands of words as evidence.  Looking over these articles, 
one finds some discussion of the work of the Party and 
government in earthquake relief.  Tan Zuoren praises them where 
praise is due but not excessively.  He does not pass over their 
shortcomings in silence but discusses them.  Just which chapters 
and which words have anything to do with subversion?  I really 
do not know. 
 
 
 
These 22 articles were collected by the prosecution from the 
private computer of Tan Zuoren and were edited by Tan Zuoren 
himself on his computer in the "My Documents" folder.  None of 
them are transcripts of media interviews.  This being such an 
"important case" how could it have been handled so sloppily? 
 
CHENGDU 00000168  005.2 OF 008 
 
 
How can these documents be taken as manuscripts that are used as 
evidence in a criminal case? 
 
 
 
¶2.  The court investigation determined that Tan Zuoren is the 
deputy secretary-general of the Green Rivers environmental NGO 
and has long been concerned about the construction of 
hydroelectric power plants in southwest China.  His statement 
about the earthquake, involving an analysis of the causes of the 
earthquake and how it could have been prevented, was from the 
perspective of an expert.  This analysis is based upon a 
considerable amount of scientific evidence.  The defense has 
already provided these materials to the court.  Moreover, two 
experts on the subject, Fan Xiao, an engineer from the Sichuan 
Province Mining Bureau Geological Survey Team and Professor Ai 
Nanshan of the Sichuan University Construction and Environmental 
College are willing to testify as defense witnesses in court. 
They are now waiting outside the court because unfortunately the 
court arbitrarily refused to hear them.  We regret this decision. 
 
 
 
¶3.  According to the court record of interrogation, Tan Zuoren 
after the May 12 earthquake made 23 trips to determine the 
number of students who were killed in the earthquake as well as 
the number of school and dormitory buildings that had collapsed. 
 He spent over 50 days on these survey trips and collected much 
first-hand material. He made an objective description of the 
situation based on these trips. 
 
 
 
His surveys showed that for many of the schools in the 
earthquake zone, poor construction quality led to their 
collapse. The problem of "bean curd construction" that Tan 
Zuoren describes certainly exists.  Tan Zuoren urges now that 
the cause of the collapse of the schools and dormitories be 
thoroughly investigated, that the people responsible face 
criminal prosecution, and that a natural disaster should not be 
an excuse to hide a man-made calamity.  What is wrong with 
saying this?  And how can anyone be accused of committing a 
crime by saying this? 
 
 
 
Provoked by the deaths of so many students, Tan Zuoren may have 
said some words in anger and criticized the Ministry of 
Education.  But the defense wants to remind the prosecution: to 
criticize is not to incite to overthrow the state.  The Ministry 
of Education has never represented state power. Therefore 
nothing could be as ridiculous as this accusation against Tan 
Zuoren for incitement to overthrow state power. 
 
 
 
IV.  The prosecution's accusation on the legal nature of Tan 
Zuoren's behavior. 
 
 
 
The prosecution believes that "the indicted Tan Zuoren, in order 
to achieve his goal of subverting state power and overthrowing 
the socialist system fabricated things out of whole cloth, 
distorted news, and spread speech that is injurious to state 
power and the socialist system in order to hurt the image of 
state power and the socialist system in the eyes of the people. 
This constitutes a crime under article 105 of the Criminal Code 
of the People's Republic of China.  The crime is clear, the 
evidence is certain and abundant.  Tan Zuoren should be 
prosecuted and convicted of the crime of inciting subversion of 
state power". 
 
 
 
The defense again reminds the panel of judges that the accused 
Tan Zuoren, who has made an accurate description of many 
matters, is accused of "fabricating things out of whole cloth 
and distorting news".  However, the prosecution has not yet 
presented any evidence to contradict what Tan Zuoren has written 
nor any evidence supporting the accusation.  If the prosecution 
is unable to present relevant evidence, then some of the matters 
it has presented as fact are not credible. 
 
 
 
The defense presents three opinions on the legal validity of the 
accusations brought by the prosecution: 
 
 
 
 
CHENGDU 00000168  006.2 OF 008 
 
 
¶1. Tan Zuoren's speech related to this case is a matter of a 
citizen exercising his right to make suggestions and criticisms. 
 That speech does not constitute incitement to overthrow the 
state and does not fit the criteria for that crime. 
 
 
 
This crime is found in the first chapter of the criminal code, 
"Crimes Against State Security".  Examining that section of the 
law, it is clear that the definition of this crime is limited to 
threatening state security. 
 
 
 
How can speech threaten state security?  We can find an 
explanation in "The Johannesburg Principles on National 
Security, Freedom of Expression and Access to Information" which 
are widely accepted by international society. Principle Five 
holds that "Subject to Principles 15 and 16, expression may be 
punished as a threat to national security only if a government 
can demonstrate that: (a) the expression is intended to incite 
imminent violence; (b) it is likely to incite such violence; and 
(c) there is a direct and immediate connection between the 
expression and the likelihood or occurrence of such violence". 
 
 
 
In China's legal system no legal or administrative explanation 
accompanies the legislation on this crime.  Therefore, widely 
accepted international principles can provide an important 
reference point for judging this case.  The speech of Tan Zuoren 
relating to this case had no language inciting to overthrow the 
state or to violence.  On the contrary, Tan Zuoren's political 
views favor gradual and peaceful social progress.  The objective 
effect of his views does not harm but actually supports state 
security and so of course do not fall with the legal definition 
of this crime. 
 
 
 
Article 41 of the PRC Constitution stipulates: "Citizens of the 
People's Republic of China have the right to criticize and make 
suggestions to any state organ or functionary".  The defense 
believes that Tan Zuoren's speech involved in this case was the 
normal exercise by a citizen of their right to criticize and 
make suggestions, and should therefore be protected by the PRC 
Constitution.  How can it be construed as "incitement to 
overthrow the state"? 
 
 
 
¶2.  Tan Zuoren did not have any subjective intention to incite 
to overthrown the State. 
 
 
 
This crime in its subjective aspect relates to intention, the 
person committing the act must have the motive of inciting two 
or more persons to act to overthrow state power and to overthrow 
the socialist system. 
 
 
 
The defense believes that in order to determine the subjective 
motive of a personal act, one needs to do a historical study of 
it objective manifestations over a long period.  The court 
investigation shows that the indicted freely confesses without 
reservation that he is passionate about the well-being of 
society and that he has for a long time been making outstanding 
contributions to political science and administration. 
 
 
 
The principal facts are these: 
 
 
 
--  During 1996 - 1997, he served as the chief planner of the 
Chengdu City government's Fenghuang Mountain development project 
and later led the planning work for the Sichuan International 
Rehabilitation Center and the Chengdu Rest Home and Assistance 
Center for the Elderly, the Chengdu City Temporary Residence 
project, and was asked by the Pi County government to design the 
Jinguancheng Recreation Area, the Shudu Rear Garden and other 
projects. 
 
--  In 1998, he was asked by the Sichuan Province Academy of 
Social Sciences to plan the "Great Turn of the Century Human 
Talent Project". 
 
--  In 1999 he participated in the Yangtze River Environmental 
 
CHENGDU 00000168  007.2 OF 008 
 
 
Memorial Construction Project. 
 
--  In 2000 he planned the Sichuan Exhibition Center 
transformation project; 
 
--  In 2001 he was chosen by the Chengdu Daily as an outstanding 
citizen of Chengdu; 
 
--  In 2002 he planned and implemented the "Century of Great 
Changes - Chengdu's Big Transformation" a major photo 
exhibition; at the Sichuan Provincial People's Congress 
consultative conference his proposal to enact a law to protect 
the Great Panda was adopted.  He also participated in the 
planning for the construction of the "Deng Xiaoping Old Home 
Tourism District"; 
 
--  In 2004 he was invited by the Chengdu Jinniu District to 
devise a plan for the Jinsha Ruins Park.  His proposal for the 
"Tianfu Gourmet Park" was adopted and became a key project for 
Chengdu.  On behalf of the Sichuan Cultural Bureau he designed 
and organized a "Culture and the Creative Industries Forum"; 
revised and made new suggestions for the "Chengdu City Cultural 
Tourism Industry Plan", participated in several important 
meetings organized by the Chengdu City Propaganda Department, 
participated in the survey and review of the "South to North 
Water Diversion Project". 
 
--  In 2006, he was asked to design the "Chengdu City Eastern 
Suburbs Creative Industries Park" concept; 
 
--  In 2007 he led the "Chengdu Citizen Ethnic Culture Tourism 
Development Plan".  His Botiao River Research Project and the 
research on the "Small Scale Western Waters Diversion" won the 
approval of Premier Wen Jiabao. 
 
--  In 2008, he designed the Cultural Tourism Street project for 
the Xichang City government.  He wrote and distributed an 
academic report on the issues of the Pengzhou City petrochemical 
plant project entitled "A Citizen's Suggestion on the Pengzhou 
City Petrochemical Project" and sent it to the departments 
concerned. 
 
--  In 2009 he participated in the "May 12 Student Deaths 
Survey". 
 
 
 
The facts above demonstrate that Tan Zuoren has contributed for 
the past twenty years to the construction of Chengdu and of 
Sichuan Province, to scientific planning and to economic 
planning, all of which have greatly improved the image of the 
government.  In his capacity as Chinese citizen or as an 
outstanding expert, Tan Zuoren has also of course criticized 
some improper administrative actions of the government.  How 
could these well-intentioned and honest criticisms be 
maliciously understood as incitement to overthrow state power? 
 
 
 
¶3.  The behavior and speech of Tan Zuoren do not constitute this 
crime. 
 
 
 
As everyone knows, the character of the PRC government is a 
"people's democratic dictatorship", that is to say the great 
majority of the people through democratic means hold state 
power.  Overthrowing state power, then, means having the 
intention to use anti-democratic methods to destroy the system 
of people's democracy.  By looking through all of Tan Zuoren's 
writings, one can see that he is a person who passionately loves 
the people, supports democracy, and is opposed to autocracy. 
Mr. Tan Zuoren is a pioneer of people's democracy and its 
guardian, not one who would overturn it and destroy it.  To 
convict him of incitement to overturn state power contradicts 
the basic character of PRC state political regime. 
 
 
 
¶V.  Summation 
 
 
 
The matters described above are sufficient to prove that none of 
the accusations of the prosecution about the speech and actions 
of Tan Zuoren constitute the crime described in Article 151 in 
the PRC Criminal Code of "incitement to overthrow state power". 
The accusation that Mr. Tan Zuoren committed this crime fails 
for lack of evidence. 
 
 
 
CHENGDU 00000168  008.2 OF 008 
 
 
 
Sichuan since ancient times has been a place where cultured 
people gather.  Many heroes have arisen throughout the history 
of Chengdu.  We are confident that Sichuan has sufficient 
political wisdom to handle the Tan Zuoren case.  Let us quote 
here a couplet from the Wuhou Temple of Chengdu for the people 
involved in this case: 
 
 
 
"Those able to win people's hearts are able to eliminate their 
doubts and their worries; from ancient times people 
knowledgeable in military affairs have avoided fighting whenever 
possible; those who are not able to judge situations will make 
mistakes no matter whether they are strict or lenient. Those who 
govern Sichuan in the future should deeply reflect upon this". 
 
 
 
The defense earnestly requests that the panel of judges reflect 
deeply and according to Article 162 of the Law of Criminal 
Procedure of the PRC, and that they find and proclaim the 
defendant Tan Zuoren not guilty. 
 
 
 
Defense attorneys:  Xia Lin and Pu Zhiqiang 
 
Beijing Municipality Huayi Law Firm 
 
 
 
August 12, 2008 
 
 
 
END  TRANSLATION 
BROWN