09HELSINKI287
FINLAND:  RESPONSE TO PRESIDENT'S REQUEST FOR
Mon Jul 27 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Helsinki
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHHE #0287 2081136
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 271136Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY HELSINKI
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 5094UNCLAS HELSINKI 000287 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DRL/MLGA FOR KRISTEN MCGEENY, EUR/NB FOR MIGUEL RODRIGUES 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM UN FI
SUBJECT: FINLAND:  RESPONSE TO PRESIDENT'S REQUEST FOR 
INITIATIVES TO COUNTER TORTURE 
 
REF: STATE 070129 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Summary:  On July 20, PolOff and PolAsst met with 
Dr. Pekka Tuomola, Director of the Helsinki Deaconess 
Institute Centre for Torture Survivors in Finland.  The 
Centre for Torture Survivors provides a unique holistic 
approach to therapy, offering a range of treatments from 
psychological trauma to art therapy.  Interpreters are also 
provided to better understand victim's cultural norms.  The 
center is 100 per cent funded by  Finland's Slot Machine 
Association (RAY) through 2010 and provides one of the only 
resources in Finland for victims of torture.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  (U) On July 20, PolOff and PolAsst met with Dr. Pekka 
Tuomola of the Helsinki Deaconess Institute Centre for 
Torture Survivors in Finland.  The apolitical and 
nonsectarian Centre for Torture Survivors began operations in 
1993 as a way for the Government of Finland (GoF) to fulfill 
international refugee and asylum conventions to treat torture 
survivors. 
 
Center's Treatment Includes Art Therapy and Group Meetings 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  The center provides a unique comprehensive and 
holistic approach to therapy.   Torture victims have multiple 
symptoms requiring a variety of specialists.  The center 
offers psychiatric trauma therapy, psychotherapy, 
physiotherapy, art therapy, pain treatment, neurological 
assessment, and family and group meetings.  The center's 
professional staff consists of two psychiatrists, a 
neurologist, two psychologists, a psychiatric nurse, a 
physiotherapist and an art therapist.  A child psychiatrist 
also works at the center one day a week treating young 
adults; no children are treated at the center. 
 
Interpreters Help Overcome Cultural Challenges 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶4. (SBU)  Torture victims may be referred by nurses, 
physicians and social workers in the immigration reception 
centers or by municipal refugee or health care authorities. 
Each patient undergoes an extensive initial evaluation to 
determine the extent of torture, which is often a combination 
of physical, mental and sexual torture.  Patients come from 
over 30 countries with most coming from Afghanistan, Iran, 
Iraq, Turkey and the Democratic Republic of Congo. (Note: 
Tuomola specifically noted that Somalis do not come to the 
center and prefer to treat "themselves."  End note.) The 
center provides interpreters for translation but also to 
better understand a victim's cultural roots and norms. 
Tuomola stressed that an interpreter who understands and is 
apart from regional and tribal differences can be key to 
successful treatment. 
 
¶5. (U) Tuomola said that the treatment period can vary from 
months to years.  Torture victims come to the center plagued 
by trust issues and may view treatment as a continuation of 
torture, thereby delaying recovery. Treatment is free of 
charge to the patients. RAY currently provides 100 per cent 
of the funding and will do so through 2010. 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) The center, which treats approximately 140 patients 
a year, is vital to victim's rehabilitation.  Finnish 
psychiatric centers, for example, do not accept torture 
patients as they are difficult to treat. A smaller similar 
center for torture survivors operates in Oulu under the Oulu 
Deaconess Institute. 
 
 
BUTLER