09KABUL1211
FEFA ASSESSES PROGRESS, SOME IRREGULARITIES IN
Mon May 11 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO1221
PP RUEHDBU RUEHPW
DE RUEHBUL #1211 1311421
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 111421Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8838
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS KABUL 001211 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM PGOV AF
SUBJECT: FEFA ASSESSES PROGRESS, SOME IRREGULARITIES IN 
CANDIDATE REGISTRATION 
 
REF: A. KABUL 1136 
     ¶B. KABUL 891 
 
¶1. (SBU)  SUMMARY: FEFA, the Afghan election observer 
organization, noted both positive developments and some 
irregularities in its assessment of the candidate 
registration process at its May 11 press conference. Looking 
ahead, FEFA called for the Media Commission and the Electoral 
Complaints Commission (ECC) to begin their electoral 
safeguards work promptly.  FEFA's read-out showed again the 
sharp contrast between its strong grassroots data collection 
network and its weak analytical capabilities (reftels.)  We 
will follow up with FEFA to seek more precision about some of 
its findings, and will continue to look for ways to provide 
technical support. END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Executive director Jandad Spinghar opened his calm, 
steady remarks by noting the absence of any security 
incidents that could have affected the process.  He praised 
the Independent Elections Commission (IEC) for its work in 
organizing adequate staffing and materials in all the 
provinces, an accomplishment made more remarkable by 
Afghanistan's scarce human resources, weak infrastructure, 
and difficult terrain. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  As for irregularities, Spinghar cited several 
types.  Most importantly, FEFA observed that, on 15 
occasions, "powerful individuals," not linked to the 
government but not further identified, threatened provincial 
council candidates.  FEFA did not report whether the 
candidates themselves or other sources provided its 
information, and did not specify the nature of the threats. 
These 15 incidents took place in Uruzgan, Farah, Balkh, Ghor, 
Badghis, Takhar, and Sar-e-pul provinces. 
 
¶4. (SBU) FEFA reported two types of misuse of government 
resources, totaling 100 observed or reported incidents. In 
Kabul, Parwan, Balkh, Baghlan, and Kandahar, provincial 
council members and district governors used their government 
vehicles and bodyguards while registering as provincial 
council candidates.   FEFA did not describe whether these 
official resources were used for transport of the would-be 
candidates, or in collection of voter signatures.  In 
Nangarhar and Kandahar, some government officials organized 
gatherings in support of several provincial council 
candidates. 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  FEFA observers in the provinces of Parwan, Balkh, 
Logar, and Baghlan each reported one case where local 
electoral officials, based on personal ties, displayed 
favoritism toward a provincial council candidate.  FEFA did 
not detail the nature of the display of favoritism. 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  FEFA also noted two irregularities which we judge 
minor.  Spinghar briefed that, while President Karzai filed 
his registration papers at the IEC, the presidential security 
detail for several hours blocked access to the IEC, which 
prevented other presidential candidates from registering 
during that period.  FEFA argued that the IEC failed to 
provide equitable access to all candidates because the 
candidate information packages arrived late in some areas. 
Registration packages, however, all arrived on time. 
EIKENBERRY