09MANAGUA496
NICARAGUA: TIMBER INDUSTRY AT A STANDSTILL
Mon May 18 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #0496/01 1381830
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 181830Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4142
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEHRC/DEPT OF AGRICULTURE WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS MANAGUA 000496 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS USTR 
AGRICULTURE FOR US FOREST SERVICE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR SENV ETRD EINV ECON NU
SUBJECT: NICARAGUA: TIMBER INDUSTRY AT A STANDSTILL 
 
REF: A. A) MANAGUA 0405 
     ¶B. B) MANAGUA 1747 
     ¶C. C) MANAGUA 2655 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  Nicaraguan timber exports in 2008 
reflected a complete collapse of the timber industry - a 
collapse that began in 2006 with the passage of Law 585 
(known as the "Veda Forestal," or forestry ban), which 
included a logging ban and a moratorium on timber exports. 
Nicaragua's exports of cut timber fell 93% between 2006 and 
¶2007.  In 2008, the focus of Nicaraguan forestry authorities 
and potential investors in the sector shifted to the 1.6 
million hectares (four million acres) of broadleaf forest and 
400,000 hectares (one million acres) of pine forest that were 
felled by Hurricane Felix in September of 2007.  The GON has 
backed away from a suspension of all logging in the 
hurricane-affected area, and now permits private companies to 
log the fallen wood and export it as rough-cut timber.  A few 
companies have begun small-scale operations, but are hampered 
by excessive red tape in acquiring transport permits.  Twenty 
months after the hurricane, very little of the fallen timber 
has been collected and what remains on the ground is 
decaying.  End Summary. 
 
Timber Industry Unable to Recover from Logging Ban 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶2. (U) Nicaraguan timber exports in 2008 reflected a complete 
collapse of the timber industry - a collapse that began in 
2006 with the passage of Law 585 (known as the "Veda 
Forestal," or forestry ban), which included a logging ban and 
a moratorium on timber exports.  The ban, which was intended 
to curb rampant illegal logging in Nicaragua's forests, 
instead resulted in legitimate businesses closing down (Ref 
A) and a dramatic decline in exports.  Illegal logging 
consequently did decline in 2008, largely because most of the 
timber mills shut down leaving no place to process the wood. 
Along the economically depressed Atlantic Coast and inland in 
Nicaragua's RAAN and RAAS autonomous regions, where the vast 
majority of the country's five million hectares of forest 
land is located, the collapse of the industry has created 
unemployment and economic hardship. 
 
¶3. (U) Nicaragua's exports of cut timber fell 93% between 
2006 and 2007.  In 2008 exports were just 600 metric tons, 
compared to 11,000 metric tons in 2006.  Between 2002 and 
2005, Nicaraguan exports of forest products -- including cut 
timber, processed wood, and furniture -- averaged $18 million 
per year.  This figure fell to $5 million in 2008, a 73% 
decline.  Moreover, the export of furniture and other wood 
products, which had held steady between 2006 and 2007, 
declined 40% in volume and 21% in value. 
 
¶4. (U) Nicaragua has some of the most extensive rainforests 
in Central America, and is home to 65 different commercially 
valuable tree species.  Among the most valuable are mahogany, 
rosewood, and cedar.  Just over 40% of Nicaragua's territory 
is forested - about 5 million hectares.  Of that, 60% is 
thick, or closed, forest with more than 70% foliage cover. 
The remaining area is open forest with 30-70% cover.  GON 
statistics report that forestry contributes 1.3% to 
Nicaragua's GNP, compared to 19% for agriculture. 
 
Focus Shifts to Wood Downed by Hurricane Felix 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶5. (U) In 2008, the focus of Nicaraguan forestry authorities 
and potential investors in the sector shifted to the 1.6 
million hectares (four million acres) of broadleaf forest and 
400,000 hectares (one million acres) of pine forest that were 
felled by Hurricane Felix in September of 2007.  Estimates of 
the volume of timber on the ground in the hurricane-affected 
areas range from the official government estimate of 11 
million cubic meters to unofficial estimates closer to 50 
million cubic meters.  Twenty months later, very little of 
the fallen timber has been collected and what remains on the 
ground has begun to decay.  A local expert hired to compile a 
national forest inventory believes that half of the downed 
wood is pine and other soft woods, which are the first to 
decay.  An estimated 30% of this could still be harvested. 
The other half consists of tropical hard wood that rots more 
slowly.  As much as 80% of this could still be salvaged.  At 
current market prices, the commercial value of the fallen 
timber ranges between $500 million to $1 billion. 
 
¶6. (U) In September 2008, Director of the Nicaraguan Forestry 
Institute (INAFOR) William Schwartz began implementing 
Presidential Decree 42-2008, permitting commercial timber 
operations (in coordination with local RAAN governments) to 
collect fallen trees and export cut timber and other wood 
products from the area affected by Hurricane Felix.  Decree 
42-2008 reversed the GON's 2007 suspension of all commercial 
timber extraction in the RAAN, an action taken as part of an 
unsuccessful attempt to force timber companies to release 
their inventories to post-hurricane housing reconstruction 
projects without compensation (Ref C).  INAFOR has initiated 
a process to approve forest use plans and grant private 
concessions for the harvest of downed timber.  A few 
companies have begun to ship from the RAAN to Managua and 
traditional export markets.  Nevertheless, Law 585, coupled 
with regulatory inconsistencies and bureaucratic red tape, 
has dissuaded most investors from returning to Nicaragua to 
pursue timber projects. 
 
Bureaucratic Hurdles 
-------------------- 
 
¶7. (U) For those who continue to work in the sector, 
bureaucratic hurdles are everywhere.  Operators complain of 
excessive delays involved with the inspection and transport 
of timber from the RAAN to Managua.  One company waited up to 
12 hours for a permit from INAFOR to transport wood by truck. 
 The same company had a load of timber delayed for 3 months 
before it could depart for Managua.  An up-front fee of $3000 
per concession means that only those with financing can turn 
timber rotting on the ground into commercial opportunity. 
Most local residents cannot afford a permit to harvest fallen 
timber on their own land. 
 
Deforestation Continues 
------------------------ 
 
¶8. (SBU) INAFOR and the Food and Agriculture Organization 
(FAO) have recently completed, but not yet released, an 
18-month national inventory of forests that is expected to 
show that deforestation continues, even when the timber 
industry is paralyzed.  This would confirm that the principal 
cause of deforestation in Nicaragua has been the burning and 
clearing of forested land to make way for agriculture and 
cattle -- not logging, legal or illegal.  Between 1990 and 
2005, Nicaragua reportedly lost 20% of its forest cover, 
about 1,350,000 hectares.  Since, deforestation has slowed, 
but not stopped.  Current estimates are that Nicaragua has a 
little more than 3 million hectares of closed pine and 
broadleaf forests, and 2 million hectares of open forest 
canopy.  The inventory is also expected to show, for the 
first time ever, that there is more non-forested land than 
forested land in Nicaragua's protected areas. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) Despite a series of decrees modifying Law 585's 
logging and export restrictions, the GON has proven incapable 
of managing the sector in a way that protects standing 
forests, develops a timber industry, and creates employment. 
What is needed is a law and a competent regulatory authority 
that could facilitate future investment, perhaps by providing 
incentives through the use of carbon credits or offsets for 
reforestation and forest restoration.  Given the continuing 
popular perception that a logging ban protects Nicaragua's 
forests from exploitation, despite evidence to the contrary, 
a thorough revision of Law 585 any time soon is highly 
unlikely. 
CALLAHAN