09PHNOMPENH363
BURMA DOMINATES ASEAN-EU MINISTERIAL DISCUSSIONS
Tue Jun 02 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXRO8231
PP RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM RUEHNH
DE RUEHPF #0363/01 1531046
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 021046Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0768
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS PRIORITY 0111UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PHNOM PENH 000363 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS TO EAP/MLS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL CB
SUBJECT: BURMA DOMINATES ASEAN-EU MINISTERIAL DISCUSSIONS 
IN CAMBODIA 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: Cambodia hosted the 17th ASEAN-EU 
Ministerial meeting held in Phnom Penh May 27 ) 28, in which 
a strong statement was issued calling for the release of Aung 
San Suu Kyi (ASSK).  Although a wide range of issues were 
discussed, to include climate change, infectious diseases, 
terrorism and human trafficking, ASSK and Burmese human 
rights violations monopolized news conferences, informal 
meetings, and even formal discussions during the two day 
meeting.  Burma's Deputy Foreign Minister addressed critics 
and spoke out for the first time on ASSK's trial.  Prime 
Minister Hun Sen, who spoke at the opening ceremony, steered 
clear of the controversy.  However, by carefully worded 
statements to the press as well as the issuance of a joint 
ASAN-EU statement, Cambodia and other ASEAN countries have 
taken what appears to be a tougher stance against their rogue 
neighbor.  End Summary. 
 
Mounting Pressure 
----------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Twenty-seven European and ten Southeast Asian 
foreign ministers gathered together in Phnom Penh this week 
for the 17th ASEAN-EU Ministerial.  The ministerial was 
intended to enhance cooperation between ASEAN and the EU in 
areas such as trade, transnational crime, health and the 
environment.  However, the atmosphere was described by 
foreign diplomats as exceptionally tense due to the looming 
question of ASSK's future, which has served to highlight the 
long history of human rights abuses by the Burmese 
government.  Although peaceful overall, local news sources 
reported approximately 100 demonstrators gathered outside the 
Burmese embassy in Phnom Penh May 27 to demand the release of 
ASSK and the end of repression in Burma, urging ASEAN leaders 
to expel Burma from the regional alliance. 
 
¶3. (SBU) In conversations with Poloff, EU diplomats called 
the discussions on Burma, which began with a strong statement 
by the UK, as "quite hard."  The UK and other EU ministers' 
use of "Burma" and refusal to refer to it as "Myanmar" 
provoked repeated objections by the Burmese Deputy Foreign 
Minister Maung Myint.  For the first time since ASSK's 
arrest, Maung Myint reacted to mounting international 
pressure by speaking at length on the topic.  He stated that 
his country does not accept pressure and interference from 
abroad and went on to accuse the junta's critics of 
threatening "Myanmar's sovereignty," stating that ASSK's 
trial "is an internal legal issue, and it is not a human 
rights issue." 
 
ASEAN Reaction 
--------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Cambodian Foreign Minister Hor Namhong told local 
reporters that it was the EU, not ASEAN members, who insisted 
on focusing on Burma.  He nevertheless expressed his hope 
that Burma would move ahead in the democratization process. 
Cambodian Foreign Ministry spokesman Koy Kuong previously 
stated that "the stand of our government is that it hopes 
Mrs. Suu Kyi will be found innocent of these accusations and 
that she will not receive any additional punishment, because 
she has been punished already."  Thai Foreign Minister Kasit 
Piromya said he respected Burma's insistence on 
non-interference.  According to a Western diplomat at the 
meeting, Singaporean delegate Zainul Abidin Rasheed stated 
that "EU is a union of values ) but ASEAN is not.  Instead, 
diversity is, if not encouraged, at least agreed."  The 
Singaporean delegate later stated that ASEAN prefers 
engagement as opposed to sanctions and isolation when dealing 
with Burma.  However, nine ASEAN ministers stood alongside 
their EU counterparts to urge Burma to free all political 
prisoners including ASSK at the end of the ministerial.  In a 
discussion with Poloff, opposition Sam Rainsy Party MP Son 
Chhay praised ASEAN for the stance it took on Burma, calling 
the ASEAN-EU statement "strong and clear." 
 
Objection 
---------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) A nine-page joint statement was released at the 
close of the meeting which called on the Burmese government 
to conduct the multi-party general election in 2010 in a free 
and fair manner.  It also called for the early release of 
those under detention and the lifting of restrictions on 
political parties.  Western diplomats stated that Burma 
rejected portions of the statement and "adamantly refused any 
text related to the EU envoy Mr. Fassino whatsoever." Burmese 
officials demanded their objections, which were added as a 
footnote to the final declaration, be officially recorded. 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000363  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) Comment: Cambodia sees itself as a potential bridge 
to Burma, should ASEAN ever be tapped to play a more central 
role in Burma's reform and democratization.  Until then, the 
RGC will go along with joint ASEAN statements calling for the 
Burmese junta to free prisoners and hold open elections.  End 
Comment. 
RODLEY