09RABAT112
MOROCCO READY FOR NEW ENVIRONMENTAL ACTION PLAN,
Thu Feb 05 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Rabat
VZCZCXYZ0001
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHRB #0112/01 0361652
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 051652Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY RABAT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9627
INFO RUCNMGH/MAGHREB COLLECTIVE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 0640
RUEHCL/AMCONSUL CASABLANCA 4486UNCLAS RABAT 000112 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR OES/PCI, OES/ENV, NEA/MAG 
AMMAN FOR ESTH-MBHALLA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID SENV ETRD MO
SUBJECT: MOROCCO READY FOR NEW ENVIRONMENTAL ACTION PLAN, 
AND AIMS HIGHER 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: Morocco's Department of the Environment 
favors renewing discussions under the 2006 Free Trade 
Agreement (FTA) to create the next multi-year Environmental 
Plan of Action, and has also proposed exploring a separate 
bilateral Environmental Agreement, as envisioned under the 
FTA. Morocco's environmental programs align with USG 
development goals and agendas, and merit USG support.  Post 
will coordinate with OES/ENV on further discussion of an 
Environmental Plan of Action.  End summary. 
 
Prior Environmental Cooperation Winding Down 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) Under the procedures outlined in the U.S.-Morocco 
Free Trade Agreement (FTA) of 2006, the USG and GOM developed 
a Joint Statement on Environmental Cooperation, and signed in 
November 2006 a 2005-2007 Plan of Action Pursuant to the 
Joint Statement.  Significant environmental cooperation under 
this plan included USAID Morocco grants, and MEPI-funded 
projects administered by the U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency (USEPA) and the U.S. Department of the Interior (DOI), 
among others.  These projects have helped Morocco comply with 
the environmental provisions of the FTA, principally through 
capacity building among regulators and enforcement agencies 
in the GOM to manage and enforce environmental laws. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) In a January 27 meeting with EconOff and visiting 
Regional ESTH Hub Officer, Director for Partnership, 
Communication and Cooperation Mohamed Benyahia of the 
Moroccan Department of the Environment praised USAID and 
USEPA assistance, noting that it has provided the Department 
of Environment with needed capacities to enforce Morocco's 
portfolio of laws and regulations aimed at protecting the 
environment.  He lamented the expiration of the 2005-2007 
Plan of Action, and stated that the GOM would like to proceed 
on long-stalled discussions for a new Plan to continue that 
cooperation.  However, he expanded, Morocco's longer term 
goal would be to negotiate with the United States a "global" 
Environmental Agreement, such as is envisioned under Section 
17.3 of the FTA.  Given the time it would take a conclude a 
new Agreement, Benyahia said the GOM proposes a two track 
approach to quickly develop a new Plan of Action, and 
concurrently begin negotiations for an over-arching 
Environmental Agreement. 
 
Why an Environmental Agreement? 
------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Benyahia stated that the GOM would like to develop 
an Environmental Agreement that would structure U.S.-Morocco 
cooperation for long-term "investment" in environmental 
areas.  The GOM already benefits from several agreements of 
this nature with European partners, he said, citing accords 
with German development corporations GTZ and KFW.  While the 
discrete projects under the past Plan of Action were 
important for strengthening Morocco's capabilities, now is 
the time for institutional support.  The Department of 
Environment hopes for "investment programs to accompany 
Morocco's priority programs," Benyahia stated, including a 
desire to have USAID resume its support for environmental 
protection projects.  He outlined Morocco's highest 
environmental priorities including: 
 
-- Sanitation/wastewater management and reuse, both to 
protect the water quality and maximize Morocco's limited 
water resources; 
 
-- Household waste management, including proper disposal, 
rehabilitation of uncontrolled dumps, and recycling; and 
 
-- Air quality, with a two-part focus on air quality 
surveillance networks and national strategy to control 
emissions from fixed and mobile sources of pollution. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) EconOff and ESTHOff observed that USG commitments 
to long-term investments in an environmental program are 
uncommon, but undertook to convey the Department of 
Environment's ideas to Washington.  We also agreed to report 
the GOM's interest in renewing discussions for a follow-on 
Environmental Plan of Action and explore the next steps. 
 
GOM Seeks to Expand Regional Coordination 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (U) The GOM is also attempting to engage its neighbors in 
environmental cooperation and capacity building, reported 
 
Department of Environment Chief of Enforcement and Litigation 
Fouad Zyadi.  The Department of Environment is the chair of 
the three year old Network for Environmental Compliance and 
Enforcement in the Maghreb (NECEMA), a regional grouping of 
environmental agencies in North Africa.  This network has 
held two conferences and several international 
training/experience sharing seminars, aimed at improving the 
North African states' capacities to regulate and enforce 
environmental laws.  The Department of the Environment hopes 
to use the NECEMA forum to help the Maghreb countries 
harmonize their approach to environmental protection, both to 
further regional environmental protection and to improve the 
business environment for international partners who would 
have more comfort and familiarity in operating in different 
countries of the Maghreb, Zyadi stated. 
 
Comment: What Next? 
------------------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Comment: We hear not infrequently from ESTH 
interlocutors their wish that the U.S. sponsor long-term 
projects in a manner similar to some European environmental 
assistance.  While Moroccan counterparts appreciate and 
praise past and current USG assistance, they unfortunately 
perceive our annual budgeting and project development process 
as less effective than European approaches to development 
projects.  Although Post does not anticipate that a bilateral 
Environmental Agreement with U.S. funding for long-term 
environmental projects would be likely to materialize in the 
near future, we welcome Morocco's interest in prioritizing 
environmental and natural resource protection and management, 
and complying with its FTA environmental obligations.  Post 
will coordinate with OES/ENV to determine our follow up on a 
new Environmental Plan of Action, focusing on areas of 
interest to USG global environment objectives and FTA 
support.  We also continue to research additional options for 
strengthening our environmental cooperation, including 
Science Fellows or technical exchanges, while USAID is 
considering support for GOM implementation of policies 
relevant to wastewater management and reuse.  Morocco's 
support of the NECEMA network and desire to position itself 
as a regional leader in this area provide an opportunity to 
leverage bilateral cooperation and capacity building for a 
wider regional audience.  End Comment. 
 
 
***************************************** 
Visit Embassy Rabat's Classified Website; 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/rabat 
***************************************** 
 
Jackson