09RABAT621
TRADE EXPERTS ADVISE EXPORTERS ON FTA OPPORTUNITIES
Mon Jul 20 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Rabat
VZCZCXYZ0015
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHRB #0621/01 2011656
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 201656Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY RABAT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0457
INFO RUEHCL/AMCONSUL CASABLANCA 4676
RUEHRC/DEPT OF AGRICULTURE WASHDC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDCUNCLAS RABAT 000621 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EEB/TPP, NEA/PI AND NEA/MAG 
STATE PLEASE PASS USTR (WILSON AND BURKHEAD) 
STATE PLEASE PASS COMMERCE (MASON) AND CLDP (TEJTEL AND 
ELKSTOUF) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD ECON ECIN EAGR MO
SUBJECT: TRADE EXPERTS ADVISE EXPORTERS ON FTA OPPORTUNITIES 
 
REF: A. RABAT 0271 
     ¶B. RABAT 0276 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  Minister of Foreign Trade Abdellatif 
Maazouz and Charge d,Affaires, a.i., Robert Jackson opened 
the Department of State,s (DOS,) Middle East Partnership 
Initiative- (MEPI-) sponsored "Maximizing Trade with the 
U.S." seminar on June 9 in Casablanca.  Presenters explained 
U.S. market expectations, technical requirements for 
exporting to the U.S., how to use commercial partnerships and 
organizations as bridges between the U.S. and Moroccan 
markets, and marketing the "Moroccan story" abroad.  The 
audience asked questions focusing on sanitary certification 
and port requirements, and commented on their companies' 
experiences.  While the seminar was much appreciated by 
Moroccan contacts, the wide range of topics was covered in 
too little time, and content at times veered from the 
objective, suggesting the need for closer program control by 
MEPI and the Mission for future events.  The Mission 
appreciates MEPI support for this public outreach event, 
which responded to Government of Morocco (GOM) and private 
sector requests for practical information that would allow 
them to take greater advantage of the Free Trade Agreement 
(FTA).  We hope to build on this event by continuing to 
improve businesses, willingness to increase commercial links 
with the U.S.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------ 
EXPORTERS SEEKING ADVICE 
------------------------ 
 
¶2.  (U) Despite the growth in bilateral trade sparked by the 
entry into force of the U.S.-Morocco Free Trade Agreement 
(FTA), contacts at the Ministry of Foreign Trade (MFT), the 
General Confederation of Moroccan Enterprises (CGEM), and 
Moroccan businesses have consistently expressed their desire 
for outreach and assistance to help Moroccan businesses 
overcome perceived obstacles to exporting to the U.S.  Small 
and medium-size enterprises (SMEs) are afraid of the U.S. 
market, noted MFT's Head of Bilateral Trade Souad Bennani on 
several occasions, and need reassurance on how to penetrate 
such a large market.  Bennani has advocated more targeted 
assistance directly aimed at SMEs.  In March 2009, EconOff 
met with CGEM Commission Label President Abdemalek Kettani to 
discuss ways to assist Moroccan businesses to take advantage 
of the opportunities offered by the FTA.  "Businesspeople 
need practical information on how to create more export, 
import and investment opportunities under the FTA," asserted 
Kettani. 
 
¶3.  (U) In response to these requests, the Mission 
coordinated with MEPI, the Department of Commerce (DOC), and 
the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative (USTR) to develop 
an outreach seminar to demystify the process of exporting to 
the U.S., providing local businesses with the knowledge and 
tools they would need to develop commercial ties with 
American partners.  In addition to publicly promoting the 
advantages of the FTA, this event advanced the MEPI objective 
of strengthening economic reforms by promoting good business 
practices in small and medium-size enterprises.  This seminar 
was one of four similar events arranged with Arab FTA 
partners in the Middle East and North Africa (Morocco, 
Jordan, Bahrain and Oman) to address the technical concerns 
common to our FTA partners. 
 
---------------------------- 
HIGH INTEREST IN THE SEMINAR 
---------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (U) Over 200 public and private sector representatives 
attended the June 9 seminar, co-sponsored by Maroc Export 
(the Moroccan Center for Export Promotion) and the American 
Chamber of Commerce (AmCham).  Minister Maazouz and the 
Charge looked forward in their remarks to "seeing Moroccan 
and American businesses create effective partnerships to 
attract investment and take advantage of the FTA's 
opportunities."  The first two panels emphasized how 
businesses could use the FTA as a tool for success.  Post's 
Regional Agricultural Attache, Hassan Ahmed, asserted that a 
key market problem for Morocco continues to be the lack of 
promotion for its products in the U.S. market.  Jeff Povolny, 
Chief of Party for USAID's New Business Opportunities 
Program, noted that Jordan and Egypt currently have a 
competitive advantage because they cater specifically to the 
U.S. market.  He concluded that investing in middle 
management and marketing professionals with English skills 
and increasing market integration will be key to Morocco,s 
success. 
 
--------------- 
TRADE RESOURCES 
--------------- 
 
¶5.  (U) Other presentations outlined processes and resources 
necessary to export goods to the U.S.  Panelists included 
Maroc Export, Society of Moroccan Export Insurance (SMAEX), 
Foreign Commercial Service (USFCS), U.S. Trade and 
Development Agency (USTDA), Department of Agriculture/Animal 
and Plant Health Inspection Service (USDA/APHIS), and the 
Moroccan-American Trade and Investment Center.  These 
panelists discussed with attendees topics such as advocacy 
for partnerships, APHIS import approval processes, and 
different programs and organizations, such as AmCham, that 
assist companies to export to the U.S.  Several Moroccan 
participants raised technical questions and voiced their 
frustrations with the long wait times required for sanitary 
certifications of consumable products, as well as a general 
misunderstanding of U.S. agricultural regulations. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
GETTING MOROCCO READY FOR THE U.S. MARKET 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (U) Trade experts from the International Executive 
Service Corps summarized the information provided throughout 
the seminar and advocated internet social networking. 
Presenters explained the technological expectations of 
potential U.S. partners, and endorsed the use of business 
plan software.  DOC North Africa Desk Officer Nathaniel Mason 
stressed that the keys to successful implementation of an FTA 
are market research, providing complete and timely 
information to regulatory organizations, and forming strong 
partnerships with U.S. companies and facilitating 
organizations. 
 
-------------------------------- 
LESSONS LEARNED: CONTENT CONTROL 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Comment:  The seminar succeeded in presenting 
useful technical information directly responding to public 
and private sector needs.  However, participants assessed 
that its effectiveness was somewhat diminished by too many 
topics covered in too little time, and diversion from the 
intended content that distracted attendees from trade 
promotion.  One outside presenter was expected to lead a 
discussion of labor rights standards and the business, trade, 
and societal benefits of upholding labor standards.  However, 
the presenter used the occasion to sharply criticize Moroccan 
businesses for past practices.  The intervention estranged 
the largely Moroccan audience, some of whom did not return to 
the remaining presentations.  Future events would benefit 
from either a more narrow set of topics or an additional day 
to address the large number of issues.  More detailed 
oversight of implementing contractors would ensure that 
content is appropriate to the audience and focused on the 
seminar objective. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Comment Continued:  The Maximizing Trade with the 
U.S. seminar attracted substantial interest from prospective 
exporters.  Panelists did not shy away from frank discussion, 
including responding to pointed questions from participants 
and addressing head-on skeptical assessments of the FTA's 
effects (Ref B).  The seminar successfully reinforced our 
message that the USG intends the FTA to be a mutually 
beneficial partnership, at a time when public commentary 
often questions the value of the FTA to Moroccan businesses. 
The Mission appreciates MEPI sponsorship of this conference, 
demonstrating USG commitment to Morocco's entrepreneur-led 
economic growth.  Ultimately, the conference's success, like 
that of the FTA itself, will depend on how effectively 
private sector participants take advantage of the information 
shared during the event.  End Comment. 
 
 
***************************************** 
Visit Embassy Rabat's Classified Website; 
http://www.intelink.sgov.gov/wiki/Portal:Moro cco 
***************************************** 
Jackson