09RABAT678
MINISTRY OF INTERIOR SEIZES NEWS MAGAZINES
Wed Aug 05 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Rabat
VZCZCXRO5554
OO RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDBU RUEHDE RUEHDH RUEHGI RUEHJS RUEHKUK RUEHLH
RUEHPW RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHRB #0678/01 2171808
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 051808Z AUG 09
FM AMEMBASSY RABAT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0536
INFO RUCNISL/ISLAMIC COLLECTIVE
RUCNMGH/MAGHREB COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 RABAT 000678 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR NEA/MAG, DRL/NESCA AND NEA/PPD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL KPAO MO
SUBJECT: MINISTRY OF INTERIOR SEIZES NEWS MAGAZINES 
FOR PUBLISHING OPINION POLL ON THE KING'S 
PERFORMANCE 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY:  Morocco's Ministry of Interior 
seized the August 1 editions of two influential 
weekly news magazines of the independent TelQuel 
group for publishing an opinion poll on the King's 
first decade in power.  The Ministry also banned 
import of an edition of French daily "Le Monde" that 
also published the results.  To justify its action, 
the Ministry of Interior cited Morocco's 1958 press 
code, which allows seizure of publications that 
violate public order or violate respect for the 
royal family or Islam.  The Moroccan independent 
press has united in a strong reaction against the 
Ministry's action, which the French Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs has also criticized.  Ironically, 
the poll in question showed 91 percent support for 
the King.  Post recommends the Department comment on 
the seizure and provides suggested guidance in para 
¶7.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (U) On Saturday, August 1, all copies of 
"TelQuel" (French language) and "Nichane" (Arabic 
language) news weeklies, both owned and published by 
Ahmed Benshemi's TelQuel Group, were seized by the 
Ministry of the Interior during the distribution 
process.  The August 4 edition of French daily "Le 
Monde" (a co-sponsor of the poll) was also barred 
from distribution in Morocco.  The Ministry of the 
Interior cited Chapter 77 of the 1958 Moroccan press 
code in seizing the publications, while 
Communications Minister Khalid Naciri asserted in an 
August 1 statement that "the monarchy in Morocco 
cannot be the object of a debate, even by opinion 
poll."  In an interview with France 24 TV on August 
4, Naciri invoked Morocco's Constitution, which, he 
said, "obliges respect for the monarchy and the 
sacred character of the monarchy." 
 
¶3.  (U) TelQuel publisher Benshemsi, in a press 
conference in Casablanca on Monday, August 3, said 
this event is significantly damaging Morocco's image 
abroad and shows freedom of expression in Morocco is 
"not guaranteed."  He also asserted that the 
destruction of 100,000 magazine copies will have 
serious financial consequences for his company. 
TelQuel's lawyer, in appealing the decision to a 
Casablanca court, claimed that a poll showing 
overwhelming approval for the King could hardly be 
deemed a threat to public order.  However, on 
Tuesday August 4, the court backed the Ministry's 
action, stating "the complaint by the TelQuel group 
asking for the annulment of the Interior Ministry's 
decision is acceptable in its form but not in 
substance." 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
Independent Media, Blogs, and French MFA Weigh In 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶4.  (U) Independent print media have followed the 
story closely, pointedly criticizing the ministries. 
The National Union of Moroccan Press (SNPM) issued a 
statement condemning the government's action, and 
SNPM President Younes Moujahid called for "passing a 
law in Morocco to regulate opinion polls on the 
basis of respect for professional and democratic 
principles."  Moroccan social media networks and the 
blogosphere have exploded with criticism of the 
GOM's stance on polling.  Independent Arabic- 
language daily "Akhbar Al Youm" asked, "Do Moroccan 
officials know that a ban in the Internet era is 
bizarre ... and that millions of people and readers 
have easy access to the contents of both TelQuel and 
Nichane via Facebook and Moroccan bloggers ...?" 
However, print media affiliated with political 
parties, even opposition parties, have avoided 
comment, as have electronic media outlets, most of 
which are government-affiliated. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Embassy media contacts reiterated 
privately their public criticism of these 
developments.  Ali Anouzla, director and publisher 
of independent Arabic-language daily Al Jareeda Al 
Oula, said, "Seizure of the two magazines was a big 
mistake by the Ministry of Interior, which is 
incapable of bringing legal poof for its accusation 
against the magazines."  Taoufiq Boucahrine, 
publisher of independent Arabic-language daily 
 
RABAT 00000678  002 OF 002 
 
 
Akhbar Al Youm, expessed great concern about the 
events, which he worries will damage Morocco's 
fragile reputation for press freedom. 
 
¶6.  (U) The French government, through a Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs spokesman, expressed "regret" for 
the seizure.  The statement said, "We are surprised 
by this measure which we regret.  We are 
particularly attached to freedom of expression, 
which is protected by the United Nations' 
International Covenant on Civil and Political 
Rights, which Morocco has ratified, and its 
corollary, freedom of the press." 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Post provides the following language for a 
possible Department statement: 
 
Begin text.  We note with concern the recent seizure 
of two independent newsweeklies in Morocco, and the 
related ban on distribution of an edition of a 
French newspaper, for publishing an opinion survey. 
We encourage Morocco to continue working to develop 
a new media law consistent with modern information 
practices and technologies as well as with basic 
principles of freedom of speech and the press.  End 
text. 
 
JACKSON