09ROME1048
SCENESETTER FOR ITALIAN MINISTER CLAUDIO SCAJOLA'S
Fri Sep 11 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN
Embassy Rome
VZCZCXRO3347
PP RUEHAG RUEHROV RUEHSL RUEHSR
DE RUEHRO #1048/01 2541139
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 111139Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY ROME
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2645
INFO RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHFL/AMCONSUL FLORENCE PRIORITY 3784
RUEHMIL/AMCONSUL MILAN PRIORITY 0214
RUEHNP/AMCONSUL NAPLES PRIORITY 3993
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEBAAA/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHDC PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ROME 001048 
 
NOFORN 
SIPDIS 
 
DOE FOR ENERGY SECRETARY CHU 
DOE FOR A/S DAVID SANDALOW 
DOE FOR INTERNATIONAL ENERGY COOPERATION DAS YOSHIDA 
DOE FOR OFFICE OF NUCLEAR ENERGY DAS MCGINNIS 
DOC FOR ENERGY, ...

SUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR ITALIAN MINISTER CLAUDIO SCAJOLA'S 
VISIT TO WASHINGTON 
 


REF: A) ROME 878 B) ROME 678 C) ROME 283 C) 08 ROME 
     1191 
 
ROME 00001048  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
Classified By: A/DCM Barbara Leaf for reasons 1.4b and d 
 


1.(C/NF) SUMMARY: Italian Economic Development Minister 
Claudio Scajola will visit Washington September 29 as part of 
a week-long tour of the United States. Scajola is one of 
Italy's most powerful cabinet officers. He and his staff have 
told us that they consider this a very important visit. The 
key event will be a September 29 meeting with Energy 
Secretary Chu. At this meeting Scajola hopes to sign 
agreements on research and development and on industrial 
cooperation on nuclear power.  Scajola's visit is an 
excellent opportunity to promote and protect the rights of 
U.S. firms that wish to participate in Italy's multi-billion 
dollar nuclear power project. This is also an opportunity for 
us to push for greater Italian cooperation on European Energy 
Security, and to ask for Scajola's support for the launch in 
Italy of DoE's Megaports (radiation detection in container 
ports) program. The Italian delegation is also seeking a 
meeting with USTR Kirk and hopes to raise several 
economic/commercial issues. Given the importance that GOI 
officials are attaching to Scajola's trip, and its potential 
for advancing key pieces of our bilateral agenda, post urges 
Washington agencies to assist the Italian Embassy in making 
sure that the visit proceeds smoothly. End Summary 
 
 


SCAJOLA TO THE U.S. 
------------------ 
 

¶2. (C/NF) On September 27, Claudio Scajola, Italy's Minister 
for Economic Development, will travel to the United States. 
Scajola's long-planned and several times delayed trip comes 
in part as a follow-up to his meeting in Rome this Spring 
with U.S. Energy Secretary David Chu (at the G8 Energy 
Ministerial). Scajola, a long-time collaborator of Prime 
Minister Silvio Berlusconi, heads what amounts to a 
super-ministry in the GOI.  Although his title is Minister 
for Economic Development, his portfolio does not include 
overseas development assistance.  Instead, he has 
responsibility for a very wide range of Italian economic and 
commercial activity, including telecommunications, energy, 
trade, and intellectual property rights.  He is Italy's de 
facto Energy Minister. 
 


MEETING AT DOE WITH SECRETARY CHU 
---------------------------------- 
 

¶3. (C/NF) The centerpiece of Scajola's visit will be his 
September 29 call on Secretary Chu. Scajola's staff 
frequently remind us of the high regard in which Scajola 
holds Secretary Chu. Scajola believes that Chu's May visit to 
Rome marked the beginning of a warm professional friendship; 
Scajola clearly sees this visit to Washington as a 
reciprocation of Chu's May visit. In Washington Scajola hopes 
to sign a Research and Development agreement that has been 
under discussion for some time, and a new ""Industrial 
Cooperation Agreement"" on nuclear power that Scajola first 
proposed during his May 2009 bilateral meeting with Secretary 
Chu. 
 
 


RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT 
---------------------------------- 
 

¶4. (SBU) The research and development agreement has been 
under discussion for some time. We understand, however, that 
requested Italian revisions and the possible need for EURATOM 
approval could scuttle chances for a September 29 signing. 
On 8 September Scajola's staff told us that they consider it 
very important for this agreement to be signed on September 
¶29.  (COMMENT:  In terms of U.S. interests, we think the 
Industrial Coopertion agreement is more important than the 
R&D agreement.  We also think that while Scajola would like 
to sign both, staff claims notwithstanding, he too is more 
interested in the Industrial Cooperation agreement.) 
 
ROME 00001048  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
 


INDUSTRIAL COOPERATION AGREEMENT 
------------------------------- 
 

¶5. (C/NF) Since his appointment in Spring 2008, Scajola has 
been leading the charge in Italy for a return to nuclear 
power. USG efforts to promote and protect the interests of 
U.S. firms in this multi-billion dollar project suffered a 
major blow in February 2009 when Italy announced an 
Italo-French agreement that would allow French firms to build 
the first four of Italy's new nuclear reactors.  At their May 
2009 bilateral meeting in Rome, Scajola seemed to pre-empt 
Secretary Chu's expected call for a level playing field by 
offering to negotiate a like agreement with the U.S. 
Secretary Chu agreed to work out such a deal, and DoE staff 
have been working with the Italian Embassy in Washington on 
text with the aim of signing it on September 29. 
 


¶6. (C/NF) We have recently seen indications that Scajola has 
another reason for supporting the involvement of U.S. firms 
in Italy's re-nuclearization.  The Franco-Italian agreement 
had the effect of denying opportunities to Italian firms that 
hoped to help build the new plants.  One of these firms, 
Ansaldo Nucleare, has close ties to Westinghouse, one of the 
U.S. firms most interested in obtaining Italian contracts. 
Ansaldo Nucleare and Westinghouse are expected to formally 
announce a consortium agreement in Washington on September 
¶29.  Ansaldo Nucleare is based in Scajola's home region of 
Liguria.  So if Westinghouse gets a piece of the action, 
Ansaldo -- Scajola's hometown company -- benefits. 
(COMMENT: We need all the help we can get in our advocacy 
efforts for U.S. firms.  If Scajola also has a local interest 
in seeing U.S. firms obtain contracts, that is an advantage 
we should seize and maximize to U.S. benefit.)  Scajola's 
visit represents a critical opportunity to get this 
Industrial Cooperation agreement signed.  A failure to secure 
this agreement is likely to make it significantly more 
difficult for U.S. firms to win contracts in Italy's 
substantial nuclear power project. 
 
 


EUROPEAN ENERGY SECURITY 
- - - - - - - - - - - - 
 

¶7. (C/NF) Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi's close personal 
ties with Vladimir Putin and the very strong corporate ties 
between Italian energy parastatal ENI and Russia's Gazprom 
often put Italy squarely at odds with U.S. and EU energy 
security efforts. Italy's energy policy too often reflects 
Russian, rather than European, priorities.  For example, the 
Italian government is deeply ambivalent about the EU's 
Nabucco Caspian pipeline, and ENI is poised to help GAZPROM 
construct Black Sea and Baltic Sea pipelines that will only 
deepen EU's dependence on Russia. ENI, 30 percent owned by 
the Italian Government, often appears to dictate GOI energy 
policy and uses its influence, through the GOI, to block EU 
energy market liberalization plans. Italy is taking some 
steps in the right direction: In addition to the nuclear 
power effort, one of the Caspian ""Southern Corridor"" 
projects, the proposed Turkey-Greece-Italy (TGI) pipeline 
will be built by an Italian company. Liquid Natural Gas 
projects promise further diversification.  It would be 
helpful if during his time in Washington, Minister Scajola 
were to hear in clear terms our long-standing concerns about 
European energy security. He should be reminded that we hope 
Italy will support European efforts to diversify energy 
sources, types and routes, particularly through the ""Southern 
Corridor"" projects -- including Nabucco -- intended to bring 
alternative Caspian gas to the EU.  COMMENT: Scajola is more 
concerned about and active on energy security issues than any 
other senior member of the GOI, so we would be preaching to 
the choir here.  This would, however, give Scajola useful 
ammunition to bring home: a strong message to PM Berlusconi 
in particular that Washington is concerned about Italy's 
energy security actions. 
 


MEGAPORTS 
--------- 
 
ROME 00001048  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
 

¶8. (C/NF) Post has been working for several years to convince 
the Italian government to support the launching in Italy of 
DoE's Megaports program, an effort that would put radiation 
detectors in key shipping ports.  Because of the strong 
influence of organized crime in Italian ports, it is 
especially important that this program be implemented in 
Italy. Unfortunately, Italian officials continue to drag 
their feet. To break this impasse, it is critical at this 
point for Secretary Chu to solicit Scajola's advice and 
support in getting Megaports launched in Italy. 
 


POSSIBLE ISSUES FOR USTR 
------------------------ 
 

¶9. (SBU) On 8 September the Italian Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs gave us a preview of other issues that Scajola may 
raise in Washington.  The Italians are seeking a meeting with 
USTR Kirk, but we understand that meeting has not been 
confirmed as of yet.  If the Italian delegation does have an 
opportunity to raise economic/commercial concerns, we are 
told that they would include: ""Buy American"" issues, 
anti-dumping actions affecting Italian pasta, U.S. customs 
treatment of Italian gold jewelry, Italian concerns regarding 
certain Cuba-related certifications affecting trade in 
nickel, and Italy's interest in participating in railroad 
infrastructure projects in the United States. 
 
 


PLANNING CONCERNS 
----------------- 
 

¶10. (C/NF) Post has picked up on what appear to be some 
organizational problems with regard to this visit at the 
Italian Embassy in Washington. This may be the result of 
summer-time staffing gaps there. Scajola's fear-based 
management style may also be a factor.  Given the number of 
key U.S. interests that will be affected by the visit, We ask 
that Washington agencies, especially State, DoE, and USTR, 
work closely with the Italian Embassy in an effort to smooth 
the way for this visit. Scajola has a reputation for being 
proud, demanding, and protocol conscious. 
 

COMMENT 
------- 
 

¶11. (C/NF) Scajola's visit provides us with significant 
opportunities to make progress on a wide variety of U.S. 
interests.  We could bolster the position of U.S. firms 
seeking opportunities in the multi-billion dollar Italian 
nuclear project, make progress on Italy's problematic energy 
security policies, and perhaps even get Megaports going in 
Italy. 
THORNE