09ROME815
ITALIAN PARLIAMENT GIVES GREEN LIGHT FOR NUCLEAR
Thu Jul 16 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN
Embassy Rome
VZCZCXRO9022
PP RUEHRN
DE RUEHRO #0815/01 1971227
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 161227Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY ROME
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2396
INFO RUEHSS/OECD POSTS COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHFL/AMCONSUL FLORENCE PRIORITY 3718
RUEHMIL/AMCONSUL MILAN PRIORITY 0148
RUEHNP/AMCONSUL NAPLES PRIORITY 3922
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEBAAA/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS PRIORITY 4847C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ROME 000815 
 
NOFORN 
SIPDIS 
 
DOE FOR THE OFFICE OF POLICY AND INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS, AND 
THE OFFICE OF NUCLEAR ENERGY; DOC FOR SARAH LOPP 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/16/2019 
TAGS: ECON EINV ENRG IT

SUBJECT: ITALIAN PARLIAMENT GIVES GREEN LIGHT FOR NUCLEAR 
ENERGY RELAUNCH 
 
REF: A. A) ROME 283 
     ¶B. B) ROME 207 
     ¶C. C) 08 ROME 1577 
     ¶D. D) 08 ROME 1191 
 
ROME 00000815  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
Classified By: A/DCM Barbara A. Leaf for reasons 1.4 b and d. 
 



¶1. (C/NF) Summary: The Italian Parliament approved nuclear 
energy legislation on July 9th that gives the GOI the 
green-light to re-launch Italy's civil nuclear energy 
program. The legislation calls for the GOI to come up within 
six months with revamped regulation to govern the nuclear 
sector, identification of the sites where the new plants will 
be built, definition of accepted technology, and a plan on 
how to handle the nuclear waste. A new nuclear safety agency 
will also be created.  Despite the short amount of time for 
such a big task, industry experts remain cautiously 
optimistic that such a deadline will help to focus government 
efforts towards delivering the key regulatory and 
institutional areas needed for a nuclear energy re-launch. 
Continued USG engagement is crucial for ensuring a level 
playing field for U.S.-based nuclear energy companies 
interested in entering the Italian market. Economic 
Development Minister Scajola plans to visit the U.S. from 
September 27 to October 3rd to meet with DOE Secretary Chu 
(and possibly DOC Secretary Locke). This would be an 
excellent opportunity to engage with Italy on U.S.-Italian 
nuclear energy cooperation both on the research and 
industrial side. End Summary. 
 


NUCLEAR TECHNOLOGY, SITES, WASTE DISPOSAL AND NUCLEAR SAFETY 
AGENCY 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- - - 
 

¶2. (C/NF) On July 9, the Italian Parliament approved nuclear 
energy legislation that provides the GOI the long-awaited 
green light to re-launch Italy's civilian nuclear energy 
program. The bill calls for the GOI to introduce within six 
months the necessary regulations that will govern the 
building of nuclear power plants in Italy, identify the sites 
where the new nuclear plants will be built, and present a 
plan on how to deal with the nuclear radioactive waste. The 
bill also calls for the reconstitution of a new Italian 
nuclear safety agency from the existing one (ISPRA), and 
authorizes the Interministerial Economic Committee (CIPE) to 
give the final approval over the nuclear technology to be 
adopted, as well as the consortia that will build and manage 
the nuclear power plants. The approved bill will be published 
in about two weeks after the expected pro-forma approval by 
President Napolitano. (Background Note. Until the late 1980s, 
Italy was one of the leading European countries in nuclear 
energy. However, public concerns over nuclear energy plant's 
safety following the 1987 Chernobyl nuclear accident led to 
passage of a referendum to decommission the four existing 
nuclear power plants.  Soon after coming to power in the 
Spring of 2008, the new Berlusconi Government announced its 
plans to bring back nuclear energy to Italy. Current GOI 
plans call for the building of up to 10 nuclear plants to 
supply Italy with about 25 percent of its total electricity 
needs. End note) 
 


¶3. (C/NF) While recognizing that six months is quite short 
for the GOI to put together the crucial underpinnings of a 
nuclear sector, industry contacts have told us that the GOI 
may meet its targets.  According to Francesco Mazzuca, 
President of Italy's leading nuclear energy service company, 
Ansaldo Nucleare, the Ministry of Economic Development has 
already been working for several months on the draft 
regulations for the approved bill.  In terms of site 
selection, Mazzuca said that a practical approach will be for 
the GOI to present as a first batch the four sites of the 
decommissioned nuclear plants that are known to be the most 
readily available for new nuclear plants construction. 
Mazzuca added that other greenfield sites could later be 
identified. Though putting together a long-term plan on how 
to handle the nuclear waste will be more challenging for the 
GOI, Mazzuca suggested that shipping abroad the nuclear waste 
for reprocessing may be a medium-term solution that the GOI 
could propose. In this regard, Mazzuca explained the only 
realistic options are for Italy to send its nuclear waste for 
 
ROME 00000815  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
reprocessing to either the U.S., France or Russia (Note. 
Under a 2006 agreement, Italy already ships to France for 
reprocessing some of the nuclear waste material of its former 
nuclear plants, with the un-reprocessed material due to be 
shipped back to Italy by 2020. End note).  With regard to the 
new nuclear safety agency, Mazzuca explained that serious 
political discussions are already underway within the GOI on 
choosing its five person board. Mazzuca said that who the GOI 
selects will determine the strength and clout of the new 
agency. He expressed hope that the current president of 
Italy's nuclear decommissioning parastatal, SOGIN, Professor 
Maurizio Cumo, would be chosen as one of the chairpersons due 
to his long experience in the nuclear field. However, Mazzuca 
told us it was not clear at this point who might be tapped to 
lead the new agency. (Note: Cumo favors U.S. nuclear 
technology and has told Post that the Westinghouse AP-1000 
design is the most suitable nuclear technology for Italy. End 
note). 
 


¶4. (C/NF)  Mazzuca reiterated that U.S. nuclear companies 
still have a chance to compete for contracts.  Mazzuca said 
that American nuclear plant designs remain the most 
competitive to meet Italian needs due to their smaller 
""footprint"" and advanced technology. Mazzuca advised greater 
engagement by U.S. nuclear companies with the GOI now that 
the nuclear legislation has been passed. He added that USG 
engagement at the highest levels of the GOI is important in 
order to counterbalance continued French government lobbying 
efforts on behalf of its national companies. Mazzuca stated 
that the French government is even increasing its lobbying 
efforts by adding a second official with a nuclear portfolio 
at the French Embassy in Rome.  Despite the ENEL-EDF 
agreement to build four Areva-design nuclear plants in Italy 
(see Ref A), Mazzuca assessed that the ideal situation for 
Italy is to adopt two nuclear technologies, with American 
technology being the other option. 
 



NEXT STEPS 
- - - - - 
 
¶5. (C/NF) Comment: Continued USG engagement, especially at a 
high level, is crucial to ensure that U.S. nuclear technology 
is given a ""green light"" to be one of the approved 
technologies for Italy's nuclear restart. A major upcoming 
opportunity for persuading the Italian energy and political 
establishment to sign on to U.S. technology is the visit of 
Economic Development Minister Scajola to the U.S. in late 
September (September 27 to October 3rd are the tentative 
dates). Scajola plans to meet DOE Secretary Chu and possibly 
with DOC Secretary Locke.  Minister Scajola would also like 
to tour a U.S. nuclear energy facility. We understand that 
both Westinghouse and GE have invited Scajola to visit their 
facilities. The Italian Embassy in Washington is already 
working on this visit, and the Minister's advisors have asked 
for USG assistance in ensuring the trip's success. This is an 
important moment to engage the GOI and showcase U.S. nuclear 
technology as well as opportunities for U.S.- Italian nuclear 
energy cooperation. 
 


¶6. (C/NF) Minister Scajola's trip could also be an optimal 
occasion to sign the pending nuclear energy cooperation 
agreement that his Ministry has been negotiating with DOE. 
The issues of nuclear power plant financing and investment 
guarantees remain important areas for the GOI to address. We 
are told by our Italian government interlocutors that USG 
technical assistance in this area would be well received. End 
Comment. 
DIBBLE 
"