09STATE66681
EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC REGIONAL ENVIRONMENT,
Fri Jun 26 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO0367
RR RUEHAP RUEHCHI RUEHCN RUEHDT RUEHFK RUEHGH RUEHHM RUEHJS RUEHKN
RUEHKR RUEHKSO RUEHMJ RUEHNAG RUEHNH RUEHNZ RUEHPB RUEHPT
DE RUEHC #6681/01 1772148
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 262126Z JUN 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO ALL EAST ASIAN AND PACIFIC DIPLOMATIC POSTSUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 STATE 066681 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV XB XC XE XU ID
SUBJECT: EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC REGIONAL ENVIRONMENT, 
SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND HEALTH CONFERENCE 
 
REF: A. STATE 18520 
     ¶B. STATE 42286 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY:  The Department convened a regional Environment, 
Science, Technology and Health (ESTH) Officers Conference 
(ESTHOC) on April 15 - 17 for officers and foreign service 
nationals (FSNs) covering ESTH issues at posts in the East 
Asia and Pacific (EAP) region.  The Bureau of Oceans, 
Environment and Science (OES) works with regional bureaus to 
hold ESTHOC conferences in order to provide up-to-date 
information and training to the field and provide an exchange 
among ESTH officers, FSNs, Washington-based offices, and 
outside experts. - END SUMMARY 
 
¶2.  The Department convened a regional ESTHOC on April 15 - 
17 for Department officers and foreign service nationals 
covering ESTH issues at posts in the EAP region.  OES works 
with regional bureaus to hold ESTHOC conferences in order to 
provide up-to-date information and training to the field and 
provide an exchange among ESTH officers, FSNs, 
Washington-based offices, and selected outside experts. 
 
¶3.  This year's EAP ESTHOC was chaired by Acting Assistant 
Secretary for Oceans, Environment and Science Reno Harnish, 
hosted by Ambassador Cameron Hume, and cosponsored by EAP and 
the Department's Regional Environment Offices based in 
Bangkok and Suva.   The event brought together Ambassadors 
Harnish and Hume; Ambassador Robert Loftis, the Special 
Representative for Avian Influenza and Pandemic Preparedness; 
21 officers covering ESTH issues in the field; four FSNs; 
five officers from OES, one from EAP, and officials from 
AID/Jakarta, CDC/Jakarta, DOC/NOAA, DOD/NAMRU (Bankgok), and 
EPA/Office of International Affairs.  Two representatives of 
the ASEAN secretariat gave presentations, as did speakers 
from the Asian Development Bank, private enterprise and 
environmental organizations. 
 
¶4.  Ambassador Hume kicked off the conference, emphasizing 
the importance of ESTH issues and giving examples of 
initiatives he has undertaken in Jakarta.  The ambassador 
also gave the closing speech, in which he urged officers to 
take a pro-active role in advancing their agendas, including 
by taking innovative initiatives to generate media coverage. 
The ambassador argued that ESTH issues are an integral 
element of the Secretary's "smart power" strategy, and 
discussed how he has incorporated these issues at the core of 
the new "Comprehensive Partnership" between the U.S. and 
Indonesia.  America's strength in science and technology is 
respected throughout the world, and can help break through 
negative perceptions, including in major Muslim nations such 
as Indonesia.  The U.S. must also recognize Indonesia's 
centrality in the global ecological arena:  Indonesia is #1 
in marine biodiversity, #2 in terrestrial diversity, but #3 
in carbon emissions when land use impacts are taken into 
account.  In addition, Ambassador Hume hosted a reception for 
all conference participants that provided an opportunity to 
meet with Indonesian government officials and NGOs. 
 
¶5.  OES Acting Assistant Secretary Harnish also welcomed 
conference participants and gave a talk on the Obama 
Administration's Global and Regional ESTH priorities.  The 
diplomatic challenges of the U.S. are increasingly driven in 
part by competition for natural resources, the impact of 
human actions on ecological systems, health threats, and the 
impact of these factors on prosperity and security. 
President Obama has signaled his commitment to addressing 
climate change, and we are now leading by example, helping 
spearhead a global "Green New Deal" by including investments 
in "green collar jobs" through energy efficiency and 
renewables in our stimulus funding.  The Secretary's first 
trip abroad, in which she visited China, Indonesia, Japan and 
Korea in February, accompanied by Special Envoy for Climate 
Change Todd Stern, sent a strong message that EAP and 
environmental issues are now at the top of the U.S. agenda. 
OES global priorities focus on:  forging consensus on climate 
policy; engaging with China on global environmental impacts; 
promoting sustainable use of forests, wildlife, and marine 
resources; improving access to safe water and sanitation; 
enhancing international cooperation with respect to polar 
regions; confronting chronic and infectious diseases; 
promoting the Global Positioning System; and strengthening 
science and technology partnerships, especially regarding 
energy and climate and with Islamic communities.  A/S Harnish 
also led a discussion that generated specific proposals for 
how Washington and posts can improve our effectiveness in the 
region. 
 
¶6.  Other highlights included a briefing and discussion on 
 
STATE 00066681  002 OF 002 
 
 
Administration climate policy with Deputy Special Envoy for 
Climate Change Jonathan Pershing.  Ambassador Robert Loftis 
joined a panel on Avian Influenza and Pandemic Preparedness. 
EPA/Office of International Affairs East Asia Team Leader 
Mark Kasman spoke on EPA's priorities and clean energy 
programs.  Several panels featured presentations by officers 
from Embassy Jakarta and other posts in the region exchanging 
information, analysis, and best practices in ESTH diplomacy. 
 
¶7.  OES reiterates its appreciation for the extensive support 
provided by Embassy Jakarta (reftel State 42286) and all 
conference participants.  This is one of a series of training 
opportunities provided by OES, complementing ESTH courses 
offered at the Foreign Service Institute. 
 
¶8.  The conference agenda, background papers and speakers' 
presentations are available from OES/PCI Regional Policy 
Advisor Erwin Rose. 
CLINTON