09STATE30114
USUN INSTRUCTION: IRAN SANCTIONS COMMITTEE
Sun Mar 29 00:00:00 +0100 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #0114 0882100
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 292042Z MAR 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000C O N F I D E N T I A L STATE 030114 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/26/2019 
TAGS: PARM IR UNSC MNUC ETTC KNNP SY CY
SUBJECT: USUN INSTRUCTION: IRAN SANCTIONS COMMITTEE 
EFFORTS ON MONCHEGORSK 
 
REF: USUN 305 
 
Classified By: IO Acting A/S James B. Warlick for reasons 
1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action request. 
 
¶2. (C) Washington concurs with USUN's proposed approach 
(reftel) for next steps in the Iran Sanctions Committee 
with regard to the M/V Monchegorsk incident. 
 
¶3. (C) ACTION REQUEST:  Mission is instructed to engage 
the UK and France on possible next steps in the Iran 
Sanctions Committee and propose the Chairman of the 
Committee (Japan) send a Note Verbale to all UN Member 
States providing information on the Monchegorsk incident 
and urging enhanced vigilance over possible future 
violations.  Mission should also propose the Chairman send 
a final round of letters to Cyprus, Iran, and Syria. 
Mission should use the texts included in paragraphs 4-7 
below as a basis for discussion and further development 
with the UK and France. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Proposed text of Iran Sanctions Committee letter 
to all UN Member States: 
 
On behalf of the Committee established pursuant to 
resolution 1737 (2006), I would like to share information 
with you regarding a recent violation of measures imposed 
in Security Council resolution 1747 (2007) regarding 
Iran.  The Committee believes this information may help 
Member States carry out their international obligations 
with respect to resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007), and 
1803 (2008), in particular to aid States in detecting and 
future violations. 
 
In February 2009, a Member State shared with the Committee 
the results of an inspection of the cargo of the M/V 
Monchegorsk, a Cypriot-flagged vessel chartered by the 
Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines (IRISL).  These 
inspections revealed arms-related materiel, including 
items described as "bullet shells," "Gun H.E. [High 
Explosive] Full Charge," "125 mm Gun APFSDS [Armor 
Piercing Fin-Stabilizing Discarded Sabot]" and "HEAT [High 
Explosive Anti-Tank].  The ship's manifest indicated that 
the cargo was being transferred from Bandar Abbas (Iran) 
to Lataki (Syria).  This transfer was in violation of 
paragraph five of resolution 1747 (2007), which states: 
 
"Iran shall not supply, sell or transfer directly or 
indirectly from its territory or by its nationals or using 
its flag vessels or aircraft any arms or related materiel, 
and that all States shall prohibit the procurement of such 
items from Iran by their nationals, or using their flag 
vessels or aircraft, and whether or not originating in the 
territory of Iran." 
 
Paragraph five of resolution 1747 (2007) clearly applies 
to conventional arms and related materiels.  The Member 
State that reported this violation, in accordance with its 
international obligations, has since retained, unloaded 
and stored the cargo.  The Committee requested from the 
transferring and procuring states additional relevant 
information about this transaction, but regretfully no 
such information was provided. 
 
In light of this incident, the committee urges all Member 
States to redouble their efforts to ensure full 
implementation of resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007), 
and 1803 (2008).  In particular, the Committee recommends 
Member States be especially alert for additional 
violations that might occur in similar circumstances to 
the case described above. 
 
The Committee would also like to call your attention to 
the involvement of IRISL in transporting goods prohibited 
under resolution 1747 (2007).  In this regard, the 
Committee would like to recall that in resolution 1803 
(2008) the Security Council called upon all States to 
inspect the cargoes to and from Iran of vessels owned or 
operated by IRISL, provided there are reasonable grounds 
to believe that the vessel is transporting goods 
prohibited under resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007), and 
1803 (2008).  The Committee therefore urges Member States 
to exercise extra vigilance with respect to IRISL's role 
in violations of these resolutions. 
 
The Committee further calls upon all Member States to 
share - on a confidential basis, if necessary - 
information regarding alleged violations of the measures 
imposed in these resolutions.  The Committee intends to 
take seriously its mandate to examine and take appropriate 
action on such information.  The Committee remains 
available to answer inquiries from Member States about the 
obligations imposed by these resolutions. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Proposed text of Iran Sanctions Committee letter 
to Cyprus: 
 
Excellency (CYPRUS), 
 
On behalf of the Committee established pursuant to 
resolution 1737 (2006), I am writing you regarding your 
letters to the Committee of February 3, February 12, and 
March 26 regarding Security Council resolutions 1737 
(2006), 1747 (2007), and 1803 (2008). 
 
The Committee would again like to express its appreciation 
for the information the Republic of Cyprus provided 
documenting the transfer of arms-related materiel from 
Iran to Syria aboard the Cypriot-flagged vessel M/V 
Monchegorsk.  This information was useful to the Committee 
in carrying out its mandate to examine and take 
appropriate action regarding alleged violations of the 
measures contained in these Security Council resolutions. 
The Committee would also like to thank your government for 
its responsible decision, in line with Cyprus' 
international obligations, to retain the cargo. 
 
After reviewing the information provided to the Committee 
by the Republic of Cyprus, the Committee has confirmed 
that this transfer was indeed in violation of paragraph 
five of resolution 1747 (2007).  As a violation of 
resolution 1747, the cargo should not be transferred to 
Syria nor returned to Iran.  In line with its mandate to 
examine and take appropriate action regarding alleged 
violations of the measures imposed in the relevant 
Security Council resolutions, the Committee provided the 
parties involved an opportunity to provide additional 
relevant information regarding this transaction.  The 
Committee is now in the process of notifying Member States 
to be alert for possible future violations in similar 
circumstances. 
 
The Committee remains interested in receiving any 
additional information you may have uncovered regarding 
the cargo, such as further relevant details about the 
ownership of the goods.  The Committee has a particular 
interest in knowing whether any of the cargo may be linked 
to individuals or entities designated in the annexes of 
Security Council resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007), and 
1803 (2008). 
 
The Committee encourages the Republic of Cyprus to 
continue to detain the cargo pending further 
investigation.  Additionally, the Committee would also 
appreciate any efforts by the Republic of Cyprus to 
explore options for other Member States or relevant 
regional organizations to assist in the storing, 
safe-keeping, or disposing of the cargo. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Proposed text of Iran Sanctions Committee letter 
to Iran: 
 
Excellency (IRAN), 
 
On behalf of the Committee established pursuant to 
resolution 1737 (2006), I am writing you regarding the 
measures imposed by Security Council resolutions 1737 
(2006), 1747 (2007), and 1803 (2008). 
 
The Committee regrets that you did not reply to our 
request for information regarding the transfer of 
arms-related materiel from Iran aboard the M/V 
Monchegorsk.  As the Committee noted in its letter of 
March 9, this transfer was in violation of paragraph five 
of Security Council resolution 1747 (2007), which states: 
 
"Iran shall not supply, sell or transfer directly or 
indirectly from its territory or by its nationals or using 
its flag vessels or aircraft any arms or related materiel, 
and that all States shall prohibit the procurement of such 
items from Iran by their nationals, or using their flag 
vessels or aircraft, and whether or not originating in the 
territory of Iran." 
 
The Committee would like to recall that under Article 25 
of the UN Charter, all Member States are obligated to 
"accept and carry out the decisions of the Security 
Council."  In light of this incident, the Committee 
requests that Iran redouble its efforts to ensure full 
compliance with the provisions of these resolutions. 
 
The Committee would welcome at any time information from 
Iran that may assist the Committee in carrying out its 
mandate to examine and take appropriate action regarding 
alleged violations of the measures imposed in relevant 
Security Council resolutions. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Proposed text of Iran Sanctions Committee letter 
to Syria: 
 
Excellency (SYRIA), 
 
On behalf of the Committee established pursuant to 
resolution 1737 (2006), I am writing you regarding the 
measures imposed by Security Council resolutions 1737 
(2006), 1747 (2007), and 1803 (2008) relating to Iran. 
 
On March 9, the Committee invited you to provide any 
additional relevant information regarding the transfer of 
arms-related materiel aboard the M/V Monchegorsk from Iran 
to Syria.  The Committee notes that in your response of 
March 18 you neither denied that Syria was attempting to 
procure arms-related materiel from Iran nor provided 
additional relevant information regarding this particular 
transaction. 
 
As the Committee noted in its letter, this procurement of 
arms-related materiel from Iran was in violation of 
paragraph five of Security Council resolution 1747 (2007), 
which states: 
 
"Iran shall not supply, sell or transfer directly or 
indirectly from its territory or by its nationals or using 
its flag vessels or aircraft any arms or related materiel, 
and that all States shall prohibit the procurement of such 
items from Iran by their nationals, or using their flag 
vessels or aircraft, and whether or not originating in the 
territory of Iran." 
 
The Committee would like to remind Syria that under 
Article 25 of the UN Charter, all Member States are 
obligated to "accept and carry out the decisions of the 
Security Council."  In light of this incident, the 
Committee requests that Syria redouble its efforts to 
ensure full compliance with the provisions of these 
resolutions. 
 
The Committee would welcome at any time information from 
Syria that may assist the Committee in carrying out its 
mandate to examine and take appropriate action regarding 
alleged violations of the measures imposed in relevant 
Security Council resolutions. 
CLINTON