09STATE116895
DELIVERY OF GROUND TRANSPORTATION CARGO INVENTORY
Thu Nov 12 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0013
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #6895 3162135
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 122128Z NOV 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA IMMEDIATE 0000
RHMFISS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RHMFIUU/DTRA ALEX WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RHMFIUU/DTRA DULLES WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RUESDT/DTRA-OSES DARMSTADT GE IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATEUNCLAS STATE 116895 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
MOSCOW FOR DTRO-M/ACID 
GENEVA FOR JCIC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PARM KACT START JCIC US RS BO
SUBJECT: DELIVERY OF GROUND TRANSPORTATION CARGO INVENTORY 
LISTS TO RUSSIA 
 
REF: A. 02 GENEVA 1134 (JCIC-XXIV-055) 
     ¶B. STATE 107364 (ANC/STR 09-853/144A) 
     ¶C. STATE 108431 (RNC/STR 09-291/142) 
     ¶D. STATE 109958 (ANC/STR 09-880/143) 
     ¶E. STATE 114546 (ANC/STR 09-922/144B) 
     ¶F. STATE 114547 (ANC/STR 09-923/144B) 
     ¶G. STATE 115691 (ANC/STR 09-933/143) 
     ¶H. GENEVA 0915 (SFO-GVA-VI-005) 
 
¶1.  (SBU) BACKGROUND.  On March 20, 2002, the United States, 
Belarus, and Russia reached agreement in the Joint Compliance 
and Inspection Commission (JCIC) regarding use of ground 
transportation and related services, provided by a Russian 
commercial cargo carrier designated by the Russian 
Government, to transport U.S. equipment and supplies to/from 
the U.S. START Continuous Portal Monitoring Facility (VPMF) 
located near Votkinsk, Russia (Ref A).  The U.S. Defense 
Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA) is the designated U.S. 
government agency responsible for implementing the terms of 
the Ground Transportation Agreement (GTA).  Raytheon 
Technical Services Company (RTSC) is the U.S. commercial 
logistics contractor designated by DTRA to coordinate the 
provision of GTA-mandated services with the Russian 
commercial cargo carrier (Votkinsk Plant State Production 
Association). The Russian Nuclear Risk Reduction Center 
(RNRRC) and the Belarusian National Agency for Control and 
Inspections (NAKI) have been designated by their respective 
governments as the agencies responsible for implementation of 
the GTA. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) The RNRRC and the NAKI have been notified, via an 
exchange of U.S. and Russian START notifications (Refs B-G), 
regarding the U.S. intent to conduct two VPMF Ground 
Transportation Resupply Missions in the November/December 
2009 time frame.  The purpose of these two missions is to 
support the closure of the VPMF in accordance with agreements 
signed by the  United States and Russia on October 20, 2009 
(Ref H).  As outlined in Refs B-E, the first mission is to 
occur on November 26-December 10, 2009, with three commercial 
Russian trucks.  On November 26, 2009, the Russian trucks are 
to arrive at the VPMF where they will be loaded with outbound 
cargo and depart the VPMF for Darmstadt, Germany (Nathan Hale 
Army Depot).  The trucks are to arrive at Nathan Hale Army 
Depot on December 3, 2009.  On that date, outbound cargo will 
be offloaded and the empty trucks will depart Nathan Hale 
Army Depot for the return trip to Russia.  The trucks are to 
arrive in the Votkinsk area on December 10, 2009. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) As outlined in Refs C, D, F, and G, the second 
mission is to occur on November 29-December 15, 2009, with 
two commercial Russian trucks.  On November 29, 2009, the 
Russian trucks are to arrive at the VPMF where they will be 
loaded with outbound cargo and depart the VPMF for Nathan 
Hale Army Depot.  The trucks are to arrive at Nathan Hale 
Army Depot on December 8, 2009.  On that date, outbound cargo 
will be offloaded and the empty trucks will depart Nathan 
Hale Army Depot for the return trip to Russia.  The trucks 
are to arrive in the Votkinsk area on December 15, 2009. 
 
¶4.  (U) Paragraph 9 of the attachment to the GTA letters 
states that the United States "shall provide the Republic of 
Belarus and the Russian Federation with an inventory of the 
cargo consisting of equipment and supplies to be delivered to 
the monitored facility at Votkinsk or removed from that 
facility."  Paragraph 9 also states that the United States 
"shall provide such inventory through its embassy no less 
than ten days prior to the arrival of the vehicles on the 
territory of the Republic of Belarus and prior to their 
arrival on (or departure from) the territory of the Russian 
Federation." 
 
¶5.  (SBU) RTSC, under the direction of DTRA, has prepared 
cargo inventory lists for the outbound cargo as required by 
the GTA.  RTSC will be forwarding the cargo inventory lists 
to Embassy Moscow (DTRO-M/ACID) via unclassified E-mail on or 
about November 13, 2009.  Washington is requesting that 
Embassy Moscow deliver the inventory lists to appropriate 
host nation government officials.  Due to manning issues at 
Embassy Minsk, the inventory lists will be delivered directly 
to the NAKI by the U.S. Nuclear Risk Reduction Center via a 
service message. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Washington has prepared talking points for host 
nation representatives which reiterate to Russia and Belarus 
the obligations contained in the GTA to ensure: (1) 
expeditious processing of the cargo shipments at the Russian 
and Belarusian national borders; (2) that the cargo shipments 
are exempt from all customs duties; and (3) that examination 
of the cargo shipments is limited to an examination by 
Russian officials at the VPMF.  Washington is requesting that 
Embassy Moscow deliver the talking points to appropriate host 
nation government officials in conjunction with the delivery 
of the inventory lists.  The talking points will be delivered 
to the NAKI via the service message mentioned in paragraph 5 
above. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) ACTION REQUEST FOR EMBASSY MOSCOW (DTRO-M/ACID): 
Embassy Moscow is requested to deliver the U.S. Cargo 
Inventory Lists and the information in paragraph 8 below to 
appropriate host nation government officials not later than 
November 16, 2009.  Embassy Moscow is further requested to 
confirm, via cable to Washington and unclassified E-mail to 
DTRA/OSSM (joseph.myer@dtra.mil, eric.mottice@dtra.mil, and 
john.sullivan@dtra.mil) and DTRA/OSAS 
(robert.habashi@dtra.mil and mark.beddoes@dtra.mil), the 
delivery of the cargo inventory lists, the name and office of 
the official to whom they were delivered, the date of 
delivery, and any comment or reaction provided at that time. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Begin text: 
 
-- On November 6 and November 10, 2009, the Russian Nuclear 
Risk Reduction Center (RNRRC) and the Belarusian National 
Agency for Control and Inspections (NAKI) were notified, via 
U.S. START Treaty notifications ANC/STR 09-922/144B, ANC/STR 
09-923/144B, and ANC/STR 09-933/143, regarding the U.S. 
intent to conduct two Ground Transportation Resupply Missions 
during the November/December 2009 time frame (November 
26-December 10 and November 29-December 15).  These two 
missions have been scheduled to support the closure of the 
U.S. START Continuous Portal Monitoring Facility (VPMF) 
located near Votkinsk, Russia. 
 
-- All trucks transporting outbound cargo from the VPMF will 
depart the territory of Russia and Belarus prior to December 
5, 2009.  For the first mission, three commercial Russian 
trucks are expected to arrive at the VPMF on or about 
November 26, 2009.  Upon arrival, the trucks will be loaded 
with outbound cargo and depart the VPMF for Darmstadt, 
Germany (Nathan Hale Army Depot).  The trucks are expected to 
arrive at Nathan Hale Army Depot on or about December 3, 
¶2009.  Upon arrival, the outbound cargo will be offloaded and 
the empty trucks will depart Nathan Hale Army Depot for the 
return trip to Russia.  The empty trucks are expected to 
arrive in the Votkinsk area on or about December 10, 2009. 
 
-- For the second mission, two commercial Russian trucks are 
expected to arrive at the VPMF on or about November 29, 2009. 
 Upon arrival, the trucks will be loaded with outbound cargo 
and depart the VPMF for Nathan Hale Army Depot.  The trucks 
are expected to arrive at Nathan Hale Army Depot on or about 
December 8, 2009.  Upon arrival, the outbound cargo will be 
offloaded and the empty trucks will depart Nathan Hale Army 
Depot for the return trip to Russia.  The empty trucks are 
expected to arrive in the Votkinsk area on or about December 
15, 2009. 
 
-- The U.S. Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA) has 
prepared, in accordance with paragraph 9 of the attachment to 
the March 20, 2002, Ground Transportation Agreement (GTA) 
letters, inventory lists for cargo consisting of equipment 
and supplies to be removed from the monitored facility at 
Votkinsk.  These inventory lists are being provided to the 
Russian and Belarusian governments as required by the GTA. 
 
-- DTRA appreciates the assistance of the RNRRC, NAKI, and 
other appropriate Russian and Belarusian Government agencies, 
in ensuring that the outbound cargo shipments are 
expeditiously processed at the Russian and Belarusian 
national borders and exempt from all customs duties (in 
accordance with paragraph 12 of the attachment to the GTA 
letters) and are examined solely by Russian officials at the 
VPMF (in accordance with paragraph 11 of the attachment to 
the GTA letters). 
 
End Text. 
CLINTON