09STATE80200
GUIDANCE: UNAMI RENEWAL BUILDING BLOCKS
Fri Jul 31 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0004
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #0200 2122153
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 312133Z JUL 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD IMMEDIATE 0000
RUEHKU/AMEMBASSY KUWAIT IMMEDIATE 0000UNCLAS STATE 080200 
 
SIPDIS 
USUN FOR GERMAIN AND KUJAWINSKI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL UNSC IZ
SUBJECT: GUIDANCE: UNAMI RENEWAL BUILDING BLOCKS 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action request. 
 
¶2. (U) USUN is authorized to draw from the following points 
(para 3) in making its August 4 statement in the Security 
Council supporting adoption of the UNSC resolution renewing 
the mandate of the UN Assistance Mission in Iraq (UNAMI). 
 
¶3. BEGIN POINTS: 
 
-- Mr. President, we welcome the Council,s adoption of this 
resolution to renew the mandate of the United Nations 
Assistance Mission in Iraq (UNAMI). 
 
-- Mr. President, the United States recognizes the 
significant progress the Government of Iraq (GOI) has made 
since UNAMI,s responsibilities were first enumerated in 
UNSCR 1546 in June of 2004. Since that time, the people of 
Iraq have held elections, adopted a constitution, seated a 
freely-elected government and established the foundation for 
a peaceful and prosperous future. 
 
--As a friend and strategic partner, the U.S. is deeply 
committed to advancing this progress. We are committed to 
building a strong and long-term strategic relationship with 
Iraq, which respects both countries' sovereignty and serves 
both countries, interests - we will advance our work with 
the Iraqi people to strengthen democratic institutions, 
uphold the rule of law, support the voluntary return of the 
displaced, and develop peaceful and cooperative engagements 
with their neighbors.  We will also encourage the wider 
international community to work with Iraq in order to further 
stabilize the region and use the tools necessary to eradicate 
the continuing threats to Iraq,s peace and security. 
Moreover, and in accordance with the U.S.-Iraq Security 
Agreement, the U.S. plans to build on the June 30, 2009 
repositioning of combat forces from Iraq cities, towns, and 
villages, leading toward the drawdown of all U.S. forces by 
the end of 2011. 
 
--Mr. President, the United States would also like to 
recognize the vital role that the United Nations continues to 
play in Iraq. Under the leadership of the newly appointed 
SRSG Ad Melkert, and at the invitation of the Government of 
Iraq, UNAMI continues to expand the presence and capacity of 
the UN throughout Iraq.  UNAMI is playing a critical 
supporting mission in promoting issues decisive to the 
long-term peace, security, and prosperity of Iraq by 
addressing disputed internal boundaries, holding of free and 
fair elections, promoting national unity, and assisting 
refugees and internally displaced persons. 
 
-- UNAMI represents the international community,s commitment 
to supporting Iraq,s efforts to build a vibrant nation in 
which all of its diverse communities participate in the 
political, social and economic life of the nation and in 
which the human rights of all are protected. 
 
--Over the next twelve months, UNAMI,s work will be 
increasingly important in supporting efforts to resolve some 
of Iraq's most important political challenges. 
 
--Mr. President, resolving ongoing Arab-Kurd disputes over 
internal boundaries is one such challenge. The U.S. strongly 
encourages senior officials from both the Government of Iraq 
(GOI) and the Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG) to support 
the UNAMI facilitated High Level Task Force.  The Task Force 
is an important mechanism to increase dialogue and a spirit 
of cooperation in an effort to work toward a just and fair 
solution ) a key step in creating stability for all of Iraq. 
 We also stand ready to assist in efforts toward achieving 
Iraqi national unity, and call on all relevant parties to 
advance this process. 
 
--Holding legitimate and transparent national elections which 
encompass the peaceful transfer of power is also important 
for Iraq to move forward as a sovereign nation.  The January 
2010 national parliamentary elections represent another 
significant opportunity for Iraq to advance national unity. 
Through the ballot box, the Iraqi people can further their 
engagement with their government and bring together groups to 
inclusively function in a democratic environment.  Achieving 
this task would be advanced by the passage of a national 
election law that maximizes participation of all Iraqis ) 
including displaced Iraqis ) and provides for transparency 
in the conduct of the electoral process.  Iraqis and the 
international community viewed Iraq,s 2009 provincial 
council elections ) which used an open list system ) as 
successful and reflective of the will of the Iraqi people. 
UNAMI will play an important role in this process, especially 
in providing technical assistance and advice to Iraq,s 
Independent High Electoral Commission in preparation for 
Iraq's parliamentary elections in January 2010. 
 
--Supporting and facilitating the sustainable and voluntary 
reintegration of Iraqi refugees and internally displaced 
persons is also essential for the long-term stability of 
Iraq.  The U.S.is acting to address Iraq,s displacement 
issues by supporting returns and reintegration, assisting 
those in displacement, and resettling in the United States 
some of the most vulnerable refugees.  The U.S. recently 
announced $100 million in new contributions to support the 
return and reintegration of displaced Iraqis.  These funds 
will be used to meet the needs of vulnerable families at the 
community level through activities such as rebuilding homes, 
creating jobs, and improving basic services.  With as many as 
300,000 returns in 2008 and over 100,000 returns in 2009 as 
of June, the U.S. supports UNAMI,s engagement with the Iraqi 
Government in their efforts to provide security and access to 
housing, jobs, and basic services. We welcome additional 
efforts on this issue by the Government of Iraq. 
 
--Mr. President, I,d like to express my Government's deep 
appreciation to all the personnel of UNAMI for their 
commitment and resolve to engage on these critical issues in 
support of a more peaceful and prosperous Iraq.  All of us 
can be proud of UNAMI,s efforts and record of accomplishment 
to date, look forward to your continued success. So on behalf 
of the United States, I offer our full support for the 
renewal of UNAMI,s mandate. This resolution renews UNAMI,s 
mission to advise and support the Iraqi government as it 
develops into a more stable and self-reliant nation. We 
unequivocally welcome and encourage UNAMI,s mission and 
stand ready to assist as necessary. We encourage all 
countries to do the same. 
 
END POINTS 
CLINTON