09STATE69720
FM BANGURA MEETING WITH A-S CARSON
Mon Jul 06 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO3014
PP RUEHMA RUEHPA
DE RUEHC #9720/01 1881746
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 061841Z JUL 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUEHFN/AMEMBASSY FREETOWN PRIORITY 9407/9408
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 6752/6753
INFO ECOWAS COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 STATE 069720 
 
SIPDIS, SENSITIVE 
 
C O R R E C T E D C O P Y  (ADDED CAPTION) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: GH GV IV LI NI PGOV PHUM PINS PREL PU SG SL UNSC
KPKO 
SUBJECT: FM BANGURA MEETING WITH A-S CARSON 
 
REF: A. FREETOWN 95 B. FREETOWN 99 C. STATE 64023 
 
STATE 00069720  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
Summary and Background 
---------------------- 
¶1.  (SBU) On June 9, Zainab Bangura, the Foreign Minister 
of Sierra Leone, met with A/S Johnnie Carson to discuss 
problems in the West Africa region, the threat of 
instability in Guinea to Sierra Leone and domestic 
issues, particularly, narcotics and the need for both of 
Sierra Leone's major political parties to begin a 
dialogue.  Bangura emphasized that Sierra Leone had stood 
by the U.S. on such issues as Kosovo and Zimbabwe on 
principle, and had turned over narcotics traffickers to 
the DEA (despite some internal APC opposition).  In 
return, she said the government would like some concrete 
signs of support from the Administration.  A/S Carson 
expressed his thanks to the GoSL and the Foreign Minister 
for their friendship and collaboration with the U.S. on 
many issues and told her that the USG will do as much as 
we can to assist and support Sierra Leone. 
 
¶2.  (U) Background: The participants were Sierra Leonean 
Foreign Minister Zainab Bangura; Ibrahim Conteh, DCM of 
the Sierra Leone embassy; Sheku Mesali, Counselor at the 
Sierra Leone embassy; A/S Johnnie Carson; Ambassador to 
Sierra Leone June Carter Perry, INR/AF Analyst for West 
Africa Bernadette Graves; and AF/W Acting Deputy 
Director, Jim Hunter, as notetaker.  FM Bangura was in 
the U.S. to attend a regularly scheduled meeting in New 
York of the UN Peace Building Commission (UN PBC).  The 
UN PBC is active in Sierra Leone. 
 
End Summary and Background. 
 
Africa is Falling Behind -- Ghana, Guinea-Bissau, 
Nigeria, Senegal 
 
------------------------------------- 
¶3.  (SBU) On June 9, Zainab Bangura, the Foreign Minister 
of Sierra Leone, held an introductory meeting with A/S 
Johnnie Carson to discuss Bangura's concerns that Africa, 
including West Africa, seemed to be moving backward on 
democracy.  She gave A/S Carson a brief readout on some 
of the salient issues in West African countries and noted 
the completion of the voter registration process in Cote 
d'Ivoire.  She observed that in Nigeria no one seems to 
be in charge and it is difficult to get the Nigerians to 
make a decision while the Yar'Adua succession crisis 
plays out; in Ghana former president Jerry Rawlings is 
the de facto president due to President Mills' poor 
health; President 
Abdoulaye Wade of Senegal is becoming a problem, as he 
does not want to leave office despite growing domestic 
oppositio; and Guinea-Bissau is a collapsed state 
dominated 
by the military that requires extensive security sector 
reform before it can democratize. 
 
Guinea: Entice with Aid Better than Confrontation 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
¶4.  (SBU) Bangura said that Guinea's instability is a big 
problem for Sierra Leone, as Sierra Leone has a long 
border with Guinea and more Guinean immigrants than any 
other 
West African state.  The GoSL, President Ellen Sirleaf 
Johnson of Liberia, and President of the Economic 
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Dr. Mohamed Ibn 
Chambas all very much doubt elections will be held on 
schedule.  She said that everyone is afraid of the 
erratic Captain Dadis Camara, leader of Guinea's ruling 
junta.  Bangura warned that a cut off in aid to Guinea 
could trigger a rampage by the large Guinean military. 
Instead, the GoSL would prefer to offer aid in exchange 
for political progress. 
 
Sierra Leone: Narcotics a Growing Threat, Pol Parties 
Must Begin Dialogue 
-------------------------------- 
¶5.  (SBU) Turning to domestic issues, Bangura expressed 
alarmed at the rapid growth of marijuana cultivation in 
Liberia and Sierra Leone.  She said that the GoSL has 
enacted good anti-drug laws but needs more information 
sharing with the U.S.  Sierra Leone's youth unemployment 
 
STATE 00069720  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
problem exacerbates Sierra Leone's drug trafficking 
problem and raises the risk of serious instability. 
Unemployed young people joined in the rioting between 
supporters of the ruling All Peoples Congress (APC) and 
the opposition Sierra Leone People's Party (SLPP) on 
March 13 and 16 (reftels A and B).  Bangura opined that 
the riots were a wakeup call that the hardliners in both 
parties are growing more influential and feeding off of 
each other's actions. She noted that the parties need to 
start a dialogue, rather than viewing each other as 
enemies.  She also said that it was GoSL policy that 
those convicted of war crimes by the Special Court for 
Sierra Leone (SCSL) serve their sentences outside of 
Sierra Leone, as their presence in Sierra Leone would be 
destabilizing. 
 
Sierra Leone-U.S.: Show Us the Love 
----------------------------------- 
¶6.  (SBU) Bangura emphasized that Sierra Leone had stood 
by the U.S. on such issues as Kosovo and Zimbabwe on 
principle, turned over narcotics traffickers to the DEA 
(despite some internal APC opposition).  In return, she 
said the government would like some concrete signs of 
support from the Administration, such as high-level 
visits, more aid money, etc.  Such deliverables would 
reinforce the position of the progressive, pro-U.S. 
faction within the GoSL. 
 
A/S Carson: We Will Assist As Much As We Can 
-------------------------------------------- 
¶7.  (SBU) A/S Carson expressed his thanks to the GoSL and 
the Foreign Minister for their friendship and 
collaboration with the U.S. on many issues, especially 
countering 
narcotics trafficking and Sierra Leone's recognition of 
Kosovo.  He stated that the USG will do as much as we can 
to assist and support Sierra Leone and its democratic 
progress, and acknowledged GoSL desire for a visible 
demonstration of that support, such as a high-level 
visit.  He added that our shared ideals, principles and 
values are the basis for our collaboration.  He said the 
United States is concerned about democracy, economic 
growth, governance and stability in West Africa.  In 
particular, he noted concern about political violence and 
erratic leadership in Guinea-Bissau and Guinea.  He 
expressed hope that ECOWAS can assist with Guinea's 
democratic transition and that the tensions between 
Sierra Leone's two major parties can be resolved 
peacefully. 
 
Comment 
------- 
¶8.  (SBU) Bangura's statement that it is GoSL policy to 
have the convicted defendants of the SCSL serve their 
terms outside of Sierra Leone was welcome, as the USG 
shares 
that goal.  While Sierra Leone shares our goal of a 
democratic Guinea, the GoSL's first priority is a stable 
Guinea, leading the GoSL to take a softer line on Guinea 
than we would like.  Other Guinean neighbors, including 
Liberia, are taking a similarly restrained approach. 
CLINTON