09STATE2008
GUIDANCE: GA SPECIAL SESSION ON THE HUMANITARIAN
Thu Jan 08 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0006
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #2008 0082205
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 082150Z JAN 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000UNCLAS STATE 002008 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNGA UNSC PREL IS SY KPAL
SUBJECT: GUIDANCE: GA SPECIAL SESSION ON THE HUMANITARIAN 
SITUATION IN GAZA; JANUARY 8, 2008 
 
¶1. (SBU) At the request of the Non-Aligned Movement, the UN 
General Assembly may hold on January 8 or 9 a resumption of 
its Emergency Special Session on "Illegal Israeli actions in 
Occupied East Jerusalem and the rest of the Occupied 
Palestinian Territory."  This emergency session last convened 
on December 15, 2006.  USUN is authorized to draw on the 
talking points in paragraph 2 for its participation at this 
session.  Mission may modify these points as necessary to 
reflect updated developments both diplomatically and on the 
ground, but should consult with the Department in doing so. 
 
¶2. (U) Begin Talking Points: 
 
-- The United States is deeply concerned about the situation 
in Gaza.  We are extremely saddened by the loss of innocent 
life.  We are grateful for the efforts of the ICRC, UNRWA and 
other humanitarian agencies for their courageous actions 
during this difficult situation. 
 
-- Secretary Rice has been working around the clock to try to 
end the violence in Gaza through continuing contacts in the 
region as well as with the Security Council and visiting 
Foreign Ministers here in New York. 
 
-- We welcome the initiative of Presidents Mubarak and 
Sarkozy in seeking an immediate, durable and sustainable 
cease fire.  Negotiators from Israel and Hamas arrived in 
Cairo today for separate talks with the Egyptian government 
on the situation. 
 
-- (USUN should insert a brief update on status of January 8 
UNSC action here.) 
 
-- The General Assembly plays a vital role in the United 
Nations and the international system.  The United States, as 
a Charter Member of the UN is particularly appreciative of 
that role.  But the Assembly must be careful it does not 
undermine ongoing diplomatic activity to halt the violence in 
Gaza with empty and one-sided rhetoric. 
 
-- This is especially so when the Security Council is 
actively seized of the matter.  Under Article 12(1) of the 
Charter, the Council has primacy.  While the Assembly can 
discuss this matter, there should be no product while the 
Security Council is still actively engaged. 
 
-- This Special Session should also not be allowed to devolve 
into a platform for criticism just as every effort is being 
made to find a mechanism to bring the conflict to a halt. 
The Assembly must exercise great caution that its 
deliberations are not seized upon by terrorist groups as 
encouragement or justification for their unlawful actions or 
to further inflame tensions and spread violence and 
hostilities in the region. 
 
-- Mr. President.  It is imperative that any ceasefire is 
durable and sustainable, and that it ensures the safety and 
security of Israelis and Palestinians alike. 
 
-- The situation before the current events in Gaza was 
clearly not sustainable.  The people of Gaza watched as 
insecurity and lawlessness increased and as their living 
conditions grew more dire because of Hamas,s actions. 
Hundreds of thousands of Israelis lived under daily threat of 
rocket attack, a circumstance no country would be willing to 
tolerate. 
 
-- An effective ceasefire must include an end to the 
smuggling into Gaza including preventing the reopening of the 
tunnel system through which Hamas obtained arms and 
explosives, and the reopening of crossings so that 
Palestinians can benefit from humanitarian goods and basic 
supplies. 
 
-- The United States has been carefully following 
developments regarding the humanitarian situation in Gaza. 
We applaud Prime Minister Olmert's initiative to open a 
humanitarian corridor to alleviate civilian suffering and are 
in constant contact with the Government of Israel regarding 
humanitarian priorities.  The people of Gaza must have a 
lifeline to goods and supplies and to sanitation and medical 
help. 
 
-- We deeply appreciate the dedicated efforts of UNRWA and 
the ICRC to deliver assistance to civilians, and have urged 
real-time, ground-level coordination between international 
organizations and Israeli combatant commanders to ensure 
relief workers can carry out their work in safety.  We would 
like to express our deepest sympathy and condolences to the 
families and colleagues of the UN aid workers who died in 
Gaza today. 
 
-- We were informed earlier today that UNRWA and ICRC 
suspended operations due to security and coordination 
concerns.  We hope the new coordination cell Israel has set 
up at Ramat Aviv to augment the one at Erez Crossing will 
enable the resumption of their efforts. 
 
-- The United States is the largest single-nation donor to 
the Palestinian people through our support to UNRWA and the 
Palestinian Authority.  In addition to the more than $555 
million the U.S. provided last year, including $185 million 
for UNRWA, we have also provided $85 million in response to 
the humanitarian situation in Gaza and will contribute more 
emergency aid if that is needed. 
 
-- In the aftermath of this crisis, the international 
community must be prepared to adopt an intensive 
reconstruction initiative, perhaps through a donors 
conference, to complement the efforts of the Palestinian 
Authority in Gaza. 
 
-- Our goal must be the stabilization and normalization of 
life for the people of Gaza.  This will require a principled 
resolution of the political challenges in Gaza that 
ultimately reestablishes the Palestinian Authority,s 
legitimate control.  The November 26 Arab League statement 
will serve as an important guide in these efforts -- efforts 
that are ably led by Egypt. 
 
-- UN Security Council Resolution 1850 describes the 
principles to chart a better future for Israelis and 
Palestinians alike -- noting a lasting peace can only be 
based on an enduring commitment to mutual recognition; 
freedom from violence, incitement, and terror; and the 
two-state solution, building upon previous agreements and 
obligations. 
 
End points. 
RICE