09STATE111693
MISSILE TECHNOLOGY CONTROL REGIME (MTCR): U.S.
Thu Oct 29 00:00:00 +0100 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0003
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #1693 3021607
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 291542Z OCT 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO MISSILE TECHNOLOGY CONTROL REGIME COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
AMEMBASSY BRASILIA PRIORITY 0000C O N F I D E N T I A L STATE 111693 
 
SIPDIS 
PARIS FOR: NOAH HARDIE 
BRASILIA FOR JOHN ERATH 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/29/2029 
TAGS: BR ETTC FR KSCA MTCRE PARM PREL TSPA
SUBJECT: MISSILE TECHNOLOGY CONTROL REGIME (MTCR): U.S. 
REPORT ON CONTACTS WITH NON-PARTNERS (C) 
 
Classified By: ISN/MTR Director Pam Durham. 
Reason 1.4 (B) and (D) 
 
¶1. (U)  This is an action request.  Please see 
paragraph 2. 
 
¶2. (C)  Action request:  The non-paper in paragraph 3 below 
provides a brief summary of Missile Technology Control Regime 
(MTCR)-related contacts between the U.S. and non-MTCR 
countries since the November 2008 Canberra  MTCR Plenary.  As 
part of our preparation for the November 2009 Rio de Janeiro 
MTCR Plenary, we request all MTCR Partner country embassies 
provide a copy of this non-paper to appropriate host 
government officials.  Embassy Paris should provide a copy to 
the French MTCR Point of Contact (POC) for posting on ePOC as 
a Plenary report and distribution to the Partners as a POC 
document.  Request Embassy Brasilia provide a copy to the 
 
incoming Brazilian MTCR Plenary Chair and/or appropriate 
staff. 
 
¶3.  (C)  Begin Non-Paper: 
 
Confidential/Rel MTCR Countries: 
 
U.S. Contacts with Non-Partners since the 
2008 Canberra MTCR Plenary 
///////////////////////////////////////// 
 
Since the November 2008 Missile Technology Control Regime 
(MTCR) Plenary in Canberra, the U.S. has discussed the MTCR 
and related missile nonproliferation issues, such as the 
Hague Code of Conduct Against Ballistic Missile Proliferation 
(HCOC), with many relevant non-Partner countries. 
 
We are hopeful that through continued outreach to 
non-members, Partners can promote a greater understanding of 
the MTCR,s nonproliferation goals and stimulate further 
interest in global missile nonproliferation and unilateral 
adherence to the MTCR Guidelines. 
 
Explanatory Notes: 
 
General U.S. export control contacts are carried out under 
the Department of State,s Export Control and Related Border 
Security (EXBS) Program.  The EXBS Program is designed to 
help prevent proliferation of weapons of mass destruction 
(WMD), their delivery systems, radiological material, 
conventional weapons, and related items by assisting foreign 
governments to establish and implement effective export 
control systems that meet international standards.  The EXBS 
program comprises a range of nonproliferation export control 
assistance, from legal/regulatory and licensing workshops to 
border control infrastructure, to inspection and detection 
equipment and training for border control agencies. 
 
The Tenth International Export Control Conference in 
Istanbul, Turkey, June 25-27, 2009, was attended by more than 
200 participants from 60 countries and numerous 
non-governmental, international and regional organizations. 
Co-hosted by the United States and the Republic of Turkey, 
the conference was sponsored by the Department of State's 
Export Control and Related Border Security (EXBS) program. 
Conference delegates received updates on the latest 
proliferation and strategic trade control challenges and 
learned about developments in the multilateral export control 
regimes (Australia Group, Missile Technology Control Regime, 
Nuclear Suppliers Group, and the Wassenaar Arrangement). 
 
"Update 2009" was hosted by the U.S. Department of Commerce 
(DOC) on September 30 ) October 2, 2009.  "Update" is a 
conference that gives the exporting community the opportunity 
to learn first-hand from senior U.S. Government (USG) 
officials about current issues and trends in export control 
policies, regulations, and practices.  It also provides the 
unique opportunity to network with colleagues in the export 
control industry, interact with U.S. and foreign government 
officials, and learn about programs and services offered by 
the USG and industry exhibitors. 
 
Two EXBS programs which reached a large number of export 
control officials and customs/border officers this year were 
the Export Control Academy held at the Center for 
International Trade and Security of the University of 
Georgia, and training on "Tracker," a United States-funded 
automated system for the processing of strategic trade 
control licenses. 
 
 
Contacts with Non-Partners: 
 
Albania 
/////// 
 
From November 2008 to November 2009, Albanian officials 
participated in numerous training courses on licensing, 
export investigation, export control regulations, land and 
sea interdiction, inspection/detection equipment, and 
"Tracker" software. 
 
Albanian officials attended the Export Control Academy. 
 
In June 2009, Albania attended the 10th International Export 
Control Conference. 
 
 
Afghanistan 
/////////// 
 
Since the 2008 Canberra Plenary, the United States continued 
to work with the Government of Afghanistan through the EXBS 
program to build and strengthen border security and Customs 
enforcement and systems. 
 
From November 2008 to November 2009, Afghan officials 
participated in training courses on licensing procedures, 
implementation of UNSCR 1540, interdiction, and development 
of legislation and regulations. 
 
Afghan officials attended the Export Control Academy. 
 
In June 2009, Afghanistan attended the 10th International 
Export Control Conference. 
 
 
Algeria 
 
Algerian officials participated in a Legal/Regulatory 
Training course at the University of Georgia,s Center for 
Industry and Security in July 2009. 
 
In June 2009, Algeria attended the 10th International Export 
Control Conference. 
 
 
Armenia 
/////// 
 
From November 2008 to November 2009, Armenian officials 
participated in training courses on Analysis of Strategic 
Commodity Transfers (ASCOT), international air cargo 
interdiction, targeting and risk management, detection 
equipment, analysis of strategic commodity transfer, 
government-enterprise outreach on export controls; and 
munitions and arms brokering controls. 
 
Armenian officials attended the Export Control Academy. 
 
In April 2009, the United States reinvigorated discussions 
with the Government of Armenia (GOAM) to support its efforts 
to amend Armenia,s laws and regulations to provide an 
effective export control system for munitions and dual-use 
items that meets international standards. 
 
 
Azerbaijan 
////////// 
 
From November 2008 to November 2009, Azerbaijani officials 
participated in training courses on end use and end users, 
detection equipment and targeting and risk management. 
 
Azerbaijani officials attended the Export Control Academy. 
 
In June 2009, Azerbaijan attended the 10th International 
Export Control Conference. 
 
 
Bahamas 
/////// 
 
In May 2009, the United States urged the Bahamas to subscribe 
to the Hague Code of Conduct Against Ballistic Missile 
Proliferation (HCOC). 
 
In June 2009, the Bahamas attended the 10th International 
Export Control Conference. 
 
 
Bahrain 
/////// 
 
In January 2009, the United States informed Bahrain of the 
results of the 2008 Canberra MTCR Plenary. 
 
 
Belarus 
/////// 
 
In January 2009, the United States informed Belarus of the 
results of the 2008 Canberra MTCR Plenary. 
 
In May 2009, Belarus attended the "Tracker" Best Practices 
Conference, co-hosted by the U.S.(EXBS) and Poland in Warsaw. 
 
 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
////////////////////// 
 
Since the 2008 Canberra Plenary, the United States has 
provided Bosnia and Herzegovina substantial border 
enforcement equipment. 
 
From November 2008 to November 2009, Bosnian officials 
participated in numerous training courses on Analysis of 
Strategic Commodity Transfers (ASCOT), licensing, export 
investigation, export control regulations, land and sea 
interdiction, inspection/detection equipment, and "Tracker" 
software. 
 
Bosnian officials attended the Export Control Academy. 
 
In June 2009, Bosnia and Herzegovina attended the 10th 
International Export Control Conference. 
 
 
Botswana 
//////// 
 
In May 2009, the United States urged Botswana to subscribe to 
the HCOC. 
 
 
Cambodia 
//////// 
 
In mid-May 2009, the United States hosted a Senior Policy 
Exchange with Cambodia, focusing on the importance of 
nationally-based strategic trade control systems. 
 
EXBS sponsored a UNSCR 1540 Implementation Workshop for 
Cambodia. 
 
 
Chile 
///// 
 
In January 2009, the United States informed Chile of the 
results of the 2008 Canberra MTCR Plenary. 
 
From November 2008 to November 2009 Chilean officials 
participated in the UN Office of Disarmament Affairs (UNODA) 
Workshop on UNSCR 1540 Implementation for MERCOSUR members 
and associates. 
 
Chilean officials attended the Export Control Academy. 
 
In June 2009, Chile attended the 10th International Export 
Control Conference. 
 
In September 2009, the United States briefed the Chilean 
government and industry officials on the MTCR and Wassenaar 
Arrangement (WA) export controls during a nonproliferation 
seminar in Santiago and Valparaiso. 
 
 
China 
///// 
 
In January 2009, the United States informed China of the 
results of the 2008 Canberra MTCR Plenary. 
 
Throughout the year the United States has continued to raise 
a variety of missile nonproliferation-related issues with 
China, including discussions related to Chinese entities, 
involvement in procurement efforts by programs of concern. 
 
The United States held bilateral nonproliferation talks with 
China in September 2009. 
 
 
Congo, Republic of 
////////////////// 
 
In May 2009, the United States urged the Republic of the 
Congo to subscribe to the HCOC. 
 
 
Cote d,Ivoire 
///////////// 
 
In May 2009, the United States urged Cote d,Ivoire to 
subscribe to the HCOC. 
 
 
Croatia 
/////// 
 
The United States continues to assist the GOC with revisions 
to its export control legislation and criminal code, as well 
as provide guidance on procedures for verifying end users and 
export license application information. 
 
In January 2009, the United States informed Croatia of the 
results of the 2008 Canberra MTCR Plenary. 
 
From November 2008 to November 2009, Croatian officials 
participated in training courses on the development of an 
internal control program, commodity identification, detection 
equipment, land and sea investigations, and targeting and 
risk management. 
 
In June 2009, Croatia attended the 10th International Export 
Control Conference. 
 
 
Cyprus 
////// 
 
In January 2009, the United States informed Cyprus of the 
results of the 2008 Canberra MTCR Plenary. 
 
From November 2008 to November 2009, Cypriot officials 
participated in training courses on export control 
investigations, detection equipment, strategic trade control 
assessment, and eCIT, an online commodity identification and 
export control list search tool. 
 
 
Djibouti 
//////// 
 
In May 2009, the United States urged Djibouti to subscribe to 
the HCOC. 
 
 
Egypt 
///// 
 
In January 2009, the United States informed Egypt of the 
results of the 2008 Canberra Plenary. 
 
Since the 2008 Canberra Plenary, the United States has 
discussed with the GOE issues related to activities of 
programs of missile proliferation concern. 
 
In August 2009, Egypt participated in an EXBS-sponsored 
International Border Interdiction Training. 
 
In June 2009, Egypt attended the 10th International Export 
Control Conference. 
 
 
Estonia 
/////// 
 
In January 2009, the United States informed Estonia of the 
results of the 2008 Canberra MTCR Plenary. 
 
In May 2009, Estonia attended the "Tracker" Best Practices 
Conference, co-hosted by the U.S.(EXBS) and Poland in Warsaw. 
 
 
Georgia 
/////// 
 
Since the 2008 Canberra Plenary, the United States has 
provided Georgia substantial border enforcement equipment. 
 
From November 2008 to November 2009, Georgian officials 
participated in training courses on commodity identification, 
detection equipment, boarding and port state control, 
incident command systems, industry-government outreach, and 
"Tracker." 
 
In June 2009, Georgia attended the 10th International Export 
Control Conference. 
 
 
Hong Kong 
///////// 
 
Since the 2008 Canberra Plenary, the United States and Hong 
Kong have discussed issues related to the transfer of 
sensitive items to programs of missile proliferation concern. 
 
In January 2009, the United States informed Hong Kong of the 
results of the 2008 Canberra MTCR Plenary. 
 
In June 2009, Hong Kong participated in an EXBS-sponsored 
Commodity Identification Training event. 
 
In June 2009, Hong Kong attended the 10th International 
Export Control Conference. 
 
 
India 
///// 
 
The United States and India have an ongoing and cooperative 
dialogue on export control issues. 
 
Since the 2008 Canberra Plenary, the United States and India 
have discussed issues related to the transfer of sensitive 
items to programs of missile proliferation concern. 
 
In January 2009, the United States informed India of the 
results of the 2008 Canberra MTCR Plenary. 
 
In May 2009, the United States urged India to subscribe to 
the HCOC. 
 
In June 2009, Indian officials participated in a June 23-25 
South Asia Workshop on Nonproliferation of Weapons of Mass 
Destruction (WMD)-Implementation of UN Security Council 
Resolution (UNSCR) 1540 that was co-hosted by the U.S. and 
held in Sri Lanka. 
 
Indian officials attended the Export Control Academy. 
 
In June 2009, India attended the 10th International Export 
Control Conference. 
 
 
Indonesia 
///////// 
 
In May 2009, the United States urged Indonesia to subscribe 
to the HCOC. 
 
From November 2008 to November 2009, Indonesian officials 
participated in training courses on targeting and risk 
management, implementation of UNSCR 1540, licensing 
procedures and practices Workshop, and port security/port 
vulnerability. 
 
In June 2009, Indonesia attended the 10th International 
Export Control Conference. 
 
 
Israel 
////// 
 
The United States and Israel have an ongoing dialogue on 
export control issues, and regularly consult on a wide range 
of nonproliferation issues. 
 
In January 2009, the U.S. informed Israel of the results of 
the 2008 Canberra MTCR Plenary. 
 
In June 2009, Israel attended the 10th International Export 
Control Conference. 
 
 
Jordan 
////// 
 
In January 2009, the United States informed Jordan of the 
results of the 2008 Canberra MTCR Plenary. 
 
From November 2008 to November 2009, Jordanian officials 
participated in training courses on commodity identification, 
air, land and seaport interdiction, port security/port 
vulnerability, and export investigations. 
 
Jordanian officials attended the Export Control Academy. 
 
In June 2009, Jordan attended the 10th International Export 
Control Conference. 
 
 
Kazakhstan 
////////// 
 
In January 2009, the United States informed Kazakhstan of the 
results of the 2008 Canberra MTCR Plenary. 
 
EXBS conducted activities in Kazakhstan focused on the 
development of a comprehensive strategic trade control 
framework.  EXBS continued to train Kazakhstani border 
security officials on interdiction techniques, and provided 
technical assistance in the area of WMD-related commodity 
identification. 
 
From November 2008 to November 2009, Kazakh officials 
participated in training courses on air and land 
interdiction, investigations and prosecutions, and enterprise 
outreach. 
 
The United States held bilateral nonproliferation talks with 
Kazakhstan in May 2009. 
 
In June 2009, Kazakhstan attended the 10th International 
Export Control Conference. 
 
 
Kuwait 
////// 
 
In January 2009, the United States informed Kuwait of the 
results of the 2008 Canberra MTCR Plenary. 
 
In May 2009, the United States urged Kuwait to subscribe to 
the HCOC. 
 
 
Kyrgyzstan 
////////// 
 
EXBS conducted activities in Kyrgyzstan focused on the 
development of a comprehensive strategic trade control 
framework.  EXBS continued to train Kyrgyz border security 
officials on interdiction techniques, and provided technical 
assistance in the area of WMD-related commodity 
identification. 
 
From November 2008 to November 2009, Kyrgyz officials 
participated in training courses on commodity identification, 
detection equipment, air cargo interdiction and "Tracker." 
 
In June 2009, Kyrgyzstan attended the 10th International 
Export Control Conference. 
 
 
Latvia 
////// 
 
In January 2009, the United States informed Latvia of the 
results of the 2008 Canberra Plenary. 
 
 
Lebanon 
/////// 
 
In June 2009, the United States urged Lebanon to subscribe to 
the HCOC. 
 
In June 2009, Lebanon attended the 10th International Export 
Control Conference. 
 
 
Lesotho 
/////// 
 
In May 2009, the United States urged Lesotho to subscribe to 
the HCOC. 
 
 
Libya 
///// 
 
In January 2009, the United States informed Libya of the 
results of the 2008 Canberra MTCR Plenary. 
 
 
Lithuania 
///////// 
 
In January 2009, the United States informed Lithuania of the 
results of the 2008 Canberra MTCR Plenary. 
 
 
Macau 
///// 
 
In late November 2008, Macau officials participated in a 
Proliferation Awareness Workshop. 
 
In January 2009, the United States informed Macau of the 
results of the 2008 Canberra MTCR Plenary. 
 
 
Macedonia 
///////// 
 
Since the 2008 Canberra Plenary, the EXBS program has 
provided Macedonia substantial border enforcement equipment. 
 
From November 2008 to November 2009 Macedonian officials 
participated in training courses on air and land 
interdiction, Analysis of Strategic Commodity Transfers 
(ASCOT), arms brokering controls, detection equipment, 
investigations and prosecutions, border security assessment, 
and licensing practices and procedures. 
 
In June 2009, Macedonia attended the 10th International 
Export Control Conference. 
 
 
Malaysia 
//////// 
 
In January 2009, the United States informed Malaysia of the 
results of the 2008 Canberra MTCR Plenary. 
 
Malaysian officials attended the Export Control Academy. 
 
In June 2009, Malaysia attended the 10th International Export 
Control Conference. 
 
 
Malta 
///// 
 
In January 2009, the United States informed Malta of the 
results of the 2008 Canberra MTCR Plenary. 
 
In September 2009, the United States provided a demonstration 
of and training on its online commodity identification and 
export control list search tool. 
 
From November 2008 to November 2009, Maltese officials 
participated in training courses on export investigations, 
detection equipment and strategic trade control assessment. 
 
 
Mauritius 
///////// 
 
In May 2009, the United States urged Mauritius to subscribe 
to the HCOC. 
 
 
Mexico 
////// 
 
Representatives from Mexico participated in "Update 2009." 
 
From November 2008 to November 2009, Mexican officials 
participated in activities concerning legal/regulatory 
consultations and exchanges, expert-level consultations on 
the Wassenaar Arrangement, targeting and risk management, and 
technical consultations on multilateral export control regime 
lists. 
 
Mexican officials attended a legal/regulatory workshop on 
export controls and multilateral nonproliferation regimes in 
Chile as observers. 
 
Mexican officials attended the Export Control Academy. 
 
In June 2009, Mexico attended the 10th International Export 
Control Conference. 
 
 
Montenegro 
////////// 
 
Since the 2008 Canberra Plenary, the United States has 
provided Montenegro substantial border enforcement equipment 
and training. 
 
From November 2008 to November 2009, Montenegrin officials 
participated in training courses on licensing, export 
investigation, export control regulations, land and sea 
interdiction, inspection/detection equipment, and "Tracker" 
software. 
 
Montenegrin officials attended the Export Control Academy. 
 
In June 2009, Montenegro attended the 10th International 
Export Control Conference. 
 
 
Morocco 
/////// 
 
From November 2008 to November 2009, Moroccan officials 
participated in training courses on commodity identification, 
developing a national control list, and implementing 
regulations. 
 
In June 2009, Morocco attended the 10th International Export 
Control Conference. 
 
 
Namibia 
/////// 
 
In May 2009, the United States urged Namibia to subscribe to 
the HCOC. 
 
 
Oman 
//// 
 
From November 2008 to November 2009, Omani officials 
participated in training courses on commodity identification, 
targeting and risk management, interdiction, and model law. 
 
In June 2009, Oman attended the 10th International Export 
Control Conference. 
 
 
Pakistan 
//////// 
 
In January 2009, the United States informed Pakistan of the 
results of the 2008 Canberra MTCR Plenary. 
 
In June 2009, Pakistani officials participated in a June 
23-25 South Asia Workshop on Nonproliferation of Weapons of 
Mass Destruction (WMD)-Implementation of UN Security Council 
Resolution (UNSCR) 1540 that was co-hosted by the U.S. and 
held in Sri Lanka. 
 
From November 2008 to November 2009, Pakistani officials 
participated in training on licensing procedures and 
practices Workshop, developing a national control list, 
export investigations, interdiction, commodity 
identification, and industry-government outreach. 
 
Pakistani officials attended the Export Control Academy. 
 
In June 2009, Pakistan attended the 10th International Export 
Control Conference. 
 
 
Philippines 
/////////// 
 
Since the 2008 Canberra Plenary, the United States has 
continued to work closely with Filipino officials in 
providing legal/regulatory assistance for the development of 
their export control laws. 
 
From November 2008 to November 2009, Filipino officials 
participated in training courses on commodity identification, 
drafting legislation and regulations, targeting and risk 
management, interdiction, and end-use/end-users. 
 
Filipino officials attended the Export Control Academy. 
 
In June 2009, the Philippines attended the 10th International 
Export Control Conference. 
 
 
Romania 
/////// 
 
In January 2009, the United States informed Romania of the 
results of the 2008 Canberra MTCR Plenary. 
 
In June 2009, Romania attended the Tenth International Export 
Control Conference. 
 
 
Saudi Arabia 
//////////// 
 
In January 2009, the United States informed Saudi Arabia of 
the results of the 2008 Canberra MTCR Plenary. 
 
 
Serbia 
////// 
 
In January 2009, the United States informed Serbia of the 
results of the 2008 Canberra MTCR Plenary. 
 
The United States provided Serbia substantial equipment 
assistance, as well as training activities. 
 
From November 2008 to November 2009, Serbian officials 
participated in training courses on targeting and risk 
management, Analysis of Strategic Commodity Transfers 
(ASCOT), detection equipment, interdiction, arms brokering 
controls, strategic export investigations, and licensing 
practices and procedures. 
 
Serbian officials attended the Export Control Academy. 
 
In June 2009, Serbia attended the 10th International Export 
Control Conference. 
 
 
Singapore 
//////// 
 
In January 2009, the United States informed Singapore of the 
results of the 2008 Canberra MTCR Plenary. 
 
From November 2008 to November 2009, Singaporean officials 
participated in training courses on commodity identification, 
developing a national control list, licensing practices and 
procedures, and Analysis of Strategic Commodity Transfers 
(ASCOT). 
 
In June 2009, Singapore attended the 10th International 
Export Control Conference. 
 
 
Slovak Republic 
/////////////// 
 
In January 2009, the United States informed the Slovak 
Republic of the results of the 2008 Canberra MTCR Plenary. 
 
From November 2008 to November 2009, Slovak officials 
participated in training courses on detection equipment, 
investigation and "Tracker." 
 
In June 2009, the Slovak Republic attended the 10th 
International Export Control Conference. 
 
 
Slovenia 
//////// 
 
In January 2009, the United States informed Slovenia of the 
results of the 2008 Canberra MTCR Plenary. 
 
The United States continued to work closely with the 
Government of Slovenia on the procurement of export control 
and enforcement equipment and training to strengthen 
Slovenia,s border security integrity. 
 
 
Sri Lanka 
///////// 
 
In November 2008, the United States urged Sri Lanka to amend 
its export control legislation to cover nonproliferation 
items, including chemical and biological warfare  and related 
technologies, as well as trade in missile, nuclear, and 
dual-use items. 
 
From November 2008 to November 2009, Sri Lankan officials 
participated in training courses on proliferation awareness, 
commodity identification, laws and regulations, and licensing 
procedures and practices. 
 
In June 2009, Sri Lankan officials co-hosted with the United 
States a South Asia Workshop on Nonproliferation of Weapons 
of Mass Destruction (WMD)-Implementation of UN Security 
Council Resolution (UNSCR) 1540 held in Colombo. 
 
Sri Lankan officials attended the Export Control Academy. 
 
In June 2009, Sri Lanka attended the 10th International 
Export Control Conference. 
 
 
Taiwan 
////// 
 
In January 2009, the United States informed Taiwan of the 
results of the 2008 Canberra MTCR Plenary. 
 
Since the 2008 Canberra Plenary, the U.S. has continued 
working with Taiwan to improve its export control system. As 
part of this process, the U.S. regularly discussed with 
Taiwan issues related to the transfer of sensitive items to 
programs of missile proliferation concern and routinely 
consulted with Taiwan on export licensing issues. 
 
In February 2009, the United States held bilateral export 
control talks with Taiwan, and in September 2009 the United 
States hosted Taiwan for additional bilateral export control 
talks. 
 
From November 2008 to November 2009, Taiwanese 
representatives participated in training courses on 
interdiction, industry-government outreach, and commodity 
identification. 
 
 
Tajikistan 
////////// 
 
Since the 2008 Canberra Plenary, the United States has been 
working with Tajikistan to increase its export control 
enforcement. 
 
EXBS conducted activities in Tajikistan focused on the 
development of a comprehensive strategic trade control 
framework.  EXBS continued to train Tajik border security 
officials on interdiction techniques, and provided technical 
assistance in the area of WMD-related commodity 
identification. 
 
From November 2008 to November 2009, Tajik officials 
participated in training courses on air and land 
interdiction, licensing practices and procedures commodity 
identification, and export control legislation. 
 
In June 2009, Tajikistan attended the 10th International 
Export Control Conference. 
 
 
Thailand 
//////// 
 
In June 2009, the United States urged Thailand to subscribe 
to the HCOC. 
 
From November 2008 to November 2009, Thai officials 
participated in training courses on interagency relations and 
infrastructure, port security/port vulnerability, integrity 
awareness, commodity identification, and industry-government 
outreach. 
 
Thai officials attended the Export Control Academy. 
 
In June 2009, Thailand attended the 10th International Export 
Control Conference. 
 
 
Togo 
//// 
 
In May 2009, the United States urged Togo to subscribe to the 
HCOC. 
 
 
Turkmenistan 
//////////// 
 
Since the 2008 Canberra Plenary, the United States has 
provided a variety of equipment and export control training 
to Turkmenistan to assist it in targeting and interdicting 
sensitive items. 
 
EXBS conducted activities in Turkmenistan focused on the 
development of a comprehensive strategic trade controls EXBS 
continued to train Turkmen border security officials on 
interdiction techniques, and provided technical assistance in 
the area of WMD-related commodity identification. 
 
From November 2008 to November 2009, Turkmen officials 
participated in training courses on laws and regulations, 
commodity identification, interdiction, and detection 
equipment. 
 
 
United Arab Emirates 
//////////////////// 
 
In January 2009, the United States informed UAE of the 
results of the 2008 Canberra MTCR Plenary. 
 
On several occasions since the 2008 Canberra Plenary, the 
U.S. and UAE have discussed issues related to the transfer of 
sensitive items to programs of missile proliferation concern. 
 
In March 2009, the United States and the UAE held a Bilateral 
Counter Proliferation Task Force (CTF) meeting. 
 
Also in March 2009, officials from the UAE participated in a 
United States co-sponsored workshop on the implementation of 
UNSCR 1540 held in Qatar. 
 
From November 2008 to November 2009, UAE officials 
participated in training courses on prosecutorial training 
and commodity identification. 
 
In June 2009, the United Arab Emirates attended the 10th 
International Export Control Conference. 
 
 
Uzbekistan 
////////// 
 
Since the 2008 Canberra Plenary, the EXBS program has worked 
to strengthen Uzbekistan,s control of strategic trade and 
border security capabilities, by conducting training for 
border and customs officials and providing 
enforcement-related commodities such as inspection equipment. 
 
From November 2008 to November 2009, Uzbek officials 
participated in training courses on implementation of UNSCR 
1540, interdiction, licensing practices and procedures, 
detection equipment, and commodity identification. 
 
In June 2009, Uzbekistan attended the 10th International 
Export Control Conference. 
 
 
Vietnam 
/////// 
 
In May 2009, the United States urged Vietnam to subscribe to 
the HCOC. 
 
From November 2008 to November 2009, Vietnamese officials 
participated in training course on developing a national 
control list, interagency relations and infrastructure, laws 
and regulations, licensing practices and procedures, 
interdiction, implementation of UNSCR 1540, 
industry-government outreach, and "Tracker." 
 
In June 2009, Vietnam attended the 10th International Export 
Control Conference. 
 
Yemen 
///// 
 
In January 2009, the United States informed Yemen of the 
results of the 2008 Canberra MTCR Plenary. 
 
In May 2009, the United States urged Yemen to subscribe to 
the HCOC. 
 
From November 2008 to November 2009, Yemeni officials 
participated in training courses on interdiction. 
 
In June 2009, Yemen attended the 10th International Export 
Control Conference. 
 
 
End text of paper. 
 
¶4.  (U)  Please slug any reporting on this or other MTCR 
issues for ISN/MTR. A word version of this cable will be 
posted at www.state.sgov.gov/demarche. Department contact is 
ISN/MTR Kimberly Hargan, phone: 202-647-3176, email: 
hargankg@state.sgov.gov. 
CLINTON