09USUNNEWYORK209
UN BRIEFS SECURITY COUNCIL ON GUINEA-BISSAU
Wed Mar 04 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUCNDT #0209/01 0632240
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 042240Z MAR 09
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5992
INFO RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHDK/AMEMBASSY DAKAR PRIORITY 0247UNCLAS USUN NEW YORK 000209 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PHUM UNSC PU SG XY
SUBJECT: UN BRIEFS SECURITY COUNCIL ON GUINEA-BISSAU 
ASSASSINATIONS 
 
REF: DAKAR 263 
 
¶1. (SBU) At the request of Burkina Faso, the UN Department of 
Political Affairs (DPA) briefed the Security Council on March 
3 on the events surrounding the assassinations of 
Guinea-Bissau President Joao Vieira and Armed Forces Chief of 
Staff General Tagme Na Wai.  DPA Deputy Director for Africa 
Joh Epoko told the Council that Tagme was killed by an 
explosion at his headquarters late on March 1 and that Vieira 
was shot and killed early on March 2 by what a military 
spokesman called "unidentified citizens" who entered his 
private residence.  Epoko said several military personnel had 
been injured in the two attacks but no private citizens. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Epoko said Guinea-Bissau's institutions of 
government were continuing to function and there is no 
indication that the assassinations reflected an attempted 
coup d'etat.  He said the Guinea-Bissau constitution calls 
for the president of the National Assembly, Raimundo Pereira, 
to assume the presidency in these circumstances on an interim 
basis and that presidential elections must be held within 60 
days.  He added that Prime Minister Carlos Gomes remained in 
office. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Epoko said that Representative of the 
Secretary-General in Guinea-Bissau Joseph Mutaboba is acting 
as coordinator of international community efforts in 
Guinea-Bissau and had been instructed by the SYG to 
coordinate closely with UNGOBIS, ECOWAS, the African Union, 
and the European Union. 
 
¶4. (SBU) To Ambassador Rice's question about possible UN 
assistance for the elections to be scheduled, Epoko replied 
that a UN technical assessment mission (TAM) that had been 
scheduled to depart for Guinea-Bissau on March 10 would now 
be delayed and would consider the elections issue along with 
the Security Sector Reform efforts that were to have been the 
TAM's primary focus.  To several questions about previous bad 
blood between Vieira and Tagme and a possible connection 
between their deaths, Epoko said only that investigation 
would focus on this possible link. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Ugandan PermRep Rugunda said the Security Council, 
knowing of the problems between Vieira and Tagme, should have 
more actively monitored the situation.  French PermRep Ripert 
emphasized that calm had returned to Guinea Bissau and that 
there appeared to be little prospect that these tragic events 
would trigger civil war. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Burkina Faso drafted a Presidential Statement 
(PRST), which condemned the assassinations and called for the 
preservation of the constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau. 
The PRST was adopted as UN Document S/2009/PRST/2.  The text 
follows. 
 
7.(U) Guinea Bissau PRST.  Begin Text. 
 
- The Security Council condemns in the strongest terms the 
assassinations of the President of Guinea-Bissau, Joao 
Bernardo Vieira, and the Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces, 
Tagme Na Waie, on 1 and 2 March 2009.  It expresses its deep 
sympathy and condolences to the families of the victims, and 
to the people and Government of Guinea-Bissau. 
 
- The Security Council calls on the Government of 
Guinea-Bissau to bring to justice those responsible for these 
violent acts.  It calls upon the Government, the political 
leaders, the Armed Forces and people of Guinea-Bissau to 
remain calm, exercise restraint, maintain stability and 
constitutional order and respect the rule of law and the 
democratic process.  It also urges all parties to resolve 
their disputes through political and peaceful means within 
the framework of its democratic institutions and opposes any 
attempt to change the government through unconstitutional 
means. 
 
- The Security Council welcomes in this regard the statements 
condemning the incidents by the Secretary-General of the 
United Nations, the African Union, the Economic Community of 
West African States, the European Union and other members of 
the international community, and calls on all to assist in 
preserving the constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau and to 
continue to support peacebuilding efforts in the country. 
 
- The Security Council reaffirms its commitment to support 
the efforts of the Government and people of Guinea-Bissau to 
consolidate democratic institutions, peace and stability in 
that country. 
 
- The Security Council shall remain seized of the 
 
 
developments in Guinea-Bissau. 
 
End text. 
Rice