09YEKATERINBURG2
VARIED REACTIONS FROM RUSSIANS AND AMERICANS AT
Fri Jan 23 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Yekaterinburg
R 231246Z JAN 09
FM AMCONSUL YEKATERINBURG
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 1241
INFO AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 
AMCONSUL ST PETERSBURG 
AMCONSUL VLADIVOSTOK 
AMCONSUL YEKATERINBURGUNCLAS YEKATERINBURG 000002 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/RUS, PD/EUR FOR SBISTRANSKY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP PGOV RS
SUBJECT: VARIED REACTIONS FROM RUSSIANS AND AMERICANS AT 
YEKATERINBURG'S INAUGURATION CELEBRATION 
 
¶1. As the world watched the inauguration of President Barack 
Obama on January 20, the Consulate General in Yekaterinburg 
provided nearly 70 witnesses to the moving event.  Among the 
guests were Russian political analysts, local government 
officials, high school students, FLEX alumni, university 
students, eight media outlets, and more than twenty American 
citizens who emerged from the woodwork at the last minute asking 
to participate.  Staff observed a discernible difference in the 
reactions between the older Russian guests and those of the 
younger Russian students and Americans present.  Surprise was 
also expressed by several Russian staff members at some of the 
details of the Inauguration, such as the prayers and the musical 
performances on the Capitol steps.  The Russian students and 
American citizens expressed excitement and jubilation at several 
points during the ceremony. 
 
¶2. The reception rooms at the Consulate normally accommodate a 
maximum of 50 guests at official functions. The original guest 
list for the reception counted 45 Russians, including ten 
political contacts, media representatives from two internet 
portals, two print newspapers, and five TV channels.  The 
gathering was billed as an "informal reception" in Russian and 
as an "inauguration party" in English.  A few days before the 
Inauguration American citizens resident in Yekaterinburg began 
calling the Consulate requesting the opportunity to see the live 
feed of the ceremony.  By the time of the event, twenty-four 
additional names had been added to the guest list.  The final 
count at the event was estimated at 69 participants.  Despite 
the tight space, compounded by the roaming TV cameras, an air of 
excited expectation buzzed through the crowd. 
 
¶3. Framed by the American and Russian flags, the CG gave a 
welcoming introduction in Russian followed by a brief biography 
of President Obama.  The PAO, dressed in patriotic colors, 
presented a Power Point overview of the schedule of Inauguration 
events from the Whistle Stop Train to the National Prayer 
Service.  The 40 CDs that PAS had burned with President Obama's 
bio in Russian and English, the e-Journal on "U.S. Presidential 
Transitions" (in English), and the Russian version of 
America.gov's "New Administration" pages, were all taken by the 
end of the evening, with orders for more fulfilled the following 
day. 
 
¶4. Post placed two TV monitors in adjoining rooms tuned to a CNN 
Live broadcast.  In the main room a simultaneous translator, 
sitting next to a large screen monitor with the English sound 
turned down, provided high-quality continuous Russian 
translation of the Inauguration ceremony.  By the time the 
Inauguration ceremony began at 10:00 PM local time, about 
two-thirds of the audience was concentrated around the 
English-language monitor, while a third was gathered around the 
monitor with the Russian translation.  By that time most of the 
senior Russian political analysts had left, many expressing 
surprise at the size of the crowd both in Washington DC and the 
Consulate.  There was also a sense that some of the 
professionals were uncomfortable with the students' obvious 
enthusiasm over the celebratory atmosphere in the United States. 
 
¶5. The owner of a local radio station revealed in a conversation 
that, in his opinion, President Obama was still a "dark horse" 
with an unpredictable future.  He admitted that Obama had 
surrounded himself with a strong team of experienced advisers 
who he hoped would not let Obama down in his role as the 
"President of Change".  Another academic expressed the view that 
Russia ranked low in US priorities, while he thought many in 
Russia believed that it should be America's number one priority. 
 
¶6. Some guests reported surprise that the transfer of power in 
the United States could be such a joyful occasion, at times 
sounding almost envious.  One FSN was surprised that the 
Inauguration included prayer, believing that the United States 
had separated church from state.  Everyone agreed that the 
smooth, peaceful transfer of power in the United States was 
exemplary, admitting that this particular Inauguration seemed to 
be special, even extraordinary. 
 
¶7. A dynamic which contributed to the extra sense of excitement 
was the meeting of Americans resident in Yekaterinburg and the 
mainly young Russian students.  As ordinary Russians rubbed 
shoulders with ordinary Americans, they found much in common 
through the celebration of democratic values and the peaceful 
transfer of power.  The mix of Americans and Russians captured 
the spirit of citizen diplomacy. 
 
¶8. Despite the overflow crowd and the mixed note sounded by the 
Russian political analysts, the evening was a resounding 
success.  The media gave extensive coverage to the event, with 
interviews of the CG, American citizens and local Russians 
appearing in both TV and print outlets.  The Russian teacher 
accompanying her high school students reported that they were 
absolutely ecstatic over the opportunity to attend the 
Inauguration and that this event would remain one of the most 
memorable in their lives.  The Americans resident in 
Yekaterinburg were extremely grateful for an opportunity to 
share this event together in their Consulate.  Post is also 
grateful to IIP for providing excellent "Transition" materials. 
 
 
SANDUSKY