10BRASILIA114
2009 End-Use Monitoring Report: Brazil
Fri Feb 05 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Brasilia
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBR #0114/01 0361240
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O R 051239Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0409
INFO RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULOUNCLAS BRASILIA 000114 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPT FOR INL/RM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR BR
SUBJECT: 2009 End-Use Monitoring Report: Brazil 
 
REF: 07 STATE 166080; 08 STATE 127211; 09 STATE 119905 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
¶A. Inventory Management 
 
EUM Program Coordinator is NAS Management Analyst Ione Assumpcao, 
assumpcaoi@state.gov, phone: 55 61 3312-7342.  Ms. Assumpcao 
exercises overall responsibility for EUM and performs the majority 
of on-site inspections with the advice and supervision of NAS 
Director Terrence Flynn, flynntr@state.gov, phone 55 61 3312-7334. 
 
 
 
¶B. Inventory System 
 
LOA FY 2006 was signed August, 2008.  Since then, NAS Brasilia 
resumed providing assistance. NAS Brasilia records and tracks 
distribution of donated commodities using Microsoft Office Excel. 
The Excel document contains a general worksheet which includes all 
donated commodities and separate worksheets for each project. All 
worksheets include the following information: type, name of item 
with make and model, serial number, acquisition cost, acquisition 
year, end user, project number, date turned over to host 
government, last verification, condition and location. 
 
 
 
¶C. Staff Member EUM Responsibilities 
 
NAS Management Analyst, Ione Assumpcao, under the general 
supervision of the NAS Director, is responsible for performing the 
majority of on-site inspections, inventory list control and 
updates, and preparing the EUM report.  Law Enforcement Advisor, 
Patrick Healy and Program Specialist, Debora Arrais, under the 
general supervision of the NAS Director, are responsible for the 
project design, implementation, coordination, and evaluation. 
 
 
 
¶D. Other USG Agency Assistance 
 
DEA 
 
 
 
¶E. Counterpart Agencies 
 
Department of Federal Police (DPF)/Organized Crime Department 
(DCOR), Ministry of Justice/National Secretariat of Public Security 
(SENASP), National Department of Prisons (DEPEN), National Antidrug 
Secretariat (SENAD), and Financial Activities Oversight Council 
(COAF). 
 
 
 
¶F. Receipt 
 
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) and joint receiving letter signed 
by representative of the USG and the GOB. 
 
 
 
MONITORING PROCEDURES 
 
¶A. On-site Inspections 
 
The number of scheduled on-site inspections performed: 05(five). 
 
 
 
The number of unscheduled on-site inspection performed: 02(two). 
 
 
 
The number of counterpart sites: 07(seven), and cities visited: 
04(four). 
 
 
 
The date and location of on-site inspections performed: 
 
Council for Financial Activities Control-COAF-December 12, 2009 
 
Central Kennel, Brasilia-September 16, 2009 
 
SIU Base, Sao Paulo-August 27-28, 2009 
 
SIU Base, Belem-October 19-21, 2009 
 
SIU Base, Manaus-October 28, 2009 
 
Airport, Manaus-October 29, 2009 
 
Civil Police Academy, Sao Paulo-December 11-12, 2009 
 
 
 
The percentage (%) of donated items personally inspected: 70 
percent. 
 
 
 
¶B. Secondary Methods of Monitoring Resource Status: 
 
 
 
Discussions about equipment usefulness, quality of services 
provided and training results are part of the EUM paper report used 
during EUM inspections.  Program Officers also provide reports 
informing the status of their project regarding donated 
commodities. 
 
 
 
Percentage Monitored: 20 percent. 
 
 
 
STATUS-COMMODITIES 
 
¶A. Type of Commodity and project: 
 
 
 
Desktop computer - 100 complete desktop computers donated to 
Brazilian Federal Police in 2004. 15 complete desktop computers 
donated to the Civil Police in Sao Paulo, 05 complete desktop 
computers donated to the Civil Police in Curitiba and 05 complete 
desktop computers donated to the Civil Police in Rio de Janeiro in 
¶2009. 
 
 
 
Notebook Computer - 25 notebook computers donated to Brazilian 
Federal Police in 2004. 06 notebook computers donated to Brazilian 
Federal Police in 2009. 
 
 
 
Server - 10 servers donated to Brazilian Federal Police in 2004. 
 
 
 
Rack with sliding drawers - 02 racks with sliding drawers donated 
to Brazilian Federal Police in 2009. 
 
 
 
No-break - 01 no-break donated to Financial Activities Oversight 
Council and 03 no-breaks donated to Brazilian Federal Police in 
¶2009. 
 
 
 
Printer - 09 printers donated to Brazilian Federal Police in 2009. 
 
 
 
Scanner - 03 scanners donated to Brazilian Federal Police in 2004. 
01 scanner donated to Brazilian Federal Police in 2009. 
 
 
 
Cellular phone - 150 Nextel units donated to Brazilian Federal 
Police in 2005. 
 
GPS - 08 Garmin GPS units donated to Brazilian Federal Police in 
¶2009. 
 
 
 
Shredder - 01 shredder donated to Brazilian Federal Police in 2004. 
05 shredders donated to Brazilian Federal Police and 02 shredders 
donated to Financial Activities Oversight Council in 2009. 
 
 
 
Sliding Cabinet - 01 sliding cabinet donated to Financial 
Activities Oversight Council in 2009. 
 
 
 
Air Conditioners - 02 air conditioners donated to Brazilian Federal 
Police in 2008. 04 air conditioners donated to Brazilian Federal 
Police in 2009. 
 
 
 
Tents - 02 tents donated to Brazilian Federal Police in 2009. 
 
 
 
Night Vision Goggles - 05 night vision goggles donated to Brazilian 
Federal Police in 2009. 
 
 
 
Device Seizure - 12 device seizure command kits and 06 device 
seizure field kits donated to Brazilian Federal Police in 2009. 
 
 
 
Dog - 05 dogs donated to Brazilian Federal Police Central Kennel in 
¶2006. 02 breed dogs and 10 pre-trained dogs donated to Brazilian 
Federal Police Central Kennel in 2009. 
 
 
 
¶B. Location 
 
 
 
Special Investigation Units Program 
 
Unit in Sao Paulo: 30 desktop computers, 02 servers, 01 notebook 
computer, 21 cellular phones (Nextel), 02 scanners, 02 air 
conditioners. 
 
 
 
Unit in Rio de Janeiro: 10 desktop computers, 01 server, 02 
notebook computers, 12 cellular phones (Nextel), 01 scanner. 
 
 
 
Unit in Manaus: 01 server, 02 printers. 
 
 
 
Unit in Belem: 05 notebook computers, 01 scanner, 05 printers, 03 
no-breaks, 02 tents, 02 air conditioners, 01 rack 19" with 2 
sliding drawers, 03 servers. 
 
 
 
Unit in Porto Velho: 02 notebook computers, 02 printers, 06 GPSs. 
 
 
 
Unit in Porto Seguro: 02 GPSs, 02 servers, 01 rack 19" with 2 
drawers. 
 
 
 
Unit in Brasilia: 03 servers, 70 cellular phones (Nextel), 02 air 
conditioners, 01 shredder, 06 device seizure command kits, 03 
device seizure field kits, 04 night vision goggles. 
 
 
 
Unit Mobile Team: 07 notebook computers, 34 cellular phones 
 
(Nextel). 
 
 
 
Operational Control Center Unit Brasilia: 01 server. 
 
 
 
Unit Campo Grande: 01 server. 
 
 
 
Unit Teresina: 01 server. 
 
 
 
Airport Interdiction Program 
 
Unit Brasilia: 05 shredders, 02 device seizure field kits, 06 
device seizure command kits, 01 night vision goggle. 
 
 
 
Canine Program 
 
Central Kennel Unit Brasilia: 13 cellular phones (Nextel), 05 dogs, 
02 breed dogs and 10 pre-trained dogs. 
 
 
 
Urban Crime Control 
 
Civil Police Sao Paulo: 15 desktop computers. 
 
 
 
Civil Police Rio de Janeiro: 05 desktop computers. 
 
 
 
Civil Police Parana: 05 desktop computers. 
 
 
 
Money Laundering 
 
Financial Activities Oversight Council-COAF in Brasilia: 02 
shredders, 01 no-break 40kvas, 01 sliding cabinet. 
 
 
 
¶C. Use 
 
Special Investigation Units Program 
 
Unit in Sao Paulo: 30 desktop computers, 02 servers, 01 notebook 
computer, 21 cellular phones (Nextel), 02 scanners provided in 
¶2005. 02 air conditioners provided in 2009. They are used for 
intelligence collection and special investigations. 
 
 
 
Unit in Rio de Janeiro: 10 desktop computers, 01 server, 02 
notebook computers, 01 scanner were provided in 2004. 12 cellular 
phones (Nextel) were provided in 2005. They are used for 
intelligence collection and special investigations. 
 
 
 
Unit in Manaus: 01 server was provided in 2004, 02 printers were 
provided in 2009. They are used for intelligence collection and 
special investigations. 
 
 
 
Unit in Belem: 01 notebook computers donated in 2004, 04 notebook 
computers, 01 scanner, 05 printers, 03 no-breaks, 02 tents, 02 air 
conditioners, 01 rack 19" with 2 sliding drawers, 03 servers 
donated in 2009. They are used for intelligence collection and 
special investigations. 
 
 
 
Unit in Porto Velho: 02 notebook computers, 02 printers, 06 GPSs 
were donated in 2009. They are used for intelligence collection and 
special investigations. 
 
Unit in Porto Seguro: 02 GPSs, 02 servers, 01 rack 19" with 2 
drawers. They are used for intelligence collection and special 
investigations. 
 
 
 
Unit in Brasilia: 03 servers, 01 shredder were provided in 2004.70 
cellular phones (Nextel) were provided in 2005. 02 air 
conditioners, , 06 device seizure command kits, 03 device seizure 
field kits, 04 night vision goggles were provided in 2009. They are 
used for intelligence collection and special investigations. 
 
 
 
Unit Mobile Team: 07 notebook computers, 34 cellular phones 
(Nextel) were provided in 2004. They are used for intelligence 
collection and special investigations. 
 
 
 
Operational Control Center Unit in Brasilia: 01 server was donated 
in 2004. It is being used for intelligence collection and special 
investigations. 
 
 
 
Unit in Campo Grande: 01 server was donated in 2004. It is being 
used for intelligence collection and special investigations. 
 
 
 
Unit in Teresina: 01 server was donated in 2004. It is being used 
for intelligence collection and special investigations. 
 
 
 
Airport Interdiction Program 
 
Unit in Brasilia: 02 device seizure field kits, 06 device seizure 
command kits, 01 night vision goggle were donated in 2009. They are 
being used for airport interdiction operations. 
 
 
 
Canine Program 
 
Central Kennel Unit in Brasilia: 13 cellular phones (Nextel), 05 
dogs were donated in 2006. One dog has been put to sleep due to 
Leishmania disease. Two were donated because they were not 
responding to the needs of the service and two are being used for 
drug detection. 02 breed dogs and 10 pre-trained dogs were donated 
in the end of 2009. 
 
 
 
Urban Crime Control 
 
Civil Police in Sao Paulo: 15 desktop computers were donated in 
¶2009. They are being used at the Civil Police Academy for training 
purposes. 
 
 
 
Civil Police in Rio de Janeiro: 05 desktop computers were donated 
in 2009. They are being used at the tourist assistance office in 
assisting tourists in cases of theft of credit cards, passport, and 
documents. 
 
 
 
Civil Police in Parana: 05 desktop computers were donated in 2009. 
They are being used by the COPE-Special Police Operation Center in 
Curitiba city. 
 
 
 
Money Laundering 
 
Financial Activities Oversight Council-COAF in Brasilia: 02 
shredders, 01 no-break 40kvas, 01 sliding cabinet were donated in 
¶2009. The are being used for the money laundering investigations. 
 
¶D. Condition 
 
 
 
Special Investigation Units Program 
 
Unit in Sao Paulo: 30 desktop computers, 02 servers, 01 notebook 
computer, 21 cellular phones (Nextel), 02 scanners provided in 
¶2005. 02 air conditioners provided in 2009. They are used for 
intelligence collection and special investigations. Information 
equipment provided in 2005 has been repaired and is in fair 
condition. Air conditioners are in excellent condition. 
 
 
 
Unit in Rio de Janeiro: 10 desktop computers, 01 server, 02 
notebook computers, 01 scanner were provided in 2004. 12 cellular 
phones (Nextel) were provided in 2005. They are used for 
intelligence collection and special investigations. Information 
equipment provided in 2005 has been repaired and is in fair 
condition. 
 
 
 
Unit in Manaus: 01 server was provided in 2004, 02 printers were 
provided in 2009. They are used for intelligence collection and 
special investigations. Server is in good condition and printers 
are in excellent condition. 
 
 
 
Unit in Belem: 01 notebook computers donated in 2004, 04 notebook 
computers, 01 scanner, 05 printers, 03 no-breaks, 02 tents, 02 air 
conditioners, 01 rack 19" with 2 sliding drawers, 03 servers 
donated in 2009. They are used for intelligence collection and 
special investigations. One of the notebook computers is in good 
condition. The other equipment is in excellent condition. 
 
 
 
Unit in Porto Velho: 02 notebook computers, 02 printers, 06 GPSs 
were donated in 2009. They are used for intelligence collection and 
special investigations. Equipment is in excellent condition. 
 
 
 
Unit in Porto Seguro: 02 GPSs, 02 servers, 01 rack 19" with 2 
drawers. They are used for intelligence collection and special 
investigations. Equipment is in excellent condition. 
 
 
 
Unit in Brasilia: 03 servers, 01 shredder were provided in 2004. 70 
cellular phones (Nextel) were provided in 2005. 02 air 
conditioners, , 06 device seizure command kits, 03 device seizure 
field kits, 04 night vision goggles were provided in 2009. They are 
used for intelligence collection and special investigations. 
Information equipment has been repaired and is in fair condition. 
Items donated in 2009 are in excellent condition. 
 
 
 
Unit Mobile Team: 07 notebook computers, 34 cellular phones 
(Nextel) were provided in 2004. They are used for intelligence 
collection and special investigations. Equipment has being repaired 
and is in fair condition. 
 
 
 
Operational Control Center Unit in Brasilia: 01 server was donated 
in 2004. It is being used for intelligence collection and special 
investigations. It is in good condition. 
 
 
 
Unit Campo Grande: 01 server was donated in 2004. It is being used 
for intelligence collection and special investigations. It is in 
good condition. 
 
 
 
Unit Teresina: 01 server was donated in 2004. It is being used for 
intelligence collection and special investigations. It is in good 
condition. 
 
Airport Interdiction Program 
 
Unit in Brasilia: 02 device seizure field kits, 06 device seizure 
command kits, 01 night vision goggle were donated in 2009 and are 
being used for airport interdiction operations. They are in 
excellent condition. 
 
 
 
Canine Program 
 
Central Kennel Unit in Brasilia: 13 cellular phones (Nextel), 05 
dogs were donated in 2006. One dog has been put to sleep due to 
Leishmania disease. Two were donated because they were not 
responding to the needs of the service and two are being used for 
drug detection. 02 breed dogs and 10 pre-trained dogs were donated 
in the end of 2009. 
 
 
 
Urban Crime Control 
 
Civil Police in Sao Paulo: 15 desktop computers were donated in 
2009 and are being used at the Civil Police Academy for training 
proposes. They are in excellent condition. 
 
 
 
Civil Police in Rio de Janeiro: 05 desktop computers were donated 
in 2009 and are being used at the tourist assistance office 
assisting tourists in cases of theft of credit cards, passport, and 
documents. They are in excellent condition. 
 
 
 
Civil Police in Parana: 05 desktop computers were donated in 2009 
and are being used by the COPE-Special Police Operation Center in 
Curitiba city. They are in excellent condition. 
 
 
 
Money Laundering 
 
Financial Activities Oversight Council-COAF in Brasilia: 02 
shredders, 01 no-break 40kvas, 01 sliding cabinet were donated in 
2009 and are being used for the money laundering investigations. 
Equipment is in excellent condition. 
 
 
 
¶E. Complete Inventories-Aircraft, Vehicles Vessels, Weapons. N/A 
 
 
 
¶5. STATUS-SERVICES 
 
¶A. Construction Projects 
 
N/A 
 
 
 
¶B. Demand Reduction Services 
 
Funded simultaneous translation services for the GOB to host 
OAS/CICAD to host the Working Group and Conference on updating the 
Western Hemisphere Policy Against Drugs.  We provided a keynote 
speaker and travel of community coalition members for the Tough 
Love International Conference and training for Brazilian anti-drug 
community coalitions.  We also provided travel for Brazilian 
officials to attend the National Drug Court Professionals 
Conference in California and CADCA Community Coalition training in 
Kentucky. 
 
 
 
¶C. Other Professional Services 
 
We funded various training, training-related travel, and 
translation services to Brazilian Federal Police and other 
host-country partners under all seven programs designated in our 
current LOA. 
 
PROGRAM IMPACT 
 
¶A. Communication Equipment - 2009 was the first full year of 
implementation of the programs in the bilateral agreement on 
Narcotics Control & Law Enforcement.  Commodities donated continue 
to enhance the intelligence collection capacities of the SIUs, as 
well as expansion of the bases to other important areas in Brazil. 
Specialized narcotics and explosive detection equipment was 
purchased and is in the process of being imported into Brazil for 
the Airport Interdiction Program.  Twelve dogs were procured to 
boost the dog population of the Canine Program for drug detection, 
some of which were trained for the first time for explosive 
detection.  The Money Laundering Program was enhanced through 
equipment purchases and coordinated cooperation between Brazil's 
enforcement entity and their U.S. counterparts, including a 
technical visit to FinCen.   Equipment purchases and planned 
training is in progress under the Urban Crime Control Program for 
the National Rapid Response Force, which falls under the National 
Public Security Secretariat.  U.S. Prison Specialists conducted an 
assessment of Brazil's Federal Prison System and we have instituted 
a partnership to help improve the system.  Drug Prevention programs 
have continued to improve with integration of the National 
Anti-Drug Secretariat, the National Public Security Secretariat, 
and several NGOs (non-governmental organizations).  And finally, 
six training courses were carried out for police, including airport 
interdiction, cyber crime investigations, forensics handheld device 
recovery and narcotics enforcement. 
 
 
 
¶B. Weapons-N/A 
 
 
 
¶C. Construction Project-N/A 
 
 
 
¶D. Surveillance Equipment-the equipment led to corroboration of 
intelligence obtained by Brazilian Federal Police and DEA. 
 
 
 
¶F. Laboratory Equipment-N/A 
 
 
 
¶G. Aircraft-N/A 
 
 
 
¶H. Vehicles-N/A 
 
 
 
PROBLEMS & CORRECTIVE ACTION PLANS (CAP's) 
 
¶A. Unmonitored Resources - N/A. 
 
 
 
¶B. Repair and Maintenance of Commodities - Maintenance and repair 
of donated information equipment purchased in the U.S. has always 
been a problem for our counterparts.  Product warranties generally 
do not cover maintenance in Brazil, and the high cost of shipping 
makes repairs a very expense procedure.  Furthermore, replacement 
parts for U.S. produced computers are not readily available in 
Brazil.  The computers sold in Brazil are different models and do 
not have Portuguese as a language option. In an effort to continue 
buying U.S. models but address previous compatibility issues, we 
research to find U.S. equipment that can be bought with a Brazilian 
warranty and software in Portuguese. 
 
 
 
¶C. Lack of Use and Misuse of Commodities - N/A. 
 
 
 
¶D. Disposal of Commodities - N/A. 
SHANNON