10BUJUMBURA59
AMISOM:  BURUNDIAN CONCERNS
Fri Jan 29 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Bujumbura
INFO  LOG-00   AF-00    ACQ-00   CIAE-00  INL-00   DODE-00  OIGO-00  
      UTED-00  H-00     TEDE-00  INR-00   MOFM-00  MOF-00   NSAE-00  
      NSCE-00  PER-00   GIWI-00  SSO-00   SS-00    FMP-00   SCRS-00  
      PMB-00   PRM-00   NFAT-00  SAS-00   PESU-00    /000W
    
R 291349Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY BUJUMBURA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 1968
INFO AFRICAN UNION COLLECTIVEUNCLAS BUJUMBURA 000059 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MARR BY SO AU
SUBJECT: AMISOM:  BURUNDIAN CONCERNS 
 
REF: DAO IIRS 6916004010 AND 6916004210 
 
¶1. This is an action message.  Action request at para 7. 
 
¶2.  In the past week, the First and Second Vice Presidents 
and the Minister of Defense have raised with the Ambassador 
the subject of protection and "equitable" remuneration for 
the Burundian contingent in AMISOM.  In the wake of another 
Burundian troop casualty in Somalia last week (for a total of 
25 Burundian peacekeepers killed in Somalia to date), they 
urged the USG to provide additional protective equipment and 
to weigh in with the African Union to, first, pay the 
six-month salary arrears to the AMISOM (both Burundian and 
Ugandan) troops and, second, to increase the remuneration of 
all AMISOM troops to equal the salaries being paid to 
Burundian (and other) forces conducting UN PKO missions in 
Darfur and elsewhere in Africa. Ambassador was told that at a 
recent meeting of senior African military officers in 
Kampala, it was apparent that all considered service in 
Somali to be "extremely dangerous" and that other African 
nations would contribute troops to AMISOM only if the mission 
were either taken over the UN or the AU agreed to pay the 
equivalent of UN PKO mission salaries. 
 
¶3.  According to all three Burundian interlocutors, Burundian 
troops serving in Somalia are well-aware of -- and unhappy 
with -- the discrepancy in their salaries between what the 
African Union is paying them for AMISOM ($750/month) and what 
the UN is paying their colleagues in Darfur and other UN PKO 
missions ($1,028).  This unhappiness recently surfaced in the 
form of a show of "discontent" within the army (reftel). 
According to the minister of defense, MOD responded by 
sharing with the soldiers a copy of the MOU with the AU 
(which outlines the pay scheme) and by court-martialing and 
dismissing those (few) who chose to manifest their discontent 
inappropriately (i.e., by going public). 
 
¶4. Despite promises and previous reports from the AU, the MOD 
told us today that the Central Bank of Burundi has not -- as 
of today -- received a money transfer from the AU to settle 
the troop salary arrears. On the other hand, the Burundians 
claim that the AU has already transferred funds to Uganda and 
that the Ugandan troops have been paid. (Note:  Each 
Burundian soldier with AMISOM should be banking $650/month. 
The AU pays $750/month and the Government of Burundi deducts 
$100 (in tax). The AU transfers funds to the Central Bank of 
Burundi which then deposits $650/month/soldier into 
individual accounts specifically established for the 
peacekeepers and which families can draw on. End Comment.) 
 
¶5. With regard to protective equipment, we have reminded the 
Burundians that the USG has provided each Burundian AMISOM 
peacekeeper with armored vests and basic kit (helmets, boots, 
uniform, belt).  But what is perhaps more welcome to the 
Burundians is news that the USG will provide twelve (12) 
CASSPIRs (a landmine-protected armored personnel carrier) -- 
10 to Somalia and two to Bujumbura for training purposes -- 
for Burundian troops in Somalia. These will be delivered to 
the Burundians in April, 2010.  The USG is also providing, 
under a cooperative agreement between the U.S. Department of 
State and the Burundi MOD, Counter IED and Force Protection 
training and assistance. The award is for 12 months, 
beginning January, 2010, and extendible for an additional 
year. 
 
¶6. Comment:  The issue of the remuneration and the safety of 
the Burundian AMISOM troops is apparently beginning to 
attract more (and not all positive) attention at home -- to 
wit the recent show of discontent in the army which was 
"picked up" by the media and a few of the political parties. 
Given the national elections this year, the government/ruling 
party is going to be sensitive to its image and to the need 
to protect and reward its troops in Somalia. Too, the 
reformed and integrated (but still fragile) Burundian 
military is concerned that such internal, morale issues be 
averted so that they do not become politicized by the 
political parties. End Comment. 
 
¶7. Action Request:  Please advise how Ambassador should 
respond to the request that USG weigh in with the AU to 
ensure full payment of arrears and increase in base salary 
for AMISOM troops. 
 
 
Slutz