10CHENGDU5
WORLD BANK'S IFC ON ASSET BUBBLES, HOUSING COSTS, ECONOMIC
Wed Jan 06 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Chengdu
VZCZCXRO1426
RR RUEHGH
DE RUEHCN #0005/01 0060732
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 060732Z JAN 10
FM AMCONSUL CHENGDU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3666
INFO RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 4387UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 CHENGDU 000005 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/CM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EIND EFIN PGOV CH
SUBJECT: WORLD BANK'S IFC ON ASSET BUBBLES, HOUSING COSTS, ECONOMIC 
RESTRUCTURING, AND THE CHINESE EDUCATION SYSTEM 
 
REF: A) 09 CHENGDU 271, B) 09 CHENGDU 310, C) 09 BEIJING 665 
 
CHENGDU 00000005  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶1. (U) This cable contains sensitive but unclassified 
information - not for distribution on the Internet. 
 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) Summary: The head of the World Bank's International 
Finance Corporation (IFC) office in Chengdu, a PRC national with 
a patriotic bent, acknowledged that China faces possible asset 
bubbles, but was confident that China's "strong and 
technocratic" government would intervene effectively if the 
signals of overheating became too severe.  Rapidly rising urban 
housing prices are here to stay for the coming few years, he 
believes, as they are an unavoidable, long-term aspect of the 
nationwide, structural shift in the population from rural area 
to urban centers.  The IFC is trying to push Beijing to address 
the lack of affordable housing for moderate income households. 
China does have overcapacity in several industries, but the 
emphasis on mega-projects by local politicians, many of whom are 
engineers, will make reducing overcapacity more difficult.  Over 
the next 10-20 years, China will need to restructure its economy 
so that it has a significantly higher share of knowledge-based 
services, especially research and development.  However China's 
"terrible" educational system, which promotes copying and 
pasting over creative and independent thought, is the largest 
impediment the country faces on this front, our IFC contact 
said.  End summary. 
 
 
 
Asset Bubbles: "Signs Are There", 
 
But Government Intervention Will Address 
 
---------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) In a December 17 meeting with Consul General, the 
 
head of IFC's Chengdu office, Lai Jinchang, discussed the 
question of whether stimulus policies have created asset bubbles 
in the Chinese economy.  Lai noted the "staggering" amount of 
credit the government injected into the economy in 2009, 
contrasting the estimates of around 9.3 - 9.4 trillion RMB (USD 
1.3 - 1.4 trillion) with the "normal" annual figure of less than 
4 trillion (USD 588 billion).  This has certainly caused 
inflationary pressures - he particularly noted increased prices 
in iron and steel, petroleum products, electricity, water, 
edible oil, and produce.  However, Lai, perhaps in part out of 
patriotism and bureaucratic survival instincts, made the 
ambivalent prognosis that, although "The signs of an asset 
bubble are there," the economy was not yet experiencing 
"genuine" asset bubbles. 
 
 
 
¶4. (SBU) Overall, Lai said he was not worried about the possible 
emergence of asset bubbles because of the Chinese government's 
capacity to track the situation and take timely and effective 
action.  If credit needs to be further reigned, the government 
will just set a new quota and make it happen.  In particular, he 
highlighted the December Communist Party of China (CPC) Economic 
Work Conference, where participants emphasized the need for some 
cooling down of credit.  He also noted the Central Bank of 
China's public stance on moderating credit in the coming year. 
Lai assessed the basic economic policy stance going into 2010 as 
unchanged, continuing to emphasize a favorable monetary policy, 
but with the size of the credit expansion significantly reduced. 
 
 
 
Overcapacity in Number of Industries: 
 
Local Politicians Contribute to the Problem 
 
------------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) Asked about the European Chamber of Commerce in China's 
recent report on overcapacity in China, Lai said he had not yet 
read the report, but agreed that overcapacity was a problem in a 
number of industries.  He highlighted the bio-energy, wind and 
solar industries in particular, noting that they had grown 
rapidly in recent years as a result of a surfeit of subsidies, 
and would likely face a period of restructuring.  He also 
 
CHENGDU 00000005  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
expected the industries targeted in the central government's 
ten-industry stimulus plans (Ref C) to develop overcapacity. 
 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) Regardless of concerns about national overcapacity, 
local politicians, such as in inland provinces of Southwest 
China, will continue to rely on investment in large projects to 
boost local GDP and further their own prestige, Lai said.  He 
agreed that Leshan in Sichuan, where the city is planning three 
billion USD investment in transportation and industrial 
infrastructure (see Ref B) may be such a case.  "They are mostly 
engineers so they understand mega-projects, but they don't 
understand the law," Lai stressed, further explaining that he 
views most Chinese leaders as lacking an understanding of 
institution building.  However, he said, the emphasis on large 
projects to boost GDP figures is "not all bad."  After all, 
"they have been doing it for decades" and there have clearly 
been some benefits. 
 
 
 
Inflated Housing Costs: Here to Stay as Urbanization Continues; 
Moderate Income Households Most Severely Affected 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------------ 
 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) While housing prices have certainly seen some increase, 
this is not a major issue in cities such as Chengdu, Lai felt, 
as prices generally remain within reason.  Discussing the 
Beijing and Shanghai markets, he described the housing prices as 
"a little scary" and in many cases "totally out of reach" for 
the vast majority of Chinese citizens.  Nevertheless, investment 
in the hotter housing markets - for those who can afford it -- 
will likely remain secure for a while to come, he predicted. 
Although purchase prices often far outstrip realistic rental 
incomes, the capital gains on most housing purchases will 
continue to make the purchases worthwhile.  The apparent excess 
of new empty apartment buildings in urban areas, along with 
price increases, was not necessarily irrational, Lai asserted. 
Rather, he believed these trends to be driven by the long-term 
process of urbanizing the Chinese population - a process that 
still has years to go.  Separately, Lai asserted that one 
problem with including housing prices in China's Consumer Price 
Index (CPI) is that the commercial housing market was immature 
and just over a decade old (so that the data was not yet 
reliable enough for its inclusion in the CPI). 
 
 
 
¶8. (SBU) Overall, he said, the current housing market in China 
is still manageable for middle and high income households.  Low 
income households are also managing as they have access to 
government housing programs whereby they can rent low-cost 
homes.  However, moderate income households - with incomes too 
high to qualify for low-income housing but falling short of the 
middle class -- are falling through the cracks.  The IFC is 
trying to push the government to address this problem, with a 
focus primarily on incentivizing commercial developers to build 
moderately priced housing for this market.  To this end, Lai 
believes the government should conditionally support developers 
by providing lower priced land and government subsidies.  In 
addition, he emphasized the need for mortgage insurance, and 
more broadly for capital market development in order to broaden 
mortgage access. 
 
 
 
Toward a "Respectable" Mid-Level Economy in 10-20 Years: China 
Must Shift to Become a Knowledge - and Service-Based Economy 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------------- 
 
 
 
¶9. (SBU) China will remain a "poor country" for years to come, 
and can expect to emerge as a "respectable mid-level" country 
only in another 10-20 years, Lai said.  Successful development 
over this period will require a structural shift so that Chinese 
companies' share of the intangible elements of economic output 
increase significantly.  China's share of the research and 
development, services, and marketing remains low, he emphasized. 
 He stressed that the service sector accounts for only 30-40 
percent of the economy at present, in contrast to the US at 75 
percent, and Europe at 70 percent.  In the coming years, China 
 
CHENGDU 00000005  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
needs to affect a shift to increase the service sector to at 
least 60 percent. 
 
 
 
¶10. (SBU) The necessary structural shifts are already happening 
to some extent in places like the Pearl River Delta, Lai noted, 
highlighting a transition there from industries requiring 
low-tech labor, to those that are increasingly skills-based. 
Citing historical shifts in other Asian economies such as South 
Korea, he also foresaw Chinese companies increasingly setting up 
factories overseas, utilizing local labor with Chinese 
management.  As the Chinese economy shifted to become more 
knowledge-based, and as Chinese companies increased their 
overseas presence, the constituency for IPR protection would 
also expand, he believed. 
 
 
 
"Terrible" Education System Is Main Impediment 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
 
 
¶11. (SBU) However, Lai identified China's "terrible" educational 
system as presenting a serious impediment toward achieving a 
shift to a more knowledge-based economy.  The current system 
promotes copying and pasting over creative and independent 
thought.  Lai said that the system rewards students for thinking 
"within a framework" in order to get the grade.  He described 
the normal process undertaken by students when writing as 
essentially collecting sentences from various sources without 
any original thinking.  He compared the writing ability of a 
typical Chinese Phd as paling in comparison to his "unskilled" 
staff during his decade of work with the IFC in Africa. 
BROWN