10JAKARTA258
INDONESIA - - ANTI-TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT 2010
Sat Feb 27 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Jakarta
VZCZCXRO5084
OO RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDBU RUEHDH RUEHDT RUEHGI RUEHJS RUEHKUK RUEHLH
RUEHPB RUEHPW RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHJA #0258/01 0581934
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 271934Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4565
INFO RUCNARF/ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEAWJB/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDC PRIORITY
RUCNISL/ISLAMIC COLLECTIVE
RUEHIN/AIT TAIPEI 2053
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDC
RUEAUSA/DEPT OF HHS WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 26 JAKARTA 000258 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP, EAP/MTS, EAP/MLS, PRM EAP/RSP, G/TIP, G-LAURA PENA, 
INR/EAP, DRL, INL FOR CARLON/BLOOMQUIST, AID 
DOJ FOR AAG SWARTZ, OPDAT FOR ALEXANDRE/BERMAN/HAKIM 
AMEMBASSY SINGAPORE FOR ICE 
NSC FOR D.WALTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM KTIP KCRM KWMN SNIG KFRD ASEC PREF ELAB KMCA
ID 
 
SUBJECT: INDONESIA - - ANTI-TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT 2010 
 
REF: A) SECSTATE 02094 
 B) JAKARTA 00378 
 
¶1.  (U) This message was coordinated with Consulate General Surabaya 
and Consulate Medan.  It is sensitive but unclassified.  Please 
handle accordingly. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) OVERVIEW:  The Government of Indonesia continued to make 
progress combating trafficking, although it remains a serious 
problem.  Indonesia is primarily a source country and to a much 
lesser extent a destination and transit country.  The number of 
Indonesians seeking work abroad, due to poverty and a lack of jobs, 
reached an all time high.  The government has taken significant 
steps both at home and with receiving countries to better safeguard 
these labor migrants.  As in the past, there continue to be cases of 
severe abuse of Indonesians trafficked abroad. 
 
STATISTICS 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Post has indicated where we do not yet have statistics for 
¶2009.  As in previous years the Government of Indonesia is in the 
process of compiling data from the local level.  We will report this 
information septel as soon as it becomes available. END OVERVIEW. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) SUMMARY:  During this reporting period, the GOI continued 
to solidify and implement a comprehensive legal, political and 
social approach to combating trafficking at all governmental levels, 
thus demonstrating the political will to address the problem.  The 
GOI has passed and promulgated all three implementing regulations of 
its 2007 comprehensive legislative framework, Law No. 21.  With a 
comprehensive legal framework in place, victim protection has been 
improved and should facilitate the prosecution of trafficking under 
its statutes.  It makes it easier, for example, for prosecutors to 
use circumstantial evidence to demonstrate intent in TIP cases. 
Implementation of this key framework, however, is still underway. 
Police and prosecutors, still unfamiliar with the new legislation, 
are often reluctant or unsure of how to effectively use it to punish 
traffickers.   Prosecutors instead often rely on more traditional 
criminal remedies to prosecute tip cases (crimes of violence, 
extortion, pimping statutes, the Indonesian Child Protection Statute 
etc.) 
 
¶5.  (SBU) In 2009, the GOI signed a new 2009-2014 National Plan of 
Action (NAP) on Trafficking and Child Sexual Exploitation after an 
extensive evaluation of their 2002 NAP.  In accordance with the 2007 
law and previous NAP, in 2009 local governments passed 
anti-trafficking legislation in many districts and established local 
task forces.  The GOI has also drafted supporting legislation on 
money-laundering and asset-forfeiture for criminals which will prove 
important tools to combat trafficking.  The GOI also ratified the UN 
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its two 
Protocols (Palermo) this year. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) According to the NGO Migrant Care, 6.5 million Indonesians 
are overseas migrant workers, although other organizations estimates 
reach as high as 9 million.  Around 2.6 million work in Malaysia, 
1.8 million in the Middle East, 120,000 in Singapore, 124,000 in 
Hong Kong, 113,000 in Taiwan, 160,000 in South Korea, and 80,000 in 
Japan. The rest are in Europe, United States, and other countries. 
Approximately 54 percent of these workers are minors, and 46 percent 
of all overseas workers are allegedly victims of some form of 
trafficking activities. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) NGOs point out that Law 39 on the Protection and Placement 
of Migrant Workers is one of the remaining weak spots in trafficking 
legislation and needs revising to better protect workers and tackle 
false recruitment.  Indonesia is increasingly decentralizing its 
government, and this sometimes hinders rescuing, treating and 
reintegrating victims across borders within Indonesia and beyond. 
However, consistent training from the USG, other donors and NGOs has 
helped reinforce networks the local and national governments are 
putting in place, resulting in increased communication and 
cooperation between police, prosecutors and NGOs across borders. 
Recently the GOI asked IOM to assist them in revising Law 39 on the 
protection of migrant workers. 
 
JAKARTA 00000258  002 OF 026 
 
 
 
¶8.  (SBU) One of the main challenges to combating trafficking, 
particularly labor trafficking, are the fraudulent recruitment 
brokers who often operate outside the law with impunity due to 
severe unemployment and weak legal enforcement. Some fraudulent 
recruitment agencies tied to families or friends of government 
officials or police make deals when caught, and then continue to 
operate.  The Manpower Ministry publicly stated that it is 
identifying and punishing these companies, but does not yet have 
readily available statistics on its activities.  The Ministry notes 
that falsification of documents and the willingness of migrant 
workers to migrate illegally are critical factors leading to the 
exploitation and victimization of migrant workers skills. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) The GOI is working on a national identity card system 
which will help address the problem of falsified documents.  The GOI 
implemented a biometrics based passport system in 2007.  In 2009, 
Jakarta will pilot a similar biometric system for identity cards. 
According to the Ministry of Home Affairs, this single identity 
number system will then be applied throughout Indonesia by December 
2011 to eliminate possibilities for falsifying documents.  In 2009, 
the GOI implemented a new strategy for registering births which will 
facilitate protecting minors from being exploited.  Although 
registering for a birth certificate has been free since 2002, about 
sixty percent of children remain unregistered, which makes them 
vulnerable. 
 
¶10.  (SBU) In 2009, the Police and Manpower Ministry continued to 
shut down fraudulent recruitment brokers involved in trafficking and 
strengthened awareness of the need to protect of migrant workers. 
Immigration officials are increasing cooperation with police in 
border areas and at the 136 border entry and exit points. 
Kalimantan immigration officials reported a decrease in cross-border 
trafficking flows in 2009.  Police arrested 17 people from manpower 
agencies over a four month period in late 2008 on suspicion of 
trafficking-related activities including falsification of 
documents. 
 
¶11. (SBU) Corruption remains endemic in Indonesia and in 2009 police 
and prosecutors continued to pursue justice in cases involving 
official complicity.  Embassy Jakarta Regional Security Office (RSO) 
training of Indonesian National Police (INP) designed to reduce 
human trafficking focused on document fraud as a predicate offense 
to trafficking.  On February 10, 2010, INP and RSO uncovered a large 
visa and passport forgery syndicate including counterfeit plates to 
make security features on Indonesian passports, and U.S., Australian 
and Japanese visas. 
 
¶12.  (SBU) The Manpower, Social Welfare, Ministry of Health and 
other government Ministries focused more time, attention and 
resources on trafficking this year.  They have successfully divided 
the responsibility for TIP activities among the various ministries 
rather than leaving it exclusively, as before, to the Ministry of 
Women's Empowerment.  GOI commitment to combating trafficking was 
evident when, with the assistance of IOM, a government working group 
was established with members from eight different ministries, 
including two NGOs.  IOM led this group on two study visits to 
Malaysia and Singapore in Aug/Sep 2009 and to Kuwait and Bahrain in 
October 2009 to examine the situation of migrant workers overseas. 
The delegation rescued and repatriated over 500 migrant workers from 
the Indonesian Embassy shelter in Kuwait. In a significant show of 
political commitment, the Indonesian government officials requested 
and received funds from their ministries to take additional rescue 
and rehabilitation trips in December 2009 and January 2010 to 
Kuwait, Jordan, Saudi Arabia and Yemen.  These officials helped 
return 425 workers from Jeddah, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia and Amman. 
Indonesian officials at embassies and consulates received limited 
training in learning how best to accommodate the large numbers of 
migrant workers who remain in need of assistance. 
 
¶13. (SBU) This year the Ministry of Health and Ministry of Social 
Welfare had funds earmarked for the return and recovery of victims. 
The GOI also increased the allotment of other ministries to combat 
trafficking in 2009.  The protocol to apply for such funds is still 
being prepared, however this represents a significant step forward 
 
JAKARTA 00000258  003 OF 026 
 
 
for Indonesian anti-trafficking efforts.  The GOI budget allocation 
for trafficking increased in 2009.  Given the scope of Indonesia's 
trafficking problem it should be increased further to meet 
Indonesia's needs. 
 
¶14.  (SBU) The Manpower Ministry is actively engaging foreign 
governments to protect the rights of Indonesian migrant workers - 
working on an MOU with Malaysia which will soon be signed; they also 
recently met with officials in Hong Kong and Kuwait to advocate for 
better protections for Indonesian migrant workers.  On 26 June 2009, 
the GOI took a strong stance to protect workers' rights and deter 
exploitation by halting the departure of all Indonesian migrant 
workers for Malaysia until Malaysia's government can provide 
stronger protection of their rights. According to press reports the 
GOI is to sign a breakthrough MOU with Malaysia by March 2010 which 
would increase wages for Indonesian migrant workers in Malaysia, 
provide them a day off, and ensure freedom of movement for the 
workers by ensuring that they, not their employers, hold their 
passports. 
 
¶15.  (SBU) Media and public information campaigns across the country 
highlighted trafficking issues, such as police efforts to combat 
trafficking in new social media such as the internet.  The issue of 
women and children entrapped in debt bondage as domestic servants 
within Indonesia and overseas became a major issue in 2009. 
Successful GOI-NGO partnerships with NGOs such as Solidarity Center, 
UNODC, ICMC and IOM are increasing public awareness of trafficking 
through public awareness campaigns and extensive media coverage. 
Government officials and police are thus now paying more attention 
to the problem of entrenched cultural norms in certain regions, such 
as West Java, where a severe job shortage makes overseas employment 
particularly attractive.  In 2009 the Manpower Ministry created a 
plan for a community based learning group in the 200 villages across 
Indonesia which supply the most workers overseas.  There remains a 
need to increase awareness of trafficking particularly in the rural 
and poorer areas of Indonesia  and to increase information and 
establish mechanisms for Indonesian consular officers abroad to 
prevent trafficking  and protect  the trafficking victims among the 
migrant worker population. 
 
¶16.   (SBU) Indonesia needs to take the following actions to make 
further headway in curbing trafficking: 
 
--Continue efforts to combat the corruption that feeds trafficking, 
particularly among law enforcement and manpower officials. 
 
--Increase and make more readily accessible GOI funding for law 
enforcement against traffickers and for rescue, recovery and 
reintegration of victims. 
 
--Increase efforts to regulate recruiters. Not only should GOI 
actively monitor recruiters, investigate complaints and punish 
offenders, but it should set standards for the terms of recruiting 
agreements such as the levels of fees charged to the workers. These 
high fee agreements can sometimes lead to debt bondage. 
 
--Better protect domestic workers within Indonesia, particularly 
children, through enforcement of existing laws. 
 
--Revise Article 39 on the placement and protection of Migrant 
Workers to more effectively protect workers overseas. 
 
--Conclude MOUs with destination countries to protect migrant 
workers. 
 
--Conduct and support public awareness campaigns with NGO partners, 
including faith-based NGOs, in main trafficking source regions such 
as West Java aimed at changing cultural norms which make trafficking 
acceptable to unemployment. 
 END SUMMARY. 
 
SOURCES 
-------------- 
 
¶17.  (U) The U.S. Mission in Indonesia received information from the 
 
JAKARTA 00000258  004 OF 026 
 
 
following sources: Indonesian National Police (INP) CID division; 
the Ministry of Women's Empowerment which provided comprehensive 
information of national efforts; the Ministry of Social Welfare; the 
Manpower Ministry, and the Attorney General's Office (AGO); 
Surabaya, Kalimantan, and other local police and prosecutors' 
offices; International and domestic NGOs also provided information, 
in particular the International Organization for Migration (IOM), 
Migrant Care, ACILS, UNODC, Komnas Perempuan, Derap Warapsari, and 
LBH APIK. Post also gathered information from prominent mass media, 
KOMPAS, Detik, and Kupang Pos. 
 
POST REPORT POINT OF CONTACT 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
The point of contact at Embassy Jakarta for this report is Second 
Secretary Elise Mellinger, mellingerem@state.gov, 62-21-3435-9281, 
fax (62) 21-3435-9116.  You may also contact Acting Political 
Counselor and Labor Attache Darcy Zotter, at zotterdf@state.gov 
 
¶18.  (U) The report text follows the general outline of themes and 
questions per ref a. 
 
¶19.  (U) Report text follows: 
 
¶I.  OVERVIEW OF INDONESIA'S ACTIVITIES TO ELIMINATE TRAFFICKING IN 
PERSONS 
----------------------------------------- 
 
The Government of Indonesia continued to make progress combating 
trafficking, although it remains a serious problem.  Indonesia 
remains primarily a source country and to a much lesser extent a 
destination and transit country.  The number of Indonesians seeking 
work abroad hit an all time high.  The government has taken 
significant steps both at home and with receiving countries to 
better safeguard these labor migrants.  Nonetheless, almost half of 
overseas workers are estimated to be a victim of some form of 
trafficking and trafficking domestically and internationally remains 
a serious problem. 
 
INDONESIA FACES SIGNIFICANT TRAFFICKING CRIMES 
------------------------------------------ 
 
Indonesia, a developing country and emerging democracy with the 
world's fourth largest population, is a place of origin for a 
significant number of internationally trafficked women and children, 
and to a lesser extent men. Indonesia is also a transit and 
destination country for international trafficking, although foreign 
victims are very small in number relative to Indonesian victims. 
Significant incidents of trafficking occur within Indonesia's 
borders, including for prostitution.  Different regions of the 
country are identifiable as sending, transiting and/or receiving 
areas for internal as well as international trafficking.  There were 
no reports during this period of trafficking in territory outside of 
GOI control. 
 
SOURCE REGIONS 
-------------------------- 
 
All provinces of Indonesia are both sources and destinations. 
Primary origin areas include: The highest is West Java, followed by 
East and Central Java, and East and West Nusa Tenggara.  Other 
provinces with considerably high numbers of trafficking victims are 
West Kalimantan, North Sumatra, Riau Islands and South Sumatra. 
 
TRANSIT AREAS 
----------------------- 
 
Primary transit areas are:  Jakarta, Surabaya, Manado, Riau Islands, 
Kalimantan and Moluccas. Domestic routes varied. 
 
DESTINATIONS 
---------------------- 
Primary domestic destinations are: Java, Bangka Belitung, Riau 
Islands, West Kalimantan and Papua.  A disturbing trend in recent 
years has been an increase in trafficking of young boys and girls, 
 
JAKARTA 00000258  005 OF 026 
 
 
many under age 18, from West Java, North Sulawesi, West Kalimantan, 
and Papua, where they are labor trafficked or sexually exploited in 
areas with rich extractive industries, according to NGOs. 
 
Internationally, following are the primary destinations in rough 
order of magnitude based on March 2005-December 2009 IOM data of 
rescued victims:  Malaysia, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Japan, Kuwait, 
Syria, and Iraq.  Other destinations include:  Taiwan, Thailand, 
Macau, Hong Kong, UEA, Qatar, Mauritius, Yemen, Palestine, Egypt, 
France, Belgium, Germany, Cyprus, Spain, Holland and the United 
States. 
 
 
TYPES OF WORKERS EXPLOITED 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
Men and boys, women and girls, are all widely trafficked. IOM data 
revealed the following breakdown of the 3,376 Indonesian victims it 
assisted between 2005 to December 2009:  55.75 percent domestic 
workers, 16 percent sex workers, and 4.6 percent plantation workers. 
Fewer than three percent each were waitresses, construction workers, 
shopkeepers, nannies, fishermen, masseuses, and cultural dancers. 
Females comprised 90.31 percent and males 9.69 percent; 76.6 percent 
were adults 23.94 percent were children. 
 
CHILDREN 
---------------- 
Children are trafficked for a variety of purposes, but primarily 
into domestic servitude, prostitution, rural agriculture and cottage 
industries.  According to a survey by ILO and from various human 
rights NGOs, many girls under age 18, and even under age 16, work 
long hours - typically 14-16 hours a day at very low wages as 
domestic servants.  They are often under perpetual debt bondage due 
to pay advances given to the children's families by brokers. There 
are credible reports that children under 10 years old work in 
plantation industries helping their parents and family, without any 
time for school.  Approximately sixty per cent of the country's 
under five-year-olds do not have an official birth certificate, 
which puts them at higher risk of child trafficking.  In December 
2009 the GOI announced a new strategy aimed at registering all 
children by 2011 which according to UNICEF is an important step 
toward combating child trafficking.   According to Indonesia's child 
protection policy, all newborns must be given free birth 
certificates, but registrations have only risen by two per cent 
since that law was adopted in 2002.  Child trafficking is a serious 
problem in Indonesia which the government is only now beginning to 
tackle as a separate issue.  Media attention has turned to child 
trafficking rings centered on selling children for adoption, 
particularly in the aftermath of the 2005 tsunami which orphaned 
thousands.  The plight of street children and the specter of sex 
trafficking of children, particularly in the Riau islands and by 
Facebook in Surabaya have received considerable media attention 
recently. 
 
RELIABLE STATISTICS UNAVAILABLE 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Reliable statistics or estimates of the overall number of 
victims--including number of prostitutes and child victims--are 
unavailable. 
 
TRAFFICKING CONDITIONS, METHODS 
-------------------------------------- 
 
For internal and external trafficking into the sex trade, 
traffickers used debt bondage, violence, intimidation, drug 
addiction, and - for those overseas-the withholding of documents to 
keep women and children in prostitution. Traffickers employ a 
variety of means to attract and hold victims, including promises of 
well-paying jobs, debt bondage, community or family pressures, and 
threats of violence, rape, and false marriages.  For example, women 
who escaped from forced prostitution in Bantam, Papua and Malaysia 
commonly related that traffickers recruited the young women with 
offers of jobs in restaurants, supermarkets or as domestic servants. 
Once at their destination, traffickers used violence and rape to 
 
JAKARTA 00000258  006 OF 026 
 
 
force them into the sex trade.  Migrant worker recruiters also use 
misrepresentation and debt bondage to traffic men and women. 
 
Police found in 2008 that traffickers had begun occasionally 
kidnapping victims.  They are drugged, transferred by car through 
the border areas from Indonesia to Malaysia and then sexually 
exploited.  Another relatively new method which police discovered in 
2008 was recruiting victims through schools.  Brokers sent schools 
official-looking letters offering internship programs to students. 
No new kidnapping or internship cases were reported in 2009, but 
prosecutions and trials of the traffickers involved in the 2008 
cases are ongoing. 
 
In February 2010, however, police uncovered new trafficking methods 
using electronic social media, such as Facebook, blogs, and Yahoo 
Messenger.  Police in Surabaya, East Java arrested two traffickers 
who were involved in an online underage child trafficking and 
prostitution ring that used Facebook and Yahoo Messenger to find 
recruits.  At the end of February, 2010, Jakarta police unraveled 
another online prostitution ring involving minors.  The suspect is 
facing a prison sentence of at least five years.  Profiles of 
hundreds of women, including teenagers were featured on the 
suspect's Web site, with the price for services ranging from Rp 10 
million ($1,069) to Rp 50 million.  Clients were given a contact 
number to set up a meeting place.  After that was finalized, the 
women were taken to the hotel where the client waited. Police said 
the trafficker started the business last year and relied on word of 
mouth to promote his business.  Although it was clear that some of 
the women whose services were sold on the website were minors, 
police were quoted as saying "There were no indications that the 
suspect was involved in human trafficking, because the women 
willfully entered the business, police said."  This indicates that 
continued training and awareness-raising among local police and 
prosecutors is still critical in pursuing justice in TIP cases. 
 
The Criminal Investigation Unit of the Police unearthed another 
troubling new trend this year, in which traffickers befriend 
potential victims from Indonesia or Indonesian migrant workers in 
Malaysia, gain their trust and invite them to go on Umroh, a 
religious pilgrimage trip to Mecca.  Once there, they are trafficked 
to various points in the Middle East. 
 
Debt bondage is particularly common in the sex trade. Indonesian 
women and girls trafficked into prostitution in Tanjung Pinang, 
Bangka Belitung, for example, commonly began with a debt of 
USD600-1,200.  Given the constant accumulation of other debts, women 
and girls are often unable to repay these amounts, even after years 
of work as prostitutes. 
 
Some migrant workers, often female, also entered trafficking 
situations during their attempt to find work abroad through migrant 
worker recruiting companies (PJTKI).  Licensed and unlicensed 
companies used debt bondage, withholding of documents and 
confinement in locked premises to keep migrant workers in holding 
centers, sometimes for periods of many months.  Some also used 
threats of violence to maintain control over prospective migrant 
workers. 
 
Traffickers took advantage of persons in impoverished regions. While 
poverty plays a leading role in facilitating trafficking, poor 
educational opportunities, cultural factors and established 
trafficking networks also acted as important determinants.  For 
example, in Indramayu, West Java, some farming communities have 
adopted a widely accepted practice of selling girls into 
prostitution in Japan and elsewhere in order for families to 
accumulate material possessions, a cycle which has proven difficult 
to break. 
 
Indonesians sometimes arrive legally in one country, for example 
Malaysia, and then traffickers provide them with false documentation 
and lured to more remote locations, such as the Middle East and 
Europe, where they are trafficked. 
 
TRAFFICKERS 
-------------------- 
 
JAKARTA 00000258  007 OF 026 
 
 
 
Traffickers fit various profiles.  Some worked in larger mafia-like 
organizations, particularly for trafficking into major prostitution 
areas.  Others operated as small or family-run businesses.  In many 
instances, local community leaders and parents of victims assisted 
in trafficking. 
 
Some manpower brokers operated similar to trafficking rings, leading 
both male and female workers into debt bondage, abusive employment 
situations and other trafficking situations.  Some of the offending 
manpower companies held official licenses.  Others operated 
illegally or appeared to be fronts for traffickers. 
 
This continues to be one of the main challenges in combating 
trafficking in Indonesia, but law enforcement, the ministries and 
immigration officials have demonstrated an increased awareness of 
this problem and have taken action against it.  Immigration is 
reporting cases of trafficking syndicates they come across to the 
police, who are increasingly arresting and detaining these 
traffickers.  Immigration officials from Kalimantan report good 
coordination with police in border areas and a corresponding drop 
this year in trafficking across their border to Malaysia. 
 
The Provincial Police of Bangka Belitung and West Java have 
apprehended traffickers from a major syndicate of trafficking in BB 
province which stretched across both provinces.  Seventeen victims 
of the fifty rescued victims were from West Java and the rest were 
from across the country.  The syndicate had been transferring 
victims to Malaysia and Singapore.  The head of this syndicate was 
caught along with her accomplices from several provinces. 
 
The police in NTT, East Java and Bali have identified an Iranian 
born trafficker who funded and supported international trafficking 
from Middle Eastern countries to Australia. 
 
 
OFFICIAL COMPLICITY AND CORRUPTION 
------------------------------- 
 
The GOI has begun to seriously take action against officials 
involved in trafficking, including corruption charges, 
administrative sanctions, dismissals and transfers. The impact of 
these actions is beginning to change the culture of impunity. 
Unfortunately, this type of action is not yet being uniformly 
applied to military officials involved in trafficking, particularly 
of women and girls trapped in prostitution. 
 
Individual members of the police and military were sometimes 
associated with brothels and prostitution fronts, most frequently 
through the collection of protection money, which was a widespread 
practice.  Sometimes off-duty security force members worked as 
security personnel at brothels.  Security force members also 
involved themselves in prostitution as brothel owners or through 
other illicit business interests, according to NGOs and other 
reports.  Examples include allegations of Indonesian security forces 
complicity in trafficking to the "Dolly" prostitution complex in 
Surabaya, one of Southeast Asia's largest brothel areas, and 
trafficking to Papua. 
 
In February 2009, the Police in District of Watampone, South 
Sulawesi raided a caf and apprehended a lieutenant police officer, 
allegedly collecting "protection money" from a brothel-caf. 
Approximately ten underage victims were rescued.  The police officer 
was disciplined and prosecution is ongoing. 
 
Enforcement of the new anti-trafficking law deterred local officials 
from issuing false documentation for trafficking purposes, thus 
greatly inhibiting the ability of traffickers to obtain false 
documents.  The most common example of such complicity was in the 
production of national identity cards.  In local communities, 
low-level officials certified false information to produce national 
identity cards and family data cards for children to allow them to 
work as adults.  Based on the identity cards, traffickers processed 
passports and work visas for children who otherwise would not be 
able to obtain such documents.  With less than 30 percent of all 
 
JAKARTA 00000258  008 OF 026 
 
 
births registered in the country, and such registrations also 
subject to falsification, authorities often had little legal basis 
to challenge documents containing false information.  The GOI aims 
to implement a biometrics based national single identity number or 
KITNAS by December 2011, but the Home Affairs Ministry has yet to 
find the funds and the necessary infrastructure and human resources 
for the project. 
 
In July 2009, according to the Attorney General's office, police 
apprehended several civil servants for complicity in trafficking 
through falsification of documents.  One case involved a civil 
servant in Larantuka, East Nusa Tenggara NTT from sub-district 
(country clerk) office responsible for processing identity papers. 
The other involved a sub-district level immigration official from 
West Java who had provided illegal papers and abetted trafficking 
activities.  The local Attorney General's offices in both provinces 
are currently prosecuting these cases under the 2007 trafficking 
statutes. 
 
In April 2009, four consular officials from Indonesia's Consulate 
General in Kinabalu, Malaysia were sentenced to 2 year imprisonment 
and fees for charging inflated fees to Indonesian migrant workers in 
Kuala Lumpur seeking visa services.  Although the prosecutors sought 
2.5-3 years sentence, they got off with slightly shorter sentences 
because they argued that they had used the proceeds to make up for a 
shortfall in the Embassy's budget to deal with migrant workers in 
Kuala Lumpur.  In December 2008, four other officials of the same 
consulate were indicted for taking illegal immigrant fees. 
 
In September 2009 RSO worked together with INP to alert them to a 
possible trafficking/smuggling operation under the guise of Sanjaya 
Tour.  This complicated visa scam involved the Indonesian Ministry 
of Trade, and one of those arrested was a trade ministry official. 
(See section below on police for more details) 
 
Most corruption in trafficking cases starts from the early stages of 
the recruitment process.  The lack of education and limited 
information and skills of most migrant workers makes it easier for 
middlemen to exploit and traffic them.  According to the national 
agency for migrant workers administration, BNP2TKI (under the 
Manpower Ministry) in 2009 they created a plan to establish a 
"Kelompok Belajar Berbasis Masyarakat" (KBBM).   The KBBM will 
provide migrant workers with basic skills and knowledge and teach 
them about their legal rights.  Workers will be trained and educated 
for the specific knowledge demanded overseas.  This program will 
minimize the opportunities for illegal parties to benefit from the 
workers by reducing middle man in bridging domestic and 
international agencies. 
 
 
GOVERNMENT INVOLVEMENT IN OR TOLERANCE OF TRAFFICKING 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
Some officials in local Manpower offices reportedly licensed and 
tolerated migrant worker recruiting agencies despite the officials' 
knowledge of the agencies' involvement in trafficking.  In return 
for bribes, some Immigration officials turned a blind eye to 
potential trafficking victims, failing to screen or act with due 
diligence in processing passports and immigration control. Local 
governments' loose regulation of prostitution zones in larger cities 
also raised concerns about local officials' involvement and 
tolerance of trafficking. 
 
 
 
DATA ON PROSTITUTION 
----------------------------------- 
 
Prostitution constitutes a major source of concern for TIP in 
Indonesia due to the number of women and children involved; the 
clandestine, abusive and often forced nature of this work; the 
prevalence of organized crime; and the awareness and/or complicity 
of some officials and security forces (police and military) in 
prostitution.  There is no reliable data on the number of girls and 
women forced into prostitution through debt bondage but the numbers 
 
JAKARTA 00000258  009 OF 026 
 
 
are significant. 
 
GOI officials and NGOs often criticized police officers as too 
passive in combating trafficking absent specific complaints. 
Although police were often aware of underage prostitutes or other 
trafficking situations, they frequently did not intervene to protect 
victims or arrest probable traffickers without specific reports from 
third parties.  Surabaya NGOs related that when police are informed 
of trafficking situations or learn that children are in a brothel, 
they rescue them and turn to the NGOs to help repatriate them. 
 
INDONESIAN VICTIMS IN MALAYSIA 
------------------------------------------ 
 
Malaysia is commonly identified as the country receiving the 
greatest number of Indonesian trafficking victims.  An oversupply of 
Indonesian women and girls in Malaysia results in placement agencies 
in Malaysia offering incentives to more families to hire foreign 
maids, including offering the employer recovery of fees from the 
employee through wage reductions.  The first five months of wages 
are commonly deducted. 
 
IOM reported that from March 2005 to December 2009, 69.50 percent of 
female and 57.14 male victims rescued from overseas had Chlamydia, 
23.18 male had gonorrhea, and more than 11 percent had hepatitis B. 
 
 
A 2006 bilateral MOU between Indonesia and Malaysia failed to give 
adequate protection to Indonesian migrant workers, opening the door 
to abuse.  The agreement allows employers to hold workers' passports 
restricting their freedom to return home, allows monthly deductions 
of up to 50 percent of negotiated wages to repay loans and advances, 
and does not specify time off.   The GOI on June 26 took a stronger 
stance to protect its migrant workers there by halting the departure 
of all Indonesian migrant workers for Malaysia until Malaysia's 
government can provide stronger protection of their rights. 
According to press reports the GOI will sign a breakthrough MOU with 
Malaysia in March 2010 which would ensure a specified livable 
minimum wage for Indonesian migrant workers in Malaysia, provide 
them a day off, and ensure freedom of movement for the workers by 
ensuring that they, not their employers, hold their passports. 
Malaysia and Indonesia are still hammering out agreements on 
monitoring procedures and costs. 
 
A Malaysian court of law is proceeding with the murder trial of 
Munti binti Bani, a domestic worker from Jember, Indonesia who was 
killed in September 2009, by her employer, a Malaysian spouse. 
Munti was found unconscious, severely tortured, wounds decaying, and 
kept in a room with no foods for several days.  She then took to 
hospital, but died after several days.  She was 36, and was killed 
in Klang, Selangor, Malaysia. 
 
The Indonesian government has appealed to a court in Kuala Lumpur, 
Malaysia to retry the case of Nirmala Bonat from NTT.  The lower 
court has sentenced her employer to 18 years for her employer, but 
reduced it to 12 years upon appeal.  (The horrific details of 
Bonat's 2005 case provided the impetus for a fast passage of the 
anti-trafficking legislation and raised awareness of trafficking 
issues in Indonesia.) 
 
In 2009, Modesta, a woman from East Nusa Tenggara, was tortured, not 
paid for 3 years of work, and worked long hours for her Malaysian 
employer.  The Malaysian authorities have not yet proceeded with her 
case. 
 
 
MIDDLE EAST 
---------------------- 
 
Large-scale trafficking to the Middle East persists, with Saudi 
Arabia being the worst offender. Victims from Saudi Arabia often 
return extremely brutalized and report that they have no protection 
from exploitation and abuse in Saudi Arabia.  Many Muslim girls are 
lured to Saudi Arabia with promises of a good salary and the 
opportunity to make a pilgrimage to Mecca, a dream far beyond their 
 
JAKARTA 00000258  010 OF 026 
 
 
financial means.  An increasing trend is for Saudi employers to 
contract out their domestic servants to several households, withhold 
wages, and then find an excuse to return the worker home unpaid. 
 
Syria, UAE, Jordan and Iraq are destination countries for Indonesian 
migrant workers.  According to Migrant Care, there are approximately 
10,000 Indonesian workers in Syria and 45,000 in Lebanon despite the 
fact that Indonesia has no MOU on migrant workers with these 
countries.  The Indonesian government funded trips to the Middle 
East to examine the GOI working group in conjunction with the 
International Organization for Migration (IOM) rescued and 
repatriated 425 Indonesian workers from Jeddah, Saudi Arabia and 
Amman, Jordan, on January 20, 2010 with funding from the Indonesian 
government.  On January 18, 2010, a similar collaborative group of 
government ministries, parliamentarians and NGO staff facilitated 
the repatriation of 199 Indonesian migrant workers from the 
Indonesian Embassy shelter in Kuwait.  The National Police screened 
for minors while the Department of Social Welfare worked with IOM to 
screen for trafficking victims, who they then referred back to IOM 
for medical treatment. 
 
During 2009, 200 other migrant workers were successfully repatriated 
from Kuwait and Indonesia is currently negotiating with Kuwait to 
return 500 more workers which the Indonesian Embassy is currently 
housing in their shelter.  According to the press on February 24, 
2010, the Kuwait government agreed to sign an MOU with the GOI to 
regulate Indonesian workers' welfare in Kuwait.  Negotiations are 
ongoing, and both countries agreed to establish special joint task 
forces on migrant labor.  The GOI stopped sending workers to Kuwait 
in September 2009. 
 
 
MIGRANT WORKERS 
----------------------------- 
 
Legal and illegal migrant workers are equally likely to be 
trafficked, in large part because in some destination countries, 
such as Malaysia, employers have the right to hold the workers' 
documentation.  Many workers prefer to go abroad to work illegally 
because they feel they are in more control of their own destiny.  In 
2008 and 2009, large numbers of Indonesian migrant workers abroad 
were laid off due to the global financial crisis, increasing 
concerns that these workers would be more vulnerable to trafficking. 
Similarly, increasing lay-offs of workers in Indonesia raised 
concerns that these workers would be forced to seek jobs as migrant 
workers and be vulnerable to trafficking. 
 
FOREIGN VICTIMS IN INDONESIA 
------------------------------- 
 
NGOs working on migrant worker advocacy and trafficking issues 
confirmed that there is a continuing trend for foreign victims to be 
trafficked to Indonesia.  According to a 2007 study, most foreign 
prostitutes in Indonesia are from Mainland China, then central Asian 
countries.   Sources estimate their total numbers to be between 
4,000 to 20,000.  The pimps/smugglers kept their passports and said 
it was easy to extend the visas with bribes. Other victims came from 
Thailand and Eastern Europe. 
 
POLITICAL WILL 
------------------------ 
 
Political will to fight trafficking was clear at the national 
leadership level as well as at local levels in 2009, while awareness 
of the issue continued to penetrate through government agencies. 
Indonesia ratified the United Nations Convention against 
Transnational Organized Crime in February 2009.  The government has 
trained over a thousand law enforcement officials on fighting 
trafficking, often times in interagency courses also attended by 
NGOs. The number of special anti-trafficking police and prosecutors 
greatly increased. 
 
With the passage of the new anti-trafficking law, local task forces 
in many provinces across Indonesia have reinvigorated their efforts. 
 For example, in Bandung, West Java, the local task force meets 
 
JAKARTA 00000258  011 OF 026 
 
 
regularly, sharing information among agencies and NGOs, and gaining 
government funding for a local shelter and other support for 
victims.  The National Task Force is actively coordinating 
activities to avoid overlap between ministries.  The Foreign 
Ministry coordinated a seminar in October, 2009, with UNODC, other 
ministries, NGOs, and entitled "Effective Criminal Justice Response 
to Trafficking."  Government working groups under the task force 
umbrella helped repatriate groups of victims from the Middle East. 
 
GOVERNMENT RESOURCES TO COMBAT TIP\ 
------------------------ 
 
The GOI allocated significantly more funds to trafficking in 2009 
than previous years and spread funds more widely across national and 
local entities.  The GOI allocates its anti-TIP funding to the 
National Task Force among the 19 agencies involved in it.  The 
Coordinating Ministry for People's Welfare, which oversees the Task 
Force in conjunction with the Women's Ministry, said that the TIP 
funding allocation for her Ministry increased 50 percent, from 400 
million Rupiah ($40,000) in 2009 to 600 million Rupiah ($60,000) in 
¶2010.  In 2008, the Social Ministry had $200,000 to build 22 
shelters across the country.  These shelters also included victims 
of domestic and other types of violence in addition to VOTs. 
 
In 2009, the Social Ministry received a budget of $300,000, some of 
which was specifically earmarked for recovery of victims-a first. 
In 2009, also for the first time, the government awarded the Health 
Ministry anti-trafficking funds for the medical care of victims. 
The National Education Ministry received $1.5 million in 2008 in 
anti-trafficking funds and $2 million in 2009.   In addition, the 
GOI, sometimes in cooperation with IOM, has funded at significant 
expense the repatriation of rescued trafficking victims from 
Malaysia and the Middle East.  Increasingly, local governments 
across Indonesia provided budgets, facilities and staff to assist 
trafficking victims.  Moreover, almost every police station in 
Indonesia has a center for the protection of women and children 
called PPA, staffed by officers who work with victims of 
trafficking.  Typically such centers include facilities for 
temporary accommodation of trafficking victims.  We do not have 
details of what portion of the national police budget covers these 
expenses but it must be significant. 
 
 
II. PREVENTION OF TRAFFICKING 
--------------------------- 
 
In January 2007, the GOI, as required by the 2004 Overseas Labor 
Placement and Protection Law, established the National Agency for 
the Placement and Protection of Overseas Workers was (BNP).  The 
agency took over the Ministry of Manpower's responsibilities to 
protect migrant workers, such as facilitating labor export and 
providing legal protection.  BNP's jurisdiction to protect migrant 
workers is unclear vis a vis the Manpower Ministry.  Both bodies 
have been largely ineffective in protecting migrant workers from 
trafficking.  However, this seems to be largely a function more of 
migrants' willingness to risk trafficking in search of employment. 
 
However, under BNP's management, a new migrant worker transit 
terminal, Terminal Four, opened up in 2008 at Jakarta's 
international airport, providing better care for trafficked victims. 
 BNP officers do limited screenings of returning migrant workers to 
detect if they were trafficked.  A medical doctor and beds are 
available for victims.  Legal Aid Society staff is allowed access 
and checks to ensure migrant workers are protected and trafficking 
victims receive care. 
 
In areas such as North Sulawesi, traffickers resorted to recruiting 
in more isolated villages because of increased community awareness 
and law enforcement.  In Indramayu, West Java, where entire villages 
were once depleted of girls trafficked overseas for sexual 
exploitation, trafficking in some villages has been entirely 
eliminated due to community efforts. 
 
GOI SUPPORT TO OTHER PREVENTION PROGRAMS 
---------------------------- 
 
JAKARTA 00000258  012 OF 026 
 
 
 
The GOI supported and administered other national programs related 
to the prevention of trafficking, but not designed specifically as 
anti-trafficking efforts.  These programs faced serious constraints 
in terms of limited funds, institutional capacity, and corruption. 
Some of the more relevant programs were: 
 
-- A program to encourage free basic public education through the 
first nine years of schooling, including subsidies for students from 
poor families.  A number of districts announced their achievement of 
free public schooling. 
 
-- School Subsidy Operation providing a subsidy to poor people. 
 
-- A national program to eliminate gender inequality in education. 
 
-- Programs to train female migrant workers. 
 
-- Credit schemes for micro-businesses, some of which focused on 
women. 
 
-- Revolving credit schemes for cooperatives and savings and loan 
associations. 
 
-- The Directorate of Women and Child Labor Monitoring in the 
Manpower Ministry has allocated funds for the establishment and 
operation of Provincial and District Action Committees on the 
Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labor. 
 
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN GOI, NGOs AND OTHER ELEMENTS 
--------------------------------- 
 
The overall relationship between relevant GOI offices and NGOs 
remained cooperative and mutually supportive on TIP-related issues. 
Cooperation varied from agency to agency and location to location. 
The GOI recognized the importance of NGO expertise, networks and 
involvement.  NGOs met regularly with officials and participated in 
national and local task forces.  The GOI and NGOs collaborated on 
many TIP initiatives, including in protection of victims, public 
awareness-raising, and in providing assistance to law enforcement 
officials in investigations and prosecutions. The police and NGOs 
continued to share information on trafficking.  NGOs in Surabaya 
reported that police generally smoothly integrated them into their 
rescue and repatriation efforts and seemed satisfied with their 
responsiveness. 
 
 
MONITORING OF IMMIGRATION/EMIGRATION 
---------------------------------- 
 
The implementation of bio-metric passports assisted immigration 
officials to stop trafficking of children. Immigration, police, 
prosecutors and judges from migrant worker transit areas were 
trained together in 2009.  DOJ, ICITAP and RSO conducted a series of 
trainings throughout the country sensitizing officials to the use of 
fraudulent documents and other issues in trafficking. 
 
While the GOI has made some efforts to increase passport integrity, 
Indonesia's passport services, remained the object of widespread 
corruption. Indonesians are able to easily obtain passports with 
false and multiple identities.  Recruitment agencies routinely 
falsified birth dates, including for children, in order to apply for 
passports and migrant worker documents. 
 
The GOI did not effectively monitor immigration and emigration 
patterns for evidence of trafficking, with some limited exceptions. 
On the whole, immigration officials and law enforcement agencies did 
not have the equipment, capacity or tools to generate useful 
information, or did not prioritize such information.  There is a 
need to train immigration officials at the borders, particularly, to 
identify and protect VOTs.  IOM has been awarded a grant to begin 
such a project in 2010. 
 
The Transnational Crime Center (TNCC), which includes trafficking as 
one focus, was established in 2004 and has aggressively tackled 
 
JAKARTA 00000258  013 OF 026 
 
 
trafficking. 
 
COORDINATION AND COMMUNICATION MECHANISMS 
----------------------------- 
 
In 2006, Indonesia signed the ASEAN Declaration on the Protection 
and Promotion of the Rights and of Migrant Workers, committing 
itself to an extensive list of protections. 
 
At the national level, the Women's Ministry served as the focal 
point for GOI actions on TIP.  The People's Welfare Coordinating 
Ministry, which includes the Women's Ministry under its umbrella, 
also played a key role in coordinating efforts across different 
agencies.  The 2002 National Action Plan stipulated that the GOI set 
up a National Anti-Trafficking Task Force.  Presidential Decree No. 
69/2008 established this national and local taskforces.  The 
Coordinating Minister for the People's Welfare and the Women's 
Empowerment Minister runs the task force, which includes 19 members 
including other ministries and law enforcement agencies, the 
national statistical bureau, NGOs, and civil society groups. 
Responsibility for provincial and district-level programs varies 
from location to location.  A growing number of provinces and 
districts have their own task forces or committees. 
 
The NGO Advocacy for Women and Children (AWC) in Surabaya and other 
Surabaya NGO interlocutors praised the police and local government 
for soliciting the NGO's assistance and participation on trafficking 
issues.  AWC noted that the police call the NGO when they rescue 
victims or need assistance.  Moreover, the City Administration has 
invited the AWC to participate in a regional task force that 
includes police, prosecutors, and government agencies and is tasked 
with drafting a standard operating procedure to assist and protect 
tip victims.  AWC said that police frequently help repatriate TIP 
victims, but often victims are repatriated immediately-- 
particularly if there are large groups being repatriated at once-- 
without an opportunity to recover and recuperate and without 
sufficient financial assistance to cover repatriation.  AWC also 
said that the City maintains adequate shelter facilities for 
trafficking victims and provides medical, psychological and social 
counseling assistance to trafficking victims. 
 
The GOI actively participated in multilateral and international 
coordination efforts to combat trafficking under UN, ASEAN and 
regional frameworks. 
 
 
NATIONAL PLAN OF ACTION 
----------------------------------------- 
 
In 2008 the GOI completed evaluating the 2002-2007 National Action 
Plan.  In 2009, the GOI signed the new action plan on the 
Eradication of Trafficking and Child Sexual Exploitation for 
2009-2014.  This was promulgated in September 2009 as Government 
Regulation NO. 25/2009. 
 
In the 2008 GOI evaluation of the 2002-2007 National Plan of Action, 
they noted that many local stakeholders did not yet fully understand 
the 2007 law and thus there were difficulties in implementation. 
 
The Attorney Generals' office, the police, and NGOs have agreed on 
the importance for Indonesia to prioritize six initiatives to combat 
trafficking in the new 2009-2014 Action Plan. They are as follows: 
 
--Coordination between government agencies: the need to establish a 
secretariat with full-time staff to take on centralized 
responsibility of ensuring coordination between government agencies. 
To improve coordination, budgets from each government agency should 
be coordinated to avoid overlap of activities. 
 
--Data gathering and management: There is a lack of data and 
information on trafficking patterns and responses within Indonesia. 
A dedicated unit with full time staff to monitor the collection of 
data on trafficking is needed. 
 
--Reformation of the legal migration system to reduce opportunities 
 
JAKARTA 00000258  014 OF 026 
 
 
for exploitation: Many current policies are based on the assumption 
that trafficking occurs through illegal migration streams.  However, 
the current migration system may facilitate exploitation and 
trafficking and thus should be reviewed to ensure all possible 
protections are in place while freedom of movement is respected. 
There needs to be a greater focus on respect for the rights and 
additional protections for migrant workers, with a particular focus 
on domestic workers. 
 
--Debt bondage practices are increasingly identified as a common 
mechanism of exploitation that leads to trafficking and forced 
labor.  Widespread education of stakeholders on debt bondage as well 
as awareness-raising of vulnerable communities is needed. 
 
--Arrest, prosecution and asset confiscation of traffickers and 
those facilitating trafficking: An increased commitment to effective 
deterrence through criminal prosecution and monetary penalties is 
needed, including asset confiscation of traffickers.  Trafficking 
needs to be made an unprofitable venture by pursuing corporations 
complicit in trafficking and taking strong action against government 
officials involved in trafficking practices. 
 
--Child Sexual Exploitation: Increase efforts around child sexual 
exploitation are needed by reforming criminal laws so that the 
purchase of sex from children is clearly criminalized. Specific 
training is needed on this issue for the police and the general 
public. 
 
 
 
III. INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION OF TRAFFICKERS 
---------------------------------- 
 
Law Enforcement 
----------------------- 
 
Police and prosecutors began using the 2007 anti-trafficking law 
soon after it passed, not waiting for implementing regulations.  By 
the end of 2008, GOI passed and promulgated all three implementing 
regulations for its 2007 comprehensive legislative framework, Law 
No. 21.  This means that a comprehensive legal framework is in 
place, which increases victim protection and should facilitate the 
prosecution of trafficking under its statutes.  It makes it easier, 
for example, for prosecutors to use circumstantial evidence to 
demonstrate intent in TIP cases. Implementation of this key 
framework, however, is still underway.  Police and prosecutors, 
still unfamiliar with the new legislation, are often reluctant or 
unsure of how to effectively use it to punish traffickers. 
Prosecutors instead often rely on more traditional criminal remedies 
to prosecute tip cases as crimes of violence, extortion, pimping 
statutes.  They use laws such as the Penal Code, Child Protection 
Act, the Manpower Placement Act and the Manpower Act.  Police 
routinely use the new law but prosecutors and judges are using it 
still sporadically, even when cases are brought forward by police 
under the new law. 
 
Indonesian National Police, in particular the Criminal Investigation 
Department, the Anti-Trafficking Unit and the units dedicated to the 
protection of women and children (called PPA), are working with the 
UNODC, DOJ, ICITAP, RSO, DHS and other U.S. agencies and NGOs to 
learn how to identify cases and victims of trafficking in persons, 
investigate trafficking-related offences and improve cooperation 
within the criminal justice system and between States. 
 
The Police CID unit headquarters released a report of 142 arrests 
(involving163 offenders) in 2009.   (Note: Local law enforcement 
officials will provide us with additional information, including the 
number of prosecutions and convictions, so that we may confirm this. 
  Police and the AG's office explained that many district and 
provincial level police and district attorney's offices have not yet 
recorded and reported their cases, so we expect these numbers to 
increase.)  On many occasions, offenders who committed crimes 
elsewhere but were apprehended in Jakarta-where trafficking law 
awareness is high--had to be sent and tried in the districts where 
they committed those crimes and where the law enforcers are unaware 
 
JAKARTA 00000258  015 OF 026 
 
 
of or still anxious about using trafficking statutes. 
 
 
POLICE EFFORTS IN APPREHENDING OFFENDERS 
--------------------------------- 
 
The police continued their efforts in 2009 to apprehend trafficking 
offenders and rescue victims.  One ongoing challenge is that in 
Indonesian law, police and prosecutors do not officially work 
together on a case until the police have given the dossier over to 
the prosecutor.  In DOJ training, the RLO urged earlier cooperation 
between police and prosecutors in order to help build a more 
effective case.  Police, prosecutors, immigration officials and NGOs 
used training opportunities to help build communication networks 
across provinces which helped bring to light syndicates and 
trafficking rings across provincial borders. 
 
In 2009, the Women and Children's Unit of the Provincial Police of 
West Kalimantan Police in Pontianak, West Kalimantan, uncovered and 
raided a transit house for TIP victims.  The women, 16-25 years old, 
were recruited from many provinces in Indonesia to be sex workers in 
brothels and karaoke joints. Some of them were trafficked to Kuching 
city in Serawak, Malaysia. The pimp and owner of this place, an 
Acehnese ethnic man from Jakarta, was apprehended and is awaiting 
trial.  The women were forced to find their own food, promised 1.5 
million to 2 million rupiah ($100- $150 a month) salaries and were 
not paid. 
 
In North Sulawesi, police reported that they had rescued thirty 
children who were trafficked to Papua to work in bars. 
 
Also in 2009, fifty women and girls were rescued when Police 
Commissioner Fatmah Noer, Head of the Women and Children's Unit of 
the West Java Provincial Police led a cross-border raid on a karaoke 
bar and a brothel in West Java and in Bangka Belitung Provinces. 
Her unit arrested a female pimp (born in South Sumatra Province), 
her bodyguards in Bangka Belitung Province and accomplices in both 
provinces.  Seventeen of the victims were from West Java and the 
rest were from across the country.  They had been held in debt 
bondage, forced to work long hours, paid low wages, threatened, 
intimidated, and starved.  They told police that their traffickers 
have transferred other victims to Malaysia and Singapore.  The 
police worked with IOM, which assisted the return and recovery of 14 
of the victims, and transport for the social worker. 
 
An Indonesian court in 2009 convicted a Malaysian national of 
trafficking crimes, giving him 10 years imprisonment.  He recruited 
and trafficked women from many provinces in Indonesia. 
 
In February 2010, police in Surabaya, East Java arrested two 
traffickers who were involved in an online underage child 
trafficking and prostitution ring that used Facebook and Yahoo 
Messenger to find recruits.  At the end of February, 2010, Jakarta 
police unraveled another online prostitution ring involving minors. 
The suspect is facing a prison sentence of at least five years. 
 
To aid trafficking investigations, police have liaison officers in 
Indonesian embassies in Saudi Arabia, Malaysia, Australia, 
Philippines and Thailand. These police liaison officers contributed 
to growing international law enforcement cooperation, particularly 
with Malaysia. 
 
In 2009 the RSO and Indonesia National Police continued to work 
together against traffickers, resulting in the police conducting 
multiple raids and operations on trafficking rings throughout 2009. 
In February, police rescued 16 victims who were to be sent to the 
States illegally when they raided the safe house.  The police 
arrested the two traffickers, who had recruited them in Bali, taken 
them to Jakarta and kept them in the safe house while preparing for 
visa interviews.  Also in February, RSO presented evidence to the 
police gathered since May 2008 that Mitra Tama Agency was a 
potential human smuggling/trafficking organization.  On February 12, 
Unit 4 (anti-trafficking unit) raided MTA, arresting two owners for 
violation of fraud under the Indonesian penal code. 
 
 
JAKARTA 00000258  016 OF 026 
 
 
On April 22, the police arrested two possible traffickers, owners of 
the Citra Jaya Indonesia company which since RSO had been 
investigating since December 2007 under operation headhunter.  They 
charged them with fraud under the Indonesian penal code and under 
the manpower protection law. 
 
In September 2009 INP arrested the owner of Sanjaya Tour and a staff 
member and rescued twelve victims who were recruited in Bali and 
kept in a safe house in Tangerang.   The staff was later released 
due to lack of evidence.  October arrests of suspects in the same 
ring, a human smuggling operation, brought the total to 16.  This 
complicated visa scam involved the Indonesian Ministry of Trade, and 
one of those arrested was a trade ministry official. 
 
In November, a trafficker who counterfeited documents and three of 
his clients were arrested.  They were to work for him in the U.S. in 
debt bondage, owing $600 per month for ten months once employed. 
 
According to Surabaya Police in Surabaya, East Java province, police 
actually has been doing the maximum to arrest traffickers and apply 
the new anti-trafficking law.  However, prosecutions of trafficking 
cases run too slowly.  The prosecution of some trafficking cases 
from 2008, for example, is not yet complete.  A police officer from 
Surabaya Police's Detective Unit gave an example, that in 2009 he 
rescued trafficking victims from Bangkalan (Madura) when they were 
carried in a truck full of vegetables.  He also arrested the 
trafficker.  There was no follow up and prosecution on this case. 
 
Police in Surabaya arrested dozens of traffickers during the 
reporting period.  Only a few of them, however, were brought before 
the court due to lack of evidence, corruption, and lack of 
understanding on the new anti trafficking law.  Sometimes 
prosecutors and judges only sentenced the field worker and freed the 
main trafficker (the real actor). 
 On April 14, 2009, Surabaya State Court held the trial of Ana 
Tamina, trafficking suspect and owner of "Sembrodo" Brothel in 
Surabaya. She was charged under article # 88 of Child Protection Law 
# 23/2003 and article # 506 of Criminal Code of gains from 
conducting a prostitution business. 
 
On April 22, 2009, Surabaya State Court freed Hengky Hariyono, owner 
of a brothel at Jarak prostitute area from trafficking charges. The 
judges were of the view that Hengky's brothel actually benefits 
prostitutes by helping them to find customers. The Surabaya 
Prosecution's Office submitted an appeal to the Supreme Court 
following this verdict. 
 
On April 29, Surabaya State Court freed Sapta Wahyu from trafficking 
charges. The panel of judge argued that Sapta Wahyu's case was not a 
trafficking case. NGO Samitra Abhaya KPPD who assisted the victim 
argued that it was clearly trafficking a case as the suspect locked 
up and raped the victim. 
 
On August 27, 2009 Surabaya State Court held the trial of Bambang 
Ismoyo who was accused of selling a woman named Erfina Setyawati for 
prostitution.  Bambang was charged under article # 2 of the anti 
Trafficking Law # 21/2007 and under the Child Protection Law. 
 
These cases show both the complexity of the trafficking situation 
and the Indonesian government's increasingly successful efforts to 
use new tools and work across agencies and borders to identify, 
protect, and repatriate victims of trafficking. 
 
 
EXISTING ANTI-TIP LAWS 
---------------------- 
 
The New Anti-Trafficking Law 
---------------------------- 
 
On March 20, 2007, the Indonesian national legislature passed Law 
No. 21 of 2007 on the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking 
in Persons. The law defines trafficking, establishes harsh 
punishments, provides protections for victims and witnesses, 
provides services and restitution to victims, and calls for actions 
 
JAKARTA 00000258  017 OF 026 
 
 
to address trafficking.  In 2007 and 2008, GOI passed all three 
implementing regulations under the law: 
 
The National Police Decree No. 10 of 2007 was enacted on July 6, 
2007 to provide the organizational structure and procedures for a 
special unit providing services to women and children. 
 
Government of Indonesia Regulation No. 9 of 2008 on Procedures and 
Mechanisms for Integrated Service Centers regarding Witnesses and/or 
Victims of Trafficking in Persons requires the establishment of 
"integrated service centers" in every district and municipality to 
provide services for trafficked persons and witnesses.  It takes a 
holistic approach to the services needed by trafficked persons and 
witnesses.  Providing integrated service centers will promote the 
return and social integration of a victim or witness in the form of 
medical rehabilitation, social rehabilitation and legal assistance. 
The regulation states that funding for the centers will come from 
both local and national governments but does not specify sources of 
funding or allocation of funding. 
 
A third regulation, to establish counter-trafficking task forces at 
the national, provincial and district/municipal levels was 
promulgated on November 6, 2008.  The national task force formed 
under the new law met for the first time in early 2009.  Indonesia 
has achieved all three goals of the implementing regulations.  It 
has established new police units, and now has to work to build their 
capacity.  It has established one stop service centers and task 
forces which have started working effectively. 
 
Local governments are also creating legislation to combat 
trafficking.  In an unprecedented move in one of Indonesia's major 
source provinces, West Java, the District of Cianjur on 17 February 
2010, issued a new district by-law (Perda) to combat trafficking 
which NGOs in the district have long pushed for.  The local 
parliament (DPRD) approved and issued the new law.  In 2009 around 
300 trafficking victims from Cianjur, mostly Southern Cianjur were 
trafficked to Middle East. 
 
OTHER LAWS 
-------------------- 
 
The National Plan of Action encourages provincial and local 
governments to establish their own anti-trafficking regulations and 
a number have done so.  Notable are strong anti-trafficking or women 
and child protection laws which reflect local reactions to the 
trafficking problem and are being used vigorously. 
 
In 2004, the DPR passed Law 39/2004 on the protection of migrant 
workers abroad.  The law provides greater regulation of the migrant 
worker recruiting and placement process.  It establishes jail 
sentences of 2 to 15 years for unlicensed labor recruitment 
agencies.  However, NGOs often criticize this law as ineffective and 
of little real assistance to migrants in need of protection.  IOM 
has a pending proposal to help revise this law in order to emphasize 
its protection aspects.  Post has sent a cable indicating its 
support of this proposal. 
 
In 2009, the GOI initiated two pieces of legislation that will be 
powerful tools to punish traffickers for their crimes.  First, an 
interagency Indonesian legislative drafting team completed and sent 
to the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights for review a draft law 
that will allow the government to pursue traffickers and other 
criminals through non-conviction based asset forfeiture.   Once 
Parliament passes the legislation, the government of Indonesia can 
forfeit the assets of criminals even in the absence of a criminal 
conviction. 
 
The second important legal initiative is the administration's 
amendment of a new draft anti-money laundering law that broadens 
predicate offenses for money laundering to include any offense with 
a jail term of more than one year.  This law will apply to 
trafficking cases, providing another way to punish traffickers. 
 
In addition to a comprehensive legal framework for trafficking, 
implementing regulations and these new legal tools, Indonesia has 
 
JAKARTA 00000258  018 OF 026 
 
 
also ratified almost all major conventions relating to trafficking. 
In 2009, Indonesia has also signed the UN Convention against 
Transnational Organized Crime and its supplemental Protocol to 
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially 
Women and Children.  In addition to those referred to above, 
Indonesia has ratified ILO Convention 29 on Forced Labor, the UN 
Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, and 
has signed the optional protocol to the Convention on the Rights of 
the Child on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child 
Pornography. 
 
PENALTIES FOR RAPE OR FORCIBLE SEXUAL ASSAULT 
------------------------------- 
 
The Criminal Code, Article 285, stipulates a maximum of 12 years 
imprisonment for rape committed outside of marriage. Other generally 
less severe criminal sanctions apply for sexual intercourse with a 
minor, forcing a person to commit an act of sexual abuse of a minor, 
facilitating minors to perform acts of obscenity, and other related 
offenses.  The 12-year maximum jail sentence for rape exceeds the 
6-year maximum for trafficking under the Criminal Code, but is 
similar to the 15-year maximum penalty for trafficking of children 
under the Child Protection Act. 
 
PROSTITUTION 
----------------------- 
 
As a matter of national law, Indonesia has not legalized 
prostitution.  Indonesia's Penal Code does not explicitly mention 
prostitution, but the Code's Chapter 14 refers to "crimes against 
decency/morality," which many within national and local governments 
interpret to apply to prostitution. Central government officials 
contacted by the Embassy agreed in their interpretation that the 
Penal Code renders prostitution illegal.  The prostitution of 
children is clearly illegal under the Penal Code and the 2002 Child 
Protection Act. 
 
The Penal Code can be used to prosecute the acts of pimps, brothel 
owners and enforcers on the basis of various crimes, including: 
using violence or threats of violence to force persons to conduct 
indecent acts (Article 289, with a maximum penalty of nine years in 
jail); facilitating indecent acts (Article 296, with a possible jail 
term of 16 months); conducing/facilitating public indecency (Article 
281); and making profits from the indecent acts of a woman (Article 
506, with a possible one-year jail sentence).  In practice, 
authorities rarely pursued such charges against those involved in 
prostitution. 
 
Clients of child prostitutes can be charged under the Penal Code and 
the Child Protection Act.  In theory, married persons who are 
clients of prostitutes can be charged for engaging in sexual 
relations outside of marriage (Penal Code Article 284).  In general, 
police did not arrest and pursue charges against clients of 
prostitutes. 
 
While contrary to societal and religious norms in Indonesia, the 
practice of prostitution is widespread and largely tolerated in many 
areas of the country, particularly when it is not a matter of public 
display.  Although contrary to national interpretations that the 
Penal Code prohibits prostitution, authorities in some localities 
have formally or informally regulated prostitution in response to 
community pressure.  In some areas, including certain locations in 
Papua, brothel owners registered prostitutes with the police with a 
view to demonstrating that the prostitutes are not coerced or 
underage. 
 
Some local governments gained important tax revenues from otherwise 
legal entertainment businesses, such as karaoke bars, that also 
offer prostitution.  Individual police and other officials also 
gained illegal income as a result of prostitution.  These factors 
encouraged the tendency to tolerate prostitution, according to 
observers. 
 
 
INVESTIGATIVE TECHNIQUES 
 
JAKARTA 00000258  019 OF 026 
 
 
---------------------------------------- 
 
In some instances, the police, particularly those who had received 
anti-trafficking training, used active investigation techniques to 
develop trafficking cases.  The police used undercover operations to 
some extent.  In the past, police occasionally employed electronic 
surveillance using technical expertise developed for 
counter-terrorism.  Information collected through electronic 
surveillance is not admissible in Indonesian courts except in cases 
of terrorism.  The cooperation of victims and witnesses was 
important to police and prosecutors in making cases against 
traffickers. According to a number of the police, GOI officials and 
NGOs, victims frequently avoided testifying because of the prolonged 
nature of court cases, their desire to return to their home areas 
and lack of financial assistance to maintain themselves.  This 
complicated prosecution efforts.  In some cases, police did not 
detain suspects, who then subsequently disappeared and did not 
present themselves in court.  NGOs criticized police who rescued 
victims but often failed to pursue traffickers who fled to other 
regions or left the country. 
 
SPECIALIZED TRAINING 
---------------------------------- 
 
Training of law enforcement officials by USG and international NGOs 
greatly increased this year, with strong cooperation by Indonesian 
officials. Over a thousand police, prosecutors and judges were 
trained in anti-trafficking techniques in 2009 and 2010. 
 
Since October 2007, US Mission Jakarta's RSO has coordinated with 
the INP to target criminal syndicates that specialize in the 
production and sale of counterfeit documents to facilitate human 
smuggling and/or trafficking to the United States.  RSO is 
coordinating with Diplomatic Security Service's (DSS) Visa Fraud 
Branch, the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Department of 
State's Human Smuggling and Trafficking Center to investigate these 
syndicates.  In February, 2009, RSO in conjunction with INP cracked 
a fraudulent document ring which could have been used in 
facilitating TIP. 
 
From March to April 2009 USAID supported American Center for 
International Labor Solidarity (Solidarity Center or ACILS)  in 
providing capacity training for Service Providers in the districts 
of Indramayu, Cianjur, Pontianak, Batam, Sanggau, Tanjung Balai 
Karimun, Tanjung Pinang and Sambas.  A total of 170 participants 
including representatives of local NGOs and local health office 
attended the training. 
 
RSO, in conjunction with Department of Justice's International 
Criminal Investigative Training Assistance Program (ICITIAP), 
provided human smuggling and trafficking training courses to the INP 
in 2008. RSO conducted multiple raids with the new anti-trafficking 
unit which the INP set up after training with them in 2008.   In 
2009, ICITAP completed four training courses including 144 police, 
49 prosecutors, 26 immigration officials and 14 NGO members.  On 
February 23-25, ICITAP held a training session on improving 
Indonesian-Malaysian Cooperation in Combating Trafficking in 
Persons.  The trainees from Malaysia included 5 prosecutors, 7 
police, 2 immigration officials, 2 Ministry of Home Affairs 
officials and 2 maritime security officials.  From Indonesia, 7 
police officers from Bali, 3 from West Kalimantan Police, 1 from 
Riau Islands Police and one from West Java Police, two from Interpol 
Indonesia, 5 immigration officials and 5 prosecutors, 3 IGOs/NGOs 
and 2 from UN.  ICITAP also conducted 2 trainings of police trainers 
in Bogor in January and February 2010 and one in Surabaya in late 
February, training approximately 80 police. 
 
In addition, a Department of Justice Regional Legal Advisor (RLA) 
from Office of Overseas Prosecutorial Development Assistance and 
Training (OPDAT) provided successful joint training to 70 officials 
from Ministry of Manpower and Overseas Manpower Protection Agency, 
along with judges, prosecutors, police and NGOs in February 2010 in 
Surabaya, East Java.  In November, 2009 OPDAT trained 35 police and 
senior prosecutors in Bandung.  The training provided opportunities 
for collaboration and cooperation among the community of TIP 
 
JAKARTA 00000258  020 OF 026 
 
 
stakeholders. 
 
In addition, IOM trained police, prosecutors, immigration official 
and judges in a series of national workshops. 
 
Solidarity Center (ACILS) and ICMC completed a three year project 
with USAID in September 2009 called ATP. (Anti-Trafficking in 
Persons).  They targeted eight districts for special assistance in 
delivering effective services to trafficking victims.  These 
assisted the local task forces to develop policies and procedures 
for service provision.  They also trained mass social organization 
partners PKK, PGRI and FSPMI by delivering awareness raising 
information about human trafficking and safe migration to 224,151 
people.  With ATP assistance, the National Task force and local task 
forces in eight target districts held a two-day strategic planning 
workshop on August 12, 2009 in which stakeholders shared information 
and improved coordination. 
 
COOPERATION WITH OTHER GOVERNMENTS 
---------------------------------- 
 
The GOI cooperated with other governments, particularly Malaysia, in 
the investigation and prosecution of trafficking cases during 2009. 
Indonesian and Malaysian law enforcement officers worked together to 
stop trafficking operations. 
 
In the past, Indonesia and Australia cooperated in the 
investigations of Australian pedophiles victimizing children in Bali 
and the current case in Jakarta, and syndicates trafficking women to 
Australia.   We have a pedophile case being worked by the FBI with 
the assistance of the Indonesian government. 
 
 
EXTRADITION 
---------------------- 
 
Indonesia maintains extradition treaties with only five countries or 
territories, but very seldom utilizes this mechanism to seek 
extradition of its citizens, preferring less formal options such as 
rendering and deportation. Indonesia does not have a history of 
extraditing or rendering its own citizens to other countries. 
 
Indonesia did not extradite any traffickers during this reporting 
period and there were no reports of such requests from other 
countries. 
 
Indonesian police and officials have cooperated with foreign 
governments, including the U.S. and Australia, in the apprehension 
and repatriation of foreign sex offenders. 
 
The AGO office has reached an agreement to extradite an Australian 
who committed sex offenses to boys during his work in Indonesia. The 
offender is now waiting to be sent to Indonesia to be tried for a 
pedophile case he committed. 
 
 
FOREIGN PEDOPHILES PROSECUTED, DEPORTED 
--------------------------------------- 
 
The AGO has prepared final prosecution papers on Peter Smith, an 
Australian national being charged with sexual exploitation of street 
children in Jakarta.  The AGO is now finalizing their agreement with 
Australian government to extradite Peter to put him in trial in 
Indonesia. 
 
RATIFICATION OF INTERNATIONAL INSTRUMENTS 
---------------------------------- 
 
Indonesia has signed and in most cases ratified international 
instruments related to the worst forms of child labor and the 
trafficking of women and children: 
 
-- The House of Representatives ratified a United Nations protocol 
against human trafficking which aims to stop and punish human 
traffickers, particularly those trafficking women and children, and 
 
JAKARTA 00000258  021 OF 026 
 
 
is part of the UN Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime. 
The protocol will allow law enforcers to charge those responsible 
for trafficking people with the maximum possible sentence in a move 
to crack down on trafficking syndicates. 
 
-- In 2009 the House of Representatives ratified a UN protocol 
against human trafficking which aims to stop and punish human 
traffickers, particularly those trafficking women and children, and 
is part of the UN convention against transnational organized crime. 
 
-- In 2009 the House of Representatives ratified a UN protocol 
against smuggling of migrants. 
 
-- The GOI signed ILO Convention 182 concerning the elimination of 
the worst forms of child labor and ratified this with Law No. 1 of 
2000 on March 8, 2000. 
 
-- Indonesia ratified ILO Convention 29 on Forced Labor in 1950. 
The GOI ratified ILO Convention 105 on the Abolition of Forced Labor 
in 1999. 
 
-- Indonesia signed the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the 
Rights of the Child on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and 
Child Pornography, and ratified this in September 2001. 
 
-- Indonesia signed in December 2000 the UN Convention Against 
Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress 
and Punish Trafficking in Persons.  The GOI ratified the Convention 
and Protocol in 2009. 
 
-- On September 25, 2003, Indonesia signed the Convention for the 
Suppression of the Traffic in Persons and the Exploitation of the 
Prostitution of Others, 1950, and the Convention's Final Protocol. 
Indonesia has not yet ratified these instruments. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
IV. PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS 
----------------------------------------- 
 
GOVERNMENT ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS 
-------------------------------- 
 
National and local level assistance efforts continued or increased 
over the past year, although they remained small in comparison with 
the scope of the problem.  The Social Service Ministry operated 22 
shelters and trauma clinic, they called, RPTC or Rumah Perlindungan 
dan Trauma Center in various provinces in Indonesia.  These shelters 
are open to traumatized victims of violence and trafficking.  In 
2007 the Ministry ordered that comprehensive one stop social and 
medical services for victims be set up.  Police often refer victims 
to these shelters which provides psychologists, social worker, 
psychoanalyst, and medical teams. A referral system within this 
shelter will refer victims to other organizations and institution 
for special care.  Although government funds are available, the 
needs for training and capacity building are urgent.  The shelter 
will also need a special room in which to provide services and tools 
to assess victims privately before referring them for further care. 
 
 
The National Police operated numerous "integrated service centers," 
providing health services to TIP and other victims of violence. 
Four of these are full medical recovery centers specifically for 
trafficking victims.  The GOI pays for about a third of the cost of 
treating victims by offering intensive care treatment for the cost 
of ordinary care funded by IOM.  These trafficking victim recovery 
centers have treated thousands of patients since opening in 2005. 
The integrated service centers in Jakarta, Surabaya, Pontianak and 
Makassar provide support services such as temporary shelter, 
medical, psychological, and legal assistance.  The National Police 
established a "medical recovery center" at the National Police 
Hospital in Jakarta with the help of IOM. 
 
The health department provides 20 government funded hospitals, and 
will coordinate with private hospitals in coming years to assess, 
help, and cure victims specifically for their problems.  In 2009, 
 
JAKARTA 00000258  022 OF 026 
 
 
the GOI provided funding for the Ministry of Health for trafficking 
victims.  The MOH will pay all forensic evidence expenses for 
victims of trafficking or violence.  In 2009, police or prosecutors 
often referred victims to the health Ministry to pay for the 
forensic exams. 
 
The Regional Offices of Women's Empowerment also operates the 
Integrated Service Center for Empowering Women and Children (PTP), 
centers for women and children.  These provide medical, economic, 
and legal services to victims of trafficking and violence. 
 
 
GOI SUPPORT FOR NGO SERVICES TO VICTIMS 
----------------------------- 
 
The GOI provided some funding to domestic NGOs and civil society 
groups that supported services for TIP victims, usually as part of a 
larger program rather than one focused exclusively on trafficking. 
At the national level, for example, the People's Welfare 
Coordinating Ministry and the Social Affairs Ministry provided food 
assistance to social centers and safe houses nationwide.  According 
to ICMC and ACILS and other organizations, local governments across 
Indonesia funded NGOs to provide services to victims, including 
shelters, medical exams and training. 
 
In local raids, the police and AGO office did always not understand 
how best to deal with victims.  In identifying and referring 
victims, these officials need deeper insights from humanitarian 
agencies and social workers.  This need is easily filled by NGOs in 
big cities, but it is still a problem in many districts. In 
Surabaya, for example, NGOs emphasized their close cooperation with 
police in rescuing and protecting victims. 
 
 
SCREENING AND REFERRAL OF VICTIMS 
--------------------------------- 
 
In Jakarta, a screening system is in place at the Tanjung Priok 
seaport to refer cases of abused migrant workers and trafficking 
victims to the city's police hospital.  NGOs active in migrant 
worker advocacy also identify and refer returned migrant workers who 
need medical attention.  An NGO screening process was also in 
practice in Surabaya.  However, at Jakarta international airport's 
Terminal Four, screening by officials is sometimes cursory and many 
trafficking victims appear to slip through without being helped. 
 
Women's help desks at provincial and district level police offices 
typically have formal or informal arrangements in place with local 
NGO's to provide short-term shelter and a modicum of care for 
trafficking victims.  In general, however, long-term care does not 
appear to be available in the absence of private assistance through 
an NGO.  The AGO's office is concerned about how to assess victims 
in districts where no NGO is available to assist them and accompany 
the victims.  The issue of trafficking is still new for some areas 
in Indonesia, where no NGO or government agencies are available to 
help them deal with the situation. 
 
RESPECT FOR THE RIGHTS OF VICTIMS 
--------------------------------- 
 
The GOI's written policy, found in its annual trafficking report, is 
that, "from a legal perspective, the Government treats persons who 
are trafficked not as criminals, but as victims who need help and 
protection."  The People's Welfare Coordinating Ministry, the 
Women's Ministry, and training conducted by international NGOs and 
DOJ/ICITAP, reinforced this policy during the year in public 
settings and trainings of police and other officials.  Police who 
received ICITAP training demonstrated greater awareness of and 
respect for TIP victims. 
 
Local government and police practice varied, particularly in the 
lower ranks of law enforcement agencies.  Local governments, 
exercising greater authority under the nation's decentralization 
program, sometimes enacted regulations that tend to treat trafficked 
prostitutes as criminals, contrary to national policy.  In many 
 
JAKARTA 00000258  023 OF 026 
 
 
instances, GOI officials and police actively protected and assisted 
victims.  In other cases, police officers treated victims, 
particularly trafficked prostitutes, as criminals, subjected them to 
detention, and took advantage of their vulnerability to demand 
bribes and sexual services.  The media and lower level officials, 
including police, frequently failed to protect victims' identities 
and commonly provided victims' names to the public. 
 
The GOI's policy is not to detain or imprison trafficking victims. 
Police implementation of this policy varies in practice.  Not all 
local government laws comply with this policy.  Local police often 
arrested prostitutes, presumably including trafficking victims, who 
operated outside recognized prostitution zones on charges of 
violating public order.  Police raids on prostitute areas commonly 
resulted in the arrest of prostitutes, rather than users or pimps. 
On occasion, the police detained victims, sometimes to gain their 
testimony or in the belief they were protecting the victims from 
traffickers.  In other cases, police detained victims in order to 
extract bribes. 
 
There was a growing understanding of the need to protect Indonesian 
victims of trafficking.  This included case of foreign prostitutes 
trafficked to Indonesia.  They were screened for trafficking and the 
GOI worked with the governments of the countries of origin for the 
humane repatriation of victims. 
 
ENCOURAGING VICTIMS TO ASSIST INVESTIGATIONS/PROSECUTIONS 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
The GOI encourages victims to assist in the investigation and 
prosecution of traffickers.  The GOI reported that victims 
frequently were reluctant or refused to provide testimony out of 
shame and fear of retribution against themselves and their 
families. 
 
There have been reports of police officers who refused to receive 
complaints from trafficking victims, but insisted instead that 
victims and traffickers reach an informal settlement (for example, 
payment of debts in return for a prostitute's release from a 
brothel). 
 
In order to enforce law and apprehend more traffickers, witness 
testimony is vital. The AGO office reported that they have limited 
funds to facilitate bringing witnesses from far away. 
 
 
PROTECTIONS FOR VICTIMS AND WITNESSES 
------------------------------------- 
 
The functions of the women's help desks at provincial and district 
level police stations include protection of women and children 
during the police investigation process of crimes such as 
trafficking.  Some of the desks functioned reasonably well, while 
others did not function adequately. 
 
With the new anti-trafficking law and the Witness Protection law, 
police routinely offer witnesses special protection such as giving 
testimony via videotape.  The new Witness Protection Commission 
(LPSK) affords a mechanism to shelter and protect trafficking 
victims as well as a mechanism to fund their assistance and care. 
The legislation establishing the witness protection commission 
authorizes the Commission to protect victims and witnesses and 
arrange for their assistance and compensation. All women's desks set 
up special victim interview rooms in 2008 and 2009, in some cases 
including a video camera to film testimony. 
 
TRAINING FOR OFFICIALS TO RECOGNIZE/ASSIST VICTIMS 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
NGOs, international organizations, ICITAP, and DOJ OPDAT have 
assisted in the training of Indonesian officials, including how to 
identify and screen for trafficking victims.  IOM has worked with 
Indonesian diplomatic offices, police, attorney general's office, 
and in Malaysia to improve their screening procedures for potential 
trafficking victims. 
 
JAKARTA 00000258  024 OF 026 
 
 
 
ASSISTANCE TO REPATRIATED NATIONALS 
----------------------------------- 
 
The government of Indonesia (GOI) is taking trafficking issues 
seriously, and is focusing on the welfare of Indonesian citizens 
overseas. A government working group in conjunction with the 
International Organization for Migration (IOM) rescued and 
repatriated 425 Indonesian workers from Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, and 
Amman, Jordan on January 20, 2010.  On January 18, 2010, a 
collaborative group of government ministries facilitated the 
repatriation of 199 Indonesian migrant workers from the Indonesian 
Embassy shelter in Kuwaiti.  The National Police screened for 
minors.  IOM encouraged the Department of Social Welfare to screen 
for trafficking victims, who they then referred to IOM for medical 
treatment. 
 
NGOS WORKING WITH TRAFFICKING VICTIMS 
-------------------------------- 
Genta Foundation works closely with the police in evacuating 
trafficking victims from local brothels and provides shelter, 
protection and medical assistance at a privately funded shelter 
maintained at their offices.   The foundation has signed a 
memorandum of understanding with the police, which outlines the 
assistance the NGO will provide to rescued victims.  The members 
operate a program that counsels local prostitutes on HIV/AIDS. 
Whenever they find an underage prostitute, they ask the brothel 
owner to release the minor to the NGO.  If the owner refuses they 
notify the police, who then raid the establishment.   They were very 
complimentary of the work of the police who they said have rescued a 
number of trafficking victims. 
 
The Genta Foundation also rescues migrant workers although the 
majority of the cases they encounter involve children destined for 
domestic servitude.  While the police rescue labor trafficking 
victims, NGO representatives stated that the police do not initiate 
enough criminal cases. The NGO interlocutors were only aware of one 
case involving a labor recruitment firm which is presently pending 
in court.  They also criticized the Law on the Protection of Migrant 
Workers as poorly drafted, vague and difficult to apply in the 
field.  They added that police need training on how to investigate 
and prosecute labor trafficking cases. 
 
Rescued victims typically spend two weeks at the Genta shelter 
before being returned home; the foundation carefully investigates 
the family before repatriation to make sure the victim will not be 
re-trafficked when returned. During those two weeks, victims receive 
medical and psychological assistance and counseling, and if 
necessary, victims can stay longer.  Genta reports that their close 
cooperation with the police, social services and the Manpower 
Ministry effectively facilitates this reepatriation. 
 
 After a broad discussion of human trafficking, the role of NGOs and 
NGO/police relations, and transnational criminal issues, the Center 
inquired whether Embassy RLA would participate in a human 
trafficking course at the law school, as well as a special program 
for NGOs sponsored by the Center to address how law enforcement can 
work with NGOs to ensure trafficking victim assistance and 
protection.  Embassy RLA agreed to return in May to participate in 
these programs. 
 
Some of the more prominent NGOs are Solidaritas Perempuan (Jakarta), 
LBH-Apik (Jakarta and West Kalimantan), Mitra Perempuan, Derap 
Warapsari, Kalyanamitra, Yayasan Mitra Kesehatan dan Kemanusiaan or 
YMKK (Bantam), Rifka Anisa (Yogyakarta), Asa Puan (West Kalimantan) 
and LADA (Lampung).  Some labor unions also provided services to 
trafficking victims.  The activities of these groups related to TIP 
include:  legal assistance, prevention and education programs, 
medical services, clinics for children, research and advocacy, 
counseling, reproductive health, HIV/AIDS prevention, and shelters. 
More NGOs have emerged over the past several years, including 
Migrant Care, currently a leading advocacy body for migrant worker 
rights and anti-trafficking. 
 
The GOI continued strong cooperation with NGOs over the past year in 
 
JAKARTA 00000258  025 OF 026 
 
 
the area of assistance to trafficking victims.  In some cases 
government offices relied heavily on NGO input and advice.  GOI 
offices provided licenses to organizations and access to trafficking 
victims, included NGOs on national and local action committees, and 
interceded with law enforcement agencies in some cases to permit 
NGOs to carry out their activities.  NGOs frequently interacted with 
the police, though mutual suspicions limited the interaction in some 
areas. 
 
------------------ 
¶V. HEROES 
----------------- 
 
Lita Anggraini, an activist for domestic workers rights, is 41 years 
old.  She is the coordinator of the National Network for Domestic 
Worker Advocacy (Jala PRT), and advocates passionately for the 
rights of domestic workers.  Jala PRT works to ensure that domestic 
workers are aware of their rights, and are acknowledged as well as 
legally protected as workers. 
 
She came to Jakarta in 2008 to help run Jala PRT, an umbrella 
organization for 35 similar-minded groups across the country 
established in 2004.  Lita's motivation is to change the public's 
mindset about domestic workers, making sure the rights of domestic 
workers, both as citizens and workers are recognized and protected. 
 
Most domestic workers in Indonesia - the country with reportedly the 
largest number of domestic workers employed worldwide - ae women 
from rural areas who have very little edcation. Domestic workers 
have consequently been arginalized, as they are often looked down 
on as econd-class citizens.  They are also prone to physcal, 
social and sexual abuse.  But Lita retorts hat domestic workers 
perform tasks that are as dgnified as other jobs in the formal 
sector.  Domstic workers play a crucial role in the society, 
nabling other individuals to develop themselves an carry out their 
jobs. 
 
To help empower domestc workers, Lita set up a domestic worker 
school t RTND's headquarters i(n o*gyakarta in 2003 to provide 
thr`-(month-long corrses.  Participants are trained not only become 
r"ofessional domestic workers but also citizens whouunderstand their 
rights as workers and can fend for themselves in time of trouble. 
By setting up as"chool, she said, she wanted to show the public thtt 
domestic work also required skills. At the sam  time, she is helping 
domestic workers realize taat with each task well performed will 
come a sense of satisfaction and a feeling of respect. 
 
Whil  joining the course, participants are also advisedtto form 
their own organizations to increase thei  bargaining power, fight 
for their rights, reasoaable wages and working hours, as well as be 
treated like workers, not slaves. To achieve these objeci(ves, with 
the help of organizations she either hhairs or joins, Lita campaigns 
for the rights ofd omestic workers through various media. 
 
Section  of the public have also recognized the need for domestic 
workers to be protected by law.  In 2005, a la PRT prepared a draft 
bill concerning the proeection of domestic workers and proposed it 
to the House of Representatives for deliberation.  It was once 
included in the House's 2004-2009 list of national legislation 
programs (Prolegnas) but was never discussed.  Only this year did it 
finally become a priority for the 2010 Prolegnas. 
 
Promising developments, according to Lita, have also been seen at 
the international level with the International Labor Organization 
(ILO) discussing legal instruments to protect domestic workers 
either in the form of a convention or recommendations. She hoped the 
Asian Domestic Worker Network and the International Domestic Worker 
Network, co-established by RTND in 2005 and 2006, would encourage 
people to respect the work of domestic workers. 
 
Lita, an alumnus of the International Relations Department of Gadjah 
Mada University's School of Social and Political Sciences, is 
planning to establish a domestic work institute to help speed up the 
struggle for domestic workers' rights. The institute is for anyone 
who wants to know more about domestic workers, to foster in them a 
 
JAKARTA 00000258  026 OF 026 
 
 
sense of pride in their job. She hopes the institute would take off 
either in Jakarta, Semarang or Yogyakarta in two years time. 
(source: Jakarta Post) 
 
 
------------------ 
VI. BEST PRACTICES 
------------------ 
Success stories: 
 
RAIDs and CROSS-DISTRICT JOINT INVESTIGATION 
 
The INP conducted raids in several places in the hope to find 
trafficking victims, illegal drugs use and internal affairs control 
activities. In some raids, the police found and apprehend their 
officers supporting trafficking activities. 
 
In December 2009, the district police from Aceh Singkil, Aceh, and 
Southern Tapanuli, North Sumatera secured 4 female victims, and 
unveiled and apprehended a female pimp, allegedly the head of 
syndication of trafficking from Aceh to North Sumatera and other 
parts of Sumatera to be recruited as sex workers.  The police from 
Singkil investigated a report from a victim escaping from one of the 
caf/ brothels in North Sumatera.  The Singkil police coordinated 
with Southern Tapanuli CID and caught Ramhat, one of the 
accomplices, who showed them where the brothel was located.  Rahmat 
recruited these girls promising a better job. Some even had romantic 
relations with him. The cases are still ongoing. 
 
On 17 June, 2009, District Police in Subang apprehended 2 men and 
rescued 5 women that were to be trafficked to Bali. They were 
promised work in the tourism industry in Bali. The prosecution is 
ongoing (sources: INP). 
 
On August 25, 2009, District police in Mataram stopped seven women 
who were accompanied by another woman in a bus terminal in Bali. 
The leader of the group told police that her brother in Bali would 
provide work there for the other women.  The police did not find any 
legal supporting documents or representative from any recruitment 
service to corroborate this. 
 
The establishment of a special unit for Women and Children (PPA) 
services within the police body nationwide as the first point of 
contact for trafficking victims has contributed to the enforcement 
of TIP laws in many parts of the country.  The National Police 
Decree No. 10 of 2007 was enacted on July 6, 2007, although such 
units have existed for several years in some provincial and district 
police unit.  The PPA in many districts have developed a 
communication mechanism among public prosecutor office, NGOS, and 
counterparts' government agencies in health, social, and women 
empowerment at the local level.  The PPA has apprehended many 
criminals and successfully increased public awareness.  People may 
now simply go to the police station to ask the police about women 
and children's rights.  The PPA unit in North Sulawesi, Aceh, West 
Java, West Kalimantan, Jakarta, Bali, and many other places have 
received reports from the public and proceeded with their 
investigations accordingly.  Due to budgetary limitations, in many 
instances, the police have had to self-fund investigations and 
travel at their own expense. Coordination and support from local 
government, district or municipal governments is necessary to 
resolve the issue and to maximize the impact of their work. 
 
# HUME 
1