10SANTODOMINGO21
RESULTS OF 1/18 HEMISPHERIC PREPARATORY CONVERENCE ON HAITI
Tue Jan 19 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Santo Domingo
VZCZCXRO2228
OO RUEHAG RUEHAO RUEHCD RUEHDF RUEHGD RUEHHO RUEHIK RUEHLZ RUEHMC
RUEHNG RUEHNL RUEHRD RUEHROV RUEHRS RUEHSL RUEHSR RUEHTM
DE RUEHDG #0021/01 0192043
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O R 192043Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY SANTO DOMINGO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0546
INFO EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVE
WESTERN HEMISPHERIC AFFAIRS DIPL POSTS
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC
RHMCSUU/CDR USSOCOM MACDILL AFB FL
RHMFISS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RHMFIUU/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 0014
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 SANTO DOMINGO 000021 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL EAID ECON PGOV HA DR
SUBJECT: RESULTS OF 1/18 HEMISPHERIC PREPARATORY CONVERENCE ON HAITI 
RELIEF AND RECONSTRUCTION EFFORTS 
 
SUMMARY 
 
 
 
¶1.  Dominican Rebublic (DR) President Leonel Fernandez, on 1/18/10, 
hosted a hemispheric preparatory meeting for a future international 
conference on elaborating a strategic plan for the reconstruction 
of Haiti.  He proposed that a coordinating committee be created 
made up of Haiti, the DR, CARICOM, the UN, the EU, the OAS, the Rio 
Group, the U.S., Canada, Brazil and the Inter-American Development 
Bank.  Fernandez also proposed that the Canadian initiative to hold 
Friends of Haiti meeting in Montreal on 1/25 include the 
coordinating committee members and be considered a follow-on to 
today's session.  At Haitian President Preval's request, the 
principal Haiti reconstruction strategy meeting would then be held 
in the DR in April, followed by the unveiling of a "Plan of Action" 
at the 05/16-18/10 EU-Latin American Summit in Madrid.  The 
Dominican hosts circulated a draft "Declaration of Santo Domingo," 
which states that the April meeting in the DR will be "convoked" by 
the Eureopean Union (seemingly influenced by visiting Spanish Vice 
President  Maria Teresa Fernandez de la Vega).  In addition, 
Fernandez  suggested that Caribbean nations' debts to the Paris 
Club be paid into a Haiti reconstruction fund.  The UN rep insisted 
that MINUSTAH be in charge of all security in Haiti, with other 
foreign military forces limited to humanitarian relief operations, 
and stressed that any organizations deploying resources to Haiti be 
self-sustaining.  WHA A/S Valenzuela spoke on the USG's long-term 
commitment to Haiti reconstruction, highlighted SECSTATE's call for 
the creation of a Coordination Center in Haiti to manage the 
distribution of assistance, noted that the U.S. recognizes 
MINUSTAH's primary role in providing security, which our military 
forces will support but not supplant, and recognized the efforts of 
the DR's government and people in the Haiti relief effort.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
 
 
¶2.  Attendees at the meeting included Haitian President Preval, 
Spanish Vice President Fernandez de la Vega (also speaking for the 
EU), OAS Secretary General Insulza, CARICOM Chairman Carrington, 
the Prime Ministers of Trinidad and Tobago, Jamaica, Dominica, 
Barbados and the Bahamas, high-level diplomatic representatives 
from Canada, Brazil, Chile and Mexico, and representatives from the 
International Committee of the Red Cross, the United Nations, the 
Inter-American Development Bank, and the World Bank.  WHA A/S 
Arturo Valenzuela headed the U.S. delegation, accompanied by 
Charge, USAID Director, Pol-Econ Counselor, Information Officer, 
S/P Peter Harrell and PRM Guy Lawson. 
 
 
 
STATEMENTS BY THE COUNTRIES AND ORGANIZATIONS 
 
 
 
¶3.  President Fernandez opened the meeting and then called on the 
head of each delegation to make a statement.  Following these 
interventions, Fernandez summarized the meeting's conclusions and 
Spanish VP Fernandez de la Vega suggested that these be 
incorporated in a "Declaration of Santo Domingo" (operative text at 
para 6).  The gist of participants' comments follows: 
 
 
 
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC - PRESIDENT LEONEL FERNANDEZ 
 
 
 
n  The Haiti earthquake was an unimaginable catastrophe 
 
n  There is the need to concentrate on the immediate task of relief 
and reconstruction, but there is also the need for a long-term 
strategic plan aimed at achieving sustainable development in Haiti, 
including long-term financing of this plan 
 
n  To develop this plan, he proposes the creation of a Permanent 
Working Committee 
 
n  The international community has to make sure that assistance to 
Haiti does not fade away once the earthquake and its aftermath 
disappears from the front pages 
 
 
 
SPAIN (Speaking for the EU) - VICE PRESIDENT MARIA TERESA FERNANDEZ 
DE LA VEGA 
 
 
 
n  Expresses full support for the DR's initiative 
 
n  Earlier that day in Brussels, EU cooperation ministers agreed to 
send an assistance package composed of search and rescue teams, a 
logistics unit, air assets, engineers and security forces 
 
n  Congratulates the DR for the important role it is playing as a 
logistics platform 
 
n  Total assistance pledged to date from EU is 306 million Euros 
 
 
 
DOMINICA - PRIME MINISTER ROOSEVELT SKERRIT 
 
 
 
n  In the past, Haiti has not always received promised aid; this 
must not be repeated now 
 
n  CARICOM members are ready to work with the international 
community to rebuild Haiti 
 
n  Long-term development plan is needed 
 
 
 
ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES - SECRETARY GENERAL JOSE MIGUEL 
INSULZA 
 
 
 
n  OAS has created an assistance fund, contributing USD one million 
and hopes to collect USD 10 million in donations from Latin 
American companies 
 
n  It's facilities and staff in Haiti is at the disposition of the 
Haitian Government 
 
n  A single coordinating center is needed for the relief operation; 
suggests that this should include representatives from the UN, 
major donors, Chile, Brazil and CARICOM. 
 
 
 
HAITI - PRESIDENT RENE PREVAL 
 
 
 
n  Thanks President Fernandez and the DR for assistance, notes need 
to continue to strengthen ties between the two countries 
 
n  Thanks the international community for its rapid and massive 
assistance 
 
n  Priorities are to establish political and economic stability and 
recreate institutions 
 
n  Haiti was in a difficult situation before the earthquake, now 
need it not only to repair the damage but also to create jobs, 
reinforce democratic institutions and promote economic growth and 
development 
 
n  The reconstruction effort is above all the responsibility of the 
Haitian people themselves 
 
n  Need donors to better coordinate efforts and to follow the end 
use of aid being given 
 
 
USA - WHA ASSISTANT SECRETARY ARTURO VALENZUELA 
 
 
 
n  Secretary of State Hillary Clinton told President Preval the day 
before that the U.S. will provide all the assistance it can to 
Haiti, and that this is a long-term commitment 
 
n  The U.S. is coordinating its efforts closely with Haiti, the UN 
and the international community in one of the largest relief 
efforts in memory 
 
n  U.S. paratroopers delivered 130,000 rations last Saturday alone 
 
n  We recognize that MINUSTAH has the primary security role; U.S. 
forces will support MINUSTAH, not supplant it 
 
n  Secretary Clinton called for the creation of a Coordination 
Center in Haiti to improve organization and implementation of the 
relief effort 
 
n  The USG recognizes the assistance of the Government of the 
Dominican Republic (GoDR) and the Dominican people to the relief 
effort and will take this into account in its assistance programs 
to the DR 
 
n  The USG also salutes the efforts of other Caribbean nations, the 
OAS and the international institutions and organizations 
 
 
 
CANADA - FOREIGN MINISTER FOR THE AMERICAS PETER KENT 
 
 
 
n  Canada's long-term commitment to Haiti will continue and deepen 
 
n  Salutes President Fernandez's assistance, particularly in the 
opening of a humanitarian corridor across the island of Hispaniola. 
 
n  The previous day Canada held a conference call with the Friends 
of Haiti group and arranged for a 01/25/10 meeting in Montreal to 
focus on long-term planning 
 
n  It is important to turn this crisis into an opportunity 
 
 
 
BRAZIL - SECRETARY GENERAL OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS ANTONIO AGUIAR 
PATRIOTA 
 
 
 
n  Haiti needs a long-term aid program that builds on prior 
progress, especially in the consolidation of democracy 
 
n  Salutes the DR's assistance, which marks a new chapter in 
bilateral relations on Hispaniola and in the Caribbean 
 
n  Brazil will host a summit with CARICOM in April, where Haiti 
reconstruction will be a major agenda item 
 
n   At a UN Security Council meeting that day, the need to 
reinforce MINUSTAH will be addressed 
 
n  MINUSTAH must remain in charge of security, with other foreign 
military forces concentrating on distributing supplies 
 
n  Brazil has agreed to provide USD 15 million in immediate aid, of 
which USD five million has already been authorized 
 
n  Job creation is a priority, as is improving the agricultural 
sector 
 
 
 
CHILE - FOREIGN MINISTER MARIANO FERNANDEZ 
 
 
n  Agrees with Secretary Clinton's call for a single Coordinating 
Center in Haiti 
 
n  There is a lot of confusion in the provision of medical services 
there; the UN needs to move these facilities out from the airport 
area to outlying regions 
 
 
 
MEXICO - HEAD OF ECONOMIC AND INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION DEPARTMENT 
ROGELIO GRANGUILLHOME MORFIN 
 
 
 
n  Mexico is providing USD eight million in aid, has send over 200 
people to Haiti and is dispatching 1500 tons of supplies by boat 
 
n  Supports creation of a Coordinating Center 
 
n  There needs to be a comprehensive evaluation of reconstruction 
priorities, looking at the condition of Haitian industry and 
services; suggests the UN and IDB analyze economic impact of the 
earthquake, with particular focus on lost jobs and the financial 
sector 
 
n  MINUSTAH's mandate should be revised to reflect current needs, 
and Mexico is making a proposal on these lines to the UNSC 
 
n  Given existing logistical problems, Mexico is making its ports 
available for use as logistic platforms for Haiti relief efforts 
 
 
 
WORLD BANK - DIRECTOR FOR LATIN AMERICA YVONNE TSIKATA 
 
 
 
n  The World Bank has announced a USD 100 million grant for Haiti 
relief efforts, focused on infrastructure 
 
n  It will discuss priorities with the Government of Haiti 
 
n  In short-term humanitarian needs are greatest, and the Bank is 
looking at how it can re-allocate its current portfolio to meet 
this requirement 
 
n  The Bank will begin conducting a needs assessment on 01/25 
 
n  In conjunction with the International Monetary Fund, the Bank is 
working to get the Haitian payments system back up and running; its 
team is in Santo Domingo awaiting UN approval to go into Haiti 
 
n  The Bank also supports Secretary Clinton's call for a 
Coordination Center 
 
 
 
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO - PRIME MINISTER PATRICK MANNING 
 
 
 
n  CARICOM members are behind Haiti and will contribute what they 
can 
 
n  At last April's Summit of the America's, T&T proposed the 
creation of a Special Development Fund for Haiti; it is clear that 
now the time has come to move forward on this fund 
 
n  It is also time to forgive Haiti's foreign debt 
 
 
 
UNITED NATIONS - REPRESENTATIVE OF THE UNSYG FOR THE STABILIZATION 
AND PEACE MISSION IN HAITI EDMUNDO MULET 
 
 
 
n  UNSYG Moon has requested an additional 1500 police and 2000 
troops for MINUSTAH 
 
 
n  Thanks President Fernandez for offering 315 troops for border 
duties 
 
n  The DR's humanitarian corridor for relief supplies is also very 
important 
 
n  Agrees on the need for better strategic coordination in 
capitals, operational coordination in Port au Prince and tactical 
coordination in the field 
 
n  MINUSTAH is capable of providing security in Port au Prince and 
throughout the country 
 
n  Military forces from the U.S., EU, and Canada are coming, and 
the UN is preparing memorandum's of understanding with each to 
define roles 
 
n  These troops can help with distribution of food and supplies 
around the country 
 
n  UN is considering making different countries responsible for 
different geographic areas, with Canada taking over the west, the 
U.S. managing distribution in Port au Prince 
 
n  This would be akin to the Provincial Reconstruction Teams in 
Afghanistan 
 
n  The UN is very pleased with coordination of military forces to 
date 
 
n  The UN has made a "flash appeal" for USD 500 million in 
assistance, of which some two-thirds has been pledged 
 
n  This money needs to be supplied in cash as soon as possible 
 
n  The Haitian people need to be incorporated in the relief and 
reconstruction efforts, with payments for work; this will also 
promote stability and security 
 
n  UNDP is working on an action plan to bring this about 
 
n  The UN is working closely with the Haitian Government to define 
priorities, and will bring local authorities into the process, as 
they know their communities best 
 
n  In 15 days, FAO hopes to feed one million people, doubling that 
in a month. 
 
n  Logistics needs are great, the Port au Prince airport is small 
and the humanitarian corridor to Santo Domingo is getting 
overloaded, so the UN is looking at establishing a logistics 
platform in the Dominican province of Barahona, where there is an 
airport 
 
n  Assistance to the DR is needed to assist in the establishment of 
an efficient humanitarian corridor and move border control points 
to locations where they will create fewer bottlenecks 
 
n  MINUSTAH would like to establish a permanent office in Santo 
Domingo to coordinate these efforts 
 
n  All countries, organizations and NGOs sending people to Haiti 
must ensure that their deployments are completely self-sustaining, 
as Haiti cannot absorb people competing for the scarce resources 
there 
 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE OF THE RED CROSS - PRESIDENT TABATERU KONOE 
 
 
 
n  The ICRC is providing safe water to 100,000 people,delivered a 
250 bed hospital and is providing 16 emergency response teams, 
eight of which have already deployed 
 
n  Critical needs include food, water, shelter, psychological 
support and security 
 
 
JAMAICA - PRIME MINISTER BRUCE GOLDING 
 
 
 
n  The relief efforts administrative challenges must be addressed 
under the direction of President Preval and the Haitian Government; 
there should be no ambiguity as to who is in charge 
 
n  Jamaica offers itself as a logistics platform; Kingston airport 
can handle long-haul flights 
 
n  One need not mentioned is the care of the large number of 
orphans created by the earthquake 
 
n  Commitments to Haiti need to be fulfilled this time 
 
 
 
CARICOM - SECRETARY EDWIN CARRINGTON 
 
 
 
n  CARICOM will strengthen its office in Port au Prince 
 
 
 
INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
n  An emergency fund to provide care for 100,000 people has been 
established, USD 340 million in non-disbursed funds are at Haiti's 
disposition for relief and reconstruction efforts, and USD 110 
million in debt will be converted into grants 
 
n  These measures will not reduce planned support for Haiti in the 
future 
 
 
 
FERNANDEZ SUMS UP THE DISCUSSION 
 
 
 
¶4.  President Fernandez then summed up the discussion and made 
comments and proposals of his own as follows: 
 
 
 
n  There was agreement that Haiti faces immediate and long-term 
needs and that improved coordination is needed for both 
 
n  A central coordinating center is needed in Haiti to channel 
international assistance efficiently, and the possibility of 
creating geographic zones of responsibility needs to be explored 
 
n  Proposes that a Coordination Committee be formed to develop a 
strategic plan for Haitian reconstruction and development 
 
n  Adds that this Coordination Committee be made up of Haiti, the 
DR, CARICOM, the UN, the EU, the OAS, the Rio Group, the United 
States, Canada, Brazil and the IDB (when the Mexican rep asked if 
his country could be added, Fernandez replied that they would be 
present as head of the Rio Group) 
 
n  Suggests that the 01/25 ministerial meeting in Montreal serve as 
a follow-up to the 01/18 conference, and that all members of the 
Coordination Committee be invited to participate 
 
n  Proposes that the DR host another conference in April, at which 
the Coordination Committee will present its recommendations, adding 
that Haitian President Preval suggested that this meeting be held 
in the DR 
 
n  Proposes that a Plan of Action be adopted at or on the margins 
of the 05/16-18/10  EU-Latin America Summit in Madrid 
 
n  Estimates that Haiti will require USD two billion a year for the 
next five years  
 
n  Proposes that one way to raise part of this money is to have all 
Caribbean countries pay their debt service on Paris Club loans into 
a Haiti Development Fund 
 
n  Agreement that Haiti needs assistance in consolidating its 
democratic institutions and in developing food self-sufficiency, 
which will require assistance to the agricultural sector in 
addition to the recognized need for aid to rebuild schools, 
hospitals, ports, electricity generation, telecommunications and 
the tourism infrastructure 
 
n  The DR is honored to become part of MINUSTAH and is looking at 
building up its logistic capabilities at Barahona and at the Jimani 
border crossing 
 
 
 
SPANISH VP SEEKS TO CEMENT CONCLUSIONS IN DECLARATION 
 
 
 
¶5.  Spanish VP Fernandez de la Vega seconded Fernandez's 
conclusions and proposals regarding the formation of a Coordination 
Committee and the scheduling and location of future conferences 
(although she did not refer to the Dominican President's debt 
proposals) and stated that they should be incorporated in a 
"Declaration of Santo Domingo."  There was no vote on the Spanish 
VP's proposal and no one spoke out for or against it, and the 
meeting then concluded.  Subsequently, the GoDR hosts distributed 
the text of this Declaration to attendees, although none were asked 
to sign it. 
 
 
 
TEXT OF DECLARATION 
 
 
 
¶6.  Begin informal Embassy translation of operative text of 
Declaration (full Spanish text has been scanned and emailed to 
Haiti Task Force and WHA/CAR): 
 
 
 
(description of Haiti earthquake and aftermath) 
 
 
 
The Government and the people of Hait are and should continue being 
the principal protagonists of the reconstruction of their country 
and of their collective destiny.  But it is the responsibility of 
the international community to offer all of its help to convert the 
incertitude in confidence and skepticism in a vision of its shared 
future. 
 
 
 
For all of the above, the countries and organizations present in 
this meeting agree to promote the holding of an international 
conference that will have as its objective the elaboration of a 
Strategic Plan for the Reconstruction of Haiti that, in addition to 
emergency assistance, will contribute to reinforce in the medium- 
and long-term the social, economic and political viability and 
stability of Haiti. 
 
 
 
The conference will be convoked by the European Union and 
celebrated in the Dominican Republic. 
 
 
 
A Coordination Committee, made up of Haiti, the Dominican Republic, 
CARICOM, the United Nations, the European Union, the Organization 
of American States, the Rio Group, the United Staets, Canada, 
Brazil and the Inter-American Development Bank, created to this 
effect will develop the organization of said activity that will 
hold its first meeting on January 25 in Canada. 
 
 
A working group designated by this committee will elaborate a 
proposed Strategic Plan that will be submitted for debate in the 
first plenary meeting that that will be based on three points:  the 
Millennium Objectives, the "National Strategic Document  for Growth 
and Poverty Reduction 2008-2010," and the World Bank document known 
as "Options and Opportunities for Haiti" 
 
 
 
At the same time, it is agreed to propose to the G-20 that at its 
next meeting it studies the creation of a fund for the 
reconstruction of Haiti, taking into account experiences, such as 
the Iraq fund. 
 
 
 
The globalized world in which we live demands from us answers that 
are also global.  The countries and organizations present in this 
meeting believe that the future of Haiti merits that the 
international community combine its efforts. 
 
 
 
The Haitian crisis has again reaffirmed that in our globalized 
world no only government but also citizens feel that nothing that 
occurs to someone else is foreign to us.  We can and should 
construct a more just and human world. 
 
 
 
For thousands of Haitians this tragedy has been an end, it is our 
responsibility that for millions of citizens of this and other 
continents that it be a new beginning. 
 
 
 
End text. 
 
 
 
COMMENT 
 
 
 
¶7.  President Fernandez, with the cooperation of Haitian President 
Preval and  Spanish VP Fernandez de la Vega, deftly engineered the 
01/18/10 conference to place the DR and its Caribbean neighbors at 
the center of international efforts to provide assistance to 
Haitian relief and reconstruction.  Septel will report on A/S 
Valenzuela's subsequent separate private discussions with Fernandez 
and with Spanish VP Fernandez de la Vega on this and other topics. 
A/S Valenzuela has reported via e-mail his conversations with 
Chilean Foreign Minister Fernandez, Brazilian Sec. Gen. Patriota, 
Haitian President Preval, Jamaican PM golding and Canadian Foreign 
Minister for the America's Kent.  END COMMENT. 
 
 
 
¶8.  A/S Valenzuela cleared on this cable. 
Lambert