05PARIS7715
USUNESCO:  UNESCO CHOOSES KHARTOUM AS ARAB
Mon Nov 14 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS PARIS 007715 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FROM USMISSION TO UNESCO 
 
E.O.:  12958:  N/A 
TAGS: SCUL SU UNESCO
SUBJECT:  USUNESCO:  UNESCO CHOOSES KHARTOUM AS ARAB 
CULTURAL CAPITAL 2005 
 
¶1.  On November 9, Director General Matsuura presided 
over a series of events at UNESCO headquarters to mark 
the naming of Khartoum as "Arab Cultural Capital 2005." 
The events included discussions on Nubian archaeology 
and a performance of Sudanese music.  According to an 
earlier UNESCO press release the event was organized by 
the Division of Cultural Policies and Intercultural 
Dialogue in cooperation with the permanent delegation 
of Sudan to UNESCO and the Arab Group at UNESCO, as 
part of UNESCO's Arabia Plan, which promotes dialogue 
between Arab culture and other cultures in the world. 
 
¶2.  During his remarks at the opening, the Director 
General said, "Finally the Organization is today 
joining other UN agencies.in the international 
community's efforts to establish the basis for a 
lasting peace." . (UNESCO) "will promote respect for 
the cultural diversity of the whole population in the 
North as well as in the South." 
 
 
¶3.  Previous Arab cultural capitals were: Riyadh 
(2000), Kuwait City (2001), Amman (2002), Rabat (2003) 
and Sanaa (2004). The next Arab cultural capitals will 
be: Oman (2006) and Algiers (2007). 
 
¶4.  Comment:  UNESCO has a good track record using 
education, science and culture to promote Mideast peace 
and may be able to play a role in promoting Sudanese 
reconciliation.  Still, given Sudan's record of 
genocide and other unmentionables, we are troubled that 
UNESCO has chosen to highlight Sudanese culture in such 
a positive light and that the Director General chose to 
associate himself with this event. 
 
 
KOSS