05PARIS5073
UN REFORM: CSD NOW FOCUSED ON ACCESS TO ENERGY -
Thu Jul 21 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

211645Z Jul 05UNCLAS PARIS 005073 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR IO/T, OES/PCI, EUR/WE, ROME FOR FODAG, NAIROBI FOR 
PERMREP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV ECON EAID AORC FR UN
SUBJECT: UN REFORM: CSD NOW FOCUSED ON ACCESS TO ENERGY - 
FRENCH INTERIM REPLY TO U.S. POINTS 
 
REF: STATE 114906 
 
¶1.  In June, Embassy provided sustainable development points 
contained para 10 reftel to  Marc Trouyet, an officer in the 
United Nations and International Organization Division of the 
French Foreign Ministry, for information or comment.  He 
recently provided an informal, interim note to the Embassy 
(see para two).  He also indicated he hoped to be in a 
position to provide additional views particularly about his 
government's position going into the next CSD cycle, after 
upcoming inter-agency discussions. 
 
¶2.  Trouyet noted that the French government "generally" 
agrees with the U.S. position that the results of the 
Commission on Sustainable Development should translate 
themselves concretely into "improvements on the ground" and 
should not lead to negotiation of yet more objectives. That 
is not to say that certain political options might not still 
be required to be negotiated to assist implementation of 
Johannesburg goals.  He cited as an example the lifting of 
obstacles which hinder the mobilization of personnel or 
capital.  On the other hand, the French would wish that the 
CSD continue to serve as a place of dialogue between all the 
interested parties and governments on the objectives of 
sustainable development.  In this regard, the French 
government hopes that the CSD would remain the place for 
articulating, forming up, and realizing public/private 
partnerships.  The French government does not wish to see the 
CSD reduced to a marketplace of partnerships ("une foire aux 
partenariats"), nor serve as a beauty pageant ("un concours") 
for projects. 
 
STAPLETON