06PARIS2607
MEDIA REACTION REPORT  ran China Rising Oil Prices
Thu Apr 20 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 002607 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR; IIP/RW; IIP/RNY; BBG/VOA; IIP/WEU; AF/PA; 
EUR/WE /P/SP; D/C (MCCOO); EUR/PA; INR/P; INR/EUC; PM; OSC 
ISA FOR ILN; NEA; WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC/WEUROPE; DOC FOR 
ITA/EUR/FR AND PASS USTR/PA; USINCEUR FOR PAO; NATO/PA; 
MOSCOW/PA; ROME/PA. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR FR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REPORT  ran China Rising Oil Prices 
PARIS  hursday, April 20, 2006 
 
(A) SUBJECTS COVERED IN TODAY'S REPORT: 
 
Iran 
China 
Rising Oil Prices 
 
B) SUMMARY OF COVERAGE: 
 
Today's front pages are extremely diverse: Le Figaro devotes 
its lead to the political match between Segolene Royal and 
Nicolas Sarkozy, who "Distance Their Rivals" in the race for 
the 2007 presidential election. The first poll, one year 
before the elections, shows that in the first round Segolene 
Royal would get 34% of the votes, Sarkozy 30%, Le Pen 10% and 
Villepin 6%. In a run off between Royal and Sarkozy, Royal 
gets 51% and Sarkozy 49%. 
 
Liberation concentrates on "Oil and Those Who Profit from 
Rising Prices." (See Part C) Meanwhile the economic press 
leads with the IMF's world growth projections of 4.9%, but La 
Tribune headlines: "Europe's Benefits Little From World 
Economic Growth." With only 2% projected growth for Europe, 
the editorial in La Tribune is entitled "Crumbs for Europe" 
and notes that at the G7 Europe will be "invited to proceed 
with structural reforms" in order to "get back on the saddle 
of worldwide competition." Les Echos carries an op-ed 
entitled "Free-Trade: George Bush's Hindered Ambitions" and 
comments that while the White House is traditionally "an 
active agent" of free trade around the world, however 
"President Bush's weakened position" is making it more 
difficult for him to make progress in major negotiations, 
such as at the WTO in the DOHA round. 
 
Iran, China, and Hamas and the Middle East dominate today's 
international stories. (See Part C) La Croix's question of 
the day is: "Has Hamas Missed an Opportunity to Show it is 
Responsible?" According to Bordeaux University Professor 
Laetitia Bucaille: "Hamas is under pressure from Islamic 
movements and the government's margin of maneuver is very 
narrow. Hamas does not want to cut itself from the support of 
its base, which is in fact its only asset." Le Figaro stages 
a debate between Shimon Peres and Boutros Boutros-Ghali on 
"The Middle East of Tomorrow." Peres: "A large majority of 
the Palestinian population wants peace, in contrast with some 
of its leaders, and is ready to make major compromises. And 
this despite Hamas and violence." BBG: "There have been many 
missed opportunities for peace Today, in order to reach that 
point that was missed, the international community must give 
its all. But that support has become improbable, now that the 
theatre of operations in Iraq has distracted everyone's 
attention from the Israeli-Palestinian conflict." 
 
Le Monde carries on its front page the Rocky Mountain News' 
color photo, which won the 2006 Pulitzer prize, showing a 
casket covered with a U.S. flag, a grieving relative and a 
Marine. Le Monde notes that both the Pulitzer photo and 
drawing prizes have gone to scenes depicting the Iraqi war. 
The drawing, a WHY made up of the 2000 names of U.S. soldiers 
killed in Iraq, appears on page 6. 
 
Liberation characterizes yesterday's cabinet changes at the 
White House as "Musical Chair at the White House." Despite 
the changes in the faces, the Administration is not planning 
to "refresh" its policy perspectives as called for by 
Congressional critics. President Bush continues to operate in 
a "closed bubble" with his inner circle. Le Figaro reports: 
"Bush loses his spokesman and sends Karl Rove away." For 
Philippe Gelie, Scott McClellan had been showing signs of 
"wear and tear." "He chose a cabinet reshuffle to bow out and 
not call attention to his departure." Gelie also comments: 
"The President needs new blood to bring up his ratings" 
 
(C) SUPPORTING TEXT/BLOCK QUOTES: 
 
Iran 
"Iran: Diplomacy at an Impasse" 
Corine Lesnes in left-of-center Le Monde (04/20): "While for 
President Bush 'every option remains on the table,' 
Ahmadinejad is reiterating his threats But while President 
Bush insisted that 'he wanted to resolve the crisis through 
diplomacy,' the Pentagon continues to look at detailed 
scenarios for a military intervention in Iran." 
 
"Iran: Pragmatist or Fanatic?" 
Alexandre Adler in right-of-center Le Figaro (04/20): "The 
Iranian President wants war, or at the least a confrontation 
with the U.S. and Israel He has just crossed a new yellow 
line in his verbal escalation But in fact the beast is 
wounded and this is why it roars so loud." 
 
China 
 
"American Impatience" 
Philippe Gelie in right-of-center Le Figaro (04/20): "The 
Americans are showing their impatience with Hu-Jintao who 
will be judged on his public statements and his commitments 
While many subjects of controversy remain between the two 
super powers ,the growing trade deficit is helping 
Washington's pessimists gain ground The step from 'strategic 
competitor' to 'responsible partner' goes beyond economic 
stakes: Hu Jintao will be expected to clarify his stance 
regarding North Korea and Iran." 
 
"China-U.S.: The Infernal Duo that Electrifies the World's 
Economy." 
Muriel Motte in right-of-center Le Figaro (04/20): "The day 
will come when China, which wants to 'improve the living 
conditions of its population,' will find a better use for its 
875 billion dollars than the purchase of U.S. Treasury bonds. 
That day Beijing will have decided that a competitive 
exchange rate for the Yuan is no longer needed. Chinese 
exports will certainly suffer. And the Americans will re- 
discover that Canada, Mexico, Japan and Europe also have a 
trade surplus with the U.S. and that the only way to reduce 
it is still to consume less." 
 
Rising Oil Prices 
 
"Cosmetic Changes" 
Gerard Dupuy in left-of-center Liberation (04/20): "The 
changes that politicians called for when oil hit 50 dollars a 
barrel only 12 months ago were mere cosmetic changes. Now the 
question is, how can we live with oil at 70 dollars a barrel? 
President George Bush who represents oil interests and is 
indifferent to the ecological parameters of this issue is 
explaining to Americans that they have to get out of oil 
dependence as quickly as possible. But Bush has yet to add 
gas tax increases to his good words. The same brilliant 
inaction is evident in France where the Finance Minister has 
called for another round table with oil companies  hich 
produced nothing last year." STAPLETON 
 
 
4