06PARIS683
INVITATION TO A MULTILATERAL CONSULTATION AMONG
Thu Feb 02 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS PARIS 000683 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/ERA ECKERT 
 
CABLE SENT FROM STRASBOURG 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: COE
SUBJECT: INVITATION TO A MULTILATERAL CONSULTATION AMONG 
CONTRACTING STATES TO THE CONVENTION ON CYBERCRIME (T-CY), 
20-21 MARCH 2006, COUNCIL OF EUROPE, STRASBOURG, FRANCE. 
 
¶1. This is an action request. See para 4. 
 
¶2. The USG is invited to send a representative to the 1st 
Convention of Cybercrime for a Multilateral Consultation 
Among Contracting States (T-CY), at the Council of Europe 
(COE), Strasbourg, France, 20-21 March 2006.  The meeting 
will begin at 09h30 on the 20th and will end at 17h30 on the 
21st.  Working documents will be available on the Council of 
Europe website (www.coe.int/economiccrime) in time for the 
meeting.  The meeting will be held in Room 5 of the Palais 
de l'Europe (the site of the COE). 
 
¶3. The draft agenda includes: 
 
- Exchange of views on the signature, ratification, and 
accession of the Convention on Cybercrime and its Additional 
Protocol 
 
- Identification of any problems concerning the 
effectiveness of the Convention, including the effects of 
any declarations or reservations 
 
- Exchange of information on significant legal, policy or 
technological developments concerning cybercrime and the 
collection of evidence in electronic form, including 
strengthening the role of law enforcement officials, 
strengthening the cooperation between law enforcement and 
the private sector, and strengthening the operation of the 
24/7 network and central authorities 
 
- Possible extension or amendment of the Convention of 
Cybercrime 
 
- Assistance which may be available to the States to enable 
them to amend their legislation or train law enforcement 
officials 
 
¶4. Please contact both Ms Dominique Wulfran and Strasbourg 
CG Frankie Reed (reedfa@state.gov) concerning any planned 
attendance.  Wulfran, who needs to know the name, function, 
address, e-mail address, fax number, and working language of 
the USG representative, can be reached by fax at 33-3-88-41- 
27-94.  The USG expert representative will have observer 
status - no voting rights or defrayal of expenses from the 
Council of Europe.  Hotel information can be found at 
http://home.coe.int/t/E/Travel. 
 
STAPLETON