06PARIS393
UNESCO:  SOCIAL AND HUMAN SCIENCES SECTOR
Fri Jan 20 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

201434Z Jan 06UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 000393 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FROM USMISSION UNESCO PARIS 
 
STATE FOR IO/UNESCO DOUGLAS ROHN 
STATE FOR NSC GENE WHITNEY 
STATE FOR NSF ROSE GOMBAY 
STATE FOR HHS BILL STEIGER AND LIZ YUAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AORC KSCA SOCI UNESCO
SUBJECT:  UNESCO:  SOCIAL AND HUMAN SCIENCES SECTOR 
SEEKS TO CHART COURSE IN ADVANCE OF OVERALL REVIEW 
 
REFTELS  A. 05 PARIS 5862   B. 05 PARIS 7446 
 
¶1.   SUMMARY AND COMMENT:  On January 11, Dr. Marc 
Renaud, former president of the Social Sciences and 
Humanities Research Council of Canada, outlined for 
selected delegations his recommendations regarding the 
future role of UNESCO's Social and Human Sciences 
Sector:  to act as an "observatory"; to be a key bridge 
to policy-making; to be a "capacity builder" by helping 
governments develop appropriate science policies.   The 
Social and Human Sciences Sector (SHS) hired Renaud to 
study the sector and submit recommendations on ways to 
renew and strengthen its programs.  Participants 
invited to attend the meeting, which was organized by 
the Canadian delegation, included some Geneva Group 
members and Brazil; during the discussion period, many 
expressed skepticism about the division's programs and 
activities.  The day before, Renaud participated in a 
panel discussion on the Sector's MOST (Management of 
Social Transformations) program, presided by SHS Sector 
ADG Pierre Sane.  This was an opportunity for certain 
delegations - South Africa, Senegal, and Argentina -- 
to express support for the SHS Sector, and for its 
leader, in advance of an overall review of the SHS and 
Natural Sciences sectors that may lead to a merger. 
These meetings highlight the extent to which the 
impending overall review (REFS A AND B) has added 
urgency to the SHS Sector's efforts to retool its 
programs. 
¶2.   U.S. Mission TO UNESCO believes that some of the 
functions and initiatives outlined by Renaud are not 
appropriate for the SHS sector.  We will meet with 
Renaud to express our concerns at the proposed 
expansion of the sector's role in advance of the 
overall review of the two Science programs. END SUMMARY 
AND COMMENT. 
 
¶3.   Renaud began his presentation by stressing that 
although he had been hired to evaluate the SHS Sector 
before the General Conference decision to launch an 
overall review of the SHS Sector and the Natural 
Sciences Sector, he hoped that his work could inform 
that review.  During his presentation, "UNESCO and the 
Social Sciences:  A Unique `Brokering' Role", Renaud 
asserted that "UNESCO should not be a grant agency" or 
a research center.  Rather, the SHS sector can play a 
unique role in the UN system by acting as a world 
"observatory" (on issues including migration, ethics, 
cultural diversity, etc); as a bridge between 
policymakers and researchers (by organizing conferences 
and developing tools); and as a capacity builder by 
assisting in the development of sound science policies. 
 
¶4.   Renaud explained that the Social and Human 
Sciences sector is currently promoting two initiatives. 
The first initiative is a long-term project under the 
auspices of the Management of Social Transformations 
(MOST) Program.  This project includes the launch of a 
"Google-type" search engine for policy-makers.  Through 
this search engine, policymakers will have free access 
to relevant social science research results that can 
assist them in decision making.    Success will be 
contingent on whether member states subscribe to the 
idea of the database and actually submit research 
material.  The second initiative is a conference to be 
held in Buenos Aires in February 2006 that more than 
1,000 participants, including from UN agencies, have 
been invited to attend.  The objectives that organizers 
hope to achieve include: securing member state support 
for the search engine developed by the MOST program; 
gaining agreement with other UN agencies on a division 
of roles in the social sciences; strengthening networks 
among researchers on the global (vice regional) level; 
and enhancing dialogue between  researchers and 
policymakers, particularly in the context of a forum 
devoted to regional integration organizations. 
¶5.   Renaud suggested that a possible step towards 
greater diffusion of information from the SHS programs 
would be to limit the number of single report brochures 
and books that are published in favor of a "yearbook", 
a single publication including all  related studies. 
¶6.   Renaud concluded by seeking feedback from member 
states.  The German representative asked Renaud which 
issues and themes - rather than functions -- should be 
the priorities of the SHS sector.  Currently, some 
programs, such as the study of migration, remain extant 
for much longer than is necessary.  Discussion of this 
topic concluded with the agreement by participants that 
there is a scattering of priorities in the SHS sector 
and that a system of prioritization needs to be put 
into place.  US Mission DCM stressed that the function 
of a research institution was not an appropriate one 
for the SHS Sector; he cited as an example a study on 
migration that UNESCO published advocating the 
abolition of all restrictions on migration, a position 
contrary to policies enforced by the U.S. and many 
member states.   Other representatives echoed the U.S. 
concern. 
¶7.   Some participants voiced concerns over certain  of 
Dr. Renaud's recommendations.  The Swedish delegation 
raised the issue of cooperation between the sectors in 
UNESCO on future programs.  He stated that many 
programs are relevant to more than one sector, but 
currently, the structure of the organization does not 
encourage cross-sector work:  UNESCO should think more 
in terms of programs rather than sectors.  Many 
delegations agreed; this was noted as a possible topic 
to be explored in the overall review of the SHS and 
Natural Sciences sectors, and an objective for the new 
medium-term strategy (2008-13). 
¶8.   The day before, Renaud participated in a panel 
discussion on the Sector's MOST program, presided by 
SHS Sector ADG Pierre Sane.  The South African 
Ambassador also participated in the panel:  The South 
African Minister for Social Development currently 
chairs the MOST intergovernmental council, and South 
Africa plays an active role in the program.  This was 
an opportunity for other delegations -- Senegal and 
Argentina -- to express support for the MOST program, 
including advocating increased funding.  Oliver