06PARIS2100
MEDIA REACTION REPORT - France Iran Middle East -
Fri Mar 31 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PARIS 002100 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR; IIP/RW; IIP/RNY; BBG/VOA; IIP/WEU; AF/PA; 
EUR/WE /P/SP; D/C (MCCOO); EUR/PA; INR/P; INR/EUC; PM; OSC ISA 
FOR ILN; NEA; WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC/WEUROPE; DOC FOR ITA/EUR/FR 
AND PASS USTR/PA; USINCEUR FOR PAO; NATO/PA; MOSCOW/PA; 
ROME/PA; USVIENNA FOR USDEL OSCE. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR FR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REPORT - France Iran Middle East - 
Israel - Hamas U.S. Geo-Strategy 
PARIS - Friday, March 31, 2006 
 
 
(A) SUBJECTS COVERED IN TODAY'S REPORT: 
 
France 
Iran 
Middle East - Israel - Hamas 
U.S. Geo-Strategy 
 
B) SUMMARY OF COVERAGE: 
 
Last evening's announcement from the Council of State that the 
CPE legislation is constitutional is today's lead story, with 
variations: Le Figaro states that "President Chirac Will Now 
Promulgate the Law," and entitles its editorial "Chirac's 
Choice" while La Tribune says he "should" promulgate it today. 
Les Echos says Chirac is on the "Front Line" and La Croix 
titles: "Chirac Will Have to Make the Difference." While 
Liberation headlines "The Temptation of Force," the popular 
press focuses on the impact to the streets: "A Green Light for 
Blows" reads France Soir, while Le Parisien leads with: "The 
Fever Is Mounting." President Chirac is expected to address 
the nation this evening at 8PM. Meanwhile the unions remain 
firm about the need to withdraw the CPE as they confer about 
next Tuesday's day of protest. Most editorials are devoted to 
this story. (See Part C) In La Croix a political expert 
contends that the crisis has weakened interior Minister 
Sarkozy as much as PM Villepin. 
 
Most dailies announce the UNSC decision to grant Iran one 
month to accept its conditions and stop its uranium 
enrichment. The fact that the UNSC is divided about the 
sanctions issues is noted. Le Figaro titles its article "Iran 
Lends a Deaf Ear to UN" (See Part C) and quotes Secretary Rice 
from Berlin: "I do not think it is appropriate at this time to 
talk of sanctions." Secretary Rice's meeting with President 
Chirac is noted in a separate boxed article: "President Chirac 
emphasized a `convergence of views' with Washington . during a 
one hour meeting essentially devoted to nuclear issues. 
President Chirac expressed his `concern' on the subject, but 
insisted that `France was satisfied with the UNSC resolution.' 
Secretary Rice went on to Great Britain, the last leg of her 
 
SIPDIS 
European trip." 
 
The Israeli elections elicits a commentary in Le Figaro 
entitled "With Olmert, Israel Enters the Era of Managers" 
while in Liberation former socialist FM Hubert Vedrine pens an 
op-ed on "the new chances for Israel." In Le Figaro EU 
correspondent Alexandrine Bouilhet pens an article entitled 
"Transatlantic Disagreement on Hamas" and explains how 
"despite a compromise, the Quartet is still divided as to what 
strategy to adopt." (See Part C) 
 
France Soir carries an op-ed penned by its President Jacques 
Soppelsa entitled "The Paris-Moscow Axis: A Guardrail Against 
Hegemony." (See Part C) 
 
The liberation of U.S. journalist Jill Carroll is reported in 
Le Figaro, La Croix, France Soir and Liberation, which says 
"she still doesn't know who kidnapped her or why. Their 
demands, political on the surface, probably hid a demand for 
ransom. Secretary Rice expressed her `great joy.' at the 
liberation." The article lists the other hostages still in 
Iraq. 
 
Le Figaro reports on the Christian Afghan who has found refuge 
in Italy: "Berlusconi is a lucky guy. With ten days to go 
before the legislative elections, he will try to milk to story 
for all it is worth." La Croix in its article comments: "Just 
when the right and the left are courting the votes from the 
Catholic electorate, this operation raises some questions." 
 
(C) SUPPORTING TEXT/BLOCK QUOTES: 
 
France 
 
"Chirac's Choice" 
Alexis Brezet in right-of-center Le Figaro (03/31): "The 
umpire has spoken: by validating the CPE legislation, the 
Council of State is helping Vilepin to score politically 
against the Socialist Party. But at the same time it is 
putting Chirac before one of the most crucial choices of his 
career. Will he promulgate the legislation, or take another 
road, whatever it is called - suspension, withdrawal or 
revision. The consequences of his action must be measured. If 
the latter, it is difficult to imagine Villepin staying on in 
the government. For Chirac, having to name another PM after 
the shock of the referendum would carry unimaginable 
consequences. If he does promulgate the law, as is his role as 
guardian of France's institutions, he must also look reality 
in the face. It is up to him to make the unions believe in the 
power of negotiations and change. But the social malaise goes 
beyond the CPE. Negotiations must be launched on employment 
and the training of our youth. Can the unions, at this point, 
still take Chirac's extended hand? Nothing proves it, yet for 
France we must hope it is still possible." 
 
Iran 
 
"Iran Deaf to UN" 
Alain Barluet in right-of-center Le Figaro (03/31): "Despite 
the international community's mobilization, Iran is not giving 
in on its nuclear program. While the UNSC sent its ultimatum 
to Iran, it remained divided on the prospect of using 
sanctions against Tehran. This was illustrated in the 
negotiations needed to put together the final text in which it 
is stipulated that the IAEA and not the UNSC conserves the 
central role in the final decision. A request made by China 
and Russia, which have also obtained that a paragraph on 
future punitive measures be excluded. The final declaration 
also omits the fact that nuclear proliferation represents a 
threat to international peace and security." 
 
Middle East - Israel - Hamas 
 
"New Chances for Israel" 
Former socialist FM Hubert Vedrine in left-of-center 
Liberation (03/31): "The end of the Likud's supremacy and with 
it of its dream of Greater Israel, which weighed in on the 
entire region, is an event of considerable importance and a 
bearer of hope. In leaving the Likud and pulling out of Gaza, 
Sharon did away with a major obstacle. There is little to be 
expected from the evanescent `international community' or from 
the ghostly Quartet. But what can individual nations, those 
with power, the U.S., France, the EU, Russia and certain Arab 
countries, accomplish? They can encourage Israel to go further 
in dismantling settlements and pulling out of occupied 
territories. And convince them to go form unilateralism to 
negotiations. As regards the U.S. and Europe, they must 
formulate and make clear the guarantees that can be offered to 
both sides in the name of peace and help them both in their 
development, side by side." 
 
"Transatlantic Disagreement Over Hamas Financing" 
Alexandrine Bouilhet in right-of-center Le Figaro (03/31): "A 
new transatlantic rift has erupted in the last few hours 
regarding the financing of Hamas. It was made clear in the 
trimmed down declaration made by the Quartet after bitter 
discussions. The text is a compromise between the U.S. and 
European positions, threatening the Palestinian Authority with 
sanctions and a boycott but without giving a deadline. The 
wording, which can be interpreted in different ways and which 
demonstrates no immediate involvement on the ground for the 
short term, hides a basic disagreement between the members of 
the Quartet. Says a EU diplomat: `the Americans want to 
asphyxiate Hamas, to make it fail, while the Europeans hope 
the movement will change its ways, as did the PLO in the 
past.' Caught between the Americans and the Russians, the 
Europeans remain hopeful and refuse to pull the plug. They 
believe the time for making a difficult decision is getting 
close." 
 
U.S. Geo-Strategy 
"The Paris-Moscow Axis, a Guardrail Against Hegemony" 
Jacques Soppelsa President of France Soir (03/31): "Fifteen 
years after the first Gulf War, one can only look at the 
results of unilateralism. Through the concrete examples of the 
Balkans, the Middle East, the unbelievable imbroglio of 
Afghanistan and the Iraqi quagmire., America's unilateralism 
and its famous Pax Americana present a balance sheet that 
raise more and more questions.  In this context, Russia looks 
like the one that could contribute, through its ties with 
France, `Old Europe's' leading power, to a re-balancing of 
international geo-strategy. and the establishment of a 
guardrail against Washington's hegemonic tendencies, which 
would be in the best interest of the U.S. The Paris-Moscow 
axis, far from being a weapon of war against Washington, could 
help the White House to stay on this side of the yellow line." 
STAPLETON