06PARIS3485
USUNESCO - PDAS WARLICK MEETING WITH DG MATSUURA
Tue May 23 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

231458Z May 06UNCLAS PARIS 003485 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 
 
FROM USMISSION UNESCO PARIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNESCO SCUL
SUBJECT:  USUNESCO - PDAS WARLICK MEETING WITH DG MATSUURA 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary.  Visiting IO PDAS Jim Warlick called on UNESCO 
Director-General (DG) Matsuura on May 19.  During the discussion 
Warlick emphasized the need to show successes after the cultural 
diversity setback, and, in particular, to make effective use of the 
First Lady's interest in UNESCO and its literacy programs.  ADG for 
Education Peter Smith made it clear that this is a top priority and 
committed to having UNESCO organize and raise money for future 
literary conferences.  Other topics discussed were the state of the 
UNESCO budget and the DG's perceived need to raise the budget 
ceiling in the next biennium.  PDAS Warlick also emphasized the need 
to hire more American citizens.  In closing, the DG asked the 
Department to reach out to senior officials at the World Bank and 
UNICEF to solidify their organizations' commitment to Education for 
All and the Global Action plan.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) IO PDAS Jim Warlick paid a courtesy call on DG Matsuura 
May 19.  Warlick made it clear that after the cultural diversity 
setback, the U.S. expects UNESCO to find opportunities to make good 
use of the First Lady who serves as the Honorary Ambassador to the 
United Nations Literacy Decade.  ADG for Education Peter Smith, who 
was also in attendance, made clear that after some earlier confusion 
about who will take the lead, UNESCO will organize and raise funds 
for the four follow-on meetings to the First Lady's conference in 
New York this September. The DG agreed that working with the First 
Lady will be a top priority in the next 18-20 months. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The DG raised concerns about the $25 million special fund 
of voluntary contributions to augment programs beyond the regular 
budget and expressed the hope that the U.S. will be contributing, 
since this was a U.S. idea.  He also expressed hope that the U.S. 
will financially support the Life Initiative for Empowerment (LIFE). 
 The DG was concerned that the budget for the next biennium 
(2008-2010) will be tight and that he needs more money.  He pointed 
out that extra security and renovation costs at the UN in New York 
and the OECD were not covered by the regular budget, as they have 
been at UNESCO.  Warlick made it clear that there was little ground 
for optimism, given tight U.S. budgets. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Warlick emphasized the importance of hiring more Amcits at 
UNESCO.  The DG agreed but also made clear that professional 
competence is important.  He expressed frustration with many of his 
current staff who were hired by his predecessor, are incompetent and 
impossible to fire.  In speaking of hiring, Warlick also raised 
concern that Francoise Riviere, the new ADG for Culture, a French 
citizen, will put too much emphasis on the Cultural Expressions 
Convention.  The DG assured him that Riviere did not promote the 
convention during its negotiation.  (Comment.  The Mission has heard 
otherwise.) 
 
¶5.   (SBU) In closing, the DG asked for Department help to reach out 
to the leadership of the World Bank and Unicef to get their 
cooperation on the Education for All Global Action Plan. 
 
KOSS