08PARIS438
UNESCO: MEETING WITH DEPUTY DIRECTOR GENERAL
Tue Mar 11 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Paris
VZCZCXYZ0007
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHFR #0438/01 0711031
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 111031Z MAR 08
FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2219
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 0716UNCLAS PARIS 000438 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FROM USMISSION UNESCO PARIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR IO/UNESCO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNESCO SCUL IS
SUBJECT:  UNESCO: MEETING WITH DEPUTY DIRECTOR GENERAL 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  UNESCO's Deputy Director, Marcio Barbosa, 
expressed his pride regarding UNESCO's role in the technical 
discussions on the Mughrabi Gate; his efforts to improve UNESCO's 
visibility and communications, and his work in relation to the 
Science sector review.  He also spoke about next steps on the 
Holocaust education project, and the Crossroads conference, which 
will be hosted by UNESCO.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) UNESCO's Deputy Director, Marcio Barbosa, met with Ambassador 
Oliver on Friday, 7 March 2008 on a variety of issues: 
 
UNESCO, Communications and Visibility 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Ambassador Oliver opened the meeting by asking Barbosa 
about a P-5 position in the Communications Sector (C & I) that, 
according to our information, will only be open to internal 
candidates.  Ambassador Oliver expressed her concern that the 
current UNESCO Spokesperson, Muriel de Pierrebourg, who will be 
retiring soon for medical reasons, (Barbosa noted she was also 
leaving due to her frustration with the Organization), has 
apparently hand-picked someone to replace her for the post.  He also 
said that de Pierrebourg's position may be restructured.  Ambassador 
Oliver made the point that UNESCO's inability to communicate 
effectively to the outside world has shown that the needed skills 
sets are not in house and it is, therefore, important to seek new, 
more experienced people from outside for these key slots if UNESCO 
is to improve its communications skills and raise its visibility. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Barbosa commented that UNESCO has recently missed 
opportunities to communicate on its mandated issues, noting, for 
examples, a library in the Parisian suburbs that was burned down by 
arsonists; and a racist attack on a Spanish soccer player. 
Ambassador Oliver said that UNESCO needs a person in its Bureau of 
Public Information (BPI) and Spokesperson's office that understands 
these "moments of opportunity", and how to take advantage of them. 
 
Holocaust Education 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Ambassador Oliver told DDG Barbosa that UNESCO must be 
careful in handling the strategy of the follow-up regarding the 
General Conference decision on Holocaust Education, and the 
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) signed between Israel and UNESCO, 
which also has an element regarding Holocaust Education.  Ambassador 
Oliver told Barbosa that while they are on parallel tracks and have 
a connection, UNESCO must be cautious to keep them separate, to 
avoid any concerns from other Member States (particularly from 
within the Arab Group).  Because it is possible that actions 
associated with the Israel-UNESCO MOU could advance more quickly, it 
must be clear to Member States that recommendations linked to the 
Holocaust Resolution will be carried out only after consultation 
with Member States, as had been agreed to in the General Conference 
decision. 
 
Crossroads Conference 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Barbosa mentioned that the Director General has asked him 
to participate in the conference scheduled to take place in Bahrain. 
 Ambassador Oliver then asked DDG Barbosa if he had any idea of who 
might be a good chairperson, as the role is critical for a well-run 
conference.  Barbosa said he'd give it some thought.  He also said 
he would consider some well-known sports figures, or others, as 
possible keynote speakers. 
 
 
Mughrabi Gate - Temple Mount 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Barbosa told Ambassador Oliver that his recent trip to 
Jerusalem was very successful, and that he is particularly pleased 
with the part UNESCO has played in the technical "encounters" held 
among the Israelis, the WAQF, and the Jordanians.  Barbosa 
acknowledged that UNESCO took on a "high-risk operation" in acting 
as facilitator for the meetings, but was extremely proud of the fact 
that the different sides are really exchanging ideas, "playing it 
straight", and not using the Mughrabi gate restoration as a 
political tool.  Barbosa said that he anticipates the first phase of 
the reconstruction to begin before summer.  He also mentioned that 
the last plans returned to the scale of a pedestrian walk-way, while 
previous Israeli plans had included a ramp wide enough for vehicles. 
 Barbosa then repeated proudly that UNESCO has gained enormous 
credibility for the part it played in arranging these meetings. 
 
Science 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Barbosa admitted that he has been quietly, but 
conscientiously, reviewing the plans based on the Science Review 
Committee's recommendations and the work plans approved by the 
General Conference regarding UNESCO's  Science Sector.  He said that 
he has found over 200 small projects to eliminate from current 
plans.  He added that he still needs some time to review the overall 
plans, and that meetings will be held next week to help shape the 
final report. 
 
¶9.   (SBU) One of the key things he hopes to encourage is greater 
science related work in Africa and Latin America, and said that he 
hopes to engage more National Commissions in those regions, and 
would like to see some regional conferences to spark more interest 
in science.  He also mentioned that the Germans had provided 300,000 
Euros, and the Spaniards some 200,000 Euros, to help the National 
Commissions in Africa and Latin America.  Barbosa said that the 
National Commissions are vital in those areas where UNESCO does not 
have a local or regional office.  Barbosa said that he hopes to have 
a final report to send to the Science Review Committee before the 
end of March.  He indicated that he is in informal contact with 
several of its members on a regular basis.  OLIVER