10PARIS199
FRANCE: INPUT FOR THE 2010 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS
Fri Feb 19 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
VZCZCXRO4390
OO RUEHIK
DE RUEHFR #0199/01 0501637
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 191637Z FEB 10 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8358
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEATRS/DEPARTMENT OF TREASURY WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEHC/DEPARTMENT OF LABOR WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAWJA/DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE WASHDC PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 000199 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP (JENNIFER DONNELLY), G (LAURA PENA), 
EUR/PGI (JODY BUCKNEBERG), INL, DRL, PRM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KTIP KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD ASEC PREF ELAB
,KMCA, FR 
SUBJECT: FRANCE: INPUT FOR THE 2010 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS 
REPORT (PART 3 OF 3) 
 
REF: STATE 2094 
 
PARIS 00000199  001.8 OF 002 
 
 
PARTNERSHIPS 
------------- 
¶7.  (SBU) Responses are keyed to reporting questions 
specified in paragraph 30 of reftel. 
 
Does the government engage with other governments, civil 
society, and/or multilateral organizations to focus attention 
and devote resources to addressing human trafficking?  If so, 
please provide details. 
-- A. Throughout 2009, France partnered with local 
governments, foreign countries, NGOs, civil society, and 
multilateral organizations to focus attention on addressing 
the problem of human trafficking.  In particular, the GOF 
increased its bilateral cooperation with foreign governments 
to combat trafficking in persons during the reporting period. 
 On November 1, 2009, the Ministry of Justice presented a 
bill on articles 695-2 and 695-3 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, promoting the use of joint investigation teams to 
increase cooperation in Europe between courts as well as 
investigative services such as the police, gendarmes, and 
customs.  On October 19-20, 2009, Secretary of State 
Jean-Marie Bockel participated at the Ministerial Conference 
comprised of representatives of member states of the EU, 
international organizations and NGOs, devoted to European 
action against trafficking in human beings in Brussels. He 
commended the Swedish Presidency of the European Union for 
making the fight against the human trafficking one of its top 
priorities.  Bockel committed France to developing a special 
action plan for cooperation with countries of origin and 
transit and would be a highlight of EU joint action.  Bockel 
said that the "main task will be to define, coordinate, and 
guide policy and action of ministries concerned with the 
prevention and fight against trafficking in persons and the 
protection of victims," which will be placed under the 
authority of the French Prime Minister.  He added that "the 
measures taken by France are in line with a strong knowledge 
of this criminal phenomenon and represent a powerful vehicle 
for strengthening our cooperation both on a multilateral and 
bilateral level." 
 
What sort of international assistance does the government 
provide to other countries to address TIP? 
-- B. During the reporting period, France increased its 
efforts to provide international assistance to source 
countries to address TIP.  For example, France and Romania 
held "talks on human trafficking and the integration of 
minorities" in Bucharest on February 11-12, which concluded 
with the announcement of three new joint initiatives: the 
appointment of a State Secretary for the Reintegration of the 
Roma community, an agreement to send a contingent of Romanian 
police and magistrates to France in order to help the GOF 
dismantle human trafficking networks, and the establishment 
of a cooperation policy funded by France and the EU for the 
reintegration of the Roma in Romania, according to the French 
MFA.  France's State Secretary for European Affairs Pierre 
Lellouche and a delegation of French parliamentarians met 
with Romanian Prime Minister Emil Boc to discuss the issue. 
The bilateral visit followed a July 2009 trip by Lellouche to 
Bucharest to set up the Franco-Romanian judicial working 
group to actively investigate and prosecute human trafficking 
between the two countries.  According to the Ministry of 
Interior, Romania is a primary source country for persons 
trafficked to France for the purposes of sexual exploitation 
and forced labor. 
 
CHILD SOLDIERS 
-------------- 
¶8.  (SBU) Responses are keyed to reporting questions 
specified in paragraph 31-33 of reftel. 
 
This section is not applicable to France, which has not been 
subject to allegations of unlawful child soldiering. 
 
NOMINATION OF HEROES AND BEST PRACTICES 
--------------------------------------- 
Heroes:  The introductions to the past five TIP Reports have 
included sections honoring Anti-Trafficking "Heroes".  These 
individuals or representatives of organizations or 
governments demonstrate an exceptional commitment to fighting 
TIP above and beyond the scope of their assigned work.  The 
Department encourages post to nominate one or more such 
individuals for inclusion in a similar section of the 2010 
 
PARIS 00000199  002.8 OF 002 
 
 
Report.  Please submit, under a subheading of "TIP Hero(es)," 
a brief description of the individual or organization's work, 
and note that the appropriate individual(s) has been vetted 
through databases available to post (e.g. CLASS and any law 
enforcement systems) to ensure they have no visa 
ineligibilities or other derogatory information. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Post nominates Jean-Marc Souvira for his fine work 
and leadership as the chief of the Office for the Suppression 
of Trafficking in Persons (OCRTEH).  With the establishment 
of the OCRTEH, France has a highly unique institutional 
structure to combat TIP and Souvira's substantial work makes 
him an expert on the issue both in France and throughout 
Europe.  Jean-Marc Souvira has been vetted through consular 
and political databases available at post. 
 
Commendable Initiatives:  For the past six years the Report 
has carried a section on "International Commendable 
Initiatives" in addressing TIP.  This section highlights 
particular initiatives used by governments or NGOs in 
addressing the various challenges of TIP and serves as a 
useful guide to foreign governments and posts as they design 
anti-TIP projects and strategies.  The Department encourages 
post to nominate local anti-TIP initiatives from their host 
countries for showcasing in the 2010 Report.  Please submit, 
under a "Commendable Initiative" subheading, a brief summary 
of the activity or practice, along with the positive effect 
it has had in addressing TIP. 
 
¶10.  (SBU) Post will not be nominating local anti-TIP 
initiatives for showcasing in the 2010 Report. 
 
POST POINT OF CONTACT 
--------------------- 
¶11.  (U) The information in this reporting cable is derived 
largely from post meetings with government officials, law 
enforcement, the judiciary, diplomatic counterparts, 
academics, NGOs, and members of civil society.  The estimated 
total amount of time spent by the Political Section (with 
support from the DHS/ICE and DOJ offices at post) to compile 
this information was about 100 hours.  This includes 65 hours 
by the TIP officer (FS-04), 25 hours of research by the 
Political Section Locally Engaged Staff member (LES-09), and 
10 by the Political Counselor (FS-01) in conducting 
interviews with contacts, arranging and holding meetings, as 
well as drafting and reviewing the reporting cable.  The 
point of contact at Embassy Paris for TIP related issues is 
Anny Vu, who can be contacted via email at VuAT3@state.gov, 
or telephone  (33)1-4312-2614 (IVG 8-498-2614), and fax 
 (33)1-4312-2663. 
 
RIVKIN