04WELLINGTON902
NEW ZEALAND URGES UN SECURITY COUNCIL REFORM, BUT
Thu Oct 28 00:00:00 +0200 2004
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L WELLINGTON 000902 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/ANP, IO/UNP 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/28/2014 
TAGS: PGOV PREL NZ
SUBJECT: NEW ZEALAND URGES UN SECURITY COUNCIL REFORM, BUT 
SAFEGUARDS ITS OWN CANDIDACY 
 
 
Classified By: POLITICAL COUNSELOR KATHERINE B. HADDA, FOR REASONS 1.5( 
B,D) 
 
 ¶1. (SBU) The Government of New Zealand is strongly in favor 
of UN Security Council reform, but is averse to discussing 
its, proposed changes.  The GoNZ has submitted a discussion 
paper on the topic to the SG's High Level Panel on Threats, 
Challenges and Change. 
 
¶2. (SBU) In his opening speech to the UNGA on September 21, 
Foreign Minister Phil Goff advocated UNSC reform, noting that 
an expanded Security Council and "reform of outmoded 
electoral groupings is necessary for the Council to be 
representative of the international community as it is 
today."  He also alluded to a need to expand the 
representation of Asia, Latin America and Africa, and to note 
the contributions of specific nations (i.e. Japan) to the UN. 
 Poloff followed up with Wen Powles, Deputy Director, United 
Nations and Commonwealth Division, New Zealand Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs and Trade (MFAT), who noted that the GoNZ has 
proposed expanded elected membership and changes to permanent 
membership.  Powles was hesitant to provide further details 
until the High Level Panel responds to the GoNZ 
recommendations. 
 
¶3. (C) In his UNGA speech, Goff specifically mentioned 
support for Japan's inclusion as a permanent member on the 
UNSC.  Powles noted that the original draft of the speech had 
included more specific recommendations, but in the interest 
of maintaining New Zealand's neutrality, Goff had walked back 
from including these.  Powles explained that NZ was hesitant 
to publicly support specific candidates, fearing backlash 
from other countries.  Powles referenced possible candidate 
countries India, Brazil and Germany, but reiterated that New 
Zealand was not prepared to support candidates, due to a fear 
of being seen as partisan. 
 
¶4. (C) Comment:  NZ may be advocating an expanded membership 
as a mechanism to constrict the perceived dominance of the 
UNSC by the 5 veto powers.  This is likely not specifically 
aimed at limiting US influence, but is in keeping with NZ's 
view of the UN as an egalitarian organization and a desire to 
see more representation of Asia-Pacific countries on the 
Council.  Overall, New Zealand's cautious approach to 
announcing proposed reforms may be related to their 
announcement October 1 to WEOG members that they will seek a 
two-year term on the UNSC in 2015-2016.  An early indication 
of support for specific candidate countries could negatively 
impact both NZ's candidacy and their overall policy of 
working with as wide a range of UN member countries as 
possible. 
Swindells