04WELLINGTON905
BLUE LANTERN LEVEL 3: POST-LICENSE END USE CHECK ON
Fri Oct 29 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS WELLINGTON 000905 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR PM/DTCC - BLUE LANTERN COORDINATOR 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12356: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC KOMC NZ
SUBJECT: BLUE LANTERN LEVEL 3: POST-LICENSE END USE CHECK ON 
LICENSE 05-925994 
 
REF: STATE 205261 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Following reftel instructions, post on October 6 
contacted New Zealand Police, who have confirmed the order 
of an F9811 Series (MX-10130) Gen 3 18mm image intensifier. 
The image intensifier will be installed in a Simrad KN203 
FAB MGC -- a night-vision scope to be attached to a sniper 
rifle, for use in police nighttime operations, according to 
Steven Eveleigh of New Zealand Police's account reporting 
and finance office.  The rifle and scope are considered 
necessary because of the police's decision to form a full- 
time Special Tactics Group, which includes an additional 
sniper position. 
 
¶2. (SBU) New Zealand Police believe that Owen International 
of Sydney, Australia, is the only agent for the Simrad KN 
203 in New Zealand and thus chose Owen to be the purchasing 
agent for this order.  In turn, Owen International contacted 
Simrad Optronics of Oslo, Norway, to fill the order for the 
KN203 FAB MGC, including the image intensifier.  (Owen's 
postal address is 15/2 Campbell Street, Artarmon, NSW, 2064, 
Australia.) 
 
¶3. (SBU) The KN203 FAB MGC, with image intensifier, has 
not/not yet been sent to New Zealand, according to Pam 
Bailey of Owen International.  In fact, Bailey said that the 
image intensifier -- which has been on order since early 
2004 from the manufacturer, ITT of Roanoke, Virginia -- is 
not expected to arrive in Norway until January or February 
¶2005.  Once Simrad receives the image intensifier, it will 
install it in the KN203 night sight, put it through testing 
and then ship it to Owen, for forwarding to the New Zealand 
Police.  Owen International is aiming for a delivery date of 
March 18, 2005. 
 
¶4. (U) Post will fax copies of New Zealand Police's 
documents and e-mail messages on this order. 
 
SWINDELLS