04WELLINGTON661
NEW ZEALAND FOCUSES ON REFORM OF PACIFIC ISLAND
Wed Aug 04 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS WELLINGTON 000661 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/ANP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL ECON EFIS SENV NZ
SUBJECT: NEW ZEALAND FOCUSES ON REFORM OF PACIFIC ISLAND 
FORUM 
 
REF: STATE 151991 
 
¶1. (U) On July 27, Poloff shared ref A points on the 2004 
Pacific Islands Forum (PIF) with Paul Willis, Regional Deputy 
Director, Pacific Division, New Zealand Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs and Trade.  Willis indicated that Prime Minister 
Helen Clark would lead the New Zealand delegation to the PIF, 
as New Zealand is outgoing Chair of the Forum.  However, she 
will be departing for Tokelau August 7 ) 10, and Foreign 
Minister Phil Goff will head the delegation on those dates. 
Goff is currently scheduled for a bi-lateral with A/S Kelly 
on August 8. 
 
¶2. (U) Willis noted that the GoNZ's primary focus for the 
Forum would be continuing the momentum on PIF reform 
generated by the release of the Pacific Plan.  Willis 
outlined additional higher priority GoNZ agenda items, 
including HIV/AIDS and the threat of other communicable 
diseases, specifically the implementation of the SPC regional 
strategy on disease.  In terms of the Australia-crafted 
Pacific Regional Transport Strategy, the GoNZ was firmly 
behind the Australians.  They would be pressing for follow-up 
on security and transport issues that have stalled in recent 
months.  Willis also noted a few issues that were likely to 
appear on the margins of discussion.  He advised that the 
GoNZ would likely support French Polynesia's candidacy for 
observer status at the Forum, noting that they had fulfilled 
the obligations for such a position.  Climate change would be 
discussed, but was seen as a much less contentious issue than 
at last year's meeting.  Willis theorized that the Government 
of Nauru would appeal for broader regional assistance, but 
this would take place at the Leader's Retreat, and not in the 
formal session. 
Swindells