05WELLINGTON243
NEW ZEALAND: INTERNATIONAL COORDINATION AND
Wed Mar 23 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS WELLINGTON 000243 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/ANP-TRAMSEY, EB/TRA/OTP-DHAYWOOD AND 
OES/OA-CDIAMOND 
SINGAPORE FOR DHS-MKING 
SYDNEY FOR TSA 
COMMERCE FOR ABENAISSA/4530/ITA/MAC/AP/OSAO 
 
E.O. 12356: N/A 
TAGS: EWWT ASEC ECON ETRD KSTC PARM PHSA PREL PTER NZ ADM
SUBJECT: NEW ZEALAND: INTERNATIONAL COORDINATION AND 
OUTREACH ON MARITIME SECURITY 
 
REF: STATE 38874 
 
¶1. In response to reftel, following are details and a few 
observations on how post handles maritime security issues in 
New Zealand. 
 
¶2. Post and the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement 
(ICE) attach, based in Singapore, work closely to 
coordinate our approaches to the New Zealand government on 
maritime security issues.  Meanwhile, the ICE attach and 
U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) also have forged a 
a 
direct, cooperative relationship with their New Zealand 
Customs Service counterparts.  This relationship in 
particular has resulted in an increase in information 
sharing, including export and transshipment data.  The CBP 
and New Zealand Customs recently concluded an agreement to 
implement a comprehensive and cooperative supply chain 
security arrangement that will improve information sharing 
and target and screen high-risk cargo between the two 
countries.  CBP and NZ Customs are conducting real-time 
targeting, screening and examination trials to develop this 
arrangement.  While post's defense, regional security and 
economic officers are included in these efforts, the direct 
relationship between ICE/CBP and New Zealand Customs has 
enhanced the exchange of information and expertise.  In 
turn, post's work with other parts of the New Zealand 
government -- such as the Ministry of Transport -- on 
maritime security issues has focused on policy matters. 
 
¶3. OSD recently authorized Pacific Command to place a New 
Zealand civilian law enforcement or civilian intelligence 
liaison officer on the Joint Interagency Task Force West 
(JIATF West) staff in Honolulu.  Members of New Zealand 
Customs, Police and Maritime Safety Authority will visit 
JIATF West in April to determine which agency will 
contribute the liaison officer.  The officer will provide an 
insight into the South Pacific region that PACOM has not yet 
attained and will be invaluable in handling maritime 
security issues in the region.  We expect the liaison 
officer to be in place in Honolulu as early as late 2005. 
 
¶4. Post recently began working directly with the U.S. Coast 
Guard, which in September-October 2004 sent a team to New 
Zealand to review its compliance with the International 
Maritime Organization's International Ship and Port Facility 
Security Code.  Through this visit, the Coast Guard has 
begun to develop a direct relationship with New Zealand's 
Maritime Safety Authority, Customs Service and other 
relevant agencies. 
 
¶5. As a small post, Embassy Wellington has found that ad hoc 
meetings are sufficient for coordinating USG efforts in New 
Zealand on maritime security issues.  Responsibilities 
within the post are fairly well defined, with the defense 
attach handling issues involving New Zealand defense 
forces; the regional security officer handling civilian- 
related security issues; and, the economic officer handling 
issues with any potential commercial impact and serving as 
post's primary contact with the ICE/CBP office in Singapore. 
 
SWINDELLS