05WELLINGTON79
EAST ASIAN SUMMIT: NEW ZEALAND'S VIEWS
Thu Jan 27 00:00:00 +0100 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 WELLINGTON 000079 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/FO, EAP/EP, EAP/RSP, EAP/ANP, AND INR/EAP 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/27/2015 
TAGS: PREL PGOV ECIN NZ ASEAN APECO
SUBJECT: EAST ASIAN SUMMIT: NEW ZEALAND'S VIEWS 
 
REF: 04 STATE 275091 
 
Classified By: ACTING DCM KATHERINE B. HADDA, 
FOR REASONS 1.4 (B AND D) 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary: New Zealand officials have been watching 
with interest the proposal to hold an East Asian Summit, but 
they remain unclear as to either the form or function of the 
meeting.  New Zealand would welcome the chance to participate 
in the Summit, but is unlikely to push for an invitation 
because of a perception that ASEAN's agenda is already 
overloaded.  China seems to be the driving force behind the 
EAS proposal, but New Zealand officials think the PRC's goal 
is to have more control of its dialogue with governments in 
the region rather than to push for any specific policy goal 
or to create an alternative to APEC or other groups. END 
SUMMARY 
 
¶2.  (C) On January 25, Acting DCM discussed the East Asian 
Summit (EAS) with Sarah Dennis, Director of the South/South 
East Asia Division at New Zealand's Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs and Trade (MFAT).  Rebecca Needham, a Policy Officer 
working under Dennis and who covers ASEAN issues, joined the 
meeting.  The South/South East Division has only recently 
been assigned the EAS portfolio within MFAT, as over the last 
few weeks the Ministry's small staff -- made still smaller by 
the Antipodean summer holiday -- was focused on locating New 
Zealanders missing following the Boxing Day tsunami. 
 
¶3.  (C) Dennis admitted that New Zealand officials do not 
know a great deal about the form or agenda of the EAS, and 
she said this was because even the Summit's core participants 
seem still to be working out the details.  New Zealand has 
actually been watching the proposal since last year, mainly 
through reporting done by the country's missions in the 
region. 
 
¶4.  (C) ASEAN   3 has become a fixture of the ASEAN calendar, 
Dennis said, and she has perceived both interest and some 
nervousness about the EAS proposal -- and specifically 
China's role -- among ASEAN members.  In New Zealand's view, 
China's diplomacy on the EAS has been constructive and open 
to ASEAN input, and the members seem keen to work with China 
although their suspicions remain.  Dennis said it remains 
unclear  what the content of the EAS would be, but China has 
made clear that it wants to have the ASEAN region relatively 
secure and growing economically, so it seems likely that the 
Summit agenda would cover both economic and security issues. 
 
¶5.  (C) A/DCM noted that because Taiwan and Hong Kong 
participate in APEC, China had resisted efforts by the U.S. 
and others (including New Zealand) to discuss 
counter-terrorism issues in that forum.  She asked whether it 
was possible that for this reason China saw a potential EAS 
security agenda as an alternative to APEC.  Dennis and 
Needham said they were unaware that China was seeking an 
alternative grouping in which to discuss security issues, 
although they did agree that China might be trying to take a 
strategic position that would allow them a more central role 
in shaping a regional agenda than would be possible under 
ASEAN   3. 
 
¶6.  (C) Dennis said her impression is that China floated the 
EAS idea (although some say it was Japan) and ASEAN was 
initially cautious about the proposal because members 
preferred the control afforded them by the current ASEAN   3 
format.  By the time of the Vientiane Summit, New Zealand 
officials were somewhat surprised to find that the ASEAN   3 
Leaders had agreed to the EAS, to be hosted by Malaysia. 
 
¶7.   (C) Dennis said that it was still not clear which 
countries would participate in the EAS, nor even whether or 
not ASEAN members would (as seems likely) attend as 
individual countries rather than as a bloc or whether this 
would be a one-off or annual event.  Leaders participating in 
the December ASEAN   3 meeting said that the EAS would be in 
addition to ASEAN   3, but some members have told Dennis that 
the EAS would replace the existing forum.  ASEAN   3 
officials are now tasked to decide when and where the EAS 
will be, and who will attend.  Dennis said that New Zealand 
officials are not on the inside of this process, but she 
speculated that ASEAN Foreign Ministers may make the final 
decisions when they meet in March.  At the latest, the 
details should be decided by June or July. 
 
¶8.  (C) Despite media claims at the Vientiane summit that 
invitations to the EAS would be issued to India and others, 
Dennis does not believe that any decision has been made to 
invite other countries.  New Zealand has not been invited and 
Dennis is not sure whether or not it would be.  She said that 
the time had come for New Zealand officials to decide whether 
to lobby for an invitation, but she indicated that in 
general, New Zealand has been cautious about foisting itself 
onto ASEAN because the government believes the ASEAN agenda 
is overloaded as it is.  For this reason, Prime Minister 
Clark had said in her statement in Vientiane that she would 
welcome the chance to participate in the ASEAN Summit again 
when it made sense to do so.  Dennis explained the Prime 
Minister had in mind the conclusion of the 
ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand Free Trade Agreement as an 
example of the kind of event that would logically lead to New 
Zealand's future participation in the summit. 
 
Swindells