05WELLINGTON84
NEW ZEALAND FOREIGN MINISTER SUPPORTS IRAQ
Mon Jan 31 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS WELLINGTON 000084 
 
SIPDIS 
 
EAP/ANP - TRAMSEY 
DEPT FOR TASK FORCE MGIZ01 
 
E.O. 12985:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV NZ
SUBJECT:  NEW ZEALAND FOREIGN MINISTER SUPPORTS IRAQ 
ELECTION 
 
 
¶1.  The following text is a statement from Foreign 
Minister Goff's office, released January 31, 2005. 
 
¶2.  Begin text: 
 
ELECTION RESULT REPRESENTS PROGRESS TOWARDS DEMOCRATIC AND 
PEACEFUL IRAQ 
 
Foreign Minister Phil Goff has welcomed the holding of the 
election in Iraq, and says that the level of voter turnout 
should be sufficient to give legitimacy to a new 
transitional government. 
 
"These elections represent a key step towards achieving a 
democratic and peaceful Iraq.  They are the first 
opportunity Iraqi people have had in half a century to 
determine their own government," Mr Goff said. 
 
"The process is essential to give legitimacy and a mandate 
to a transitional government that will have the task of 
drafting a new constitution by August and preparation for 
elections in December. 
 
"New Zealand fully supports this process and provided $1.5 
million to Iraq, through the United Nations, towards it. 
We unreservedly condemn the violence perpetrated by 
insurgents who have endeavoured to stop this process 
occurring. 
 
"We pay tribute to the estimated eight million Iraqis who 
defied the intimidation and violence and made the effort 
to cast their ballots.  In the circumstances prevailing, a 
60 per cent turn out of those eligible to vote is a good 
result.  Final figures on turnout, and results, will not 
be known for several weeks. 
 
"However celebration of the successful holding of the 
election must be tempered by acknowledgement of a low 
turnout by Sunni voters.  Sunni Arabs make up 20 per cent 
of the population and Sunni extremists are at the core of 
the insurgency. 
 
"Ways must be found to involve Sunnis in the drafting of 
the constitution, which will define power among Iraq's 
disparate groups, and to give them a stake in the new 
government. 
 
"New Zealand has contributed around $10 million through 
NZAID towards the rebuilding of Iraq, and deployed a 
Defence Force light engineering group in Basra for a year 
to help with reconstruction efforts. 
 
"We will continue to provide appropriate support to assist 
Iraq towards a democratic, stable and prosperous future," 
Mr Goff said. 
 
End text. 
 
Swindells