07WELLINGTON464
NZ OPPOSITION LEADER JOHN KEY'S JUNE 26-9 TRIP TO
Wed Jun 20 00:00:00 +0200 2007
CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN
Embassy Wellington
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHWL #0464/01 1710645
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 200645Z JUN 07
FM AMEMBASSY WELLINGTON
TO RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4395
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC IMMEDIATE
INFO RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA IMMEDIATE 4870
RUEHOT/AMEMBASSY OTTAWA IMMEDIATE 0284C O N F I D E N T I A L WELLINGTON 000464 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
NOFORN 
 
STATE FOR D, EAP/FO, EAP/ANP 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/20/2017 
TAGS: PREL PGOV NZ
SUBJECT: NZ OPPOSITION LEADER JOHN KEY'S JUNE 26-9 TRIP TO 
WASHINGTON 
 
REF: WELLINGTON 198 
 
Classified By: Acting DCM Katherine B. Hadda, 
For reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1.  (C/NF) Summary:  A disciplined and effective performer in 
Parliament, National Party Leader John Key has moved quickly 
since taking command late last year to signal that his party 
is a government-in-waiting.  He has managed to unseat PM 
Helen Clark as preferred Prime Minister in NZ opinion polls, 
the first politician to do so since Clark became Prime 
Minister eight years ago.  During a lunch on June 20, Key has 
told Ambassador McCormick that he views his June 26-9 
Washington trip as a chance to introduce himself to U.S. 
officials, explain his Party's desire to retain New Zealand's 
anti-nuclear policy, and to get a better sense of how the 
United States handles major world issues such as climate 
change and China's rise.  We believe he also regards the trip 
as a way to further burnish his credentials as a statesman. 
A former Merrill Lynch currency trader, Key goes out of his 
way to express his admiration for the United States.  End 
Summary. 
 
------------------------- 
Key's Visit to Washington 
------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C) In addition to meeting with the Deputy Secretary of 
State and A/S Hill, Key has meetings scheduled with Deputy 
USTR Bhatia, Chairman Connaughton of the Council on 
Environmental Quality, and Congressman Faleomavaega.  He also 
hopes to meet with senior Treasury and NSC officials, 
Senators Boxer, Levin, Smith, and Lugar, and Friends of New 
Zealand Caucus Co-Chairs Congressmen Brady and Tauscher.  He 
will travel to Ottawa on 
June 27 to meet with PM Harper. 
 
¶3.  (C/NF) Key is especially interested in discussing China's 
increasing political and economic rise.  His advisors tell us 
this is because National recognizes that we want to cooperate 
more with New Zealand in the Pacific Islands and believes New 
Zealand must understand of how U.S. officials view China's 
role in the region in order to more effectively work with us. 
 Key also told the Ambassador he has been getting policy 
advice from a non-NZ Economist who specializes in China, whom 
he did not name.  Key would also like to discuss what the 
United States would like New Zealand to do from a practical 
view on defense issues.  He told the Ambassador that he tends 
to believe that New Zealand should do a few things well 
rather than spread itself too thin, and would like to get our 
take on this.  Key and his advisors also say that if they are 
elected they will suggest New Zealand and the United States 
cooperate more on UN reform.  They describe their view on the 
United Nations as more pragmatic than PM Clark's, whom they 
say is an idealistic globalist.  They also say that the best 
path to UN reform could be for the U.S. to run reform issues 
through New Zealand and other small countries with good 
multilateral credentials. 
 
¶4.  (C/NF) Key stressed many times to the Ambassador his 
desire to discuss climate change and environment issues with 
U.S. officials.  When we asked him how National would address 
these issues if elected he was a bit vague, however, only 
stressing that he would reform New Zealand's onerous Resource 
Management Act to make it easier to develop wind and other 
alternate energy sources. 
 
---------------------------- 
Background: Who is John Key? 
---------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) When John Key was elected by his caucus colleagues 
as the new leader of the traditionally conservative National 
Party on November 27 2006, following the resignation of Dr. 
Don Brash, many commentators saw it as the fulfillment of his 
political destiny.  Ever since entering Parliament in 2002 
following a highly successful career as a Merrill Lynch 
currency trader, Key had been regarded by political pundits 
as a possible future National Partly leader.  A mere two 
years after entering politics, Key was ranked at tenth place 
in the National caucus, and was the party's spokesperson for 
finance. This was an extraordinary rapid rise by a political 
newcomer. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) After the 2005 election, Brash promoted him to 
number four in the caucus in recognition of his role in 
 
selling the party's tax package during the campaign. He was 
widely identified by election watchers as the most effective 
politician during the entire campaign. At the last election, 
Key retained his parliamentary seat with an impressive 12,778 
vote majority. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Politically, John Key is considered less 
ideologically strident and more moderate than his 
predecessor, Dr. Don Brash. He is considered relatively 
socially liberal by his colleagues and has embraced the 
causes of environment advocacy and climate change, subjects 
which he hopes to pursue during his Washington meetings. Just 
before becoming leader, Key attended the UK Conservative 
Party Conference in Bournemouth, and he has expressed 
admiration for UK Tory leader David Cameron's efforts to 
broaden his party's appeal. A quick and able study, Key is 
likely to emulate Cameron's pragmatic attempts to soften the 
image of his own historically conservative party by moving 
more to the center of New Zealand politics. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
Key on Foreign Policy, the United States, 
and the Nuclear Issue 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Key has said publicly he believes that it is in the 
national interest to have as little as space as possible 
between National and Labour on matters of foreign policy. 
Nevertheless, when Prime Minister Clark issued a statement 
distancing herself from Duty Minister Jim Anderton's January 
2007 criticism of President Bush's new policy directive on 
Iraq, Key told the press he believed that Anderton was merely 
repeating what he had heard around the Cabinet table.   Key 
has proposed more public consultation on defense goals and 
strategies and a closer defense relationship with Australia, 
and stressed the need to build on relationships with South 
Pacific nations. 
 
¶9.  (C/NF) Key has worked in the United States and speaks 
favorably of the U.S.  He has been friendly to Mission New 
Zealand and was scheduled to travel to Washington on the 
International Visitor Program earlier this year but canceled 
at the last minute, presumably to compete for the National 
Leadership once it was clear Dr. Brash would soon be forced 
out by his caucus.  Post expects the United States will 
continue to have a good working relationship with National 
under his leadership. 
 
¶10.  (SBU) Soon after becoming party leader Key commented 
that "I have a very much more positive view of the United 
States and its role in world affairs than most ministers in 
the Clark Government." He has also noted that although the 
ANZUS defense alliance has "essentially been dead for 20 
years now", he believes that there is scope for a 
constructive relationship between New Zealand and the United 
States beyond the pact.   However, he also moved quickly to 
clarify that a National Government under his premiership will 
not change NZ's anti-nuclear policy. In his statement, Key 
declared that he believes that "New Zealanders have a 
long-held view that (the anti-nuclear legislation) is 
important to (New Zealand's) nation-building. I think they 
see it as New Zealand standing up strongly for something it 
believes in. I believe in that position and I see absolutely 
no reason to change it." 
 
¶11.  (C) Key told the Ambassador that he wishes to explain 
this position to U.S. officials during his Washington 
meetings.  We expect he will explain that he needed to bring 
his party's position alongside the Government in order to 
neutralize what had been for National a political problem: 
The National Party's position on retaining the anti-nuclear 
legislation in the pre-Key period was vague at best and some 
Nat officials suggested that they might scrap the policy if 
elected. This allowed the Labour Government to score many 
easy political points off National. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
National doing extremely well under Key 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶12.  (C) Under Key's leadership, National has led the Labour 
Government in political polling and its margin is widening at 
a considerable rate. The three most recent political polls 
all show that National is well ahead of Labour Government, 
with an average 20-point advantage.  Much of National's 
success is driven by Key's high personal popularity rating. 
 
He has experienced an extraordinarily long honeymoon period 
which shows no show of abating.   Key told the Ambassador on 
June 20 that he believes his success is partly due to a 
series of Labour Government bungles over the past months, 
such as the Philip Field fiasco, as well as a growing 
electorate sense that the Government is intervening too much 
in the private lives of ordinary New Zealanders.  Said Key, 
"Anti-smacking, removing reference to Christ from the 
Parliamentary Prayer, banning junk foods in schools -- are 
these big issues?" 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶13.  (C/NF) As Auckland Consul General Desrocher observed in 
Reftel, Key's "Nice Guy" approach at times begs the question 
of how he will effectively separate himself from the Labour 
Government in the minds of the electorate.  But we were 
struck during his lunch with the Ambassador how much he has 
clearly been thinking about how to put a National-type spin 
on a range of issues.  While it is still far too early to 
call how the November 2008  elections will play out, polls 
suggest that Key is on track to be New Zealand's next Prime 
Minister.  His eagerness to meet with senior Washington 
officials suggests that he thinks this is very likely as 
well.  End Comment. 
MCCORMICK