07WELLINGTON646
YOUR VISIT AND EXPANDING US-NZ COOPERATION
Thu Aug 30 00:00:00 +0200 2007
CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN
Embassy Wellington
VZCZCXRO3882
OO RUEHPB
DE RUEHWL #0646/01 2420509
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 300509Z AUG 07
FM AMEMBASSY WELLINGTON
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4645
INFO RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA 4939
RUEHPB/AMEMBASSY PORT MORESBY 0674
RUEHSV/AMEMBASSY SUVA 0624
RHHMUNA/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HI
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHDCC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 WELLINGTON 000646 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP A/S HILL 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/29/2027 
TAGS: PREL US NZ
SUBJECT: YOUR VISIT AND EXPANDING US-NZ COOPERATION 
 
Classified By: Charge David J. Keegan, reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY AND INTRODUCTION. Since your last visit to New 
Zealand, we have seen an unprecedented improvement in 
dialogue and cooperation between the United States and New 
Zealand on a range of security and foreign policy objectives, 
culminating in the successful visit of New Zealand PM Clark 
to Washington in February 2007. The stage is set for 
continued cooperation that will expand the range of issues on 
which we cooperate and solidify the pattern of consultation 
and joint planning. Opportunities include: defense; Pacific 
Island affairs; border security and information sharing, 
including on Trafficking in Persons; a TIFA work program to 
clear away obstacles blocking an eventual FTA; democracy 
initiatives; transformational diplomacy on dialogue with 
Islamic religious leaders; and continuing cooperation in 
science, especially in Antarctica. In addition, new 
opportunities for cooperation lie in working with New Zealand 
on UN reform and transparency, and encouraging NZ to 
encourage political transformation in 
 ASEAN, particularly Burma. 
 
¶2. (C) Although the coming year will see national elections 
on both sides, we believe both sides are committed to 
cooperation. Your meetings with NZ leaders will help propel 
the agenda forward.  END SUMMARY AND INTRODUCTION. 
 
A YEAR OF ACCOMPLISHMENTS 
------------------------- 
 
¶3. (C) We have established a solid record of bilateral 
cooperation and the basis for continued cooperation. Our two 
militaries have discussed how to expand cooperation and 
advance our shared security objectives in the South Pacific 
and beyond. We cooperated closely in response to the coup in 
Fiji. Foreign Minister Winston Peters has taken a very strong 
public position in support of U.S. strategic objectives, 
particularly in the Six Party Talks. 
 
¶4. (C) On August 10, New Zealand's Ministry of Agriculture 
and Forestry (MAF) found a mutually acceptable solution to 
U.S. sovereignty requirements barring access by foreign 
officials to U.S. official aircraft, while still meeting New 
Zealand's bio-security requirements.  MAF initially developed 
this new procedure within a single day to accommodate the 
unexpected arrival of a USAF C-17. 
 
¶5. (C) The celebration of the International Polar Year was 
marked in January, 2007 by Prime Minister Helen Clark leading 
a delegation of New Zealand and U.S. senior officials, 
including National Science Foundation President Dr. Arden 
Bement, OES A/S Claudia McMurray, and EAP DAS Glyn Davies to 
the Antarctic. The following month, Prime Minister Helen 
Clark met the President, Secretary of State, Secretary of 
Defense during her first visit to Washington in four years. 
The year was bracketed by the PM's participation in the 
Embassy's July 4 celebration in 2007 and in opening a 
permanent exhibition in Wellington's Old Saint Paul's 
Cathedral on Memorial Day, 2007 commemorating the valor of 
the U.S. Marines of the Second Marine Division who encamped 
in New Zealand to prepare for the campaign to retake the 
Pacific Islands during World War II. 
 
¶6. (C) Both governments committed to set to one side the 
major issues, which had divided us - including access for US 
Navy ships and the war in Iraq -- not forgetting them, but 
choosing to focus on moving forward in a cooperative way. A 
third irritant has been New Zealand's continued public 
pleading for a Free Trade Agreement with the United States. 
New Zealand leaders have made it clear that they will 
moderate their public statements but remain committed to this 
objective. New Zealand's interest in an FTA has provided a 
significant impetus to continued dialogue and cooperation, in 
this case in reducing trade barriers that might obstruct 
eventual bilateral free trade arrangements. 
 
HOW DO WE ADVANCE IN THE COMING YEAR? 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (C) Your visit to Auckland to participate in the United 
States New Zealand Partnership Forum September 10 will offer 
the opportunity to meet with GNZ ministers and senior 
officials to discuss key objectives for the coming year. The 
 
WELLINGTON 00000646  002 OF 003 
 
 
following is a selection of objectives which we have 
developed in consultation with our colleagues at MFAT. 
 
-- Exchanges 
------------ 
 
¶8. (C) "Working Holiday" Visas. Following an exchange of 
drafts over the past two months, you are schedule to 
participate in a ceremony to sign a bilateral arrangement. 
Details of the signing are still being worked out. 
 
-- Security 
----------- 
 
¶9. (C) OSD and the NZ Defence Force have begun more specific 
discussions on areas where improved NZDF capabilities could 
advance shared objectives. NZ has made it clear that it is 
eager to cooperate, but they are seeking to focus on 
initiatives that are sustainable. Practically, this means 
looking at NZDF unit deployments in the Pacific Islands, East 
Timor, and Afghanistan. NZ understands US interest in future 
SAS deployments to Afghanistan, but they have expressed 
reluctance to make any commitments given their limited 
resources. 
 
¶10. (C) NZ knows that we are engaged in an internal effort to 
clarify the ground rules about expanded contacts between the 
two militaries. They are likely aware that this blocked 
because of internal USG disagreement on how to handle NZDF 
participation in NATO activities. 
 
¶11. (C) In the meantime, we have found ways to engage with NZ 
that continue improving our mil-mil relationship.  Just this 
month, a NZ medical team boarded the USS Pelelieu for a short 
medical assistance deployment to several South Pacific 
nations, including Solomon Islands.  A NZ deployment of a 
medical team had been disapproved just two years ago. 
Additionally, two NZ junior naval officers were deployed 
onboard USCG Cutter Walnut for an operational maritime patrol 
of the South Pacific including Solomon Islands and Samoa. 
Feedback from both vessels has been very positive. 
 
-- South Pacific Regional Cooperation 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶12. (C) Cooperation on good governance, development and 
security in the South Pacific incorporates a number of areas, 
several of which proved to be major elements of our 
cooperation over the past year. New Zealand leaders will be 
eager to exchange views in a number of areas: Fiji 
Democratization, expectations for the PIF and Partners 
Dialogue, expanded maritime law enforcement cooperation, 
including fisheries, illicit narcotics, alien smuggling, 
firearms smuggling and violence in maritime navigation. 
Finally, these specific discussions are naturally evolving 
into a broader effort to coordinate support for governance, 
development, and democracy across the South Pacific region. 
 
-- Economic and Trade Issues 
---------------------------- 
 
¶13. (C) The July 9 - 10 TIFA meeting between USTR and MFAT 
concluded with agreement that the two sides would develop a 
cooperative work plan to address specific trade issues, 
including the possibility of expanding P-4 (NZ, Singapore, 
Brunei, Chile) FTA as the basis for US-NZ free trade, and 
resolving agricultural market access issues, including market 
access for biotech. 
 
-- Democracy, Governance, and "Counter-radicalization" 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶14. (C) The U.S. and NZ sides share a strongly rooted 
commitment to democracy, human rights, and diversity. We are 
currently seeking NZ's commitment and support in both the 
Asia Democracy Partnership and the OECD Partnership for 
Democratic Governance. New Zealand has been clear that it 
endorses both efforts in concept and is prepared to support 
as feasible. PM Clark has made inter-faith dialogue a central 
part of New Zealand's efforts to counter radicalization by 
helping to generate support for moderate Islamic leaders, 
especially in Southeast Asia. She has personally identified 
this as a strategy which will improve New Zealand's national 
 
WELLINGTON 00000646  003 OF 003 
 
 
security. 
 
¶15. (C) Discussions between DHS and NZ Immigration and 
Customs have expanded over the past nine months, focusing 
particularly on expanded intelligence sharing. Bilateral 
discussions prior to the issuance of the most recent State 
Department TIP report highlighted the impact of New Zealand's 
ongoing policy revision on TIP and specifically its effort to 
enhance cross-ministry cooperation and the involvement of 
NGOs. If DHS Secretary Chertoff does visit in January 2008 en 
route to the Antarctic that will offer an opportunity to 
highlight this cooperation. 
 
-- Science and Technology 
------------------------- 
 
¶16. (C) Throughout this year scientific and technical 
cooperation will remain an enduring foundation of bilateral 
cooperation, as it has over the past twenty years. PM Clark 
has spoken enthusiastically on a number of occasions about 
her visit to the ice this past January, and DHS Secretary 
Chertoff has expressed interest in visiting Antarctica this 
coming January. 
 
-- New Initiatives 
------------------ 
 
¶17. (C) We believe there are a few significant additional 
opportunities for expanded dialogue, which we will be 
exploring in coming months. 
 
-- Encouraging New Zealand to push for greater UN 
Transparency. The Kiwis have always made the activities of 
international organizations a central focus of its foreign 
policy. Both the New Zealand and the United States share a 
common commitment to seeing international organizations 
operate with greater transparency. There may be reform and 
transparency issues especially in the UN where New Zealand 
may be able to exert leverage far beyond its size on issues 
we care about, and NZ officials have tentatively expressed 
interest in cooperating in this area. 
 
-- Cooperation in Southeast Asia.  The USG and NZ governments 
have similar objectives regarding the promotion of within 
ASEAN.  Despite the lack of NZ diplomatic missions in some 
ASEAN capitals, they might be willing to help push our 
messages and consider deploying additional official visitors 
to assist us with respect to pressing for stronger ASEAN 
action on human rights, democracy and good governance, 
particularly in Burma. 
 
-- Disaster Preparation and other Intergovernmental Visits. 
The New Zealand Embassy is interested in pursuing discussions 
between relevant government agencies on as-yet untouched 
issues - one example could be discussions with FEMA on 
disaster responses. 
 
Conclusion 
---------- 
 
¶18. (C) Your visit offers us an opportunity to establish a 
program that will build on the progress of the past year. 
Clearly there will be limiting factors, including elections 
in both countries. The New Zealand government is required to 
call elections by the fall of 2008, but there are some 
reports that it may move as early as the spring.  NZ Foreign 
Minister Winston Peters' visit in conjunction with the 
opening of the UN General Assembly, and the second year of 
the celebration of fifty years of NZ-US cooperation in 
Antarctica, in January 2008, will offer opportunities to 
consult about our progress as the year moves forward. I look 
forward to seeing you in Auckland. 
KEEGAN