07KINGSTON71
2006/2007 OBJECTIVES FOR THE MAJORS LIST REPORT TO
Wed Jan 17 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kingston
VZCZCXYZ0014
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHKG #0071/01 0171558
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 171558Z JAN 07
FM AMEMBASSY KINGSTON
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4182UNCLAS KINGSTON 000071 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INL/LP (BOZZOLO) AND (BROWN) AND WHA/CAR 
(BUDDEN) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR KCOR EFIN JM
SUBJECT: 2006/2007 OBJECTIVES FOR THE MAJORS LIST REPORT TO 
THE GOVERNMENT OF JAMAICA (GOJ) 
 
REF: A)06 STATE 204184 AND B) KINGSTON 00069 
 
1.(SBU) Summary:  Acting NAS director (NASDIR) delivered the 
majors list demarche to Minister of National Security Dr. 
Peter Phillips on January 12, 2007.  A courtesy copy of the 
embassy's January 10 diplomatic note to the MFA on this 
subject was handed to the Minister, along with NAS' table of 
Jamaica's drug seizure statistics for 2006.  Focus of the 
discussion was the four specific benchmarks identified in 
para eight of ref (a).  Phillips seemed to react positively 
to the benchmarks, but was a bit concerned about the one on 
cocaine seizures. INL will be sent the statistical table and 
text of the diplomatic note separately.  End Summary. 
 
2.(U) On January 12, Charge, NASDIR and P/E Counselor met 
with Minister of National Security Dr. Peter Phillips.  Also, 
present for the meeting were MNS Permanent Secretary Gil 
Scott and Special Advisor O'Neil Hamilton, who is on loan to 
MNS for the next three months from the Jamaican Embassy in 
Washington.  Although the primary purpose of the call was to 
present the demarche, other subjects were discussed and 
reported in ref (b). That message reports on the Minister's 
comments concerning the police and corruption, issues which 
relate directly to the demarche as well. 
 
3.(SBU) After a brief description of the majors list process 
and timeframe, NASDIR directed the presentation to the four 
specific objectives or benchmarks with regard to preventing 
and punishing public corruption, the need for cocaine 
seizures, passage of narcotics-related legislation, and 
reform of the Jamaica Constabulary Force (JCF).  Since there 
was considerable preliminary discussion of the issue of 
official corruption (see ref b), NASDIR simply underscored 
the importance of the issue by citing its negative impact on 
getting the Airport Interdiction Task Force fully 
operational. He pointed out to the Minister that 
approximately 70 percent of police recruited for the Task 
Force failed the polygraph.  In order to overcome the 
problem, NASDIR said he had been informed that the 
Commissioner of Police will provide fresh graduates from the 
police academy. In the earlier discussion, Phillips indicated 
that both overt and covert operations needed to be mounted to 
attack the problem of official corruption.  He also cited the 
importance of having security forces convert intelligence 
into investigations.  Phillips reiterated his long-standing 
desire to create a national independent investigations 
authority, which would sidestep reliance on the JCF, but 
would also require legislation. 
 
4.(SBU) Referring to the table on drug seizures in 2006, 
NASDIR congratulated the government for achieving over a 200 
percent increase in marijuana seizures.  He also pointed to 
the 29 percent decrease in cocaine seizures from the prior 
year.  NASDIR recalled that last summer he had warned the GOJ 
about an upswing in cocaine transshipments through Jamaica. 
This did not mean that it was approaching the volume that 
existed three years ago, but nonetheless it was not something 
to be ignored. The Minister did not outright disagree with 
the benchmark of four major cocaine seizures, but did express 
surprise that we presented that benchmark rather than one 
concerning arrest and prosecution of major drug traffickers. 
He spoke of the arrest of the Lewises (father and son) last 
year and considered that action far more valuable than a big 
cocaine seizure.  NASDIR reassured Phillips that the USG 
considers arrest of major traffickers to be extremely 
important, but stated that seizures of large shipments of 
cocaine also are important.  Returning to the theme of 
corruption, NASDIR pointed out that, last year despite 
several operational attempts to make large cocaine seizures, 
all had failed.  NASDIR said he had to conclude that failure 
may be the result of disloyal members within specialized 
units.  Phillips indicated that was something worth looking 
into, and if true would be disturbing. 
 
5.(U) NASDIR said that we would like to see the Proceeds of 
Crime Act passed early this year.  The Minister advised that 
the act will be voted on in the House by the end of January 
and in the Senate in February.  He said the opposition party 
no longer has a problem with the act.  Phillips indicated 
that, when the act is passed, he hopes the UK will provide 
assistance in setting up an assets recovery section.  NASDIR 
asked what had become of the Financial Investigations 
Division Act.  The Minister responded that many of its 
provisions are now included in the Proceeds of Crime Act. 
When it has been passed, the government will determine 
whether there is continuing need for the Financial 
Investigations Division Act. 
 
6.(U) With regard to the four-point JCF reform benchmarks, 
the first one concerning appointment of the fifth 
international police officer position to be in charge of the 
anti-corruption unit was largely addressed in ref (b). 
However, Phillips clarified that the position should be 
filled in April and advised that this person should report 
directly to the Commissioner of Police. The position already 
has been advertised in Jane's and other publications, 
according to the Minister.  On the suggestion that the GOJ 
take action to reform existing regulations to permit prompt 
dismissal and prosecution of corrupt police regardless of 
rank, Phillips replied that he wants a review of the Police 
Service Regulations and the Book of Rules.  The Minister took 
on board the point concerning a comprehensive vetting system 
for new and existing police and the point calling for 
rationalization of assignments and training to assure that 
untainted and competent officers are not transferred from 
specialized units shortly after receiving training.  NASDIR 
took the opportunity to remind him that our bilateral 
agreement contained a provision against transfer within two 
years following NAS-funded training.  The Minister concluded 
by stating that every couple of months the embassy and MNS 
should meet to discuss where things stand on achieving the 
benchmarks. 
 
7.(U) Finally, prior to presentation of the demarche, 
Minister Phillips wondered out loud about whether it would be 
possible to get international lending organizations like the 
World Bank and IDB to permit a flow of resources toward 
public safety programs.  He said the GOJ could use such 
resources to establish a JCF Command and Control Center, 
modern forensic laboratories (including DNA analysis) and 
upgrade the police training facilities.  This type of funding 
would, he said, be used to accelerate the police reform 
effort.  The Minister will suggest this idea to A/S Shannon. 
 
8.(SBU) Comment:  Minister Phillips' remark about lack of a 
benchmark on major traffickers or organizations seems valid. 
Embassy will propose adding language to the "Road Ahead" 
section of the INCSR.  We also noticed that there was no 
mention in the draft INCSR about arrests in 2006 of key 
members of major trafficking organizations.  Considering the 
2006 track record (and despite several special operations), 
four major cocaine seizures may be very difficult to achieve. 
Finally, as reported in ref (b), we may want to consider 
whether to actively pursue requested helicopter support for 
Buccaneer this year. In addition to marijuana eradication, 
the MNS sees more effective eradication to be in the interest 
of national security by depriving arms smugglers with the 
assets with which to purchase illegal weapons 
("guns-for-ganja").  End Comment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
JOHNSON