07KINGSTON1419
JAMAICA: NEWLY INAUGURATED PRIME MINISTER BRUCE
Mon Sep 17 00:00:00 +0200 2007
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Kingston
VZCZCXYZ0005
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHKG #1419/01 2602048
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 172048Z SEP 07
FM AMEMBASSY KINGSTON
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5356
INFO RUCNCOM/EC CARICOM COLLECTIVE PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L KINGSTON 001419 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PASS TO USAID - FOR DIRECTOR HENRIETTA FORE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/17/2017 
TAGS: PREL PGOV EAID PTER SOCI ASEC MARR OFDP UNDP
XL, JM 
SUBJECT: JAMAICA: NEWLY INAUGURATED PRIME MINISTER BRUCE 
GOLDING CONSIDERS HURRICANE RECOVERY AN URGENT PRIORITY, 
REQUESTS ADDITIONAL U.S. ASSISTANCE 
 
REF: A. KINGSTON 1369 (071956Z SEP 07) 
     Â¶B. KINGSTON 1292 (241313Z AUG 07) 
 
Classified By: Amb. Brenda L. Johnson, Reasons 1.5(b) and (d) 
 
 Summary and Comment 
--------------------- 
 
1.(C)  Newly inaugurated Prime Minister (PM) Bruce Golding 
considers recovery from the ravages of Hurricane Dean an 
urgent national priority, and requests greater U.S. 
assistance.  According to UNDP: 
 
-- 19,000 homes were seriously damaged with a cost of USD 57 
million; 
 
-- damages to schools and education buildings totaled USD 9.9 
million; 
 
-- losses in the agricultural sector exceed USD 54 million. 
 
The Office of Disaster Preparedness and Emergency Management 
(OPDEM) is still calculating total damages from the 
hurricane.  The Planning Institute of Jamaica (PIOJ) has 
revised its economic growth forecast downwards from an 
already anemic 2.1 percent to a mere 1.1 percent.  Post 
endorses PM Golding's request, and notes that Washington was 
able to provide Jamaica about USD 18 million in relief 
following Hurricane Ivan.  A generous U.S. response to Dean 
would be an excellent means of solidifying good bilateral 
relations with the new Jamaican Government. 
 
2.(C)  Golding intends to name Senator Anthony S. Johnson 
(protect closely) as the next Jamaican Ambassador to the U.S. 
(Note: Until recently Leader of Opposition Business, Johnson 
is a key figure in the Jamaica Labour Party (JLP), trusted 
confidant of the PM, and excellent Embassy contact; Post will 
provide bio background septel.  End Note.) 
 
3.(C)  Comment: After eighteen years in opposition, how 
easily Golding's JLP will adjust to the challenges and 
responsibilities of governance will be revealed in the weeks 
and months ahead.  If the new PM's deportment and demeanor 
during his first days in office are any indication, the 
transition will be well-organized and smooth. 
End Summary and Comment. 
 
4.(SBU)  Following his inauguration on September 11 (Reftel 
A), Prime Minister (PM) Bruce Golding requested a meeting 
with Ambassador the morning of September 13 at Jamaica House, 
the traditional office of the PM to which he had aspired for 
so many years; DCM and PolOff accompanied.  Permanent 
Secretary Pat McCalla, Amb. Paul Robotham (until recently 
Jamaica's Ambassador to Japan, now serving in the PM's 
office), and other senior advisors also were present.  The PM 
began by describing recovery from the ravages of Hurricane 
Dean (Reftel B) as "an urgent, pressing priority."  He had 
completed an aerial inspection of Jamaica's south coast the 
previous day, and was seriously concerned about the 
widespread damage to houses, particularly in Clarendon 
parish.  Many families had been separated and were living 
with relatives or friends.  Given its difficult fiscal 
situation, the Government of Jamaica (GoJ) was hard pressed 
to provide adequate relief to families having suffered severe 
losses. Golding then asked if there had been any indication 
of further U.S. reconstruction assistance.  Ambassador 
replied that the Embassy had requested USD 2 million from 
USAID, and also noted that former U.S. Ambassador Sue Cobb 
had established a hurricane relief fund for Jamaica, "1,000 
Roofs of Love," to which former Secretary Powell and other 
prominent figures were contributing. 
 
5.(SBU)  Golding then said that, while he certainly did not 
want to sound ungrateful, USG assistance for recovery from 
Hurricane Dean was only "a drop in the bucket" relative to 
Jamaica's needs.  He said the GoJ had been in touch with the 
European Union, which was diverting 6 million euros for 
hurricane relief.  The GoJ was keen to enable people to get 
back on their feet and restore a degree of normalcy to their 
lives.  In response to Golding's inquiry, Ambassador 
confirmed that the USD 2 million requested from USAID, if 
approved, would be fresh funds, i.e., not a diversion of 
funding already destined for Jamaica.  (Note:  Subsequent to 
Ambassador's meeting with Golding, USAID/Jamaica received 
guidance from USAID/Washington that the Mission should 
identify an appropriate level out of its projected FY-08 
Budget for reprogramming to address current hurricane 
recovery needs; USAID/Jamaica will respond to this request. 
End Note.) 
 
6.(C)  Ambassador then said the Embassy looked forward to 
working with the new Government, and noted that, on several 
past occasions, the GoJ's responses to USG overtures or 
offers of assistance had not been as timely as they might. 
She then emphasized that the U.S., U.K., and Canada had 
enjoyed excellent cooperation with outgoing Minister of 
National Security Peter Phillips; we hoped that Phillips and 
his successor, Derrick Smith, would collaborate closely to 
ensure a smooth transition and continued close cooperation in 
ongoing anti-crime, anti-corruption, and counternarcotics 
efforts.  The PM then asked whether there were any pending 
security-related issues between the GoJ and USG; Ambassador 
replied that we hoped Jamaica would move forward to conclude 
a new Status of Forces Agreement with the U.S.  Golding 
concluded by noting that the GoJ would continue its 
cooperation with the U.S. in counter-terrorism efforts.  Only 
the day before, the Commissioner of Police had brought a 
terrorist-related issue to his attention involving Jamaicans 
who had been in contact with "questionable elements" in the 
U.S.; USG and GoJ authorities were cooperating closely. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
7.(C)  PM Golding appeared relaxed, confident, and quite at 
home in his new role and new office.  Perhaps indicative of 
the heavy agenda in front of him, Golding wasted little time 
on small talk and was very focused.  After eighteen years in 
opposition, how easily the Jamaica Labour Party (JLP) will 
adjust to the challenges and responsibilities of governance 
will be revealed in the weeks and months ahead.  If the new 
PM's deportment and demeanor during his first days in office 
are any indication, the transition will be well-organized and 
smooth.  End Comment. 
JOHNSON