08STATE24915
GUIDANCE FOR 11 MARCH 2008 UN SECURITY COUNCIL
Tue Mar 11 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO0878
OO RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHC #4915/01 0710010
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O R 110005Z MAR 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0913
INFO DARFUR COLLECTIVE
RUEHGI/AMEMBASSY BANGUI 0975UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 STATE 024915 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPKO PREL PGOV UNSC SU
SUBJECT: GUIDANCE FOR 11 MARCH 2008 UN SECURITY COUNCIL 
CONSULTATIONS ON UNAMID 
 
¶1.  PURPOSE:  This is an action request.  The Department asks 
that USUN draw upon the following points for the United 
Nations Security Council briefing and consultations on the 
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur on 11 
March 2008. 
 
--We welcome the SYG's 14 February 2008 report on the 
deployment of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid 
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).  We are pleased to see some 
progress in the deployment of UNAMID, but continue to be 
gravely concerned over delays in its deployment.  Today I 
wish to discuss the security situation as well as the 
deployment of UNAMID. 
 
------------------ 
SECURITY SITUATION 
------------------ 
 
--We share the SYG's extreme concern over the security 
situation in Darfur, including the 8 February attacks on 
civilians in Western Darfur that caused about 200 casualties 
and an outpouring of more than 13,000 refugees who crossed 
the border into Chad. 
 
--We are gravely concerned by the possibility of a new level 
of violence perpetrated by the GOS, with further brutal 
attacks by the janjaweed, accompanied by more GOS bombing and 
violent follow up on the ground by troops.  The Security 
Council must make clear that such an elevation in violence 
will not be tolerated.  The Council has demanded in prior 
resolutions that the GOS fulfill its commitments to disarm 
the janjaweed.  It must stop using the janjaweed to wage war 
against innocent civilians. 
 
--An immediate cessation of hostilities remains the highest 
priority.  A political settlement is ultimately the only 
sustainable solution to the violence in Darfur.  We urge 
strong efforts by the United Nations and African Union 
Special Envoys Jan Eliasson and Salim Ahmed Salim to advance 
the political process.  To that end, we look forward to the 
appointment of a Joint UN-AU Chief Mediator to be based in 
Sudan to support the work of the Special Envoys on a daily 
basis. 
 
--Given the cross-border attacks by the government of Chad 
(GOC) and GOS, we must also urge both states to respect 
existing agreements of reconciliation and non-aggression and 
ensure protection for non-combatant civilians.  While we 
condemn Chadian incursions into Darfur in December and 
January, we view the GOS' attempt in February to overthrow 
the Chadian government by supporting Chadian rebels as 
utterly unacceptable.  The onus is on Khartoum to take the 
first step of cutting off support to the rebels and 
preventing the imminent threat of another attack from 
Sudanese territory  The US supports the mediation efforts of 
the African Union and those of Presidents Wade, Bongo, and 
Kabila to find a peaceful and long term solution for the 
region. 
 
--In addition, we emphasize we are closely watching the 
situation between northern and southern Sudan, as a reversion 
to conflict would gravely harm prospects for progress in 
Darfur, as well as risk catastrophe for the rest of Sudan. 
All parties must cooperate with the implementation of the 
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. 
 
--We also continue to condemn the 7 January attack on the 
UNAMID convoy by Sudanese Armed Forces.  We are waiting for 
the results of the joint UNAMID-government of Sudan (GOS) 
investigation to determine the cause of the attack and 
identify measures to ensure that such attacks do not happen 
again. 
 
-------------------- 
DEPLOYMENT OF UNAMID 
-------------------- 
 
--We note that fundamentally UNAMID's mandate concerns 
protecting civilians:  preventing attacks against them, and 
protecting the humanitarian operations that strive to assist 
them.  UNAMID cannot yet accomplish this urgent task.  We 
therefore must continue to urge the UN Secretariat, troop 
contributors, and the Friends of UNAMID to redouble their 
efforts to ensure that UNAMID deploys fully and rapidly. 
 
--We welcome some signs of progress in the deployment of 
 
STATE 00024915  002 OF 002 
 
 
UNAMID.  We look forward to the expeditious deployment of the 
main body of the Chinese Engineer Unit, the Egyptian 
Engineer, Signals and Transport Units, the Nigerian Level II 
hospital, and the Bangladeshi Multi-role Logistics Unit 
beginning this month. 
 
--We appreciate the SYG's support for the joint US-Canada 
chaired Friends of UNAMID group, launched by our Special 
Envoy to Sudan last week in New York.  As U/SYG Guehenno so 
aptly put it, "UNAMID needs friends."  We are hopeful that 
this concerted effort will bring the political, financial, 
and material support together needed to successfully and 
quickly deploy UNAMID.  We call on the UN Secretariat and the 
troop contributors to deploy 3,600 additional troops by June 
1, including the Egyptian and Ethiopian infantry battalions, 
and rotating former AMIS battalions at full UN strength. 
 
--We are glad that the top leadership of the mission is now 
fully deployed, but emphasize the importance of filling other 
key positions, such as the Deputy Police Commissioner for 
Operations, the Chief of Staff, and the Chief of Public 
Information.  We urge productive consultation between the AU 
and UN to fill these posts as soon as possible, as excellent 
staffing is critical. 
 
--We are concerned by the effects of delays in the deployment 
of UNAMID military and police on UNAMID's ability to patrol. 
We appreciate the patrols UNAMID troops and police have been 
able to provide, including firewood patrols and patrols in 
the more volatile camps. We strongly look forward to future 
24-hour patrols.  We urge proactive, extensive patrolling as 
critical to the core of the mandate:  protection of civilians. 
 
--We urge that all procedures between troop contributing 
countries (TCCs) and the UN Department of Peacekeeping 
Operations be accelerated.  For example, TCCs must provide 
load lists as expeditiously as possible.  All logistical and 
administrative issues must be worked out not only between 
DPKO and TCCs, but also within UNAMID, including in the 
creation of necessary camp infrastructure for future 
deployments. 
 
--The GOS must fully cooperate:  All land issues must be 
resolved.  Customs clearance and visa issuance must take 
place in a timely manner.  All TCCs must be accepted.  UNAMID 
has a predominantly African character, so there is no 
justifiable basis for hindering the deployment of non-African 
troops. 
 
--We are pleased that the Status of Forces Agreement was 
signed, but are looking to see that the GOS fully respects it. 
 
--We remain concerned about force generation issues:  the 
lack of helicopters, heavy transport units, and multi-role 
logistics unit.  We also are concerned by a lack of standards 
governing formed police units (FPUs) and the absence of donor 
support to ensure their safe deployment.  We urge member 
states to help fill these gaps. 
 
 
¶2.  POINT-OF-CONTACT:  Grace M. Kang, IO/PSC, 202-736-7735. 
RICE