08STATE21770
UN SECURITY COUNCIL'S ADOPTION OF RESOLUTION 1803
Tue Mar 04 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
O 040139Z MAR 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO ALL DIPLOMATIC POSTS COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI IMMEDIATE
AMEMBASSY DILI IMMEDIATEUNCLAS STATE 021770 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KNNP MNUC PARM IR
 
SUBJECT: UN SECURITY COUNCIL'S ADOPTION OF RESOLUTION 1803 
ON IRAN 
 
REFS:  A) STATE 19200, B) STATE 19694 
 
¶1.  (U) This is an action request.  Please see paragraph 
¶4. 
 
¶2.  (U) BACKGROUND:  On 3 March 2008, the UN Security 
Council adopted resolution 1803 by a vote of 14 to 0, with 
one abstention.  This resolution imposes further sanctions 
on Iran in response to its failure to comply with its 
obligations in UN Security Council resolutions (UNSCRs) 
1737 and 1747.  Parallel to the adoption of the 
resolution, P5+1 Foreign Ministers issued a statement 
reiterating to Iran its common hope that Iran will choose 
the path of negotiations. 
 
¶3.  (U) OBJECTIVE: To provide host governments with 
information concerning obligations imposed on Member 
States by UNSCR 1803, especially as it relates to the 
expansion of sanctions included in UNSCRs 1737 and 1747, 
and imposition of new measures. 
 
¶4.  (U) ACTION REQUEST: Department requests that Posts 
deliver points in paragraph 5 to appropriate senior-level 
officials.  Posts are also requested to provide copies of 
the resolution and its annexes in paragraph 6, and the 
P5+1 Foreign Ministers' statement found in paragraph 7. 
The text in paragraph 6 may be left as a non-paper.  For 
UN Security Council member Posts (Beijing, Paris, Moscow, 
London, Brussels, San Jose, Zagreb, Jakarta, Rome, Panama 
City, Tripoli, Hanoi, Ouagadougou, and Pretoria), when 
handing over the non-paper, please note that it is being 
provided to them as an FYI. 
 
¶5.  (U) BEGIN NON-PAPER 
 
-- The United States welcomes the adoption of UN Security 
Council Resolution 1803 but regrets its necessity.  In 
adopting this new resolution on 3 March 2008, in response 
to Iran's failure to comply with UNSCRs 1737 and 1747, the 
Security Council acted under Article 41 of Chapter VII of 
the UN Charter, which authorizes sanctions and makes 
provisions of the resolution legally binding. 
 
-- The Security Council is imposing these additional 
Chapter VII sanctions because Iran failed to comply with 
the requirements of UNSCRs 1737 and 1747.  Through UNSCR 
1803, the international community is sending an 
unambiguous message to Iran that it must fulfill its 
international obligations pursuant to each of these 
resolutions, as well as its NPT and IAEA Safeguards 
Agreement. 
 
-- This resolution carries several key components: 
 
-- UNSCR 1803 reiterates a legal requirement for Iran to 
cooperate fully with the IAEA to take the steps necessary 
to build international confidence that Iran's nuclear 
program is intended strictly for peaceful purposes.  This 
includes resolving all questions and concerns associated 
with extensive information available to the IAEA and 
described by the IAEA in its 22 February 2008 report, as 
well as during its 25 February "technical briefing" to 
member states, detailing Iran's efforts to develop a 
nuclear warhead. 
 
-- It reiterates the requirement set forth in UNSCRs 1737 
and 1747 that Iran suspend all enrichment-related and 
reprocessing activities and stop work on all heavy water- 
related projects, including construction of a heavy water- 
moderated research reactor.  The Council has requested the 
IAEA Director General to report to the UNSC on the Iranian 
regime's compliance by 30 May 2008. 
 
-- It establishes a travel ban on the individuals listed 
in Annex II of this resolution and extends the existing 
call in UNSCRs 1737 and 1747 for states to exercise 
vigilance and restraint regarding the entry or transit 
through their territories to the individuals listed in 
Annex I of this resolution. 
 
-- It requires an asset freeze on the individuals and 
entities listed in Annexes I and III. Of key importance 
are several entities associated with Iran's attempts to 
evade international sanctions through the use of front 
companies and individuals responsible for many of Iran's 
proliferation sensitive nuclear activities. 
 
-- It tightens earlier sanctions by prohibiting the 
transfer to Iran of all dual use items controlled by the 
Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG) unless for exclusive use in 
light water reactors or when necessary to support 
technical cooperation provided by the IAEA.  In the event 
that a state intends to make use of this exemption, it 
must: 
 
a) determine that the items in question will not be 
diverted to support proliferation sensitive nuclear 
activities; 
 
b) meet the requirements of the NSG's guidelines in 
conducting the transfer; 
 
c) obtain and be in a position to exercise effectively a 
right to verify the end-use and end-use location of any 
supplied item; and, 
 
d) notify the UNSC Iran Sanctions Committee and the IAEA 
of the transfer. 
 
-- States are asked to exercise vigilance over the 
activities of financial institutions in their territories 
with Iranian banks, in particular Banks Melli and Saderat 
and their branches and subsidiaries abroad.  To that end, 
the guidance issued by the Financial Actions Task Force 
(FATF) to assist states in implementing their financial 
obligations under resolution 1737 (2006) was also welcomed 
by the UNSC. 
 
---- Banks Melli and Saderat were called out since they 
are of particular concern given their involvement in 
Iran's proliferation and destabilizing regional 
activities. 
 
-- States are asked to exercise vigilance when entering 
into new commitments for public-provided financial support 
for trade with Iran, including the granting of export 
credits, guarantees, and insurance. 
 
-- Finally, states are asked to conduct inspections of 
cargoes to and from Iran conveyed by Iran Air Cargo and 
the Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Line (IRISL), when 
reasonable grounds exist and consistent with applicable 
laws, in order to prevent the transfer of items prohibited 
under UNSCRs 1737, 1747, and 1803.  These entities were 
called out since they are of particular concern given 
their involvement in Iran's procurement activities in 
violation of UN Security Council resolutions. 
 
-- So long as Iran continues to preserve and develop its 
options for establishing a nuclear weapons capability by 
refusing to meet its UNSC and other international nuclear 
nonproliferation obligations, the Council must respond 
with incremental, yet increasingly significant sanctions 
that further pressure the Iranian regime. 
 
-- In order that the Iranian regime receive this message 
loud and clear, and thus lead the regime to embrace the 
diplomatic solution we all seek, the United States urges 
all UN Member States to immediately take all necessary 
steps to ensure the full and effective implementation and 
monitoring of the obligations set out in this resolution. 
 
-- To that end, we note that States are also called upon 
in this resolution to report to the Sanctions Committee by 
30 April 2008, on those steps that they have taken to 
implement its provisions.  We urge your government to do 
so. 
 
-- As with UNSCRs 1737 and 1747, if the Iranian regime 
fails to comply with this resolution by 30 May 2008, 
ninety days [3 months] after its adoption, the Security 
Council has affirmed that it will review the situation and 
adopt additional appropriate measures in response to 
Iran's noncompliance. 
 
-- This resolution also echoes UNSCRs 1737 and 1747 in its 
clear statement of intent to suspend the implementation of 
the UNSC's sanctions on Iran if Iran were to suspend its 
proliferation sensitive nuclear activities as required. 
 
-- Furthermore, UNSCR 1803 reaffirms that the P5+1 stand 
ready to begin negotiations with Iran on the future of its 
nuclear program should Iran suspend its enrichment-related 
and reprocessing activities.  To that end, the United 
States reaffirms its willigness to meet with Iran any time 
and any place should Iran suspend. 
 
END NON-PAPER 
 
¶6.  (U) BEGIN TEXT OF UNSCR 1803 AND ANNEXES 
 
Recalling the statement of its president, S/PRST/2006/15, 
of 29 March 2006, and its resolution 1696 (2006) of 31 
July 2006, its resolution 1737 (2006) of 23 December 2006 
and its resolution 1747 (2007) of 24 March 2007, and 
reaffirming their provisions, 
Reaffirming its commitment to the Treaty on the Non- 
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the need for all States 
Party to that Treaty to comply fully with all their 
obligations, and recalling the right of States Party, in 
conformity with Articles I and II of that Treaty, to 
develop, research, production and use of nuclear energy 
for peaceful purposes without discrimination, 
 
Recalling the resolution of the IAEA Board of Governors 
(GOV/2006/14), which states that a solution to the Iranian 
nuclear issue would contribute to global non-proliferation 
efforts and to realizing the objective of a middle East 
free of weapons of mass destruction, including their means 
of delivery, 
 
Noting with serious concern that, as confirmed by the 
reports of 23 May 2007 (GOV/2007/22), 30 August 2007 
(GOV/2007/48), 15 November 2007 (GOV/2007/48) and 22 
February 2008 (GOV/2008/4) of the Director General of the 
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Iran has not 
established full and sustained suspension of all 
enrichment related and reprocessing activities and heavy 
water-related projects as set out in resolution 1696 
(2006), 1737 (2006) and 1747 (2007), nor resumed its 
cooperation with the IAEA under the Additional Protocol, 
nor taken the other steps required by the IAEA Board of 
Governors, nor complied with the provisions of Security 
Council resolution 1696 (2006), 1737 (2006) and 1747 
(2007) and which are essential to build confidence, and 
deploring Iran's refusal to take these steps, 
 
Noting with concern that Iran has taken issue with the 
IAEA's right to verify design information which had been 
provided by Iran pursuant to the modified Code 3.1, 
emphasizing that in accordance with Article 39 of Iran's 
Safeguards Agreement Code 3.1 cannot be modified nor 
suspended unilaterally and that the Agency's right to 
verify design information provided to it is a continuing 
right, which is not dependent on the stage of construction 
of, or the presence of nuclear material at, a facility, 
 
Reiterating its determination to reinforce the authority 
of the IAEA, strongly supporting the role of the IAEA 
Board of Governors, commending the IAEA for its efforts to 
resolve outstanding issues relating to Iran's nuclear 
programme in the work plan between the Secretariat of the 
IAEA and Iran (GOV/2007/48, Attachment), welcoming the 
progress in implementation of this work plan as reflected 
in the IAEA Director General's reports of 15 November 2007 
(GOV/2007/58) and 22 February 2008 (GOV/2008/4), 
underlining the importance of Iran producing tangible 
results rapidly and effectively by completing 
implementation of this work plan including by providing 
answers to all the questions the IAEA asks so that the 
Agency, through the implementation of the required 
transparency measures, can assess the completeness and 
correctness of Iran's declaration, 
 
Expressing the conviction that the suspension set out in 
paragraph 2 of resolution 1737 (2006) as well as full, 
verified Iranian compliance with the requirements set out 
by the IAEA Board of Governors would contribute to a 
diplomatic, negotiated solution, that guarantees Iran's 
nuclear programme is for exclusively peaceful purposes, 
 
Stressing that China, France, Germany, the Russian 
Federation, the United Kingdom and the United States are 
willing to take further concrete measures on exploring an 
overall strategy of resolving the Iranian nuclear issue 
through negotiation on the basis of their June 2006 
proposals (S/2006/521), and noting the confirmation by 
these countries that once the confidence of the 
international community in the exclusively peaceful nature 
of Iran's nuclear programme is restored it will be treated 
in the same manner as that of any Non-Nuclear Weapon State 
party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons, 
 
Having regard to States' rights and obligations relating 
to international trade, 
 
Welcoming the guidance issued by the Financial Actions 
Task Force (FATF) to assist States in implementing their 
financial obligations under resolution 1737 (2006), 
 
Determined to give effect to its decisions by adopting 
appropriate measures to persuade Iran to comply with 
resolution 1696 (2006), resolution 1737 (2006), resolution 
1747 (2007) and with the requirements of the IAEA, and 
also to constrain Iran's development of sensitive 
technologies in support of its nuclear and missile 
programmes, until such time as the Security Council 
determines that the objectives of these resolutions have 
been met, 
 
Concerned by the proliferation risks presented by the 
Iranian nuclear programme and, in this context, by Iran's 
continuing failure to meet the requirements of the IAEA 
Board of Governors and to comply with the provisions of 
Security Council resolutions 1696 (2006), 1737 (2006) and 
1747 (2007), mindful of its primary responsibility under 
the Charter of the United Nations for the maintenance of 
international peace and security, 
 
Acting under Article 41 of Chapter VII of the Charter of 
the United Nations, 
 
¶1.      Reaffirms that Iran shall without further delay take 
the steps required by the IAEA Board of Governors in its 
resolution GOV/2006/14, which are essential to build 
confidence in the exclusively peaceful purpose of its 
nuclear programme and to resolve outstanding questions, 
and, in this context, affirms its decision that Iran shall 
without delay take the steps required in paragraph 2 of 
resolution 1737 (2006), and underlines that the IAEA has 
sought confirmation that Iran will apply Code 3.1 
modified; 
 
¶2.      Welcomes the agreement between Iran and the IAEA to 
resolve all outstanding issues concerning Iran's nuclear 
programme and progress made in this regard as set out in 
the Director General's report of 22 February 2008 
(GOV/2008/4), encourages the IAEA to continue its work to 
clarify all outstanding issues, stresses that this would 
help to re-establish international confidence in the 
exclusively peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear programme, 
and supports the IAEA in strengthening its safeguards on 
Iran's nuclear activities in accordance with the 
Safeguards Agreement between Iran and the IAEA; 
 
¶3.      Calls upon all States to exercise vigilance and 
restraint regarding the entry into or transit through 
their territories of individuals who are engaged in, 
directly associated with or providing support for Iran's 
proliferation sensitive nuclear activities or for the 
development of nuclear weapon delivery systems, and 
decides in this regard that all States shall notify the 
Committee established pursuant to paragraph 18 of 
resolution 1737 (2006) (herein "the Committee") of the 
entry into or transit through their territories of the 
persons designated in the Annex to resolution 1737 (2006), 
Annex I to resolution 1747 (2007) or Annex I to this 
resolution, as well as of additional persons designated by 
the Security Council or the Committee as being engaged in, 
directly associated with or providing support for Iran's 
proliferation sensitive nuclear activities or for the 
development of nuclear weapon delivery systems, including 
through the involvement in procurement of the prohibited 
items, goods, equipment, materials and technology 
specified by and under the measures in paragraphs 3 and 4 
of resolution 1737 (2006), except where such entry or 
transit is for activities directly related to the items in 
subparagraphs 3(b) (i) and (ii) of resolution 1737 (2006); 
 
¶4.      Underlines that nothing in paragraph 3 above requires a 
State to refuse its own nationals entry into its 
territory, and that all States shall, in the 
implementation of the above paragraph, take into account 
humanitarian considerations, including religious 
obligations, as well as the necessity to meet the 
objectives of this resolution, resolution 1737 (2006) and 
resolution 1747 (2007), including where Article XV of the 
IAEA Statute is engaged; 
 
¶5.      Decides that all States shall take the necessary 
measures to prevent the entry into or transit through 
their territories of individuals designated in Annex II to 
this resolution as well as of additional persons 
designated by the Security Council or the Committee as 
being engaged in, directly associated with or providing 
support for Iran's proliferation sensitive nuclear 
activities or for the development of nuclear weapon 
delivery systems, including through the involvement in 
procurement of the prohibited items, goods, equipment, 
materials and technology specified by and under the 
measures in paragraphs 3 and 4 of resolution 1737 (2006), 
except where such entry or transit is for activities 
directly related to the items in subparagraphs 3 (b) (i) 
and (ii) of resolution 1737 (2006) and provided that 
nothing in this paragraph shall oblige a State to refuse 
its own nationals entry into its territory; 
 
¶6.      Decides that the measures imposed by paragraph 5 above 
shall not apply where the Committee determines on a case- 
by-case basis that such travel is justified on the grounds 
of humanitarian need, including religious obligations, or 
where the Committee concludes that an exemption would 
otherwise further the objectives of the present 
resolution; 
 
¶7.      Decides that the measures specified in paragraphs 12, 
13, 14 and 15 of resolution 1737 (2006) shall apply also 
to the persons and entities listed in Annexes I and III to 
this resolution, and any persons or entities acting on 
their behalf or at their direction, and to entities owned 
or controlled by them and to persons and entities 
determined by the Council or the Committee to have 
assisted designated persons or entities in evading 
sanctions of, or in violating the provisions of, this 
resolution, resolution 1737 (2006) or resolution 1747 
(2007); 
 
¶8.      Decides that all States shall take the necessary 
measures to prevent the supply, sale or transfer directly 
or indirectly from their territories or by their nationals 
or using their flag vessels or aircraft to, or for use in 
or benefit of, Iran, and whether or not originating in 
their territories, of: 
 
(a) all items, materials, equipment, goods and technology 
set out in INFCIRC/254/Rev.7/Part2 of document S/2006/814, 
except the supply, sale or transfer, in accordance with 
the requirements of paragraph 5 of resolution 1737 (2006), 
of items, materials, equipment, goods and technology set 
out in sections 1 and 2 of the Annex to that document, and 
sections 3 to 6 as notified in advance to the Committee, 
only when for exclusive use in light water reactors, and 
where such supply, sale or transfer is necessary for 
technical cooperation provided to Iran by the IAEA or 
under its auspices as provided for in paragraph 16 of 
resolution 1737 (2006); 
 
(b) all items, materials, equipment, goods and technology 
set out in 19.A.3 of Category II of document S/2006/815; 
 
¶9.      Calls upon all States to exercise vigilance in entering 
into new commitments for public provided financial support 
for trade with Iran, including the granting of export 
credits, guarantees or insurance, to their nationals or 
entities involved in such trade, in order to avoid such 
financial support contributing to the proliferation 
sensitive nuclear activities, or to the development of 
nuclear weapon delivery systems, as referred to in 
resolution 1737 (2006); 
 
¶10.     Calls upon all States to exercise vigilance over the 
activities of financial institutions in their territories 
with all banks domiciled in Iran, in particular with Bank 
Melli and Bank Saderat, and their branches and 
subsidiaries abroad, in order to avoid such activities 
contributing to the proliferation sensitive nuclear 
activities, or to the development of nuclear weapon 
delivery systems, as referred to in resolution 1737 
(2006); 
 
¶11.     Calls upon all States, in accordance with their 
national legal authorities and legislation and consistent 
with international law, in particular the law of the sea 
and relevant international civil aviation agreements, to 
inspect the cargoes to and from Iran, of aircraft and 
vessels, at their airports and seaports, owned or operated 
by Iran Air Cargo and Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping 
Line, provided there are reasonable grounds to believe 
that the aircraft or vessel is transporting goods 
prohibited under this resolution or resolution 1737 (2006) 
or resolution 1747 (2007); 
 
¶12.     Requires all States, in cases when inspection mentioned 
in the paragraph above is undertaken, to submit to the 
Security Council within five working days a written report 
on the inspection containing, in particular, explanation 
of the grounds for the inspection, as well as information 
on its time, place, circumstances, results and other 
relevant details; 
 
¶13.     Calls upon all States to report to the Committee within 
60 days of the adoption of this resolution on the steps 
they have taken with a view to implementing effectively 
paragraphs 3, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11 above; 
 
¶14.     Decides that the mandate of the Committee as set out in 
paragraph 18 of resolution 1737 (2006) shall also apply to 
the measures imposed in resolution 1747 (2007) and this 
resolution; 
 
¶15.     Stresses the willingness of China, France, Germany, the 
Russian Federation, the United Kingdom and the United 
States to further enhance diplomatic efforts to promote 
resumption of dialogue, and consultations on the basis of 
their offer to Iran, with a view to seeking a 
comprehensive, long-term and proper solution of this issue 
which would allow for the development of all-round 
relations and wider cooperation with Iran based on mutual 
respect and the establishment of international confidence 
in the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear 
programme, and inter alia, starting direct talks and 
negotiation with Iran as long as Iran suspends all 
enrichment-related and reprocessing activities, including 
research and development, as verified by the IAEA; 
 
¶16.     Encourages the European Union High Representative for 
the Common Foreign and Security Policy to continue 
communication with Iran in support of political and 
diplomatic efforts to find a negotiated solution including 
relevant proposals by China, France, Germany, the Russian 
Federation, the United Kingdom and the United States with 
a view to create necessary conditions for resuming talks; 
 
¶17.     Emphasizes the importance of all States, including 
Iran, taking the necessary measures to ensure that no 
claim shall lie at the instance of the Government of Iran, 
or of any person or entity in Iran, or of persons or 
entities designated pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) and 
related resolutions, or any person claiming through or for 
the benefit of any such person or entity, in connection 
with any contract or other transaction where its 
performance was prevented by reason of the measures 
imposed by the present resolution, resolution 1737 (2006) 
or resolution 1747 (2007); 
 
¶18.     Requests within 90 days a further report from the 
Director General of the IAEA on whether Iran has 
established full and sustained suspension of all 
activities mentioned in resolution 1737 (2006), as well as 
on the process of Iranian compliance with all the steps 
required by the IAEA Board and with the other provisions 
of resolution 1737 (2006), resolution 1747 (2007) and of 
this resolution, to the IAEA Board of Governors and in 
parallel to the Security Council for its consideration; 
 
¶19.     Reaffirms that it shall review Iran's actions in light 
of the report referred to in the paragraph above, and: 
 
(a)     that it shall suspend the implementation of measures if 
and for so long as Iran suspends all enrichment-related 
and reprocessing activities, including research and 
development, as verified by the IAEA, to allow for 
negotiations in good faith in order to reach an early and 
mutually acceptable outcome; 
 
that it shall terminate the measures specified in 
paragraphs 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 12 of resolution 1737 (2006), 
as well as in paragraphs 2, 4, 5, 6 and 7 of resolution 
1747 (2007), and in paragraphs 3, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11 
above, as soon as it determines, following receipt of the 
report referred to in the paragraph above, that Iran has 
fully complied with its obligations under the relevant 
resolutions of the Security Council and met the 
requirements of the IAEA Board of Governors, as confirmed 
by the IAEA Board; 
 
that it shall, in the event that the report shows that 
Iran has not complied with resolution 1696 (2006), 
resolution 1737 (2006), resolution 1747 (2007) and this 
resolution, adopt further appropriate measures under 
Article 41 of Chapter VII of the Charter of the United 
Nations to persuade Iran to comply with these resolutions 
and the requirements of the IAEA, and underlines that 
further decisions will be required should such additional 
measures be necessary; 
 
¶20. Decides to remain seized of the matter. 
 
Annex I 
 
¶1.      Amir Moayyed Alai (involved in managing the assembly 
and engineering of centrifuges) 
 
Mohammad Fedai Ashiani (involved in the production of 
ammonium uranyl carbonate and management of the Natanz 
enrichment complex) 
 
Abbas Rezaee Ashtiani (a senior official at the AEOI 
Office of Exploration and Mining Affairs) 
 
Haleh Bakhtiar (involved in the production of magnesium at 
a concentration of 99.9%) 
 
Morteza Behzad (involved in making centrifuge components) 
 
Dr. Mohammad Eslami (Head of Defence Industries Training 
and Research Institute) 
 
Seyyed Hussein Hosseini (AEOI official involved in the 
heavy water research reactor project at Arak) 
 
¶M. Javad Karimi Sabet (Head of Novin Energy Company, which 
is designated under resolution 1747 (2007)) 
 
Hamid-Reza Mohajerani (involved in production management 
at the Uranium Conversion Facility (UCF) at Esfahan) 
 
Brigadier-General Mohammad Reza Naqdi (former Deputy Chief 
of Armed Forces General Staff for Logistics and Industrial 
Research / Head of State Anti-Smuggling Headquarters, 
engaged in efforts to get round the sanctions imposed by 
resolutions 1737 (2006) and 1747 (2007)) 
 
Houshang Nobari (involved in the management of the Natanz 
enrichment complex) 
 
Abbas Rashidi (involved in enrichment work at Natanz) 
 
Ghasem Soleymani (Director of Uranium Mining Operations at 
the Saghand Uranium Mine) 
 
Annex II 
 
¶A. Individuals listed in resolution 1737 (2006) 
 
¶1.      Mohammad Qannadi, AEOI Vice President for Research & 
Development 
 
¶2.      Dawood Agha-Jani, Head of the PFEP (Natanz) 
 
¶3.      Behman Asgarpour, Operational Manager (Arak) 
 
¶B. Individuals listed in resolution 1747 (2007) 
 
¶1.      Seyed Jaber Safdari (Manager of the Natanz Enrichment 
Facilities) 
 
¶2. Amir Rahimi (Head of Esfahan Nuclear Fuel Research and 
Production Center, which is part of the AEOI's Nuclear 
Fuel Production and Procurement Company, which is involved 
in enrichment-related activities) 
 
Annex III 
 
¶1.      Abzar Boresh Kaveh Co. (BK Co.) (involved in the 
production of centrifuge components) 
 
¶2. Barzagani Tejarat Tavanmad Saccal companies (subsidiary 
of Saccal System companies) (this company tried to 
purchase sensitive goods for an entity listed in 
resolution 1737 (2006)) 
 
¶3. Electro Sanam Company (E. S. Co. / E. X. Co.) (AIO 
front-company, involved in the ballistic missile 
programme) 
 
¶4. Ettehad Technical Group (AIO front-company, involved in 
the ballistic missile programme) 
 
¶5. Industrial Factories of Precision (IFP) Machinery (aka 
Instrumentation Factories Plant) (used by AIO for some 
acquisition attempts) 
 
¶6. Jabber Ibn Hayan (AEOI laboratory involved in fuel- 
cycle activities) 
 
¶7. Joza Industrial Co. (AIO front-company, involved in the 
ballistic missile programme) 
 
¶8. Khorasan Metallurgy Industries (subsidiary of the 
Ammunition Industries Group (AMIG) which depends on DIO. 
Involved in the production of centrifuges components) 
 
¶9. Niru Battery Manufacturing Company (subsidiary of the 
DIO.  Its role is to manufacture power units for the 
Iranian military including missile systems) 
 
¶10. Pishgam (Pioneer) Energy Industries (has participated 
in construction of the Uranium Conversion Facility at 
Esfahan) 
 
¶11. Safety Equipment Procurement (SEP) (AIO front-company, 
involved in the ballistic missile programme) 
 
¶12. TAMAS Company (involved in enrichment-related 
activities. TAMAS is the overarching body, under which 
four subsidiaries have been established, including one for 
uranium extraction to concentration and another in charge 
of uranium processing, enrichment and waste) 
 
END TEXT OF UNSCR 1803 AND ANNEXES 
 
¶7.  (U) BEGIN P5+1 MINISTER'S STATEMENT 
 
Statement by the Foreign Ministers of China, France, 
Germany, Russia, the United Kingdom and the United States 
with support of the High Representative of the European 
Union 
 
¶1.      Today the UN Security Council adopted Resolution 1803, 
reflecting the international community's ongoing 
serious concerns about the proliferation risks of the 
Iranian nuclear programme.  This is the third time 
that the UN Security Council has sent a strong message 
of international resolve to Iran by adopting a 
sanctions resolution under chapter VII, Article 41 of 
the Charter of the United Nations on Iran's nuclear 
programme. We deplore Iran's continued failure to 
comply with its UNSC and IAEA Board requirements, in 
particular by expanding its enrichment-related 
activities.  We note the progress made in implementing 
the IAEA-Iran workplan and the IAEA's serious concerns 
about the "alleged studies," which are critical to an 
assessment of a possible military dimension to Iran's 
nuclear program.  We call upon Iran to heed the 
requirements of UNSC and the IAEA, including the 
suspension of its enrichment-related and reprocessing 
activities. 
 
¶2.      We remain committed to an early negotiated solution to 
the Iranian nuclear issue and reaffirm our commitment 
to a dual-track approach.  We reconfirm the proposals 
we presented to Iran in June 2006 and are prepared to 
further develop them.  Our proposals will offer 
substantial opportunities for political, security and 
economic benefits to Iran and to the region.  We urge 
Iran to take this opportunity to engage with us all 
and to find a negotiated way forward.  We reiterate 
our recognition of Iran's right to develop, research, 
production, and use of nuclear energy for peaceful 
purposes in conformity with its NPT obligations.  We 
reconfirm that once the confidence of the 
international community in the exclusively peaceful 
nature of Iran's nuclear programme is restored it will 
be treated in the same manner as that of any Non- 
Nuclear Weapon State party to the NPT.  We remain 
ready to negotiate future arrangements, modalities and 
timing in this respect once the conditions for 
negotiations have been established. 
 
¶3.      This will require further diplomatic efforts and 
innovative approaches.  To that end we have asked Dr. 
Javier Solana, the European Union's High 
Representative for Common Foreign and Security Policy, 
to meet with Dr. Saeed Jalili, Secretary of Iran's 
Supreme National Security Council, and to address the 
interests and concerns of both sides in a manner which 
can gradually create the conditions for the opening of 
negotiations. 
 
 
END P5+1 MINISTER'S STATEMENT 
 
¶8.  (U) Posts are requested to report any substantive 
responses.  Richard Nephew (ISN/RA, 202-736-4730, 
nephewrm@state.sgov.gov) and Heather Von Behren (IO/T, 
202-647-2753, vonbehrenhw@state.sgov.gov) are the 
Department's POCs for this activity. 
 
MINIMIZE CONSIDERED 
RICE 
 
 
NNNN 
 



End Cable Text