04TELAVIV6549
WB/G SITREP: MILITANTS FIRE MORTAR BARRAGE AT GUSH
Thu Dec 23 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEL AVIV 006549 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR BURNS/SATTERFIELD/DIBBLE; 
NEA/SA/EX FOR RICHIE; DEPT FOR DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR 
DS/IP/NEA; 
DRL FOR A/S CRANER; NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN; 
USAID FOR DCHA, DCHA/FPP, PRM FOR DEWEY/GREENE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG PHUM PREL PTER ASEC CASC GZ IS
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: MILITANTS FIRE MORTAR BARRAGE AT GUSH 
KATIF SETTLEMENTS: DECEMBER 23, 2004 (1400 HOURS LOCAL) 
 
 
This is a joint ConGen Jerusalem/Embassy Tel Aviv cable. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: In the aftermath of a 24-hour IDF 
incursion into Khan Yunis to stop rocket launches at Israeli 
settlements in Gush Katif, Palestinian militants fired a 
barrage of 20 mortar shells at the settlement block December 
¶23.  One Israeli was lightly injured in Netzar Hazani when a 
mortar struck his home.  In Rafah, an 11-year-old boy was 
shot and wounded December 22 while playing in the yard of an 
UNRWA-run elementary school, and a Palestinian man nearby was 
wounded in the head during an exchange of fire between 
Palestinian militants and IDF soldiers.  In the West Bank, 
the IDF sealed Ithna and Tarqumia villages in the Hebron 
region after imposing a curfew, according to Palestinian 
sources.  This was done after an Israeli security guard was 
killed December 22 while guarding two Israeli bulldozers 
working on the construction of the separation barrier in the 
area.  Israeli security forces arrested a East Jerusalem 
couple suspected of planning to carry out a suicide bombing 
immediately following their planned wedding.  End Summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) ATTACKS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injuries: Nil. 
 
-- Arrests: On December 22, the IDF arrested a total of seven 
Palestinians in different areas of the West Bank, according 
to Palestinian reports.  Among those arrested were two Fatah 
members from Al-Quds Open University in Jenin. 
 
-- Arrests: On December 22, Israeli security forces arrested 
an East Jerusalem couple suspected of planning to carry out a 
suicide bombing immediately following their upcoming wedding, 
according to Israeli sources. 
 
-- Clashes: According to Palestinian newspapers, on December 
22 Palestinian militants threw two firebombs at IDF troops 
searching for gunmen who killed an Israeli security guard 
near Hebron earlier in the day.  No injuries were reported. 
 
-- Clashes: On December 22, Palestinian militants clashed 
with the IDF in Balata refugee camp near Nablus, according to 
Palestinian sources.  No injuries were reported. 
 
-- Attacks: On December 22, an IDF jeep was damaged in a 
shooting attack in Askar camp near Nablus, according to 
Palestinian sources.  No injuries were reported. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) INCURSIONS/DEMOLITIONS/CLOSURES 
 
-- On December 22, the IDF sealed Ithna and Tarqumia villages 
in the Hebron region after imposing a curfew, according to 
Palestinian sources.  This was done after an Israeli security 
guard was killed December 22 while guarding two Israeli 
bulldozers working on the construction of separation barrier 
in the area.  The IDF is investigating the incident, 
according to Israeli sources. 
 
-- On December 22, Israeli security authorities announced 
that they would ease restrictions on travel to and from 
Bethlehem over Christmas. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Death: UNRWA and the IDF reported that IDF soldiers at an 
outpost southeast of Bayt Lahiya shot and killed one 
Palestinian December 22 when the Palestinian was seen 
approaching the border fence.  The IDF reported that the man 
was armed. 
 
-- Deaths/Injuries: UNRWA reported that three militants were 
killed and another eight Palestinians were wounded December 
22-23 during an IDF incursion into Khan Yunis (see 
"Incursions/Demolitions"). 
 
-- Injury: Israeli media reported that one Israeli was 
lightly injured in a mortar attack on the Gush Katif 
settlement of Netzar Hazani December 23. 
 
-- Injuries: UNRWA reported that an 11-year-old boy was shot 
and wounded December 22 while playing in the yard of an 
UNRWA-run elementary school in Rafah.  A Palestinian man 
nearby was wounded in the head during an exchange of fire 
between Palestinian militants and IDF soldiers. 
 
-- Catch-up item: Injury: UNRWA reported that a Palestinian 
youth was shot and seriously wounded December 21 when IDF 
soldiers stationed near the settlement of Rafiah Yam fired on 
a group of Palestinians. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: The IDF reported that Palestinian 
militants fired seven mortar shells at Israeli settler and 
IDF targets in the Gaza Strip overnight December 22-23. 
Israeli media reported that militants fired another 19 mortar 
shells at the Gush Katif settlement bloc the morning of 
December 23.  One Israeli was lightly injured, according to 
media reports (see "Injuries").  An anti-tank missile struck 
a carpentry shop in the Erez Industrial Zone December 23.  As 
a result, the Erez Crossing did not open until 1200 hours 
December 23 (see "Border Crossings").  Militants fired one 
Qassam rocket at Neve Dekalim December 22, according to the 
IDF. 
 
-- Shootings: The IDF reported that Palestinian militants 
launched two shooting attacks on IDF soldiers in the Gaza 
Strip December 22.  No injuries were reported. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) INCURSIONS/DEMOLITIONS: 
 
-- Israeli media and UNRWA reported that IDF soldiers entered 
the Bedouin village of Um al-Nasser in the northern Gaza 
Strip the morning of December 23.  The troops closed off the 
village in order to search for weapons, according to media 
reports. 
 
-- UNRWA reported that the IDF incursion into the southern 
areas of Khan Yunis refugee camp that began in the early 
morning hours December 22, ended at approximately late the 
same evening.  The goal of the operation was to destroy areas 
used as cover by militants launching rocket attacks on 
Israeli settlements in Gush Katif.  Militants used small 
arms, anti-tank rockets, mortars and IEDs to repel the 
soldiers, who were backed by IAF helicopters and armored 
vehicles.  In the 24-hour operation, three militants were 
killed, and another eight Palestinians were injured, 
according to UNRWA. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS: 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was open the morning of December 23, with a major 
detour at Netzarim Junction.  The road was closed at midday 
at Abu Khouli checkpoint, however, after Israeli settlers set 
fire to tires and blocked the road. 
 
-- Erez Crossing was delayed in opening December 23 until 
1200 hours, due to a rocket attack.  Once open, international 
workers, local staff of international organizations, and a 
small number of Palestinians were allowed to cross. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone remained closed December 23. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed December 23. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was open December 23. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was closed for arrivals and departures 
December 23. 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan checkpoint was closed December 23.  Toufah 
checkpoint was open for residents of al-Mowassi. 
 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
KURTZER