04TELAVIV1777
Canon White and Former Archbishop of
Wed Mar 24 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEL AVIV 001777 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/IPA, NEA/RA, NEA/PPD MQUINN, DBENZE 
STATE INFO FOR IIP, ECA 
JERUSALEM PASS ICD DANIELS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KMPI PHUM KPAO IS GOI EXTERNAL ISRAELI SOCIETY ISRAELI PALESTINIAN AFFAIRS
SUBJECT: Canon White and Former Archbishop of 
Canterbury Share Views with Ambassador Kurtzer on Role 
of Alexandria Process in Reducing Violence 
 
REF: A) Jerusalem 124 
 
     B) 03 Tel Aviv 6792 
     C) 03 Tel Aviv 5696 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Lord Carey of Clifton (Former Archbishop 
of Canterbury) and Canon Andrew White met with 
Ambassador March 19 to seek his views on ways they 
could move forward the Alexandria Process Israeli- 
Palestinian religious dialogue in a manner that would 
best support the political track of the peace process. 
Lord Carey noted that his main goal in staying engaged 
in the religious dialogue after leaving his post as 
Archbishop of Canterbury was to keep working to get 
religious leaders here to take a stand against the 
suicide bombings and violence and for peace. 
Ambassador Kurtzer encouraged Lord Carey and Canon 
White and all who accompanied him to keep up that 
effort, which he said was of vital importance to the 
peace process. End summary. 
 
¶2.  Lord Carey of Clifton (former Archbishop of 
Canterbury), accompanied by Lady Carey, Canon Andrew 
White, and a delegation of mostly American evangelical 
Christian leaders, called on Ambassador Kurtzer March 
19, in a meeting organized by Canon Andrew White and 
his International Centre for Reconciliation (ICR) at 
Coventry Cathedral.  Poloff and PDoff also participated 
in the meeting.  Lord and Lady Carey and their group 
were on a five-day visit to Israel and the Palestinian 
Authority March 17-21 at the ICR's initiative for 
meetings with Israeli and Palestinian officials as well 
as western diplomats.  The goal of the visit, and of 
their call on Ambassador Kurtzer, was to learn how 
those involved promoting, executing, or funding high- 
level interfaith dialogue efforts in the Israeli- 
Palestinian context could best support the goals of 
reducing incitement and violence and advancing the 
peace process. 
 
¶3.  Lord Carey informed the Ambassador that he has 
remained actively engaged in Alexandria Declaration 
implementation ("the Alexandria Process") even after 
leaving his post as Archbishop of Canterbury.  Since 
the "First Alexandria Declaration of the Religious 
Leaders of the Holy Land" was signed in Egypt by top 
Jewish, Muslim and Christian religious leaders back in 
January 2002, the primary purpose of the follow-on 
"Alexandria Process" has been to get the religious 
leader signatories to live up to their commitments, 
especially to get them to "speak out against suicide 
bombings and violence, and to take an active stand for 
peace," in Lord Carey's words. 
 
¶4.  The Ambassador encouraged Canon White and Lord 
Carey and their delegation to keep working toward that 
important goal, even if it means adding new recruits 
one by one to the ranks of those who were "on message." 
Efforts such as those being undertaken through the 
Alexandria Process to get religious leaders to condemn 
and rein in the violence are one of the most important 
of all the auxiliary efforts being carried out by non- 
government actors in support of the peace process, the 
Ambassador noted.  He added that the success of such 
efforts is made even more crucial by the fact that 
there is an increasing danger that the 
Israeli/Palestinian conflict could be moving from being 
a primarily territorial and political conflict, as it 
has traditionally been, to a religious and existential 
conflict - which would be that much harder for 
diplomats and statesmen to resolve. 
 
¶5.  Canon White briefly summarized the talks held in 
Cairo in January 2004, in which Rabbi Melchior and a 
second Israeli Jewish leader also participated.  He 
asked for the Ambassador's advice on what he and others 
involved in promoting religious dialogue in the 
Alexandria Process should focus on next, to best 
support the USG's efforts to promote the Roadmap and 
the political track of the peace process.  Ambassador 
Kurtzer said the most important role they could play 
would be to continue to expand the circle of religious 
leaders in the region -- not only senior figures but 
also those at the grassroots level -- who sign up to 
the Alexandria Declaration and support its principles 
of rejecting incitement and violence.  (Text of 
Declaration in Ref C and also on line at 
http://www.wcrp.org/RforP/Press%20Releases/Al exandriaDe 
claration.html.) 
¶6. Note: Ref B (dated December 1, 2003) was a joint 
Consulate General Jerusalem /Embassy Tel Aviv 
recommendation for NEA Multilateral funding for 
projects that would expand Arab and Israeli 
interaction.  At the top of our joint list was an ICR 
grant proposal to advance implementation of the 
Alexandria Declaration.  End note. 
 
KURTZER