05TELAVIV2362
WB/G SITREP: IDF KILLS AL-AQSA MILITANT IN NABLUS,
Thu Apr 14 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEL AVIV 002362 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FRONT OFFICE; NEA/SA/EX FOR RICHIE; DEPT FOR 
DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN; USAID 
FOR DCHA, DCHA/FPP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG PHUM PREL PTER ASEC CASC GZ IS
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: IDF KILLS AL-AQSA MILITANT IN NABLUS, 
AS MANY AS 22 INJURED IN WEST BANK VIOLENCE -- APRIL 14, 
2005 (1300 HOURS LOCAL) 
 
This is a joint ConGen Jerusalem/Embassy Tel Aviv cable. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: In the West Bank, the IDF on April 14 shot 
and killed an al-Aqsa Martyrs, Brigades militant during an 
arrest operation in the Balatah refugee camp in Nablus, 
according to Israeli media reports.  Palestinian sources, 
however, have termed the incident a targeted killing by the 
IDF.  On April 13 six Palestinians and as many as four IDF 
soldiers sustained injuries in clashes with IDF troops north 
of Hebron; another seven Israeli and Palestinian protesters 
were injured the same day west of Ramallah when they clashed 
with Israeli police during a demonstration against the 
separation barrier the same day.  In Bethlehem, five 
Palestinians on April 13 sustained moderate injuries when a 
hand grenade exploded in the city's main market.  Palestinian 
Legislative Council (PLC) member Ahmad al-Batsh on April 13 
claimed that unknown assailants fired gunshots earlier in the 
day at his home in village of Bir Nabala, north of Jerusalem. 
 There were no reported injuries from this incident. 
Although the circumstances behind the shooting are unknown, 
al-Batsh is known for his pro-reform positions and vocal 
criticism of the PA.  Gaza was largely quiet.  End Summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Death:  The IDF April 14 shot and killed a member of the 
al-Aqsa Martyrs, Brigades in the Balatah refugee camp in 
Nablus.  According to Palestinian sources, the IDF entered 
the camp and surrounded the building where the militant was 
hiding.  The militant was reportedly shot as he exited the 
building.  Palestinians are labeling the incident a targeted 
killing.  Israeli media sources, however, reported that the 
IDF killed the al-Aqsa militant after he opened fire on the 
IDF. 
 
-- Clashes/Injuries: Palestinians on April 13 clashed with 
the IDF in Surif village, north of Hebron.  Six Palestinians 
sustained injuries.  The clashes erupted after an IDF jeep 
carrying four IDF soldiers overturned in the village.  All 
four soldiers sustained light injuries, according to press 
reports.  The IDF claimed that only two soldiers were 
injured. 
 
-- Clashes/Injuries: Palestinians and Israeli peace activists 
on April 13 clashed with Israeli Border Police in Bil,in 
village, west of Ramallah, to protest the construction of the 
separation barrier.  Seven protesters sustained light 
injuries during the clashes. 
 
-- Injuries: Five Palestinian minors on April 13 sustained 
moderate injuries when an IED exploded in the main city 
market in Bethlehem.  The Palestinian police are 
investigating the exact circumstances of the incident. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) ARRESTS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Incursion/Arrests: The IDF on April 14 entered Nablus and 
arrested two Palestinian militants.  The two militants, 
associated with Hamas and the al-Aqsa Martyrs, Brigades, are 
suspected of carrying out attacks against Israeli targets. 
 
-- Police Raid: The Israeli Police on April 13 raided the 
offices of a Palestinian civil society organization 
associated with the Popular Front for the Liberation of 
Palestine (PFLP) in the Old City of Jerusalem.  The police 
searched the premises and left after several hours. 
 
-- Arrests: Israeli security officials on April 13 announced 
the arrest last week of three members of a Fatah cell from 
the Qalqiliya area that had planned to carry out an attack on 
April 10. 
 
-- Security Incident: Unknown individuals on April 13 threw 
an explosive device at an Israeli military vehicle near 
Bethlehem.  There were no injuries reported from this 
incident. 
 
-- Shooting: Unknown individuals on April 13 fired gunshots 
at an IDF position near Idhna village, west of Hebron.  There 
were no reported injuries from this incident. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) DEMOLITIONS: 
 
-- Israeli settlers from the Qedumim settlement, southwest of 
Nablus, on April 13 uprooted olive trees belonging to 
Palestinian residents in a nearby village.  The IDF searched 
the area for suspects, but made no arrests. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- Following an April 13 meeting of the Palestinian Authority 
(PA) Ministerial Committee on Gaza Disengagement, PA Prime 
Minister Ahmad Quraya, (Abu Ala,a) stated that the PA is 
interested in coordinating the withdrawal of Israeli forces 
and settlers from Gaza and the northern West Bank, according 
to the Palestinian press. 
 
-- Palestinian Legislative Council (PLC) member Ahmad 
al-Batsh on April 13 claimed that unknown assailants fired 
gunshots earlier in the day at his home in the village of Bir 
Nabala, north of Jerusalem.  There were no reported injuries 
from this incident.  Although the circumstances behind the 
shooting are unknown, al-Batsh is known for his pro-reform 
positions and vocal criticism of the PA. 
 
-- Palestinian and Israeli media reported that approximately 
30 Israeli and Palestinian mayors on April 13 held a special 
conference in Jericho where they agreed to a symbolic 
one-year civilian hudna (cease-fire).  The PA Ministry of 
Local Government and a number of Israeli mayors sponsored the 
one-day conference. 
 
-- A coalition of Fatah and Palestinian People's Party 
candidates won 16 of the 31 seats in student council 
elections held on April 13 at Bethlehem University.  Hamas 
and PIJ won a total of ten seats, while the PFLP won five 
seats. 
 
-- Palestinian prisoners incarcerated by Israel plan to go on 
a hunger strike on April 17 to mark the beginning of a 
week-long series of activities in the West Bank and Gaza 
Strip to protest their imprisonment. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injuries: Nil. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: The IDF reported that Palestinian 
militants fired one mortar shell at Morag settlement in the 
early morning hours of April 14. 
 
-- Shootings: The IDF reported that militants launched one 
shooting attack at an IDF outpost north of Netzarim April 13. 
 
-- Explosions: UNRWA and the IDF reported that IDF soldiers 
found and safely detonated an IED April 13 near an IDF 
outpost west of Rafah, along the border fence with Egypt. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS: 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was open April 14, with a major detour at Netzarim 
Junction. 
 
-- Erez Crossing was open for internationals and for a 
limited number of Palestinians April 13, and 4,612 laborers 
and 230 merchants crossed into Israel. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone was open April 13, and 674 
laborers entered. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers April 
14, but was open for the import of aggregates used in 
construction. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was open April 14. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open for arrivals and departures April 
¶14. 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan checkpoint was closed April 14.  Toufah 
checkpoint was open for residents of al-Mowassi. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- UNRWA reported that the Islamic and National Powers 
organization held a demonstration April 13 in Khan Yunis to 
show solidarity with Palestinian prisoners being held in 
Israel jails.  In al-Maghazi camp, PFLP members demonstrated 
April 13 demanding that the PA impose a death sentence on the 
men accused of murdering PFLP leader Mohammad al-Aydi in 
¶2003.  On April 13 in Bayt Lahiya and Jabaliya, family 
members and sympathizers of the woman who was killed April 8 
by armed men who attacked her vehicle in a robbery attempt 
conducted demonstrations.  The killers are reportedly Hamas 
members; Hamas has issued statements disavowing the accused. 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
CRETZ