05TELAVIV3172
WB/G SITREP: TWO WB BANK TEENS ARRESTED WITH
Wed May 25 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEL AVIV 003172 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FRONT OFFICE; NEA/SA/EX FOR RICHIE; DEPT FOR 
DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN; USAID 
FOR DCHA, DCHA/FPP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG PHUM PREL PTER ASEC CASC GZ IS
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: TWO WB BANK TEENS ARRESTED WITH 
BOMBS; FATAH MEMBERS DISRUPT HAMAS DEMO IN AL-BUREIJ -- MAY 
25, 2005 (1300 HOURS LOCAL) 
 
 
This is a joint ConGen Jerusalem/Embassy Tel Aviv cable. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: The IDF on May 24 arrested a Palestinian 
teenager carrying two pipe bombs in a bag as he attempted to 
pass through the Huwwara checkpoint, south of Nablus. 
Israeli sappers later blew up the bag containing the bombs. 
This arrest follows a similar occurrence May 22, when a 
Palestinian teenager was arrested at the Huwwara checkpoint 
after the IDF discovered he was wearing an explosive belt. 
In Gaza, a total of seven Palestinians were injured May 23 in 
al-Bureij camp, when three Palestinians, reportedly Fatah 
supporters, drove their vehicle through a large Hamas 
demonstration then in progress, while at the same time firing 
their weapons into the air.  Five people were injured when 
they were struck by the car, and two were injured by gunfire. 
 Hamas supporters reportedly stopped the vehicle and detained 
the three occupants for several hours in a mosque nearby. 
The three were later released after intervention by Fatah 
leaders.  On May 24, PA security forces, working in 
cooperation with IDF soldiers, blocked a smuggling tunnel in 
the Brazil quarter of the Rafah refugee camp.  End Summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Death: Nil. 
 
-- Injury: Nil. 
 
-- Shooting: Palestinian gunmen on May 24 fired shots at an 
IDF position in the vicinity of Qaddim settlement, southeast 
of Jenin.  There were no injuries reported from this incident. 
 
-- Shooting: Palestinian gunmen on May 24 fired shots at an 
IDF vehicle traveling south of Hebron.  There were no 
injuries reported from this incident, but the IDF vehicle 
sustained damage during the attack. 
 
-- Firebombing: Palestinians on May 24 threw two firebombs at 
Israeli vehicles traveling near Kokhav Hashahar settlement, 
northeast of Ramallah.  There were no injuries reported from 
this incident. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) ARRESTS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Arrest: The IDF on May 24 arrested a Palestinian teenager 
carrying two pipe bombs in a bag as he attempted to pass 
through the Huwwara checkpoint, south of Nablus.  Israeli 
sappers later blew up the bag containing the bombs. 
 
-- Catch-up Item: Arrests: On May 22, a Palestinian teenager 
was arrested at the Huwwara checkpoint after the IDF 
discovered the teenager wearing an explosive belt. 
 
-- Arrests: The IDF on May 24 arrested three Palestinians in 
the Nablus and Qalqilya districts.  Two of those arrested 
were identified as Fatah activists, while the third was 
reported to be a member of PIJ. 
 
-- Arrest: The IDF on May 24 arrested a member of a 
Palestinian human rights NGO at the Qalandia checkpoint, 
south of Ramallah.  Palestinians suspect that the arrest is 
linked to his reported ties to the PFLP. 
 
-- Settler violence: Israeli settlers on May 24 entered Marda 
village, south of Nablus, and damaged a vehicle belonging to 
a Palestinian resident of the village.  In the village of 
Kafr Qalil, southeast of Nablus, settlers stoned Palestinian 
homes.  There were no injuries reported from these two 
incidents. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) DEMOLITIONS: 
 
-- IDF bulldozers on May 24 destroyed a house under 
construction and two shacks in Idhna village, west of Hebron. 
 The structures reportedly lacked the required building 
permits. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- According to Palestinian sources, jailed West Bank Fatah 
leader Marwan Barghuthi is planning to establish a prisoners 
coalition that would run in the upcoming Palestinian 
Legislative Council (PLC) elections, currently scheduled for 
July 17.  Other Palestinians incarcerated by Israel, 
including jailed PLC member Husam Khader, are reportedly 
being considered to head the list. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Catch-up Item: Injuries: UNRWA and Palestinian sources 
reported that a total of seven Palestinians were injured May 
23 in al-Bureij camp, when three Palestinians, reportedly 
Fatah supporters, drove their vehicle through a large Hamas 
demonstration then in progress, while at the same time firing 
their weapons into the air.  Five people were injured when 
they were struck by the car and two were injured by gunfire, 
according to UNRWA.  Hamas supporters reportedly stopped the 
vehicle and detained the three occupants for several hours in 
a mosque nearby.  The three were later released after 
intervention by Fatah leaders. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: The IDF reported that Palestinian 
militants fired an anti-tank missile in the vicinity of an 
IDF outpost west of Rafah May 24. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: UNRWA reported that an IDF coastal vessel 
pursued a Palestinian fishing boat off al-Soudania beach in 
northern Gaza May 24.  The IDF vessel fired at the 
Palestinian boat, which was not hit and managed to escape IDF 
pursuit, according to UNRWA. 
 
-- Shootings: The IDF reported an exchange of fire northeast 
of Sufa Crossing May 24 
 
¶7.  (SBU) TUNNELS: 
 
-- UNRWA reported that PA security forces, working in 
cooperation with IDF soldiers, blocked a smuggling tunnel in 
the Brazil quarter of the Rafah refugee camp May 24. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS: 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was open May 25, with a major detour at Netzarim 
Junction. 
 
-- Erez Crossing was open May 24, and 3,983 laborers and 287 
merchants entered Israel. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone was open May 24, and 630 laborers 
entered. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers May 25, 
but was open for the import of aggregates used in 
construction. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was open May 25. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open May 25 for arrivals and 
departures. 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan checkpoint was closed May 25.  Toufah 
checkpoint was open for residents of al-Mowassi, except males 
aged 16-30. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- Members of the al-Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades demonstrated and 
burned tires in Khan Yunis the evening of May 24, blocking 
passage of PA vehicles through the area for several hours. 
The men reportedly demanded jobs, according to UNRWA. 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
KURTZER