05TELAVIV5723
GAZA STRIP: EUPHORIA OR ANARCHY?
Fri Sep 16 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TEL AVIV 005723 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG KPAL PREL ECON EAID PINS IS GAZA DISENGAGEMENT
SUBJECT: GAZA STRIP: EUPHORIA OR ANARCHY? 
 
REF: TEL AVIV 5661 
 
Consulate General Jerusalem has cleared this message. 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED.  PLEASE TREAT ACCORDINGLY. 
 
¶1. (SBU) A PA Ministry of Interior contact told poloff 
September 16 that the situation in Rafah remains "a big 
mess," with movement of Egyptians and Palestinians across the 
border through up to seven openings.  The MOI contact, who 
visited Rafah on September 15 and remained in touch with his 
contacts throughout the day on September 16, said that 
Palestinian security forces are planning with their Egyptian 
counterparts to control border crossings as of Monday, 
September 19.  ConGen contacts say that Palestinian security 
forces are making efforts to seal up breaches and prevent new 
visitors from crossing, but that a motivation for the delay 
in sealing the borders is to allow Palestinians and Egyptians 
who have already crossed to return to their respective 
countries. Israeli DMI officers also told DATT today that 
they believed the Egyptians were bringing their border guards 
forward to replace police and would be deploying next week. 
 
¶2. (U) Most Gaza contacts report that the huge flow of people 
back and forth through Rafah was an innocent outpouring of 
pent up interest in making the crossing after decades of 
being denied the trip.  Most made the crossing because they 
finally could.  In some cases, families had been separated 
for years, so some Gazans jumped at the first opportunity to 
see family members.  A business contact reported that no 
taxis were available in Gaza City on September 15 because 
"every adult in Gaza had gone to Rafah." 
 
¶3. (U) Among the day travelers were profit seekers and/or 
savvy consumers who took the opportunity to purchase cheaper 
Egyptian products.  According to one Gaza businessman, over 
$30 Million in Egyptian goods made their way into Gaza during 
this period, with buyers stocking up on cigarettes, 
medicines, cheese and livestock.  The same Gaza businessman 
said that his son made the trip through Rafah to the Egyptian 
town of El-Arish (about 100 km south of Gaza) on September 
14, only to find nothing left to buy there.  One Gazan 
businessman reportedly turned a 50,000 dollar profit in one 
day by selling cigarettes.  Egyptian Bedouin from the Sinai 
reportedly entered Gaza to conduct business there. 
 
¶4. (U) USAID local staff and other observers on the ground 
report that there has been no more than ten percent 
structural damage to greenhouses purchased with the support 
of a private foundation and private individuals in the U.S. 
Some of the greenhouses likely suffered the loss of pumps, 
pipes and other equipment during the looting that occurred in 
the days immediately following the IDF withdrawal. A detailed 
assessment of the greenhouses is underway. 
 
¶5. (SBU) An NGO contact from Gaza City, who visited family 
property near Netzarim and toured the central Gaza Strip 
September 16, reported to poloff what he termed thousands of 
militia members from Hamas, PIJ and the Al-Aqsa brigades 
brandishing weapons and patrolling in groups -- particularly 
in the Nusayrat refugee camp and vicinity.  Aside from 
sporadic firing in the air, there has been no militia 
violence of note, but neither Fatah, the PA nor its police 
force appear to have any influence on the street, he added. 
 
¶6. (SBU) A PLC vote of no confidence in the PA cabinet, 
called by 16 Palestinian legislators on September 15, may 
take place as early as September 17, according to contacts. 
ConGen contacts believe the session will not be held until 
Thursday, September 22.  Under PLC rules, ten or more 
legislators can request a session to hold a vote of no 
confidence.  However, it takes a simple majority plus one 
(i.e., 45 votes) to actually bring down the government.  None 
of our contacts believe a vote of no confidence will actually 
prevail.  According to one contact, PA PM Quraya' will travel 
to Cairo and hold talks with President Mubarak on the issue 
of Rafah. 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
KURTZER