05TELAVIV6848
2005-2006 INTERNATIONAL NARCOTICS CONTROL STRATEGY
Thu Dec 08 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 TEL AVIV 006848 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR INL, NEA/IPA 
JUSTICE FOR OIA, AFMLS, AND NDDS 
TREASURY FOR FINCEN 
DEA FOR OILS AND OFFICE OF DIVERSION CONTROL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR KSEP IS ISRAELI SOCIETY
SUBJECT: 2005-2006 INTERNATIONAL NARCOTICS CONTROL STRATEGY 
REPORT, PART I 
 
REF: SECSTATE 209558 
 
--------------- 
Part I: Summary 
--------------- 
 
¶1. Israel is not a significant producer or trafficking point 
for drugs.  The Israeli National Police (INP), however, 
reports that during the year 2005, the Israeli drug market 
continued to be characterized by high demand in nearly all 
sectors of society and a high availability of drugs including 
cannabis, ecstasy, cocaine, heroin, hashish and LSD.  The INP 
also reports a continuing demand for ecstasy in 2005, but a 
lower level of seizure compared with 2004.  The amount of 
marijuana seized is less than half that in 2004, and there 
was a slight decrease in the amount of hashish seized.  The 
INP reports that the amount of heroin seized has doubled 
since last year and that the level of demand is unchanged. 
The quantity of LSD seized in 2005 is considerably less then 
the previous years.  Widespread use of ecstasy by Israeli 
youths is a continuing source of concern for authorities. 
There was a decrease from last year in the number of offense 
files for drug use, and possession not for personal use, but 
for trafficking has increased.  The number of drug arrests 
for 2005 was 3,640 (Note:  All 2005 data are for the period 
January through October and were obtained from the Research 
Department of the Israeli Police Headquarters, unless 
otherwise indicated.  End note.)  In June 2002, Israel 
ratified the 1988 UN Drug Convention.  Israel's domestic law 
contains the legislative requirements mandated by the 
convention. 
 
-------------------------- 
Part II: Status of Country 
-------------------------- 
 
¶2.  Israel is not a major producer of narcotics or precursor 
chemicals.  Israeli narcotics traffickers operating outside 
of Israel continue to be deeply involved in the international 
ecstasy trade.  The Israeli National Police (INP) reports 
that during the year 2005, the Israeli drug market was 
characterized by a high demand in nearly all sectors of 
society and a high availability of drugs including cannabis, 
ecstasy, cocaine, heroin, hashish and LSD.  The INP estimates 
the annual scope of the Israeli market to be 100 tons of 
marijuana, 20 tons of hashish, 20 million tablets of ecstasy, 
4 tons of heroin, 3 tons of cocaine, and hundreds of 
thousands of LSD blotters.  Officials are also concerned with 
the widespread use of ecstasy and cannabis among Israeli 
youth, and say that drug use among youth mirrors trends in 
the West.  The INP indicates that most of the Hashish in 
Israel now comes from Afghanistan and Morocco, which have 
replaced Lebanon as the major source.  Another source of 
concern for law enforcement authorities is the synthetic drug 
Gamma Hydroxybutyrate (GHB), and its analogues, Gamma 
Butyrolactone (GBL), and Butanediol (BD), better known as the 
Date-Rape Drugs which have been outlawed in Israel since 2004. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
Part III: Country Action Against Drugs in 2005 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶3.  Policy initiatives.  In June 2002 Israel ratified the 
1988 UN Convention Against the Illicit Traffic in Narcotic 
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (1988 UN Drug Convention) 
after passing all the necessary laws to make Israeli laws 
consistent with the Convention.  In 2005, the INP continued 
its general policy of interdiction at Israel's borders and 
points of entry because the biggest quantities of drugs cross 
into Israel from Jordan, Egypt, and Lebanon.  Together with 
the Israeli Anti-Drug Authority (IADA), the INP concentrated 
specifically on the Jordanian and Egyptian borders, where the 
majority of heroin, cocaine, and cannabis comes into Israel. 
The INP and the IADA have jointly developed programs to help 
Israeli youth, especially in the Arab community, where there 
has been a marked increase in use of illegal drugs and 
drug-related violence since 2004.  Both organizations 
continue to identify and investigate several major families 
involved in the drug trade in Israel.  In 2005, the INP 
combined its investigations and intelligence units into one 
branch called the Special Operations Division (SOD). 
 
¶4.  Distribution.  Israel is not a significant distribution 
point for illegal drugs. 
 
¶5.  Sale, Transport, and Financing.  Israel is not a 
significant seller, transporter or financier of the drug 
trade but Israeli citizens abroad in locations such as 
France, Spain, Germany, Denmark, Holland, and Belgium serve 
as brokers and transporters of ecstasy to the U.S. and 
elsewhere. 
¶6.  Asset Seizure.  In 2005, authorities seized $2.5 million 
in illegal drug related assets and cash. 
 
¶7.  Extradition.  The INP indicate that no one was extradited 
from Israel to the U.S. on drug-related charges in 2005.  On 
November 8, 2004 Zeev Rosenstein was arrested on suspicion of 
involvement in worldwide drug deals worth millions of 
dollars.  On November 30, 2005 the Israeli Supreme Court 
unanimously ruled that Zeev Rosenstein be extradited to the 
U.S. 
 
¶8.  Law Enforcement and Drug-Transit Cooperation.  DEA 
officials characterize cooperation between the DEA and the 
INP as outstanding.  All DEA investigations related to Israel 
are coordinated through the DEA Nicosia Country Office. 
Through the Nicosia Office, the DEA and the INP conduct 
coordinated investigations throughout the world.  The INP has 
liaison officers in Bangkok, Paris, the Hague, Bogota, 
Berlin, Moscow, Ankara, and Washington, DC.  Through these 
offices, there were several significant joint investigations 
conducted in 2005 leading to arrests of 36 Israelis abroad in 
¶2005. 
 
¶9.  Precursor Chemical Control.  Israel is not a significant 
producer of precursor chemicals.  Israeli Customs authorities 
are active participants in "Operation Topaz" a UN program 
that monitors the movement of precursor chemicals. 
 
¶10.  Law Enforcement Efforts.  INP reports a high demand for 
cocaine and a total of 158 kg. seized in 2005, a figure 
almost six times that of 2004.  In 2005, 7,000 kg. of 
marijuana was seized, an amount far less than that of 2004. 
In 2005, 730 kg. of hashish were seized, a quantity down 
slightly from last year.  The number of ecstasy tablets 
seized in 2005 were 200,000, down one-third from 2004.  The 
level of heroin seized in 2005 was 140 kg., double the amount 
in 2004.  In 2005, 1,866 LSD blotters were seized, a drop of 
more than 96.6 percent from the amount of blotters seized in 
¶2004.  There was a slight change from last year in the number 
of offense files reported by the INP.  In 2005, the INP 
reported 15,427 files for drug use, 3,047 for drug 
trafficking, and 5,233 for drug possession not for personal 
use.  Israel destroyed 686 illicit labs in 2005, compared 
with 528 in 2004.  The figure for drug arrests in 2004 was 
4,340, dropping to 3,640 in 2005.  In 2005, there were 
several high profile drug cases.  In one instance, the INP 
arrested seven members of an ecstasy ring involved in 
smuggling 90,000 pills from Europe.  In another case the INP 
seized 30 kg. of pure heroine at a border crossing between 
Israel and Jordan, estimated at NIS 3.5 million (USD 
777,777).  In total there were 24,393 felony cases related to 
the narcotic crimes. 
 
¶11. Corruption.  Israel does not explicitly or implicitly 
support narcotics-related activities.  Israel does not have 
specific legislation for public corruption related to 
narcotics. 
 
¶12. Agreements and Treaties.  In June 2002, Israel ratified 
the 1988 UN Drug Convention after passing all the necessary 
laws to make Israeli laws consistent with the Convention.  In 
1991, the U.S. and Israel signed a memorandum of 
understanding calling for bilateral cooperation to combat 
illicit narcotics trafficking and abuse.  A dual taxation 
treaty between the U.S. and Israel entered into force in 
1994, which grants the U.S. tax authorities limited access to 
bank account information.  Israel is a party to the 1971 UN 
Convention on Psychotropic Substances, the 1961 UN Single 
Convention on Narcotic Drugs, and the 1972 Protocol amending 
the 1971 Convention.  A customs mutual assistance agreement 
and a mutual legal assistance treaty are also in force 
between Israel and the U.S.  The Israeli Customs Department's 
National Drug Enforcement Unit reports drug seizures to the 
World Customs Organization.  In December 2000 Israel signed 
the UN Convention against Transnational Crime and it is in 
the process of passing the necessary changes to Israeli law 
required for ratification.  In November 2001, Israel also 
signed the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress, and Punish 
Trafficking in Persons, supplementing this convention. 
Israel is a party to the European Convention on Mutual Legal 
Assistance in Criminal Matters.  Israel regularly 
participates in the Third Committee of the United Nations in 
New York.  Israel is one of 36 parties to the European Treaty 
on Extradition and has separate extradition treaties with 
several other countries, including the U.S.  Under the 
Israeli extradition law, as recently amended, all persons, 
whether citizens or not, may be extradited for purposes of 
standing trial for extraditable offenses.  If the requested 
person was both a citizen and resident of Israel at the time 
the offense was committed, he may be extradited to stand 
trial abroad only if the state seeking extradition promises 
in advance to allow the person to return to Israel to serve 
any sentence imposed.  Israel is party to a number of other 
bilateral and multilateral agreements that allow for 
extradition and asset seizure.  Israel cooperates with the 
UNDCP.  Israeli also has over 20 bilateral drug enforcement 
agreements with nations around the world.  In December 2005, 
Israeli and Palestinian law enforcement officials met in 
Egypt under the auspices of the UN and agreed to cooperate in 
the war against illegal drugs, both sides decided to set up a 
joint committee for continuing cooperation in the area of 
intelligence on drug smuggling and treatment.  Also, police 
officials from Israel and Jordan met in Turkey under the 
umbrella of the EU to discuss ways to fight drug trafficking, 
and participated in a drug convention called Drug Smuggling 
in the Middle East.  Israel has not entered into any new 
treaties in 2005. 
 
¶13.  Cultivation/Production.  There is negligible cultivation 
and production of illicit drugs in Israel. 
 
¶14. Drug Flow/Transit.  Israel is not a significant transit 
country, although Israeli citizens have been part of 
international drug trafficking networks in source, transit, 
and distribution countries.  Israeli officials are 
particularly concerned about drugs being smuggled into Israel 
from neighboring countries (Lebanon, Jordan and Egypt). 
Israel also works with Germany and Holland to interdict the 
flow of ecstasy, Turkey to interdict the flow the cocaine, 
and South American countries to interdict the flow of heroin. 
 
¶15.  Demand Reduction.  A number of both public and private 
entities are working to reduce the demand for drugs through 
awareness and prevention.  The Israeli Anti-Drug Authority 
(IADA) is one of the main governmental actors in this effort. 
 Its mission, among other things, is to spearhead prevention 
efforts, initiate and develop educational services and public 
awareness, and treat and rehabilitate drug users.  It 
coordinates with and directs the activities of a number of 
government ministries involved in reducing demand.  The IADA 
also seeks to change the public atmosphere to counter 
increasing social acceptance of recreational drug use. 
Prevention programs target high-risk segments of the 
population like the Arab sector, as well as youths, students, 
backpackers, new immigrants, and others.  The IADA offers 
workshops and lectures for immigrants from Russia and 
Ethiopia in their respective languages and tailored to their 
particular cultural needs.  The IADA is working to reduce 
demand for narcotics among soldiers by providing officers 
with the skills to combat effectively the use of drugs within 
their units.  There is an ongoing public awareness campaign 
aimed at parents and designed to focus their attention on 
their children's whereabouts and activities.  The IADA also 
concentrates on human resources development, including the 
development of a professional infrastructure, and is 
establishing a unified standard for training purposes, 
including development of a curriculum for nurses, police, 
prison employees, physicians, and counselors, as well as 
other drug prevention, treatment, and enforcement 
professionals.  The IADA also performs basic, 
epidemiological, and evaluative research in the narcotic drug 
field.  The INP participates in demand reduction initiatives 
by lecturing at schools at all levels above 10 years of age 
and in the army about the impact of drugs on the body and 
mind. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
Part IV: U.S. Policy Initiatives and Programs 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶16. Road Ahead.  The DEA regional office in Nicosia, Cyprus, 
looks forward to continued cooperation and coordination with 
its counterparts in the Israeli law enforcement community. 
The GOI is seeking to widen and build on relations with other 
countries and has created an office of International 
Relations within the IADA to pursue this objective.  Israel 
continues its four-year-term as a member of the Commission on 
Narcotic Drugs (CND), which it joined in January 2004. 
 
-------------------------- 
Part V: Statistical Tables 
-------------------------- 
 
¶17. Drug Crop Cultivation.  N/A 
 
 
Drug seizures               2005      2004     2003 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
Cocaine (kg.)                158      28.5       66 
Heroin  (kg.)                140        70       51 
Hashish (kg.)                730       900      N/A 
Cannabis Resin (kg.)         729       913      900 
Herbal Cannabis (kg.)      7,000    14,545   14,795 
LSD (blotters)             1,866    55,561   28,331 
MDMA (Ecstasy)(tablets)  200,000   300,000    7,658 
 
2005 data represent January through October. 
Source of data: Israel Police Headquarters, Research 
Department 
 
 
Drug Offense Files          2005      2004     2003 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
Use                       15,427    15,919   15,162 
Trafficking                3,047     2,714    3,160 
Possession Not for         5,233     6,026    6,219 
Personal Use 
 
2005 data represent January through October. 
Source of data: Israel Police Headquarters, Research 
Department 
 
 
Other Statistics            2005      2004     2003 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
Illicit Labs Destroyed       686       528      N/A 
Arrests                    3,640     4,340    3,616 
 
2005 data represent January through October. 
Source of data: Israel Police Headquarters, Research 
Department 
 
-------------------------- 
Part VI:  Chemical Control 
-------------------------- 
 
¶18.  Israel is not a significant producer of precursor 
chemicals.  Israeli Customs authorities are active 
participants in "Operation Topaz," a UN program that watches 
the movement of precursor chemicals.  Israel legislation 
requires factories to have licenses for the import of 
chemicals that can be used as precursor chemicals. 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
JONES