05TELAVIV5157
DISENGAGEMENT SITUATION REPORT, AUGUST 21, 2005
Sun Aug 21 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEL AVIV 005157 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG KPAL PREL ECON EAID PINS IS GAZA DISENGAGEMENT
SUBJECT: DISENGAGEMENT SITUATION REPORT, AUGUST 21, 2005 
 
REF: TEL AVIV 5154 
 
This is a joint message from Embassy Tel Aviv and Consulate 
General Jerusalem. 
 
This message is sensitive but unclassified.  Please protect 
accordingly. 
 
This message conveys information as of 1600 hours local time. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: On the seventh day of disengagement, IDF 
soldiers and police focused on evacuating the remaining 
southern Gaza Strip settlements of Katif and Atzmona and some 
remaining families in Shelo/Shalev/Slav -- after a day 
(August 20) of inaction due to the Sabbath.  The Israeli 
cabinet August 21 formerly approved the evacuation of 
northern Gaza Strip and northern West Bank settlements.  The 
GOI will evacuate any remaining families and infiltrators 
from the northern Gaza settlements of Elei Sinai and Nissanit 
(most of whose residents evacuated last week).  Israeli 
security forces are gearing up for the evacuation of Netzarim 
on August 22 and the northern West Bank settlements of Homesh 
and Sa Nur on August 23 or 24, where there a large number of 
infiltrators are gathered and stiff opposition is expected. 
While the residents have promised a tenacious struggle, they 
say they do not intend to use violence -- and have reportedly 
gathered private weapons from residents to prevent it.  End 
Summary. 
 
¶2.  2. (SBU) SETTLER EVACUATION STATUS 
 
Gaza Settlements: 
 
Vocal and graphic protests met the arrival of Israeli 
security forces at the Gaza settlement of Atzmona on August 
¶21.  A "cemetery of the oppressors" set up in front of a 
house slated for evacuation included mock gravestones for 
Hitler,  Pharaoh, Roman Emperor Titus, Yasser Arafat, and one 
tombstone left conspicuously blank.  The IDF will begin to 
demolish houses in a number of settlements, including Dugit, 
Nissanit, Peat Sadeh and possibly Rafah Yam on August 21. 
Police Commissioner Moshe Karadi told the Israeli cabinet 
August 21 that 48 police officers have been injured since the 
evacuation of Gaza began, including 24 at Kfar Darom where, 
on August 18, 249 infiltrators struggled with security forces 
on the roof of the synagogue (only 4 of them Gaza residents). 
 
Southern Gaza Strip: 
 
Atzmona -- After lengthy negotiations on August 19 residents 
agreed to evacuate on Sunday, August 21.  As of 1500, 
residents have concluded a departure ceremony and are packing 
for departure. 
 
Katif -- At 1145, troops began evacuating residents after 
firefighters and bulldozers cleared burning barricades. 
Shortly after noon residents agreed to leave the settlement 
after a final prayer service, which concluded at 1550. 
 
Shelo/Shalev/Slav -- Reported to have been completely 
evacuated on August 16; however, it appears that some 15 
remaining families will leave on August 21. 
 
Northern Gaza Strip: 
 
Nissanit -- Evacuated on August 18; however, approximately 
200 infiltrators had reoccupied this settlement.  IDF and 
police plan to evacuate this group on August 21 and begin 
demolition of houses. 
 
Elei Sinai -- The remaining 30 families (or 220 people) are 
packing their effects with assistance from soldiers.  As of 
1500, the IDF had evacuated infiltrators, many from the Golan 
Heights according to press reports. 
 
Dugit -- Ministry of Defense announced that demolition of 
houses would begin at 1500. 
 
Netzarim -- Settlers have agreed to leave on August 22. 
 
West Bank Settlements: 
 
Gannim and Kaddim were voluntarily evacuated on August 16. 
There was no disengagement activity in the northern West Bank 
August 19-21; however, there were radio reports August 21 
that 1000 Israeli police are moving to the vicinity of Homesh 
and Sa Nur.  The IDF and police will evacuate the remaining 
settlements of Homesh and Sa Nur starting August 23 or 24. 
Anti-disengagement protesters reinforced the Sa Nur and 
Homesh settlements during the past week, with as many as 
1,500 now in Homesh and 800 in Sa Nur, according to press 
reports.  While the residents have promised a tenacious 
struggle, they say they do not intend to use violence -- and 
have reportedly gathered private weapons from residents to 
prevent it. 
 
¶3.    (SBU) SECURITY SITUATION 
 
On August 21, the overall situation in Gaza continues to be 
calm, with Palestinians carrying on with their daily lives, 
according to USAID Gaza staff.  Basic services such as 
health, water, electricity and gasoline are available and no 
disruption of services related to disengagement has been 
reported.  Palestinian police are visible and on patrol in 
Gaza.  There have been no clashes reported between PA police 
and Hamas.  The IDF began to dig eight-meter trenches around 
evacuated settlements in Gush Katif to prevent anyone from 
entering the settlements.  Shin Bet head Yuval Diskin told 
the cabinet August 21 that some terrorist organizations will 
return to doing terrorist acts, even in Gaza.  According to 
press reports, Diskin indicated the true test of the PA's 
ability to maintain quiet will be after the (Israeli) 
residents leave.  Military Intelligence Chief MG Aharon 
Ze'evi-Farkash reportedly told the cabinet that Palestinian 
patience to enter territory that is being evacuated is 
running out, and that pressure will increase after the 
evacuation of settlers. 
 
-- Rocket/Mortar Attacks:  IDF reported that a Kassam rocket 
was fired late afternoon August 20 near Kibbutz Nativ 
Ha'asara.  No other rocket/mortar attacks occurred overnight, 
according to the IDF; however, a rocket was fired at Erez on 
August 21, but fell short. 
 
-- Shootings:  IDF, UN and Palestinian sources reported no 
shootings in the Gaza Strip overnight August 20-21.  Early on 
the morning of August 21, the IDF observation post at Morag 
opened fire, but no injuries were reported. 
 
-- Incursions/Shootings:  At 0955 hours, IDF bulldozers 
escorted by tanks and APCs entered the area east of Beit 
Hanoun near the border fence to clear and level land, 
according to Palestinian reporting.  There was sporadic 
shooting in the area. 
 
-- Bombing/Arson attempt:  Anti-disengagement activists 
attempted to detonate a gas cylinder near a building in 
Rehovot on Friday, sparking a fire.  Perpetrators had spray 
painted anti-Sharon and anti-disengagement slogans on the 
walls of the building before attempting to explode the 
canister, according to the press.  Two right-wing activists 
were arrested. 
 
-- Kidnapping: French Channel 3 journalist Mohammad Luoati, 
seized by gunmen on August 15, is still being held as of 
August 21.  There is no news as to his whereabouts. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) PALESTINIAN REACTIONS 
 
-- On August 20, President Abbas announced that elections in 
Gaza would occur on January 25, 2006. In a news conference 
held following his August 21 meeting with NEA A/S Welch, 
President Abbas commented favorably on the USD 50 million in 
USG budget support to the PA for housing and road 
construction projects and welcomed the announcement that the 
USG would soon start construction of the Gaza regional water 
carrier. 
 
-- Samir Huleileh, secretary general of the PA cabinet, told 
the Voice of Palestine radio August 21 that there has been no 
progress or breakthrough in the coordination meetings with 
the Israeli side concerning the airport, seaport, and freedom 
of movement between Gaza and the West Bank. 
 
-- PA officials announced their support to reopen the Gazan 
green houses, which will provide employment opportunities for 
thousands of agricultural workers. 
 
-- Fatah militia elements were reported cruising around Gaza 
City demonstrating support for President Abbas. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) GOI POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS 
 
-- Prime Minister Sharon took dissident ministers (see below) 
to task for criticizing government actions, and told his 
cabinet that anyone who wishes to resign is welcome to do so. 
 PM Sharon also blamed the Yesha Council for preferring 
political considerations over the well-being of Gaza Strip 
evacuees, and denounced their initiative to relocate evacuees 
to a tent city instead of assisting them in their search for 
permanent housing as a ploy for sympathy.  PM Sharon 
reportedly indicated that the Yesha Council would not 
participate in establishing yishuvim in the Negev, but that 
the State would do it. 
 
-- The cabinet August 21 approved the evacuation of the 
settlements in the northern part of the Gaza Strip and in 
northern the northern West Bank.  Sixteen ministers supported 
the motion, while four Likud ministers voted against the 
move: Dan Naveh, Tzachi Hanegbi, Yisrael Katz, and Limor 
Livnat.  Katz said there should not be (Israeli) agreement to 
other unilateral steps without a referendum.  Naveh sought to 
verify that this (disengagement) is a one-time trauma, and 
urged the Government to tell this to the Americans. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS/HUMANITARIAN ACCESS 
 
-- Erez Crossing and Industrial Zone:  According to Gaza 
private sector contacts, Erez remains officially closed to 
Palestinians, but the IDF continues to allow a small number 
of people to pass based on humanitarian/medical grounds with 
prior coordination.  The crossing remained open for 
internationals. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal: According to UNRWA, Rafah remains open in 
both directions. 
 
-- Abu Kholi junction:  Re-opened at 2350 hours August 20 and 
closed at 0100 hours August 21, four hours earlier than 
scheduled.  The junction is not expected to reopen until late 
on August 21 
 
-- Karni Terminal: Karni remains open on August 21.  There 
are no reported shortages of business inputs in Gaza, as 
supplies seem to be coming in from Karni with no major 
problems, according to USAID. 
 
-- Kissufim, the main crossing used to enter Gush Katif and 
Kfar Darom settlements, remains open only to traffic/persons 
leaving Gaza. 
 
-- Sofa crossing remained closed for laborers, but open for 
construction materials, according to the UN. 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
KURTZER