05TELAVIV5224
SHARON TO CONGRESSIONAL GROUP: ABBAS MUST ASSURE
Wed Aug 24 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

240901Z Aug 05UNCLAS TEL AVIV 005224 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KPAL OREP PREL XF ISRAELI PALESTINIAN AFFAIRS
SUBJECT: SHARON TO CONGRESSIONAL GROUP: ABBAS MUST ASSURE 
QUIET AND PREVENT TERROR 
 
 
¶1.  Prime Minister Sharon met for 45 minutes August 22 with 
an AIPAC-sponsored Republican congressional delegation led by 
Rep. Roy Blunt.  Rep. Blunt began the meeting by 
congratulating Sharon on the success to date of the 
disengagement plan, and he asked Sharon to explain Israel's 
thinking regarding next steps with the Palestinians. 
 
¶2.  Sharon replied that disengagement is important for both 
Israel and the United States.  It is a complicated process, 
however, in that many of the settlers have been in Gaza for 
several decades.  Sharon said the process of removing the 
settlements has proceeded faster than had been anticipated. 
 
¶3.  Sharon complained that Palestinian terrorism had not 
stopped at all during this period.  He admitted that it had 
been quieter, but asserted that Israeli security forces 
continue to deal with significant terror threats daily. 
 
¶4.  Sharon said that he would like to move forward with the 
Palestinians but would not do so unless the Palestinians take 
steps against terrorism.  Sharon said that the two parties 
are now in "the pre-roadmap stage."  In order to restart the 
roadmap, there must be a full cessation of terrorism, 
violence and incitement; Palestinians must dismantle the 
terrorist organizations; all illegal weapons must be 
collected; and Palestinians must undertake the necessary 
reforms. 
 
¶5.  Sharon continued that terrorism is the main problem and 
he repeated several times that nothing can move forward 
unless there is quiet.  Sharon said that PA President Abbas 
had made a mistake in signing an agreement with Hamas in 
which Abbas committed not to dismantle Hamas or to collect 
Hamas' weapons.  It was also a mistake to agree that Hamas 
could participate in Palestinian elections.  Sharon said that 
the PA had deployed some forces in the run-up to 
disengagement but had taken no active steps against 
terrorism. 
 
¶6.  Sharon said that the PA should come under more pressure 
to take the necessary steps against terrorism.  He opined 
that the PA might believe that the day will come when Israel 
will be pressured to give up its demands with respect to 
terrorism.  Sharon promised that this day would not come.  He 
said Israel has faced terrorism for 120 years and that there 
will be no compromises if terrorism continues.  He said that 
his government is the only one in Israel that has the ability 
to move forward with the Palestinians; Labor cannot do it and 
Likud does not want to do it. 
 
¶7.  Asked about Iran, Sharon said that there is no doubt that 
Iran is undertaking an effort to possess nuclear weapons.  He 
spelled out in detail Iran's continued terror activities, 
including efforts to recruit Israeli Arabs to participate in 
terrorism against Israel.  He said Iran should be brought to 
the UN Security Council and put under pressure to abandon its 
nuclear program.  Sharon said he was not persuaded by 
assessments of possible internal change in Iran; such change 
could take place, he thought, only if Iran came under heavy 
pressure. 
 
¶8.  Asked about Israel's request for additional U.S. 
assistance, Sharon described the significant opportunities 
for developing agriculture in the Negev and the Galilee. 
Israel, he said, has already achieved tremendous advances in 
agriculture but it needs U.S. support.  He promised the 
Congressional representatives that the GOI would provide 
further information on its assistance request. 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* *********