05TELAVIV3594
WB/G SITREP: TWO IDF SOLDIERS AND ONE PALESTINIAN
Thu Jun 09 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEL AVIV 003594 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FRONT OFFICE; NEA/SA/EX FOR RICHIE; DEPT FOR 
DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN; USAID 
FOR DCHA, DCHA/FPP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG PHUM PREL PTER ASEC CASC GZ IS
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: TWO IDF SOLDIERS AND ONE PALESTINIAN 
INJURED IN GAZA; ONE IDF SOLDIER INJURED IN THE WEST BANK 
-- JUNE 9, 2005 (1100 HOURS LOCAL) 
 
This is a joint ConGen Jerusalem/Embassy Tel Aviv cable. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: Palestinian militants fired some 17 mortar 
rounds and rockets on Israeli settlements in the Gaza Strip 
overnight June 8-9.  Two IDF soldiers were lightly injured 
when a mortar struck near their outpost in the vicinity of 
Neve Dekalim.  The barrage followed an IAF missile strike 
June 8 at a vehicle reportedly carrying three Hamas militants 
near Khan Yunis.  The militants escaped unharmed.  IDF 
soldiers injured one militant June 9 near Khan Yunis when 
soldiers opened fire on a group of militants attempting to 
launch rockets at the Gush Katif settlement bloc.  In the 
West Bank, an IDF soldier was lightly wounded in Kufr Aqab 
village, south of Ramallah, when a firebomb was thrown at the 
IDF jeep during a search operation in the village June 8.  A 
Palestinian youth stabbed an Israeli policeman on Jaffa road 
in central Jerusalem June 8.  The attacker was arrested and 
reportedly admitted during interrogation that he carried out 
the attack because he had not been paid his wages in the 
bakery where he works.  IDF soldiers arrested a total of 13 
Palestinians throughout the West Bank June 8-9,  including 
four PIJ members in Tulkarm who are accused of planning a 
double suicide attack in Jerusalem.  End Summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) ATTACKS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injury: According to Palestinian sources, an IDF soldier 
was lightly wounded in Kufr Aqab village, south of Ramallah, 
when a firebomb was thrown at the IDF jeep during a search 
operation in the village June 8. 
 
-- Injury: Palestinian and Israeli media reported that a 
Palestinian youth stabbed an Israeli policeman on Jaffa road 
in central Jerusalem June 8.  The attacker, a resident of 
Shufat refugee camp, was immediately arrested.  During 
interrogation, the attacker stated he carried out the attack 
because he had not been paid his wages in the bakery where he 
works. 
 
-- Arrests: Palestinian media sources reported that the IDF 
arrested four members of Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ) in 
Tulkarm June 8.  According to Israeli security sources, the 
PIJ cell is responsible for planning a double suicide attack 
in Jerusalem. 
 
-- Arrests: According to Palestinian sources, the IDF 
arrested seven Fatah members in Arabah village, near Jenin, 
June 8. 
 
-- Arrests: According to Palestinian media, IDF troops 
entered into the villages of Samou, and Dahriya, south of 
Hebron, and arrested two Palestinians June 8. 
 
-- Security Incidents:  According to Palestinian sources, 
Israeli settlers attacked Palestinians in the Old City of 
Hebron and set on fire a commercial store June 8.  No 
injuries were reported. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS 
 
-- Palestinian media reported that Palestinian lawyers went 
on strike June 8 to protest lawlessness and lack of respect 
for lawyers and other law enforcement bodies, including 
courthouses and prosecutors.  The strike was staged 
particularly because of the kidnapping of Ahmad Damanhouri, a 
lawyer from Ramallah, who was kidnapped by masked gunmen in 
front of the Ramallah Magistrate court.  The kidnapping 
apparently was meant to prevent Damanhouri from appearing in 
court, as he was released several hours later. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injury: The IDF reported that IDF soldiers injured one 
Palestinian June 9 west of Khan Yunis when they opened fire 
on a group of militants attempting to launch rockets (see 
"Shootings"). 
-- Injuries: The IDF reported that two IDF soldiers were 
lightly injured June 8 in a mortar attack on an IDF outpost 
near Neve Dekalim (see "Mortars/Rockets"). 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: The IDF and Israeli media reported that 
an IAF helicopter fired two missiles at a vehicle carrying 
three Hamas militants east of Khan Yunis in the late 
afternoon June 8.  According to media reports, the militants, 
who escaped unharmed, were planning to carry out rocket 
attacks against Israeli targets. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: The IDF reported that Palestinian 
militants launched a total of 17 rockets and mortar rounds at 
Israeli settlements in the Gaza Strip the evening of June 
8-9, all but one targeting Netzarim were aimed at the 
settlements in the Gush Katif settlement bloc.  Two IDF 
soldiers were lightly injured when a mortar shell landed near 
their outpost in the vicinity of Neve Dekalim (see 
"Injuries"). 
 
-- Shootings: The IDF reported that Palestinian militants 
launched four shooting attacks at IDF soldiers June 8-9.  IDF 
soldiers initiated two shooting incidents in the same period, 
with soldiers opening fire at Palestinians preparing to 
launch rockets at Israeli and Israeli settler targets from 
the area around Khan Yunis.  One Palestinian was injured in 
the IDF action west of Khan Yunis, according to the IDF (see 
"Injury."). 
 
¶5.  (SBU) INCURSIONS/DEMOLITIONS: 
 
-- UNRWA reported that two IDF bulldozers and two tanks set 
up sand barriers along the northern side of Kfar Darom 
settlement June 8. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS: 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was open June 9, with a major detour at Netzarim 
Junction. 
 
-- Erez Crossing was open June 8, and 3,971 laborers and 398 
merchants crossed into Israel. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone was open June 8, and 625 laborers 
entered the zone. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers June 9, 
but was open for the import of aggregates used in 
construction. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was open June 9. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open for arrivals and departures June 
¶9. 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan checkpoint was closed June 9.  Toufah 
checkpoint was open for residents of al-Mowassi, except males 
aged 16-30. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- UNRWA reported that Hamas organized a demonstration of 
some 5,000 Palestinians in Rafah to protest the reported 
desecration of the Koran in Megiddo prison.  A similar 
demonstration was held in northern Gaza the same day. 
 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
KURTZER