05TELAVIV881
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Mon Feb 14 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 TEL AVIV 000881 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
Mideast 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
During the weekend, all major media underscored 
reported threats from the far Right to thwart the 
disengagement plan.  Over the weekend, leading media 
reported that Likud cabinet ministers and Knesset 
members, including Shaul Mofaz and Meir Sheetrit, have 
received threats on their lives.  Maariv reported the 
increasing danger that extremists could try to hit the 
mosques on the Temple Mount from the air.  Ha'aretz 
reported that although the Justice Ministry would 
approve requests for the detention of extremists, the 
Shin Bet says there is not enough intelligence for such 
moves and that "at this stage," there will not be any 
change in the security deployment protecting ministers. 
Internal Security Minister Gideon Ezra was quoted as 
saying in an interview with Jerusalem Post: "There are 
dangerous people out there who need to be arrested 
today."  For its part, Hatzofe bannered a claim by the 
Yesha Council of Jewish Settlements in the Territories 
that Sharon is inciting against settlers. 
 
All media reported that a ministerial committee on 
Sunday approved the release of 500 Palestinians 
prisoners and administrative detainees in keeping with 
a promise Israel gave the PA before the Sharm el-Sheikh 
summit.  All prisoners, 170 of whom belong to Hamas and 
Islamic Jihad, will walk free by the end of the week or 
the beginning of the week.  All media reported that 
Jericho will be handed over to Palestinian security 
forces as early as Tuesday.  Yediot reported that the 
casino in the city, which was popular among Israelis 
following the Oslo accords, is expected to reopen soon. 
During the weekend, the media quoted Israeli and 
Palestinian officials as saying that Israel will allow 
56 deported Palestinians to return to the West Bank. 
 
All media reported that on Sunday, the Knesset's 
Constitution, Justice and Law Committee approved, 9-7, 
the part of the "evacuation-compensation" bill setting 
penalties for those who would disrupt the evacuation of 
territories.  The Knesset will vote on the second and 
third readings of the entire bill on Wednesday; next 
Sunday, February 20, the cabinet will vote on a 
practical decision to evacuate settlements, which will 
start a 5-month countdown to the actual start of the 
evacuation.  All media reported that following a 
meeting between Vice Premier Shimon Peres and the Shas 
party's spiritual leader Rabbi Ovadia Yosef on Sunday, 
the Shas leaders reiterated their opposition to 
disengagement. 
On Sunday, Jerusalem Post and Yediot cited a State 
Department announcement that the new U.S. Middle East 
security envoy, Lt. Gen. William Ward, will make his 
first trip to the region in his new job before the end 
of the month. 
On Sunday, Jerusalem Post and other media reported that 
PA Chairman Mahmoud Abbas (Abu Mazen) secured Hamas's 
"de facto" acceptance of the truce with Israel.  On 
Monday, Jerusalem Post quoted Israeli defense sources 
as saying Sunday that Hamas is using the lull in 
Israel's offensive actions to stock up on Qassam 
rockets, mines, and mortar shells in the Gaza Strip. 
 
Jerusalem Post cited "assessments that reached 
Jerusalem," according to which alongside PA reform 
issues and preparations ahead of the IDF's withdrawal 
from the Gaza Strip, political issues will also be 
addressed at a luncheon hosted by British PM Tony Blair 
on March 1. 
 
Israel Radio reported that this morning in Hebron 
Israeli troops shot dead a Palestinian who tried to 
stab an IDF soldier. 
 
Jerusalem Post quoted unnamed sources as saying that 
National Infrastructure Minister Binyamin Ben-Eliezer 
and PM Sharon have discussed acquiring natural gas from 
the PA in exchange for water and electricity services. 
 
Globes cited the belief of "Washington sources close to 
Middle East policy" as saying that the U.S. will soon 
cancel its official warning against traveling to 
Israel, and perhaps also against traveling to the PA. 
The sources said that the significant drop in terrorist 
attacks within the Green Line and in the West Bank was 
the decisive factor in a possible cancellation of the 
warning. Another motive is the desire of the Bush 
administration to express its satisfaction at the 
measures taken by Israel and the Palestinians to 
implement the disengagement plan. 
 
Globes cited New York Times that the FBI is initiating 
recruitment of Israelis and other foreigners residing 
in the U.S., including business people, to spy abroad. 
Globes says that the CIA does not particularly like the 
idea. 
 
On Sunday, Yediot cited concerns in Israel that Russia 
will launch two Iranian spy satellites that will cover 
Israel and other countries. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that registration in the U.S. for the 
upcoming seasons of Palestine Summer Encounter (PSE) is 
at its height.  The newspaper cited the organizers' 
hope that after a successful season last year, dozens 
of American students will "forge strategic partnerships 
to strengthen communities in the region" through living 
and studying in the Bethlehem area. 
 
All media reported that two days of violent clashes 
between Druze and Christian residents of the Galilee 
village of Maghar, on Friday and Saturday, resulted in 
seven injuries and caused many Christian families to 
flee the village.  The police and the media said the 
clashes constituted an anti-Christian "pogrom." 
 
On Sunday, Ha'aretz reported that Israeli diplomacy has 
enlisted Lavan Mercer, a former U.S. basketball player 
who became a star with the Maccabi Tel Aviv team, 
converted to Judaism and served in the IDF, for its PR 
efforts in the southern U.S. states. 
 
During the weekend, the media extensively reported on 
the death Friday of noted Jewish-American playwright 
Arthur Miller. 
 
-------- 
Mideast: 
-------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized: " 
Israel's foreign policy should not be damaged by 
someone [i.e. Foreign Minister Silvan Shalom] trying to 
have his cake and eat it, too." 
 
Conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized: 
"Anti-disengagement leaders -- particularly religious 
figures -- need to banish those who stray in the 
direction of incitement and violence." 
 
Editor-in-Chief Amnon Dankner wrote in popular, 
pluralist Maariv: "The next [political] assassin moves 
stealthily among us day after day, anonymous, silent 
and dangerous.  He knows that no one will catch him. 
He waits for the proper moment.  Soon.  Soon." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
Â¶I.  "Shalom's Choice" 
 
 
Independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized 
(February 14): "While [Foreign Minister Silvan] Shalom 
is not part of the 'putsch' nor counted with the Likud 
rebels, practically speaking his behavior is 
undermining the Prime Minister's policies and 
challenging the legitimacy of the disengagement process 
that Sharon is leading.  But it is much worse than 
that, because Shalom is responsible for explaining the 
disengagement plan to the world and persuading the 
world of its legitimacy and chances for its 
implementation.... There will not be a referendum 
because the Knesset and government have already decided 
on disengagement, because the Prime Minister has stuck 
to his position, and because the plan is on course and 
there is no way back without causing damage to the 
country, and Shalom knows this.  If building his 
political strength in the party is so important to him 
that he is prepared to support a lost cause, just so 
that he will be remembered for it, he should leave the 
government and devote his private time to the issue. 
Israel's foreign policy should not be damaged by 
someone trying to have his cake and eat it, too." 
 
II.  "Banish Fanatics" 
 
Conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized 
(February 14): "While threats and vandalism can be 
traced to a minuscule number of disengagement 
opponents, they must not be ignored. The level of 
incitement, the degree of demonization Sharon has been 
subjected to ('Stalin,' 'dictator'), the orchestration 
of refusal to serve, the escalating level of violence-- 
on Friday, near Itamar [in the West Bank], an IDF 
officer was almost run over by settlers -- all point to 
a problem that may not be limited to a small number of 
apocalyptic fanatics.  Today's toxic political 
environment should not be attributed to the anti- 
disengagement forces alone. It comes in the wake of 
four years of relentless Palestinian terrorism that 
claimed 1,000 Israeli lives -- a price 
disproportionately paid by the settlers -- and a 
political about-face by Sharon, who essentially 
embraced key positions of Amram Mitzna, the opponent he 
trounced at the polls in January 2003.  Moreover, 
whether you support or oppose disengagement, there is 
an argument to be made that Sharon has bulldozed rather 
than finessed its implementation.  But what we're 
dealing with here is not a political argument. Indeed, 
what must first be done is to distinguish between 
legitimate political concerns and opposition, on the 
one hand, and gangsterism, on the other.  Those who 
employ violence, intimidation and incitement must be 
identified, isolated and prosecuted.... Unfortunately, 
it is too late for words alone.  Anti-disengagement 
leaders -- particularly religious figures -- need to 
banish those who stray in the direction of incitement 
and violence.  And synagogues and communities should 
shun such persons.... The actions of the government and 
the Knesset may be regarded as imprudent, self-serving 
or misguided.  They are not 'crimes against humanity.'" 
 
 
III.  "The Next Assassin" 
 
Editor-in-Chief Amnon Dankner wrote in popular, 
pluralist Maariv (February 14): "The next [political] 
assassin knows that he will be a hero.... The next 
assassin knows that he is not the only one.  True, he 
has worked alone so far, and on the right day will also 
do the correct and sacred and awful thing on his own, 
without sharing it with a single soul.  But he knows 
deep in his heart that he is not wrong, and there are 
others like him.  He reads in the newspapers and hears 
conversations about the fears of all kinds of murderous 
violence: mass murder of Arabs, attacking the Temple 
Mount mosques, the murder of army and police officers. 
He not only hopes, he knows for a certainty that there 
are others like him, more than a few, who are thinking 
and planning carefully, and on the day of reckoning 
they will carry out all this and more.  No, he is not 
alone.... He lives among us and does not stand out in 
any way.  His speech is moderate, his reactions are not 
vehement.  When someone tries to elicit an extreme 
statement from him, he shrugs and remains silent.   He 
steers clear of crowds, and is careful to stay away 
from places where people stand and rage, waving signs 
and cursing.  No one can photograph him waving his fist 
or distorting his face in hateful cries.  He says 
nothing, shouts nothing, writes nothing.  He will only 
act.  The next assassin moves stealthily among us day 
after day, anonymous, silent and dangerous.  He knows 
that no one will catch him.  He waits for the proper 
moment.  Soon.  Soon." 
 
KURTZER