05TELAVIV6923
UNDOF COMMANDER REPORTS LIMITED RESOURCES
Wed Dec 14 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEL AVIV 006923 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NEA/IPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS SY LE EG JO PGOV GOI EXTERNAL
SUBJECT: UNDOF COMMANDER REPORTS LIMITED RESOURCES 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY:  Major-General Bala Nanda Sharma of Nepal, 
United Nations Disengagement Observor Force (UNDOF) 
Commander, told the Ambassador December 12 that UNDOF has "no 
money, no manpower, and no resources" with which to employ 
new technologies or to expand its mission.  Sharma reported 
that the Canadians want to withdraw their 185 troops and 
financial support immediately, which may result in the 
Mission losing $1 million and 25 local employees.  He said it 
is possible that if the Japanese withdraw from Iraq, they may 
contribute more soldiers or resources to UNDOF.  Sharma also 
reported that UNDOF observers witnessed but did not report 
Hizballah's November 20 attack against Israel.  "We are 
charged," he explained, "with reporting on fire between 
Israel and Syria, not fire between Lebanon and Israel." 
Sharma also said that he was displeased with the suggestion 
that UNDOF's area of responsibility could serve as a venue 
for UN Independent Investigator Detlev Mehlis to interrogate 
Syrian suspects.  END SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
UNDOF HAS LIMITED RESOURCES, NO NEW TECHNOLOGY 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶2.  (SBU) When asked if the UNDOF Mission has expanded, or 
recently employed new technology, Sharma scoffed, "We have no 
money, no manpower, and no resources."  He said UNDOF has no 
military staff aide (or, in Sharma's words, a "yemi") for its 
headquarters.  Sharma said he has had to borrow an aide from 
UNTSO.  When asked whether he has reported this state of 
affairs to the UN, Sharma replied, "In New York they don't 
want to hear anything that will irritate them."  He said it 
has been acknowledged at the UN that he needs an aide, but 
the position has not been created.  As to the future of 
UNDOF, Sharma said he expects the six-month mandate to be 
renewed.  Until the border dispute is solved, he said he 
believes the situation will not improve any time soon. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Sharma said the Canadians want to withdraw their 
185 troops and financial support immediately, and Indian 
soldiers will replace them.  The Canadians have contributed 
$1 million to the Mission, and employee 25 local civilians, 
all of which UNDOF may soon lose following the Canadians' 
departure.  The Japanese have 30 soldiers assigned to UNDOF, 
which Sharma said last year resulted in UNDOF receiving 200 
visitors from Japan, including officials, journalists and 
others.  Based on this demonstrated interest, Sharma said, it 
is possible that if the Japanese withdraw from Iraq they may 
contribute more soldiers or resources to UNDOF. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Sharma also said that he was displeased with the 
suggestion that UNDOF's area of responsibility could serve as 
a venue for UN Independent Investigator Detlev Mehlis to 
interrogate Syrian suspects.  He learned about this 
possibility only through news reports, and complained that no 
one consulted him about the matter. 
 
------------------------------ 
WE CAN SEE BUT WE CAN'T REPORT 
------------------------------ 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Sharma reported that UNDOF observers witnessed 
Hizballah's November 20 attack against Israel.  When 
Hizballah fires weapons, Sharma said, their munitions often 
land in areas observed by UNDOF.  "We are charged, though, 
with reporting on fire between Israel and Syria, not fire 
between Lebanon and Israel."  Sharma added that he believes 
"the Syrians don't want people to stop paying attention to 
the border, and so they use Hizballah to keep attention 
focused there."  When asked whether he reports on such 
matters, Sharma responded, "I do not have a political 
mandate.  It's strictly a military mandate.  I don't even 
have a political advisor." 
 
¶6.  (SBU) UNIFIL, by contrast, does have a political advisor, 
Sharma said.  He reported that UNDOF currently enjoys very 
good relations with both UNTSO and UNIFIL, and often 
communicates and exchanges notes, "to try to ensure that New 
York gets the full picture."  Sharma reported that UNDOF, 
UNIFIL, and UNTSO will hold a meeting January 24 in UNTSO 
Chief of Mission Alvara De Soto's office in Jerusalem. 
Sharma said that during a recent border tour provided to him 
by the Israeli Defense Forces (IDF), the IDF pointed out 
where UNIFIL was stationed during Hizballah's attack in order 
to argue that UNIFIL must have witnessed the events of 
November 20.  Sharma said he told the IDF that UNIFIL does 
not have a mandate to stop Hizballah from firing. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Sharma said that although Sheba Farms falls within 
the area of responsibility of UNDOF, it is not clearly 
demarcated.  The Ambassador asked whether Sharma believes the 
Government of Israel (GOI) has strategic reasons for holding 
on to Sheba Farms and whether, if Lebanon takes control of 
Sheba Farms, the IDF position can be flanked?  Sharma 
replied, "Yes and no.  Mt. Herman has more tactical 
significance.  After Sheba Farms there will be the seven 
villages.  Which ones?  No one knows.  In any case the 
Israelis say it does not matter what they do, the Syrians 
will always find another pretext to launch attacks."  (Note: 
The seven villages became part of mandatory Palestine in 
1923, when France and the U.K. drew borders between Syria, 
Lebanon and Palestine.  End note.) 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
CRETZ