05TELAVIV5154
DISENGAGEMENT SITUATION REPORT, AUGUST 19, 2005
Fri Aug 19 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 TEL AVIV 005154 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR DIBBLE 
NSC FOR ABRAMS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG KPAL PREL ECON EAID IS GAZA DISENGAGEMENT
SUBJECT: DISENGAGEMENT SITUATION REPORT, AUGUST 19, 2005 
 
REF: TEL AVIV 5132 
 
This is a joint message from Embassy Tel Aviv and Consulate 
General Jerusalem. 
 
This message is sensitive but unclassified.  Please protect 
accordingly. 
 
This message conveys information as of 1700 hours local time. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  On the fifth day of disengagement, IDF 
soldiers and police focused on evacuating the settlement of 
Gadid.  At the beginning of the day, ten families and over 
300 infiltrators remained, but the evacuation was complete by 
around 1500 hours.  The GOI also began demolishing homes in 
Kerem Atzmona outpost.  The security forces do not plan to 
evacuate any settlements on Saturday, August 20.  A Katyusha 
rocket fired from Jordan landed near Eilat Airport around 
0845 hours on August 19, causing minor material damage, 
according to Israeli press reports.  In addition, two rockets 
were fired at U.S. Navy vessels in Jordan,s Aqaba port 
across the border from Eilat.  The French journalist who was 
kidnapped on August 15 is still missing.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) SETTLER EVACUATION STATUS 
 
-- At the end of the fourth day of evacuations yesterday 
evening, Major General Dan Harel told the press that only 
about a quarter of the Gaza Strip settlers remain to be 
evacuated.  Press reports indicated that the IDF and Israeli 
Police had succeeded in clearing out all of the infiltrators 
and settlement residents from Neve Dekalim, Kfar Darom, Kfar 
Yam, and Gan Or by 2200 hours, although a few families remain 
in Neve Dekalim and Kfar Darom who will leave voluntarily in 
the coming days.  The most significant resistance took place 
in Kfar Darom, where disengagement opponents sprayed a 
mixture of paint thinner and other chemicals on ten 
policemen.  In total, 75 people were injured during the 
operation, and up to 1,000 people may have been arrested. 
 
-- Today, August 19, the IDF and Israeli Police focused on 
evacuating Gadid.  Although only ten families remained in the 
settlement at the beginning of the day, press reports 
indicated that over 300 infiltrators were barricaded in the 
synagogue and on the roofs of some houses.  The opponents 
threw eggs, roof tiles, and rocks at the security forces, 
poured oil, and burned tires, but most were evacuated about 
approximately 1230 hours.  Gunshots were heard after the 
evacuation of the synagogue, but no one was injured.  One 
teenager fell off a roof after slipping on oil, and was taken 
to Soroka Hospital in Beer Sheva. 
 
-- A group of six or seven Israeli youths vandalized a 
Palestinian-owned gas station at the entrance of the Sa Nur 
settlement in the northern West Bank.  They poured fuel on 
the floor and caused extensive damage to the buildings and 
offices, according to press.  The police arrived before they 
could set the gas station on fire. 
 
-- Press reports today indicated that home demolitions in 
Kerem Atzmona began today, which was earlier than expected, 
as previous reports said the demolitions would not begin 
until Sunday, August 21.  Homes are still expected to be 
demolished on Sunday in Peat Sadeh and Rafah Yam, and 
agricultural equipment from Gush Katif will be removed.  Gabi 
Golan of the Prime Minister's Office told EconCouns on August 
18 that the homes in Gan Or and possibly Dugit would also be 
demolished on Sunday. 
 
-- According to Voice of Israel, the evacuations of Sa Nur 
and Homesh will take place next week. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) STATUS OF INDIVIDUAL SETTLEMENTS 
 
The following is an outline of the evacuation of the Gaza 
Strip and West Bank settlements as of 1700, August 19, 
according to IDF reports and Israeli media. 
 
Atzmona:  Press reports indicate that approximately 80 
families remain.  The settlement will be evacuated either 
Sunday or Monday, August 21 or 22. 
 
Kerem Atzmona (outpost):  100 percent evacuated on Wednesday, 
August 17. 
 
Bedolah:  100 percent evacuated on Wednesday, August 17. 
 
Dugit:  100 percent evacuated on Tuesday, August 16. 
 
Ele Sinai:  Press reports indicate that 30 families, or about 
220 people, remain in the settlement.  Gaby Golan of the 
Prime Minister's Office told EconCouns yesterday that the 
families have secured permits to stay until Monday, August 22. 
Gadid:  Although the settlement was supposed to have been 
completely evacuated on Wednesday, August 17, security forces 
were present today to continue the evacuation of the ten 
families and hundreds of infiltrators remaining.  Several 
families left voluntarily at approximately 1000 hours, and 
the evacuation was complete at approximately 1500 hours. 
 
Gan Or:  100 percent evacuated on Thursday, August 18. 
 
Ganei Tal:  100 percent evacuated on Wednesday, August 17. 
 
Kfar Darom:  Despite press reports that the settlement was 
completely evacuated on Thursday, August 18, other reports 
this morning indicated that a few families remained who 
planned to depart voluntarily today. 
 
Kfar Yam:  100 percent evacuated on Thursday, August 18. 
 
Morag:  100 percent evacuated on Wednesday, August 17. 
 
Netzarim:  All of the estimated 64 families in the settlement 
had earlier agreed with the IDF to leave voluntarily by 
Monday, August 22.  Press reports this morning indicated, 
however, that the settlers are still negotiating whether to 
depart voluntarily, and that the IDF may evacuate them on 
Sunday, August 21, instead. 
 
Netzer Hazani:  100 percent evacuated on Thursday, August 18. 
 
Neve Dekalim:  Despite press reports that the settlement was 
completely evacuated on Thursday, August 18, other reports 
this morning indicated that a few families remained who would 
leave voluntarily in the coming days. 
 
Nissanit:  100 percent evacuated on Thursday, August 18. 
 
Peat Sadeh:  100 percent evacuated on Tuesday, August 16. 
 
Qatif:  Press reported today that the 61 families remaining 
will be evacuated by Sunday or Monday, August 21 or 22. 
 
Rafah Yam:  100 percent evacuated on Tuesday, August 16. 
 
Shelo/Shalev:  100 percent evacuated on Tuesday, August 16. 
 
Tel Qatifah:  100 percent evacuated on Wednesday, August 17. 
 
 
West Bank Settlements: 
 
Gannim:  100 percent evacuated on Tuesday, August 16. 
 
Homesh:  Evacuations will take place next week. 
 
Kaddim:  100 percent evacuated on Tuesday, August 16. 
 
Sa Nur:  According to Voice of Israel, the security forces 
are concerned about the number of infiltrators that have been 
arriving to the settlement since the disengagement began. 
The defense establishment is reportedly concerned that the 
settlers in Sa Nur may use weapons against the police and 
IDF. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) SECURITY SITUATION 
 
-- Rocket attacks hit Eilat and Aqaba:  A Katyusha rocket 
fired from Jordan landed near Eilat Airport around 0845 hours 
on August 19, causing minor material damage, according to 
Israeli press reports.  At about the same time, two rockets 
were fired at U.S. Navy vessels in Jordan,s Aqaba port 
across the border from Eilat.  One of the rockets hit a 
Jordanian Army warehouse, killing one Jordanian soldier and 
injuring another, according to regional press reports. 
Israeli radio reported that Jordanian security forces located 
the rocket launcher on the roof of a house in Aqaba and are 
now searching for two Iraqis and a Syrian who had rented the 
house. 
 
-- Shootings:  Palestinian militants fired in the direction 
of Gadid settlement mid-day August 19, according to 
Palestinian sources.  IDF reported shootings targeting IDF 
outposts near Neve Dekalim, Netzarim, Khan Yunis, and Rafah. 
IDF forces initiated fire late on August 18 near the Erez 
crossing, injuring one a 20-year-old Palestinian man. 
 
-- Kidnapping: French Channel 3 journalist Mohammad Luoati, 
seized by gunmen on August 15, is still being held August 18. 
 There is no news as to his whereabouts. 
-- Rocket/Mortar Attacks:  The IDF reported that a Kassam 
rocket was fired late August 18 about one kilometer south of 
Kissufim crossing.  Two mortar shells struck near Ganei Tal 
settlement, according the IDF.  Palestinian source asserted 
that rocket/mortar attacks were also directed against 
Netzarim and Morag, with one IDF soldier lightly injured in 
the Netzarim attack. 
 
-- Attack Denied:  Military commander in the Al-Quds 
Brigades, Abu-Hamzah, denied Israeli (IDF) reports that a 
four-member Islamic Jihad cell had been planning to attack 
Israeli settlements.  Abu-Hamzeh asserted that Islamic Jihad 
and its military wing Al-Quds Brigades remain committed to 
the current calm, as agreed in Cairo, and denied any 
connection to the arrested members of the alleged cell. 
 
-- Israeli-Palestinian Security Meeting:  Major General Jamal 
Abu-Zayd, head of the PA Ministry of Interior,s Strategic 
Planning team, and Major general Yitzhaq Har,el, head of the 
Israeli Army,s Planning Branch, met late on August 18 at 
Bayt Hanun Crossing.  A positive atmosphere prevailed, 
according to PA media sources, and both sides agreed to hold 
another meeting next week. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) PALESTINIAN REACTIONS 
 
-- Palestinian Minister of Foreign Affairs Nasser Al-Kidwa 
said on August 19 that Israel is portraying its disengagement 
plan as a "painful concession" which will never be repeated. 
"Israel wants to make the pullout out from the Gaza Strip and 
four settlements in the West Bank appear as a great 
achievement, costly and painful concession," Al-Kidwa told 
the Cairo-based Middle East News Agency.  He warned that 
Israeli control of the Gaza airspace, sea and crossing points 
after the withdrawal could turn the strip into a huge prison. 
 On Egypt's role, Al-Kidwa said, "I would like further to 
thank Egyptian officers who are training Palestinian troops 
to take over after the Israeli pullout from the Gaza Strip." 
He added that the Rafah crossing point should be run by the 
Egyptians and the Palestinians alone. 
 
-- A Palestinian NGO director told emboff that the atmosphere 
in Gaza is relatively calm, with lots of flag-waving and 
music on the streets.  The contact said he anticipates that 
it will be difficult for Palestinian security forces to 
prevent Palestinians from entering evacuated settlement areas 
where they once had lands, or to prevent Hamas and PIJ from 
claiming to have liberated these areas.  Post-disengagement, 
Palestinians expect greater freedom of movement and 
international travel, which has been restricted, particularly 
for men in the 16-35 age cohort.  The word on the street is 
that the PA is trying to find a way for a third party (i.e. 
EU or U.S.) to play a role at Rafah without any Israeli 
involvement.  Palestinians "want to feel that Gaza is like a 
liberated area.  Why would they travel to Israel (i.e., Kerem 
Shalom) to go to Egypt or Jordan?" 
 
¶6.  (SBU) GOI POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS 
 
-- The Israeli cabinet will meet on Sunday, August 21.  No 
agenda has been published, which is the norm, but Israeli 
radio reports that the Cabinet is expected to vote to approve 
the last two evacuation orders for the settlements in the 
northern Gaza Strip and the northern West Bank.  MOD Mofaz is 
expected to brief Israeli ministers on the disengagement 
process and the general security situation. 
 
-- Knesset Member Netanyahu told the press August 19 that 
Friday's rocket attack on Eilat should be viewed as a serious 
warning ahead of the missiles that would be launched on 
Israeli cities in a year or two from Islamic terror bases in 
Gaza and the West Bank. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS/HUMANITARIAN ACCESS 
 
-- Erez Crossing and Industrial Zone:  According to Gaza 
private sector contacts, Erez remains officially closed to 
Palestinians, but the IDF continues to allow a small number 
of people to pass based on humanitarian/medical grounds with 
prior coordination. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal: According to UNRWA, Rafah remains open in 
both directions. 
 
-- Abu Kholi junction:  Re-opened at 2350 hours August 19 and 
closed 0500 hours as scheduled. 
 
-- Karni Terminal: Karni remains open on August 19. 
-- Kissufim, the main crossing used to enter Gush Katif and 
Kfar Darom settlements, remains open only to traffic/persons 
leaving Gaza. 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
KURTZER