06TELAVIV1863
GOI REQUEST FOR USG ASSISTANCE IN TUNNEL DETECTION
Thu May 11 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TEL AVIV 001863 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON PREL PTER ASEC KWBG KPAL IS ISRAEL RELATIONS COUNTERTERRORISM
SUBJECT:  GOI REQUEST FOR USG ASSISTANCE IN TUNNEL DETECTION 
TECHNOLOGY 
 
¶1.  This is an action request. See Para 4. 
 
¶2. The perceived threat of tunnel-based terrorist attacks 
has been a principal justification for this year's lengthy 
closings of the Karni crossing between Gaza and Israel. 
Embassy has received a high-level request from the GOI 
Ministry of Defense for assistance in identifying state-of- 
the-art tunnel detection technologies used by, or known to, 
the USG, in order to improve the security of Israel's 
borders. 
 
¶3.  Department is urgently requested to take the lead in 
establishing contact between the GOI/MOD and appropriate USG 
military, intelligence, and homeland security agencies 
knowledgeable about tunnel detection.  At this point, 
funding is not the primary issue.  USAID, under its existing 
Palestinian Integrated Trade Arrangement Project (PITA), is 
able and willing to expand the scope of its current project 
from scanner technology to include the study, and even the 
procurement of tunnel-detection equipment.  Fact finding 
tours by Israeli officials to the U.S. or elsewhere, and 
hiring of consultants to advise the GOI are within the scope 
of PITA.  However, direct GOI-USG contacts are necessary to 
identify what is available and what is required. 
 
¶4.  ACTION REQUESTED: Please identify a lead agency and 
point of contact, with whom we and the GOI can work to 
arrange briefings / demonstrations on tunnel detection 
technology.  Given the large negative impact that frequent 
closings of crossing points have on the Palestinian economy, 
this action is most urgent. Department and other agencies 
are requested to give it the highest priority. 
 
JONES