07TELAVIV208
COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR JANUARY 20 - 22, VISIT TO
Thu Jan 18 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0005
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #0208/01 0181250
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 181250Z JAN 07
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8876
INFO RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 1434
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 9620
RUEHFT/AMCONSUL FRANKFURT PRIORITY 5012
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 5687UNCLAS TEL AVIV 000208 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NEA/IPA (MAHER) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OTRA PREL IS
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR JANUARY 20 - 22, VISIT TO 
ISRAEL OF ALAN PINO, NIO, ODNI 
 
REF: SECSTATE 6240 
 
¶1. (SBU) Embassy Tel Aviv warmly welcomes the January 20-22 
visit to Israel of NIO Alan Pino of the Office of the 
Director for National Intelligence.  Please note that all 
message traffic concerning travel to Israel and the Occupied 
Territories should be sent to both Embassy Tel Aviv and 
Consulate General Jerusalem.  Embassy Tel Aviv's visit 
officer for Mr. Pino will be Political Officer Mark Weed, 
office phone:  972-3-519-7612; office FAX:  972-3-519-7352; 
cell:  972-54-545-2469; unclassified E-Mail Address: 
WeedMA@state.gov.  Embassy Tel Aviv staff will greet and 
assist Mr. Pino upon arrival at the Ben Gurion Airport. 
Hotel room reservations have been made 
 
-- for the night of January 20 at the Dan Accadia Hotel in 
Herzliya Pituach; 22 Ramat Yam Street; phone: 
972-9-959-7070; FAX:  972-9-959-7091. 
 
-- and for the night of January 21 at the King David Hotel in 
Jerusalem; 23 King David Street; phone:  972-2-620-8888; FAX: 
 972-2-620-8882. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Please note the following information for 
communication purposes: 
 
¶A. TO CALL CELL PHONES IN ISRAEL FROM OUTSIDE ISRAEL:  For 
local cell phones, dial 972 and then the 10-digit number, 
minus the 0 (e.g., for 050-678-2308, dial 972-50-678-2308.). 
 
¶B. Embassy Tel Aviv Communication Center Operating Hours: 
Monday-Friday, 0700-1730; phone:  972-3-519-7430.  Secure 
Phone/FAX Number:  972-3-519-1992 (IPC) or 972-3-519-7489 
(Front Office); hours:  0700-1730.  After hours Duty 
Officer/POC:  Bill Layne, mobile phone:  972-57-752-2809. 
 
¶C. Consulate General Jerusalem Communication Center Operating 
Hours:  0745-1730.  Secure Phone Number:  972-2-625-3204; 
hours:  0745-1730.  Secure FAX Number:  972-2-625-3204; 
hours:  0745-1730. 
 
¶3. (U) All USG visitors to Israel, Gaza and the West Bank are 
responsible for reading this message thoroughly and complying 
with its instructions, and are required to comply with U.S. 
policy contained in Department of State cable 342724 (100514Z 
OCT 90).  This classified cable is available for review 
through the office of Israel and Palestinian Affairs, 
Department of State (NEA/IPA, Room 6247, 202-647-3672).  All 
official visitors to Israel with secret clearances or higher 
should review 12 FAM 262.3 prior to arrival.  Copies of this 
FAM are available in the Regional Security Offices in Tel 
Aviv and Jerusalem.  Since the opening of a new airport 
terminal in November 2004, Israeli security procedures have 
been significantly strengthened and formalized.  All official 
visitors, regardless of rank or means of transportation into 
and out of Israel, should expect to be questioned with 
respect to their luggage, purchases, and possibly with 
respect to their activities during their stay in Israel. 
 
¶4. (U) Threat assessment:  The threat of terrorism and 
violence in Israel, Gaza and the West Bank is high.  There is 
no information indicating that this particular visit is 
threatened or targeted.  Government employees should assume 
that they are subjected to technical and physical 
surveillance.  Visitors should be scrupulous in securing 
classified and sensitive information in the Embassy or 
Consulate General and assume that any materials left in hotel 
rooms or public or semi-private places may be compromised. 
 
¶5. (U) Travel Policy:  In light of the current security 
situation, the following measures are in effect for all U.S. 
Embassy Tel Aviv and Consulate General Jerusalem personnel, 
as well as all USG official visitors.  On the advice of the 
Regional Security Officer, exceptions to this policy may be 
granted on a case-by-case basis upon approval of the 
Ambassador in Tel Aviv or the Consul General in Jerusalem, 
respectively. 
 
A) Throughout Israel, travelers are strongly urged to avoid 
areas of public gathering or assembly, such as cafes, malls, 
restaurants, and movie theaters, especially during peak hours 
of business.  Discos and nightclubs are off-limits. 
 
B) The use of public buses and trains, and their respective 
terminals/stations, is prohibited. 
 
C) Travelers must exercise caution when out in public and 
should report suspicious activity to the police and RSO 
immediately. 
 
D) Official travel to the West Bank is authorized on a 
case-by-case basis when determined by the Consul General to 
be mission-critical.  For limited, personal travel, U.S. 
government personnel and family members are permitted to 
travel through the West Bank, using only Routes 1 and 90, to 
reach the Allenby/King Hussein Bridge or the Dead Sea coast 
near Ein Gedi and Masada.  Each such transit requires prior 
notification to the Consulate General's security office and 
must occur during daylight hours.  U.S. Government personnel 
and family members are permitted personal travel on Route 443 
between Modi'in and Jerusalem during the daylight hours only. 
 
 
E) Official and personal travel to the Gaza Strip, including 
to the Palestinian-controlled portions of entry/crossing 
points into the Gaza Strip, remains prohibited.  Under policy 
guidance issued by the Secretary of State, the Consul General 
may grant rare exceptions to this prohibition only for 
official, mission-critical travel by the named special envoys 
of the President. 
 
F) Jerusalem's Old City is off-limits during the hours of 
darkness, and on Fridays between the hours of 1100-1400. 
 
G) Travelers to Jerusalem are urged to remain vigilant, 
especially in the commercial and downtown areas of West 
Jerusalem and the city center.  Israeli security services 
report that they continue to receive information of planned 
terrorist attacks in and around Jerusalem. 
 
H) Also in Jerusalem, the Tayelit or Haas Promenade (vehicle 
overlook) located in Armon Hanatziv and bordering the 
Palestinian Village of Abu-Tor is open for USG personnel 
during daylight hours only.  Both the area below the 
Promenade and the village of Abu-Tor remain off-limits.  In 
addition, due to reported increases in criminal activity, 
employees should avoid the outlying villages surrounding East 
Jerusalem. 
 
I) Northern Israel/Golan Heights:  While there is a cessation 
of hostilities between Israel and Lebanon, the situation 
remains tense and a possible resumption of sporadic violence 
cannot be ruled out.  Visitors to the Golan Heights should be 
warned that due to unmarked or poorly marked minefields, they 
should walk only on established roads or trails and pay close 
attention to warning signs and notices in the area. 
 
J) Country clearance for official travel to post will be 
reviewed on an individual and mission-critical basis.  All 
TDY visitors at post for more than one week are required to 
attend the security newcomer briefing presented by the 
Regional Security Office (RSO).  Sponsoring offices will 
incorporate this briefing into visit schedules as required. 
Official visitors here less than one week are strongly 
encouraged to contact the RSO for the most recent security 
related information. 
 
¶6. (U) It has been longstanding USG policy for Administration 
officials not to travel to territories captured by Israel in 
the 1967 War (the West Bank, Gaza, the Golan Heights and East 
Jerusalem) escorted by Government of Israel officials, either 
civilian or military.  Overflights of these areas have been 
permitted in certain circumstances.  Security situation 
permitting, Administration officials may travel to the West 
Bank or Gaza in the company of Consulate General personnel. 
As noted above, however, due to the October 2003 attack on 
Embassy personnel in Gaza, all travel to Gaza has been 
suspended for the foreseeable future.  The Embassy recommends 
that Congressional and Staff delegations follow these USG 
guidelines when visiting Israel. 
 
¶7. (U) Embassy support costs:  Visitors or their 
agencies/bureaus must provide fund cites to cover requested 
commercial services such as equipment, supplies, and 
transportation, as well as required Embassy/Consulate General 
overtime.  In order to maintain their traditionally high 
standards of visitor support, Embassy Tel Aviv and Consulate 
General Jerusalem generally require an appropriate fund cite 
to cover per diem costs of control officers and motorpool 
personnel when assigned to visits.  If security personnel are 
required, the fund cite must cover their expenses as well. 
The Embassy/Consulate General will provide estimated costs 
 
upon request. 
 
¶8. (U) Computer Access:  TDY visitors requiring computer 
network access should so inform their control officers at 
least five days in advance of their arrival in Israel and 
Jerusalem. 
 
-- SBU systems: Visitors who enjoy access to their home post 
SBU computer system via Outlook Web Access, and who have 
requested SBU computer access through their visit officer, 
will receive logons upon arrival allowing them to access that 
system from terminals at the Embassy and Consulate General, 
respectively.  Visitors who are unsure whether their home 
post supports Outlook Web Access should contact their local 
systems administrator before commencing travel.  Visitors who 
do not have access to their home post SBU systems via Outlook 
Web Access must provide the Embassy and Consulate General 
with the fully qualified domain name and the IP address of 
their home e-mail server.  That information is necessary for 
Embassy and Consulate General personnel to configure the 
visitor's access to his or her home post SBU account, and is 
available from the visitor's home post SBU systems manager. 
 
-- Classified systems:  Visitors requesting access to 
classified computer systems must provide front-channel 
confirmation that they possess at least a "secret" clearance. 
 No access to home post classified e-mail accounts is 
possible from either the Embassy or Consulate General. 
Accordingly, Embassy and Consulate General information system 
personnel will be able to provide only new, separate 
classified e-mail accounts accessible only at their 
respective posts. 
 
¶9. (U) Visas:  Israel requires visas for holders of 
diplomatic and official passports.  All personnel visiting 
Israel on official business must obtain visas from the 
nearest Israeli Embassy or Consulate prior to arrival in 
Israel.  Visitors traveling on tourist passports do not need 
to obtain a visa in advance. 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
JONES