09TELAVIV466
EMBASSY TEL AVIV'S CONTRIBUTION TO THE NINTH ANNUAL
Fri Feb 27 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXRO4818
RR RUEHROV
DE RUEHTV #0466/01 0581248
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 271248Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0696
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 1515
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHINGTON DC
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDC
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 36 TEL AVIV 000466 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PASS TO AID 
PASS TO G/TIP, G-ACBlank, INL, DRL, PRM, NEA/RA, NEA/IPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM ASEC KTIP KCRM KWMN SMIG KFRD PREF ELAB IS
KPAL, CE, CH, EG, EI, IN, MD, NP, RO, RP, RS, TH, TU, UK, UP, UZ 
 
SUBJECT: EMBASSY TEL AVIV'S CONTRIBUTION TO THE NINTH ANNUAL 
TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS (TIP) REPORT 
 
REF: 2008 STATE 132759 
 
¶1.  This cable is Embassy Tel Aviv's contribution to the 
Department's ninth annual Trafficking in Persons (TIP) Report. 
Embassy Tel Aviv POC for this report is Alan Holst, 972-3-519-7437, 
holstar@state.gov.  In addition to this cable, the complete GOI and 
NGO responses will be emailed to relevant Department of State POCs 
for Israel as identified in 2008 State 132759. 
 
------------------------------ 
¶2. THE COUNTRY'S TIP SITUATION 
------------------------------ 
 
A1. What is (are) the source(s) of available information on 
trafficking in persons? 
 
Sources for information include the Government of Israel (GOI) whose 
efforts are led by the National Coordinator for Anti-Trafficking 
Efforts in the Ministry of Justice (the National Coordinator), 
Physicians for Human Rights Israel, Amnesty International Israel, 
Hotline for Migrant Workers (Hotline), Kav LaOved, Isha L'Isha-Haifa 
Feminist Center (Isha L'Isha), The Center for International 
Migration and Integration (CIMI), The Association of Rape Crisis 
Centers in Israel (ACRI), Mesila - the Assistance and Information 
Center for Foreign Workers (Mesila), and Choosing Freedom, a joint 
venture run by Hotline, Isha L'Isha, and ACRI. 
 
A2. What plans are in place (if any) to undertake further 
documentation of human trafficking? 
 
Post does not anticipate additional input from local sources. 
 
A3. How reliable are these sources? 
 
These sources are very reliable. 
 
B1. Is the country a country of origin, transit, and/or destination 
for internationally trafficked men, women, or children? 
 
Israel is a country of destination for trafficking for the purposes 
of labor and prostitution.  Israel is not considered a country of 
origin for trafficking, although media and NGO reports suggest a few 
Israeli women were trafficked to other countries for the purpose of 
prostitution. 
 
B2. Does trafficking occur within the country's borders? 
 
Yes. 
 
B3. If so, does internal trafficking occur in territory outside of 
the government's control (e.g. in a civil war situation)? 
 
No. 
 
B4. To where are people trafficked? 
 
Media and NGO reports charged that a small number of Israeli women 
were trafficked to the UK and Ireland in 2008 for the purpose of 
prostitution. 
 
B5. For what purposes are they trafficked? 
 
People are trafficked to Israel for the purposes of labor and 
prostitution. 
 
B6. Provide, where possible, numbers or estimates for each group of 
trafficking victims. 
 
According to the GOI, there has been a sharp decline in recent years 
in the number of women trafficked to Israel for prostitution, citing 
a decline in the number of trafficking victims located by law 
enforcement agencies and by he Knesset Subcommittee on Trafficking. 
The GOI reported that 12 trafficking victims for prostitution were 
transferred by the Police to the Maagan Shelter in 2008, but that 
most of them were trafficked several years ago.  In 2008, there were 
44 trafficked women (six were trafficked for labor) in the Maagan 
Shelter over the course of the year.  At the time of this report, 25 
women and five children resided at the shelter.  NGO responses were 
less certain that sex trafficking had declined, but agreed that it 
had changed in nature and was harder to detect. 
 
 
TEL AVIV 00000466  002 OF 036 
 
 
Regarding labor trafficking, the Ministry of Industry, Trade, and 
Labor (MITL) issued approximately 94,000 permits for employment of 
foreign workers in various fields.  The majority of these permits 
were issued to elderly or handicapped persons needing full time 
caregivers, and to farmers requesting employment of temporary 
agricultural workers.  Estimates on the number of workers who become 
victims of labor trafficking vary widely. 
 
For example, Hotline reported that it received 1073 requests in 2008 
for assistance from migrant workers, including labor complaints 
unrelated to trafficking, and said that during the reporting period 
it had processed 14 new cases of slavery and forced labor.  (Hotline 
noted that it does not have access to all trafficking victims, and 
said that the Tribunal for the Review of Custody of Persons Present 
Unlawfully, which orders deportations, does not locate or identify 
such individuals if they are in prison.)  Cases that Hotline 
determined to be trafficking cases thus constituted one percent of 
complaints that it handled during the year.  In its response for 
this report, Hotline estimated that there are approximately 180,000 
migrant workers in Israel, and wrote "if we assume that one percent 
of these are trafficking victims, this produces the figure 1,800" 
(victims of labor trafficking.)  Hotline's estimate of the number of 
labor trafficking victims in Israel therefore seems a speculation 
based on a percentage of complainants that was then applied to the 
percentage of total workers.  The estimates of the leading NGOs are 
made in good faith, and they do provide numerous cases that seem to 
fit our definitions of labor traffickig.  But the speculative and 
apparently arbitrarynature of this example illustrates the 
challengein quantifying the extent of the labor trafficking roblem 
in Israel. 
 
B7. Have there been any chages in the TIP situation since the last 
TIP Repot (e.g. changes in destinations)? 
 
The GOI repored a change in patterns of trafficking for 
prosttution, which it said has "gone underground."  Women were no 
longer held under lock and key in houses of prostitution or bought 
and sold for money, according to the GOI, which did not find the 
same degree of violence and control as in the past.  As described by 
 the GOI, the new system had call girl establishments or "discrete" 
apartments whose conditions are better than they were in the past, 
and prostitutes "consequently are less likely to complain."  The GOI 
also noted that the internet was increasingly used to facilitate 
prostitution. 
 
There was some disagreement between different judicial offices on 
this matter.  According to the GOI, the Tel Aviv District Attorney's 
Office observed a change in the pattern of trafficking for the 
purpose of prostitution in which the traffickers attempted to 
"disguise" their occupation.  The GOI submitted that in this new 
pattern, traffickers abstained from using violence on their victims 
(in contrast to cases that took place until 2005), refrained from 
detaining the legal documents of the victims, did not lock up the 
victims, and allowed the women to receive a small portion of the 
fees paid for their services.  The District Attorney, in the words 
of the GOI, is of the opinion that these changed circumstances still 
point to the existence of trafficking, albeit in a different form, 
with evidence showing  control, supervision, and objectification of 
the victims, even if there was no "classic" aspect of 
buying/purchasing or dominance as in past cases.  The GOI reported 
that the Tel Aviv District Court did not agree with this position, 
and cited an October 16 release of defendants by the District Court 
and denial of a request for detention until the conclusion of 
proceedings in the case.  The presiding judge determined that there 
was no substantial evidence on which to base the TIP offense, no 
indication of the "purchase" of the complainants, no coercion to 
engage in sexual intercourse without paying for it, no physical 
examination of the complainants in order to "gauge their fitness to 
engage in prostitution", or any other "indications that the women 
had been trafficked."  This decision provoked an extensive public 
debate, and was deliberated upon in discussions of the Subcommittee 
for Trafficking in Women.  The two offices remained in disagreement 
on this subject at the time of this report. 
 
According to Isha L'Isha, an increasing number of Israeli women were 
trafficked for the purpose of prostitution in 2008. 
 
The August 15, 2008 edition of Yedi'ot Aharonot reported that 
Chinese women were being trafficked for sex to Chinese and Thai 
workers, some or many of whom might be labor trafficking victims 
themselves.  The article described gruesome conditions encountered 
 
TEL AVIV 00000466  003 OF 036 
 
 
by the women. 
 
In June and July 2008, Israel ratified the two major international 
treaties on trafficking: The Optional Protocol to the Convention on 
the Rights of the Child, on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution 
and Child Pornography; and The Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and 
Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children, 
supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational 
Organized Crime. 
 
¶C. What kind of conditions are the victims trafficked into? 
 
The GOI reported that it estimated that most trafficked women were 
engaged in "discrete" apartments or by escort agencies, and said the 
conditions provided by the escort agencies were relatively less 
harsh than in brothels, citing less violence, higher wages, and more 
freedom of movement.  In the words of Isha L'Isha, it depended on 
the brothel and its location.  If it was what they called an 
"explicit center of the sex industry", the conditions were very 
extreme: no windows or grates or even the minimum conditions for 
living."  If it was a "VIP" brothel, the conditions were better and 
the women had more freedom, according to Isha L'Isha. 
 
The GOI agreed that migrant workers arriving in Israel may be 
exposed to several forms of abuse or violations of their rights, but 
emphasized that "only the most severe cases can be considered 
slavery, forced labor or trafficking."  According to the Immigration 
Administration, living conditions of foreign workers generally 
ranged between "reasonable" and "good", although they acknowledged 
that there were exceptions.  Most of the violations of migrant 
workers rights concerned working hours and the amount of wages paid, 
according to the GOI, which also said there was evidence of some 
cases where workers were employed for extremely long hours or not 
given days of rest, holidays or breaks as required by law.  The GOI 
also said there were cases of workers whose freedom of movement was 
drastically curtailed (including withheld passports) or some measure 
of physical or psychological violence was used, including some cases 
of sexual harassment.  The GOI also said in its reply that some 
workers arrived in Israel "after committing themselves to a debt of 
over $15,000 in their countries of origin, thus becoming more 
vulnerable to abuse because they are in greater need of 
employment." 
 
According to Hotline, Yael Gur, director of the Ministry of Health's 
Levinsky STD Clinic, reported at a Knesset session on October 29, 
2008 that she was aware of some 150 women who are employed as 
prostitutes in conditions of slavery.  Gur reportedly stated that 
the women were held in a state of "objectification, control, and 
deprivation, but they do not know to complain and, unfortunately, 
they do not have sufficient trust in the police to tell them." 
Hotline noted that a new state-run project (under the auspices of 
the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Social Affairs) to 
rehabilitate women working as prostitutes that was announced in 
January 2007, began operations in December 2008.  The project 
includes the establishment of day shelters in Tel Aviv and Haifa, 
and activists will also go out into the field. Hotline explained 
that the hope is the project will locate and rehabilitate Israeli 
women who have been the victims of trafficking and are being held in 
conditions of slavery. 
 
Hotline stated that, in general, the trafficking situation had not 
changed much during the reporting period.  In Hotline's words, 
"There is almost no enforcement. This year, as in the past, the new 
women we have helped who were sex trafficking victims had been 
brought to Israel years ago. As for trafficking for the purpose of 
slavery, the victims mainly come from the same countries mentioned 
in our last report (China, Sri Lanka, India, and Nepal) and for the 
same purposes (mainly to work in private homes.)"  Hotline also 
reported that it had observed little if any change in the conditions 
of sex trafficking victims.  According to Hotline, conditions of 
slavery included withholding of passports, insufficient food, 
isolation from the outside world and prohibition from communicating 
with others, inability to leave the home (because they were locked 
inside, or due to threats, or because their documents had been 
taken, or because they were afraid of what might happen outside), 
working for long hours without rest, insufficient or missing pay, 
and failure to regulate their legal status. Hotline said that some 
victims reported physical violence, others were subjected to verbal 
violence and threats, some were made to sleep on a mattress on the 
floor, some were not allowed showers, one woman stated that she was 
given a fixed period of time to go to the toilet, and one man 
 
TEL AVIV 00000466  004 OF 036 
 
 
reported that his employer made him clean up the employer's feces 
without gloves. 
 
¶D. Vulnerability to TIP: Are certain groups of persons more at risk 
of being trafficked (e.g. women and children, boys versus girls, 
certain ethnic groups, refugees, IDPs, etc.)? 
 
According to the GOI, the average age of victims of trafficking for 
the purpose of prostitution was 18-35, with most victims being women 
aged 20-26.  The government reported that most victims of 
trafficking for prostitution came from the former Soviet Union, 
primarily from Ukraine, Moldova, Russia, and Uzbekistan.  The 
individuals at highest risk were identified as poor, abused, or 
neglected women.  Isha L'Isha said that it observed a sharp rise in 
the exploitation of Arab women for prostitution.  Hotline reported 
that most internally trafficked Israeli women were drug addicts 
subject to violence by clients, traffickers, drug peddlers and 
"anyone else they come into contact with." 
 
Israel is also a country of destination for temporary migrant 
workers from Asia, Eastern Europe and Africa.  The GOI agreed that 
middleman fees that foreign workers are required to pay in their 
countries of origin in order to obtain a work permit in Israel was a 
key aspect of their vulnerability.  The Immigration Administration 
estimated that foreign workers at the greatest risk for abuse 
trafficking were from Thailand, Sri Lanka, Nepal, China and India. 
The National Coordinator estimated that Thai agricultural workers 
were highly vulnerable due to circumstances having to do with their 
isolated places of work, compounded by lack of familiarity with the 
language and with their cultural background.  The National 
Coordinator determined that women working in the nursing care field 
were highly vulnerable due to the isolated nature of their work 
within a home.  Philippine domestic caregivers were also vulnerable 
because of the isolated nature (alone, within a home) of their 
work. 
 
While the population of African asylum seekers has risen from 
approximately 200 in August 2006 to estimates of more than 20,000 at 
the time of this report, we received no reports that this population 
was being trafficked. 
 
Kav LaOved reported that while the law does not permit employment 
agents to charge foreign workers more than NIS 3,150 ($800) plus 
airfare for a job in Israel, in practice, the sums paid by migrant 
workers who arrive to Israel are much higher. 
 
China - $25,000 (mostly in the construction industry) 
Thailand - $8,000 - $12,000 
Nepal, India, Sri Lanka - $6,000 - $10,000 
Philippines, Moldova - $4,000 - $9,000 
Romania - $2,000 - $3,000 
 
The GOI agreed that, in some cases, migrant workers arriving in 
Israel "find themselves in situations in which their labor rights or 
human rights are not respected, in which they are sexually or 
otherwise abused, or have their basic freedoms limited."  General 
examples provided by the GOI included workers who arrived in the 
country only to find that the employer who invited them has passed 
away or was not interested in employing them, or recruited workers 
who lacked the necessary and basic skills to fulfill the employer's 
needs and were dismissed by the employer after a short period of 
employment.  The GOI acknowledged that foreign workers encounter 
difficulties in finding alternate legal employment due to their lack 
of knowledge of the Israeli procedures, culture and language, and 
that these factors can lead to situations where they are abused or 
defrauded. 
 
In summary, the combination of the illegally excessive fees and 
perceived lack of freedom to change employers puts foreign workers 
at great risk for exploitation and trafficking.  Furthermore, as 
detailed in B6, the extent of the problem is open to much debate, 
and estimates as to the number of labor trafficking victims in 
Israel vary widely.  For a variety of reasons - language barriers, 
isolated circumstances, distrust of authorities by many workers, 
fear (because of large debits incurred due to the aforementioned 
excessive job placement fees, often due to economic reasons rather 
than safety concerns), the perception of some/many workers that the 
difficult conditions and low pay are still better than what they 
would find in their home country, and the often unclear line between 
labor trafficking and labor law violations  - identifying labor 
trafficking victims is a problem for both the GOI and NGOs.  The 
 
TEL AVIV 00000466  005 OF 036 
 
 
risks and the populations at risk are well known, but the numbers 
remain elusive. 
 
E1. Traffickers and Their Methods: Who are the 
traffickers/exploiters?  Are they independent business people? 
Small or family-based crime groups?  Large international organized 
crime syndicates? 
 
The GOI reported that trafficking for prostitution was often 
conducted by organized crime groups, with cases of trafficking by 
families or individuals.  The organized crime groups were most often 
comprised of members from the former Soviet Union states, according 
to the GOI, which reported native-born Israelis traffickers in some 
cases.  The GOI reported that, according to information accumulated 
by the Immigration Administration, including investigation files and 
intelligence information, organized crime did not appear to be 
involved in trafficking for the purpose of labor. 
 
According to Isha L'Isha, all of these groups were involved, but the 
sex traffickers often were at least connected to the underworld and 
to organized crime.  Isha L'Isha reported that it had not seen any 
involvement of travel agencies in trafficking.  There are 
traffickers known to the police that weren't arrested due to lack of 
evidence, according to Isha L'Isha, who described active trafficking 
in northern Israel.  Isha L'Isha also described cases in which 
boyfriends forced women into prostitution for drugs, and husbands 
exploited their wives for prostitution income. 
 
Regarding trafficking for the purpose of prostitution, Hotline 
suggested that people on the ground - drivers, brothel managers and 
other operatives - tended to be opportunists looking to make quick 
money. 
 
Regarding labor trafficking, Hotline reported that foreign workers 
are recruited through manpower agencies in source countries with 
offers of lucrative jobs, or through friends who provide the contact 
person in Israel and "tempt them to pay for a visa which sometimes 
they get and sometimes never receive."  According to Hotline, labor 
traffickers tend to be private individuals who employ domestic 
workers (with or without permission by the government) or 
agriculture workers, and some are private manpower agencies. 
Hotline said there was usually someone from the origin country who 
worked with an Israeli partner.  Hotline also described the 
well-known (in Israel) problem of "flying visas", where the work 
visa the foreign worker received turn out to be baseless, such as 
visas issued to work for an elderly man that has already died, or 
visas issued to work for someone who doesn't require a caregiver. 
At this point, Hotline continued, the worker finds himself in huge 
debt, without work, and with no legal status in Israel because of 
the employer/employee binding policy for foreign workers. 
 
E2. What methods are used to approach victims?  For example, are 
they offered lucrative jobs, sold by their families, or approached 
by friends of friends? 
 
The GOI responded that, according to information gathered by the 
police from victims' testimonies, most victims answered ads placed 
in local newspapers or websites in their countries of origin. 
Alternate sources were personal relations - friends, relatives, or 
acquaintances sometimes persuaded young women to travel outside 
their countries for "work" that turned out to be prostitution. 
 
Isha L'Isha reported that an increasing number of Israeli women were 
trafficked by pimps who lured women into prostitution with drugs. 
 
Regarding labor trafficking, the GOI responded that cases under 
investigation for trafficking offenses "which apply in Israel" 
generally related to foreign workers who were employed under 
conditions that severely limited their freedom.  According to the 
GOI, labor trafficking cases were not "classic" cases as in 
trafficking for prostitution "in that the pattern is not that of 
workers being approached in countries of origin with offers of 
lucrative jobs for the purpose of enslaving them, but rather 
middlemen who require payment of large sums in order to allow the 
worker to obtain a permit and who care only about the money, and not 
about what happens to the worker subsequently in the country of 
destination."  The GOI responded that high middleman fees made the 
workers more vulnerable to exploitation by employers, but because 
these employers had "no connection" with the mediators or middlemen, 
the indictment filed on forced labor and the four pending cases of 
forced labor focused on the conditions in Israel rather than on the 
 
TEL AVIV 00000466  006 OF 036 
 
 
recruitment abroad. 
 
E3. What methods are used to move the victims (e.g., are false 
documents being used?).   Are employment, travel, and tourism 
agencies or marriage brokers involved with or fronting for 
traffickers or crime groups to traffic individuals? 
 
Most of the victims trafficked for prostitution were smuggled 
through the Israeli-Egyptian border, according to the GOI, which 
added that in recent years there has been an increase in the number 
of prostitutes who entered through the Ben Gurion Airport with 
forged documents.  The GOI reported that there have been no known 
cases of trafficking through maritime borders in recent year, and 
noted that most of the trafficking victims identified in 2008 were 
trafficked to Israel in previous years, usually earlier than 2005. 
 
The GOI responded that it generally had not found travel agencies or 
marriage brokers serving as fronts for sex or labor trafficking, but 
added that government agencies carefully monitored individuals with 
a history of pandering or trafficking, who married women from 
countries of origin for trafficking, on suspicion that in some cases 
the marriages may have been used to traffic the women into 
prostitution.  The GOI said that this allegation was very difficult 
to prove but that several agencies were involved in the monitoring 
efforts, including the Ministry of the Interior, the Police, the 
State Attorney's Office, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Nativ 
Contact Center, and the National Coordinator. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
¶3. SETTING THE SCENE FOR THE GOVERNMENT'S ANTI-TIP EFFORTS 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶A. Does the government acknowledge that trafficking is a problem in 
the country?  If not, why not? 
 
The government acknowledges a trafficking problem in Israel.  The 
GOI reported that The Ministry of Justice announced that Trafficking 
in Persons will be the main theme of the Ministry again in 2009, as 
it was in 2008, with a special emphasis on the issue of training in 
all levels of the Ministry. 
 
¶B. Which government agencies are involved in anti-trafficking 
efforts and which agency, if any, has the lead? 
 
Many government agencies are involved in anti-trafficking efforts. 
The lead agencies are the Ministry of Public Security and the 
Israeli Police; the Immigration Administration; various branches of 
the Ministry of Justice (including the Attorney General, State 
Attorney, the Legal Aid Division, the Tribunal for Detention Review, 
the Administrator General and the Department of International 
Agreements); the Ministry of the Interior; the Ministry of Social 
Affairs and Social Services; MITL; the Prime Minister's Office 
(particularly the Authority for the Advancement of the Status of 
Women); the Ministry of Education; and the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs.  Overall coordination comes from the National Coordinator 
for Anti-Trafficking Efforts in the Ministry of Justice. 
 
The GOI described the National Coordinator as having "a central role 
in the fight against trafficking on two levels: creating mechanisms 
to encourage cooperation and designing substantive initiatives." 
 
The GOI reported that the National Coordinator performed the 
following responsibilities during 2008: 
--  Assisted policy making, in particular as regards protection of 
victims; 
--  Made efforts to identify trouble spots and devise solutions; 
--  Maintained communication with international entities and learned 
from comparative materials; 
--  Promoted education and training and encouraged research; 
--  Developed channels of communications between the GOI and NGOs to 
strengthen cooperation; 
--  Dealt with specific problems that arose; 
--  Promoted legislation, regulations and procedures important for 
the battle against trafficking; 
--  Was active with government ministries that participate in the 
battle against trafficking, creating procedures that create a 
climate unfriendly to trafficking; 
--  Contributed to the creation of more positive procedures; 
--  Initiated and assisted in projects important to the battle 
against trafficking; 
--  Served in an advisory capacity to government agencies and other 
 
TEL AVIV 00000466  007 OF 036 
 
 
bodies (including the Joint Distribution Committee) who needed 
information on relevant issues; and 
--  "Most importantly, her first concern is the battle against 
trafficking and as such, she places the issue in the foreground of 
any context in which she appears. She also sees as her first duty 
ascertaining that Israel accords with international standards in 
this area and in particular a human rights focus."  A full 
description of the National Coordinator's activities can be found 
starting on page 40 of the GOI response. 
 
Isha L'Isha reported that "almost all" government authorities 
responded to its requests, but added that the Ministry of Interior 
cooperated only if when the victim was returning to her country of 
origin and rejected requests if there was an issue of allowing the 
victim to remain in Israel for humanitarian reasons.  Isha L'Isha 
also complained of "unequal procedures" in the National Insurance 
Institute that they said discriminated against foreign women by not 
giving them their rights as single mothers to Israeli children with 
Israeli IDs.  The Ministry of Justice led assistance in the 
treatment of the trafficked victims, according to Isha L'Isha, but 
added that the Attorney's Office of the northern region ignored 
"almost completely" the phenomenon of trafficking in women.  Isha 
L'Isha claimed that this office's attorneys were "completely 
ignorant" of women's rights, "even those (women) who give evidence 
against pimps and traffickers." 
 
Amnesty International Israel reported that the Police (or more 
specifically the education unit) were interested in having policemen 
exposed to TIP and what their role should be in combating the 
problem, but "not to the degree of deciding to actively force units 
to order lectures from us."  Amnesty International Israel praised 
the Border Police, however, who they said saw TIP as a high priority 
issue. 
 
The Population, Immigration and Border Authority in the Ministry of 
the Interior was created in 2008 (it formally began operations in 
August) for what the GOI described as "the purpose of concentrating 
governmental powers concerning foreign nationals,  previously 
distributed between various Government Ministries, in one central 
authority."  This new Authority replaced the Population Registry in 
Ministry of the Interior and assumed responsibility for 
implementation of Government policies regarding foreign nationals, 
including foreign workers.  A full description of its activities can 
be found beginning on page 18 of the GOI response. 
 
C1. What are the limitations on the government's ability to address 
this problem in practice?  For example, is funding for police or 
other institutions inadequate? 
 
Regarding labor trafficking, the GOI responded that "one can assume 
that part of the money is transferred to recruitment agencies in 
Israel" but "to date, supportive evidence which would allow criminal 
prosecution of the agencies has not been found, and according to the 
legal regime in these countries of origin, the authorities in Israel 
are not permitted to independently investigate this phenomenon in 
these countries. 
 
The GOI generally cited resource allocation issues (mostly in 
competition with security concerns) as limiting funding below 
optimal amounts, and also said that the large workload of the court 
system, especially the Tel Aviv District Court, made it very 
difficult to run large-scale criminal proceedings, especially ones 
relating to multiple defendants and witnesses.  A full description 
of limitations as seen by the GOI, including specific cases cited by 
the State Attorney's Office, can be found starting on pages 45 and 
76 of their response. 
 
Hotline stated that the experience of previous years had proven that 
the government was "capable of creating significant impact both in 
regards to enforcement and protection" in the area of sex 
trafficking, but that "as far as we can tell, this has now become a 
low priority issue, especially with the Police."  Hotline charged 
that the Police did not initiate any investigations into trafficking 
of Israelis trafficked internally and externally, and that 
trafficked Israeli women were not recognized as such. 
 
Hotline acknowledged that distinguishing between "exploitation and 
scams, on the one hand, and trafficking and slavery, on the other, 
is not as easy as determining when foreign women have been 
trafficked for the purpose of prostitution."  Hotline continued that 
"as we noted in the last report, we believe that it is still a case 
 
TEL AVIV 00000466  008 OF 036 
 
 
of lack of knowledge and especially experience in identifying 
victims and a total and completed dependence on the police to define 
who falls into the 'trafficking' category." 
 
Hotline quoted several government representatives from a parliament 
meeting on July 1, 2008.  Dorit Ben Meir, the head of the Unit for 
Combating Crime Against Foreigners at the Immigration Authority, 
reportedly said "I'm not confident that everyone understands and has 
assimilated this new felony.  Even today, I'm not confident that 
people know the difference between forced labor and slavery.  We 
investigated many files and it turned out that it is not always a 
case of slavery, rather it is forced labor. In the end, the charges 
are brought down to passport confiscation and the files are closed." 
 Tanya Goldstein, from the Legal Department of the Ministry of 
Interior, reportedly said "In terms of identification, we have an 
objective problem.  The police claim that a person is not a victim 
and we must rely on the worker himself.  We do our best to identify 
but these cases are problematic."  According to Hotline, "this 
paints an overall picture of a slow and cumbersome system that lacks 
flexibility, impeding its ability to deal with complexities in the 
field." 
 
C2. Is overall corruption a problem? 
 
No.  Isha L'Isha reported some bureaucratic problems that sometimes 
hindered anti-trafficking efforts, but said they had not seen any 
corruption. 
 
C3. Does the government lack the resources to aid victims? 
 
No, although competition with other State priorities for available 
resources is of course an issue.  The GOI reported that a 
significant part of the (anti-trafficking) budget was allocated to 
assisting victims. 
 
¶D. To what extent does the government systematically monitor its 
anti-trafficking efforts (on all fronts -- prosecution, victim 
protection, and prevention) and periodically make available, 
publicly or privately and directly or through regional/international 
organizations, its assessments of these anti-trafficking efforts? 
 
The GOI reported that the National Coordinator attempted to monitor 
the efforts of government agencies on both micro and macro levels to 
"identify problems and seek solutions" by requesting information and 
making recommendations to various Government agencies, convening a 
permanent team appointed by the Committee of Directors General, and 
applying to the Chairman of the Committee of Directors General on 
several occasions as needs arose.   The National Coordinator 
conducted five meetings with members of the Immigration 
Administration, seven meetings with Ministry of the Interior 
officials, six meetings with State and District Attorney 
representatives, four meetings with Maagan Shelter staff, and six 
meetings with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  The National 
Coordinator also initiated meetings with NGOs and government 
officials, visited detention facilities, participated in training of 
law enforcement authorities, and prepared an annual summary of the 
GOI's steps to combat trafficking that was posted on the internet. 
 
 
The Parliamentary Subcommittee of Trafficking in Women Subcommittee 
of the Committee on the Status of Women monitored sex trafficking, 
advocated legislative solutions, and held an annual session 
following the publication of the State Department's TIP Report to 
discuss issues raised in the report.  Unfortunately, Subcommittee 
Chairperson Zehava Gal-On, a longtime leader in Israeli 
anti-trafficking efforts, will probably not return to the Government 
following a poor showing by her party in the February 10, 2009 
national election.  The Special Parliamentary Committee on the issue 
of Foreign Workers was not as active in addressing trafficking of 
foreign workers. 
 
A full description of Government monitoring efforts can be found 
beginning on page 50 of the GOI response. 
 
Isha L'Isha described the state's efforts to combat sex trafficking 
in 2008 as "abundant" generally, although it urged that more 
pressure be put on the Attorney's Office and police for the northern 
region, which it said "do not start police procedures in 
trafficking" and "even claim that the phenomenon doesn't exist." 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
TEL AVIV 00000466  009 OF 036 
 
 
¶4. INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION OF TRAFFICKERS 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
For questions A-D, posts should highlight in particular whether or 
not the country has enacted any new legislation since the last TIP 
report. 
 
A1. Existing Laws against TIP: Does the country have a law or laws 
specifically prohibiting trafficking in persons -- both for sexual 
exploitation and labor? 
 
Yes. 
 
A2. If so, please specifically cite the name of the law(s) and its 
date of enactment and provide the exact language [actual copies 
preferable] of the TIP provisions. 
 
The Anti Trafficking Law came into force on October 29, 2006.  Most 
of its provisions were incorporated into the Penal Law, 5737-1977 
(the "Penal Law").  A copy of the Law is appended as Addendum 2 of 
the GOI response.  The law includes five core offenses. 
 
(1)  Trafficking in Persons - Section 377A (a) of the Penal Law - 
carries maximum penalties of 16 years imprisonment and 20 years of 
imprisonment if the victim is a minor.  The crime includes two 
elements - "transaction in (not with) a human being" for one of 
seven purposes (removal of organs from the victim's body, having the 
victim give birth to a baby and taking it from him, bringing a 
victim to a condition of slavery or forced labor, bringing the 
victim to an act of prostitution, bringing the victim to participate 
in a pornographic publication or exhibition, committing a sexual 
offense against the victim). 
 
The GOI emphasized that, from their perspective, the elements of 
trafficking in Israel are different from that in the United States 
because the U.S. law requires three elements (moving a person from 
one place to another, by foul means, for a pernicious purpose) while 
the Israeli law requires only two elements (transaction in a person, 
for a pernicious purpose.)  According to the GOI, whereas the United 
States requires that the victim be moved from one place to another, 
Israel does not, nor does it require that foul means be employed 
towards the victim, and the victim's consent is wholly irrelevant to 
the Israeli law whether the victim is a minor or not.  The GOI also 
argued that the Israeli law details seven purposes, whereas the U.S. 
law details only two - commercial sexual exploitation and labor 
exploitation.  The GOI argued that unlike the American crime, the 
Israeli crime requires a "transaction in a human being, thus 
reflecting the view that the essence of trafficking lies in the 
objectification of a person." 
 
(2)  Abduction for the Purpose of Trafficking - Section 374A of the 
Penal Law - carries a maximum penalty of 20 years of imprisonment. 
The crime requires the following three elements - inducing a person 
to move from one place to another, by means of threats or force or 
by obtaining his/her consent by fraud, for any of the purposes of 
trafficking in persons as detailed in Section 377A (a).  According 
to the GOI, this crime is almost the same as the U.S. trafficking in 
persons offense because both require essentially the same three 
elements - moving a person from place to place, by foul means, for 
pernicious purposes.  (The GOI response added that the Israeli 
section "includes more such pernicious purposes than does the 
American section.") 
 
(3)  Holding a Person under Conditions of Slavery - Section 375A of 
the Penal Law - carries a maximum penalty of 16 years imprisonment, 
20 years if committed against a minor.  The two core elements 
include: holding a person under conditions of slavery (slavery is 
defined as exercising towards the victim the powers regularly 
exercised towards property, including exercising significant control 
over his/he life or deprivation of his/her freedom); and holding a 
person for the purpose of work or services, including sexual 
services. 
 
(4)  Forced Labor - Section 376 of the Penal Law - carries a maximum 
penalty of seven years imprisonment.  The two key elements are 
forcing a person to work, whether for remuneration or not; and 
forcing a person by means of force, other means of pressure or 
threat of these, or by obtaining his/her agreement by means of 
fraud. 
 
(5)  Causing a person to leave his country for purposes of 
 
TEL AVIV 00000466  010 OF 036 
 
 
prostitution or slavery - Section 376B of the Penal Law - carries a 
maximum penalty of ten years imprisonment.  The two key elements of 
this crime are: causing a person to leave the country in which the 
victim resides; and, in order to engage the victim in prostitution, 
holding the victim under conditions of slavery. 
 
Additional provisions in the Anti-Trafficking Law include minimum 
sentences, forfeiture provisions, a special fund for fines and 
forfeited property in trafficking cases, compensation for victims, 
legal aid, obligation to report crimes, testimony not in the 
presence of the accused, money laundering, and foreign forfeiture 
orders. 
 
--  Minimum sentences obligates the courts, as a rule, to mete out a 
minimum sentence for all trafficking and slavery crimes, which the 
GOI defined as one fourth of the maximum sentence with the 
requirement that the entire sentence not be suspended. 
 
--  Forfeiture provision obligate courts to order forfeiture of 
assets connected to trafficking crimes, including profits accruing 
from such crimes, "upon the conviction of a person who has 
trafficked or enslaved another person." 
 
--  The Special Fund (for fines and forfeited property of criminals 
convicted of trafficking and slavery crimes) is supposed to 
allocate money for the purposes of protection, prosecution and 
prevention of trafficking crimes, with at least 50% of the property 
in the Fund each year to be allotted to the rehabilitation and 
protection of trafficking victims. In addition, the Fund is supposed 
to reimburse trafficking victims (by means of a full or partial sum) 
who have received a judgment for compensation by traffickers (in 
criminal or civil proceedings) and "can establish that they have 
used all reasonable means to collect the compensation but have 
failed." 
 
On February 9th 2009, the Minister of Justice signed Regulations 
regarding the operation of this Fund that were previously approved 
by the Constitution, Law and Justice Committee of the Knesset on 
January 26th 2009.  The regulations are entitled Penal Regulations 
(Means of Managing the Special Fund Dealing with Forfeited Property 
and Fines Imposed in Cases of Trafficking in Persons and Holding 
under Conditions of Slavery), 5769-2009.  The GOI reported that with 
the publishing of these regulations, it will be possible to appoint 
a committee to distribute forfeited property and fines to victims, 
NGOs and government agencies in order to further rehabilitation 
programs for victims, enforcement and prevention activities, and 
that it will be possible for victims who were unable to collect 
compensation awarded by courts by reasonable means, to receive these 
sums (whether partially or in full) from the Fund. 
 
--  Regarding compensation for victims, courts that do not award 
compensation to victims of trafficking or slavery in criminal 
proceedings must specify the reasons for their decisions. 
 
--  The law mandates legal aid be provided to all victims of 
trafficking and slavery in civil suits arising from the crimes 
committed against them or suits arising from the Entry to Israel 
Law, 5712-1952.  According t the GOI, the rendering of legal aid is 
calculated to allow victims to use their right to submit civil and 
administrative suits and make for a friendlier climate for civil 
claims.  While victims of trafficking for prostitution had 
previously been granted this right on a permanent basis, the law had 
previously given only a temporary right to victims of trafficking 
for slavery or other purposes, but in November 2008 the Knesset 
passed Legal Aid Law (Amendment 9) granting a permanent right to 
free legal aid to all victims of trafficking and slavery. 
 
--  An obligation to report suspected trafficking offenses committed 
against minors or those who cannot care for themselves, is required 
of certain professionals (i.e. doctors, nurses, educational workers, 
social workers, employees of the social welfare services, police 
officers, psychologists, criminologists, paramedics, and staff 
members in shelters) who have a reasonable basis to believe that a 
trafficking offense has been committed at any time.  These 
professionals are to report as soon as possible to a welfare worker 
or the Police, and violation of this obligation is considered a 
criminal offense.  In addition, members of the general public are 
required to report if he/she has a reasonable basis to believe that 
such a crime has just been committed.  Violation of this obligation 
is also a criminal offense. 
 
 
TEL AVIV 00000466  011 OF 036 
 
 
--  Regarding testimony not in the presence of the accused, a victim 
of trafficking for the purposes of prostitution, pornography, or 
commission of a sexual offense may testify without the presence of 
the accused, provided that "certain procedural safeguards are 
observed." 
 
--  The law makes trafficking, slavery, forced labor, and the 
withholding of passports crimes under the Prohibition on Money 
Laundering Law 5760-2000. 
 
--  The law authorizes the courts to enforce foreign forfeiture 
orders regarding property of traffickers and enslavers in Israel in 
the framework of mutual legal assistance between nations. 
 
A complete explanation of the GOI's perspective on their law in 
comparison to U.S. law can be found beginning on page of 58 of their 
response. 
 
A new system for the employment of foreign workers in the nursing 
care field was initiated in 2008.  As described in previous Tel Aviv 
TIP reports, following the court decision in HCJ 4542/02 Kav 
LaOved-Workers Hotline et al v. the State of Israel that required 
the Government to find new methods of employment of foreign workers 
that would not "chain" the worker to one employer, an 
inter-ministerial committee designed a new method for employing 
foreign caregivers.  The GOI reported that implementation of this 
new system was delayed due to six appeals to the High Court of 
Justice against the new system filed by recruitment agencies and 
handicapped employers.  After many months of deliberations, the 
Court approved the new method, and applications from newly 
established recruitment agencies under the new procedure were 
accepted and examined.  On August 31, 2008, the licenses and permits 
of all the former private recruitment agencies specializing in 
recruitment of foreign workers for the nursing care field were 
canceled, and new licenses and permits under the new system of 
employment of foreign caregivers were granted on September 1, 2008. 
The GOI reported that these licenses were granted exclusively to 
newly formed recruitment agencies whose eligibility had been 
carefully examined under the new procedures requiring them to assume 
certain responsibilities for the recruited workers and their 
employers after the arrival of the workers in the country.  The GOI 
reported that due to the new and more stringent requirements for 
such permits, approximately 140 such agencies received licenses, and 
32 applications for licenses and permits were denied.  The various 
elements of the new system were being implemented by Population, 
Immigration and Border Authority on a gradual basis.  The GOI stated 
that it hoped that this system will limit the previously described 
"flying visa" phenomenon - where unscrupulous recruiters collected 
large fees from foreign workers who arrived in Israel to find that 
the promised job did not exist - by allowing workers who legally 
entered the country to find alternate employment if they lose their 
first place of employment, and will also allow increased supervision 
of recruitment agencies and employers.  However, MITL reported that 
due to complaints received from severely handicapped individuals 
claiming that such administrative sanctions could cause them great 
harm and should be used sparingly, it decided that decisions to 
cancel permits of severely handicapped employers of foreign workers 
should first be reviewed by a committee headed by a retired judge, 
rather than decided upon by one individual.  NGOs vigorously 
protested the MITL decision, and pointed out that at the time of 
this report the committee had yet to meet and no licenses of abusive 
employers had been revoked since the new system came into place. 
 
The Witness Protection Law 5769 - 2008 was entered into force on 
November 16, 2008.  The law is designed to allow for enhanced 
protection of witnesses who fall into particular criteria, some of 
which include trafficking cases. 
 
In addition, in June and July 2008, Israel ratified the two major 
international treaties on trafficking: 
The Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child, 
on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography; 
and The Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in 
Persons, especially Women and Children, supplementing the United 
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime. 
 
A3. Please provide a full inventory of trafficking laws, including 
non-criminal statutes that allow for civil penalties against alleged 
trafficking crimes (e.g., civil forfeiture laws and laws against 
illegal debt). 
 
 
TEL AVIV 00000466  012 OF 036 
 
 
Conveying a Person Beyond the Boundaries of a State (Section 370 of 
the Penal Law) prohibits conveying a person beyond the boundaries of 
the state in which he resides.  The maximum sentence is 10 years 
imprisonment. 
 
Withholding of Passport (Section 376A of the Penal Law) penalizes 
"anyone who withholds, unlawfully, a passport, travel document or 
identity document of another person."  The maximum sentence was 
increased to three year's imprisonment (compared to the former 
maximum sentence of one year imprisonment) and added a more severe 
five year sentence for withholding of a passport under aggravating 
circumstances, i.e. if the crime was committed in order to achieve 
one of the purposes enumerated in the trafficking crime (including 
slavery and forced labor.) 
 
Exploitation of Vulnerable Populations - (Section 431 of the Penal 
Law): Heightened Maximum Sentence - penalizes those who "exploit the 
distress, the bodily or mental weakness, the lack of experience or 
recklessness of a person in order to demand or receive something 
which is not owing or to demand or receive something at a price 
which is unreasonably higher than the norm or to pay a price 
unreasonably lower than the norm for a product or service."  This 
section existed in the Penal Law before the enactment of the Law, 
but its maximum sentence was increased from one year imprisonment to 
a maximum sentence of three years "in order to reflect the severity 
of exploitation encountered today, and in particular in the realm of 
foreign workers.  It should be noted, that this section has been 
used in the past to indict persons who exploited foreign workers." 
 
--  The Employment Service Law (Amendment no. 14) 5719-1959 
criminalizes the collection of illegal recruitment fees from foreign 
workers, above the maximum permitted fee, and makes this crime 
punishable by up to six months imprisonment and a fine of up to NIS 
202,000 ($50,500).  The amendment also makes the collection of fees 
an origin offense according to the Prohibition on Money Laundering 
Law. 
 
--  The Employment Service Regulations (Recruitment Fees) 5766-2006 
limit the permitted recruitment fee to be collected from a foreign 
worker by an Israeli recruitment agency to NIS 3,135 (app. $783, 
roughly 88% of the monthly minimum wage) minus any sum paid by the 
worker to a foreign recruitment agency.  The agency may also collect 
from the foreign worker the cost of air fare from the source country 
to Israel.  The Regulations also state the terms under which it is 
permitted to collect the fee (e.g. a detailed contract between the 
agency and the worker).  In addition, according to the Regulations, 
a recruitment agency shall reimburse payments collected from a 
foreign worker under certain circumstances. 
 
--  The Employment Service (Provisions of Information) Regulations, 
5766-2006 require recruitment agencies to provide foreign workers 
with all the information relating to their rights and obligations as 
foreign workers in Israel (e.g. permitted fees' rates, etc.). 
 
--  The Law Limiting Use of Premises in order to Prevent the 
Commission of Crime 5765-2005  authorizes the Police and Courts to 
limit the use of premises, or to close them, if they have served for 
the purpose of prostitution offenses or trafficking for the purpose 
of prostitution, if they are convinced that said premises will 
continue to serve these purposes.  Courts have the authority to 
issue such orders for periods of 90 days, with the possibility of 
extension.  Police may issue such orders for a period of 30 days 
during which they may request the court to rule. 
 
--  The Battle against Organized Crime Law 5763-2003 created 
separate criminal offenses for activity in organized crime groups 
and states that if another crime is committed in the context of 
organized crime, its maximum punishment is double the punishment of 
that crime, but may not exceed 25 years of imprisonment. 
 
--  The Prevention of Infiltration (Offenses and Jurisdiction) Law 
5714-1954-Section 6 imposes a penalty of up to five years 
imprisonment for assisting in the smuggling of persons through 
Israel's borders or providing aid to facilitate their illegal stay 
in Israel. 
 
--  The Tort Ordinance (New Version), 5729-1968 sets forth torts 
which trafficking victims may claim, such as assault (Section 23) 
and imprisonment (Section 26). 
 
--  The Contracts Law (Remedies for Breach of Contract), 5731-1970 
 
TEL AVIV 00000466  013 OF 036 
 
 
and the Unjust Enrichment Law, 5739-1979 allow remedies for breach 
of contract and unjust enrichment, which may be relevant for 
trafficking victims. 
 
--  Labor laws may be invoked in order to sue traffickers, such as 
the Protection of Salary Law, 5718-1958 and the Foreign Workers 
Law. 
 
A4. Does the law(s) cover both internal and transnational forms of 
trafficking? 
 
Israeli courts may exercise extraterritorial jurisdiction over these 
crimes when they are committed by Israeli citizens in other 
countries, even if they do not constitute crimes in these countries 
(no double criminality requirement).  The GOI responded that the 
trafficking law can be invoked against internal trafficking, as can 
"holding under conditions of slavery", "forced labor" and "abduction 
for the purposes of trafficking".  Crimes that typically take place 
transnationally and can be invoked transnationally are trafficking 
and causing a person to leave his/her country for purposes of 
prostitution or slavery, according to the GOI, which added that 
crimes such as holding under conditions of slavery, forced labor, 
and abduction for the purposes of trafficking can also be invoked 
transnationally "if the circumstances accord with Israel's laws on 
jurisdiction." 
 
A5. If not, under what other laws can traffickers be prosecuted? 
For example, are there laws against slavery or the exploitation of 
prostitution by means of force, fraud, or coercion? 
 
See laws described in previous paragraphs. 
 
A6. Are these other laws being used in trafficking cases? 
 
See response to paragraph 4 section E. 
 
¶B. Punishment of Sex Trafficking Offenses: What are the prescribed 
and imposed penalties for trafficking people for sexual 
exploitation? 
 
According to the GOI, Section 377A(a) of the Penal Law "promulgates 
a broad trafficking crime" for a number of illegal purposes: 
prostitution, sexual crimes, slavery or forced labor, removal of 
organs, pornography, and using the body of a person to give birth to 
a baby who is then taken from her.  The penalty for the crime is 16 
years of imprisonment and 20 years of imprisonment if the crime is 
committed against a minor.  The GOI added that it was noteworthy 
that this crime does not require the element of use of force, 
pressure or fraud, thus allowing conviction even if the trafficking 
was not committed by such means, and "consent" of the victim to 
being trafficked was irrelevant. 
 
Isha L'Isha complained that the section authorizing a confiscation 
fund for sex trafficking is so limited, and police record keeping so 
spotty, that Israeli women and internal trafficking victims will not 
be able to use the fund, which to the best of our knowledge has yet 
to be activated.  Isha L'Isha said it was not aware of any penalties 
imposed for sex trafficking in 2008. 
 
Hotline complained that there were no new convictions in 2008, and 
noted that traffickers filed appeals against convictions from 
previous years.  Hotline suggested that an issue relating to 
enforcement is the question of which body is responsible for this 
area.  Noting that enforcement relating to trafficking in women for 
the purpose of prostitution is the responsibility of the district 
units, but that enforcement relating to trafficking for the purpose 
of slavery and forced labor is the responsibility of the Immigration 
Authority, Hotline questioned this division at numerous meetings 
with GOI officials and emphasized the need for cooperation between 
the different units. 
 
C1. Punishment of Labor Trafficking Offenses: What are the 
prescribed and imposed penalties for trafficking for labor 
exploitation, such as forced or bonded labor? 
 
According to Section 377A of the Penal Law, trafficking in persons 
carries a maximum sentence of 16 years imprisonment, or 20 years 
imprisonment if the offense is committed against a minor.  Section 
375A - holding a person under conditions of slavery - carries a 
maximum sentence of 16 years of incarceration.  Section 374A - 
Abduction for Purposes of Trafficking in Persons - carries a maximum 
 
TEL AVIV 00000466  014 OF 036 
 
 
sentence of 20 years of imprisonment.  Section 376 - forced labor - 
7 years of incarceration.  Section 376B - Causing a person to leave 
his/her country for the purposes of prostitution or slavery - 
carries a maximum sentence of 10 years of incarceration. 
 
The Law for the Prevention of Infiltration (Offenses and 
Jurisdiction) - Section 6 of the Law, carries a maximum sentence of 
five years' imprisonment for assisting the smuggling of persons 
through Israel's borders or assisting their illegal stay in Israel. 
Employers may be prosecuted for violations of the labor laws, 
including the Foreign Workers Law.  Criminal offenses under this law 
include the following: 
--  Employment of a foreign worker without providing him/her with a 
detailed contract; 
--  Employment of a foreign worker without provision of medical 
insurance; 
--  Employment of a foreign worker without providing proper lodging; 
 
--  Employment of a foreign worker without providing a detailed 
pay-slip, or unlawfully deducting sums from his/her wages; 
--  Employment of a foreign worker without holding the documentation 
pertaining to the above obligations, as well as a listing of hours 
of work, at the workplace or the offices of the employer; and 
--  Illegal employment of a foreign worker, i.e. - employment of a 
foreign worker by an employer who does not have a permit to do so, 
or employment of a foreign worker in violation of the conditions of 
his/her visa. 
 
Under the Foreign Workers Law, the administrative fines imposed vary 
according to the violation committed.  The GOI reported that the 
relevant regulations were revised in 2008 to raise the fines imposed 
on manpower companies and recruitment agencies for offenses under 
the Law, and to lighten the fines imposed on individuals for first 
offenses of a technical nature.  The maximum administrative fine for 
a violation carried out by manpower companies and recruitment 
agencies is now NIS 10,000 ($2,500) for each original offense, and 
NIS 20,000 ($5,000) for each repeated offense. The maximum 
administrative fine for a violation is NIS 5,000 ($1,250) for each 
original offense, and NIS 10,000 ($2,500) for each repeated offense. 
 An additional fine of NIS 500 ($125) for each day the violation 
continues can also be imposed. 
 
A maximum criminal penalty of NIS 52,200 ($13,050) per employee per 
offense can be imposed upon the employer by a court of law, and when 
the violation occurs in a business framework, the maximum criminal 
penalty for each offense is NIS 104,400 ($26,100) or one year 
imprisonment. An additional penalty of NIS 5,200 ($1,300) for each 
day the violation continues can also be imposed. 
 
C2. If your country is a source country for labor migrants, do the 
government's laws provide for criminal punishment -- i.e. jail time 
-- for labor recruiters who engage in recruitment of workers using 
knowingly fraudulent or deceptive offers with the purpose of 
subjecting workers to trafficking in the destination country? 
 
N/A 
 
C3. If your country is a destination for labor migrants, are there 
laws punishing employers or labor agents who confiscate workers' 
passports or travel documents for the purpose of trafficking, switch 
contracts without the worker's consent as a means to keep the worker 
in a state of service, or withhold payment of salaries as means of 
keeping the worker in a state of service? 
 
Yes.  According to the Israeli Penal Law, if a labor recruiter knew 
that the sums were collected from the foreign worker for the purpose 
of trafficking, or if he knew that he was endangering a person into 
being trafficked by so doing, he may be considered an accomplice to 
a trafficking offense and thus liable to 16 years of imprisonment or 
eight years if his/her role is only that of an aider and abettor of 
such an offense.  In addition, Section 376B may be invoked, which 
carries ten years of imprisonment for causing a person to leave a 
state for purposes of prostitution or slavery. 
 
Furthermore, according to Section 374A, he/she may be found guilty 
of abduction for purposes of trafficking in persons, and thus liable 
to 20 years imprisonment.  (According to Section 369 of the Penal 
Law, abduction includes inducing a person to move from the place in 
which he is presently, by fraudulent means.)  For all of these 
offenses, the perpetrator must intend that his/her actions are for 
the purposes detailed in each criminal section.  A person who 
 
TEL AVIV 00000466  015 OF 036 
 
 
recruits a worker deceitfully with no knowledge that he/she may be 
trafficked or engaged in prostitution or slavery cannot be 
indicted. 
 
According to Section 7 of the Penal Law, these violations may be 
considered domestic rather than extraterritorial offense because the 
they were at least partially committed in Israel, which is where the 
victim arrives to be enslaved or prostituted. 
 
The maximum sentence for withholding a passport is three years 
imprisonment, and if aggravating circumstances are present, i.e. if 
the passport is detained for one of the purposes of trafficking, the 
maximum sentence is five years imprisonment (Section 376A of the 
Penal Law.)  In addition, Section 431 of the Penal Law relating to 
exploitation provides three years imprisonment for taking advantage 
of the "distress, physical or mental weakness, inexperience or 
carelessness of another person."  Other relevant penal provisions 
include: blackmailing by means of threats (Section 428 of the Penal 
Law) with a maximum punishment of seven years imprisonment, and nine 
years if the blackmailed party actually did what the blackmailer 
wanted him to do); fraud (Section 415 of the Penal Law) with a 
maximum punishment of five years imprisonment; threat (Section 192 
of the Penal Law) with a maximum punishment of three years 
imprisonment; taking property for the purpose of blackmail (Section 
430 of the Penal Law) with a maximum punishment of one year 
imprisonment; and trickery (Section 416 of the Penal Law) with a 
maximum punishment of two years imprisonment.  These actions could 
also be viewed as circumstantial evidence on which can be based a 
trafficking, slavery or forced labor offense. 
 
However, Kav LaOved responded that while the maximum penalty for 
passport confiscation is five years imprisonment, the penalties 
imposed on offenders are lenient.  Kav LaOved reported that to the 
best of there knowledge, there has not been "even a sole case" in 
which a perpetrator was imprisoned for passport confiscation, and 
added that not one was even sentenced to community service. 
Furthermore, according to Kav LaOved, under a court ruling of 
December 25, 2008 (C (Beer Sheva) 4688/06 State of Israel v. Reuven 
Golan), if a victim surrenders his/her passport to the perpetrator 
"voluntarily" and without protest, it is not an offense to withhold 
their passport.  Kav LaOved stated that they believe this ruling to 
be at odds with the law's language and purpose, and requested that 
the State file an appeal. 
 
¶D. What are the prescribed penalties for rape or forcible sexual 
assault? (NOTE: This is necessary to evaluate a foreign government's 
compliance with TVPA Minimum Standard 2, which reads: "For the 
knowing commission of any act of sex trafficking . . . the 
government of the country should prescribe punishment commensurate 
with that for grave crimes, such as forcible sexual assault (rape)." 
END NOTE) 
 
Rape: 16 years; rape under aggravated circumstances: 20 years 
(Section 345 of the Penal Law). According to Article 345(a) of the 
Penal Law, if a person had intercourse with a woman (introduces any 
part of the body, or any object into the woman's sex organ) - (1) 
without her freely given consent; (2) with the woman's consent, 
which was obtained by deceit in respect of the identity of the 
person and the nature of the act; (3) when the woman is a minor 
below age 14, even with her consent; (4) by exploiting the woman's 
state of unconsciousness or other condition that prevents her from 
giving her free consent; (5) by exploiting the fact that she is 
mentally ill or deficient, if because of her illness or mental 
deficiency her consent to intercourse did not constitute free 
consent - then he committed rape and is liable to sixteen years 
imprisonment. 
 
Intercourse with a minor: Having intercourse with a minor who has 
reached age 14 but has not yet reached age 16, and who is not 
married to the offender, or with a minor who has reached age 16 but 
has not yet reached age 18, by exploiting a relationship of 
dependence, authority, education, or supervision, or by a false 
promise of marriage, carries a penalty of five years (Section 346(a) 
of the Penal Law). 
 
Forbidden intercourse with consent (with a woman aged over 18, by 
exploiting the offender's authority at the workplace or service, or 
by false promises of marriage, while pretending to be single) 
carries a penalty of three years (Section 346(b) of the Penal Law). 
 
 
 
TEL AVIV 00000466  016 OF 036 
 
 
Sodomy - where the victim is aged over 14 but under 18 - carried a 
penalty of five years (Section 347(a) of the Penal Law). 
 
Sodomy - where the victim has reached age 18, by exploiting the 
offender's authority at the workplace or service - carries a penalty 
of three years (Section 347(b)). 
 
Sodomy - under circumstances detailed in the Section on rape - 
carries the penalties of a rapist (Section 347(c) of the Penal 
Law). 
 
Indecent acts carries penalties that range from 3-10 years, 
depending on the circumstances (Section 348 of the Penal Law). 
 
Indecent acts in public carry penalties that range from 1-3 years 
imprisonment, depending on the circumstances. (Section 349) 
 
Sexual offenses within the family incur heavier penalties.  For 
example, rape or sodomy may incur a penalty of 20 years if the 
victim is a minor and a relative of the offender (Section 351 of the 
Penal Law). 
 
E1. Law Enforcement Statistics: Did the government prosecute any 
cases against human trafficking offenders during the reporting 
period? 
 
Yes. 
 
E2. If so, provide numbers of investigations, prosecutions, 
convictions, and sentences imposed, including details on plea 
bargains and fines, if relevant and available. 
 
SEX TRAFFICKING 
 
The GOI reported that in 2008, the police conducted nine criminal 
investigations on trafficking in persons for the purpose of engaging 
them in prostitution, resulting in the arrest of nine individuals. 
Six indictments were filed in 2008 for these offenses, in addition 
to 12 ongoing cases pending before the courts.  The State Attorney's 
Office convicted five persons in 2008 for trafficking for the 
purpose of prostitution "and/or related offenses."   Another seven 
appeals were submitted to the Supreme Court by defendants convicted 
of trafficking in persons for the purpose of prostitution, and/or 
related offenses (several of which appealed against their 
conviction). These appeals are pending before the Supreme Court. 
The sentences appealed vary from six months to 13 years of 
imprisonment, in addition to compensation to victims, depending on 
the severity of the offenses.  An appeal submitted by the State 
against a lenient sentence is also pending before the Supreme Court. 
 
 
The GOI also reported that during 2008 the Supreme Court dismissed 
11 appeals submitted by defendants against the severity of their 
sentence (ranging from 1.5 to 18 years, plus in some case additional 
compensation to the victims) and several defendants who appealed the 
conviction itself.  During 2008, the Supreme Court also dismissed 
four appeals submitted by the State contesting the leniency of 
sentences imposed for trafficking and/or related offenses, which 
ranged from 6 to 12 years of imprisonment and additional 
compensation to the victims.  In one case the State appealed the 
partial acquittal of one of the defendants. 
 
In addition, the GOI reported that the Police opened three cases in 
2008 based on Section 374 of the Penal Law - Abduction for Purposes 
of Trafficking in Persons.  According to the GOI, two of these cases 
were still being investigated at the time of this report, and the 
third case was under review by the State Attorney's Office. 
 
Individual cases are detailed beginning on page 72 of the GOI 
response. 
 
In its response, the GOI said that the number of trafficking cases 
handled by the Tel Aviv District Attorney's Office decreased 
significantly, from 100 active cases in 2007 to less than 20 during 
this reporting period, and that this decrease was the result of a 
decrease in the number of trafficking for prostitution victims due 
to "determined enforcement."  The GOI noted that most of the cases 
in 2008 referred to trafficking that took place in previous years. 
The Police and State Attorney give priority to the prosecution of 
trafficking for the purpose of prostitution, according to the GOI, 
which said in its response that the courts have "espoused broad 
 
TEL AVIV 00000466  017 OF 036 
 
 
principles of interpretation which allow the conviction of all links 
in the chain of trafficking."  The GOI added that while sentencing 
is "not uniform" it is "increasingly severe, including cases where 
traffickers were sentenced to periods of incarceration of 18 and 15 
years" and that emphasis was given to the issue of compensation to 
victims of trafficking. 
 
LABOR TRAFFICKING 
 
In November 2008, the GOI filed the first indictment for forced 
labor under the trafficking law as amended (to include labor 
trafficking) in October 2006.  The GOI reported that at the time of 
this report, four more indictments were in advanced stages of review 
in the Central and Southern District State Attorney's Office at the 
time of this report, and several more cases were under review by the 
Crime Unit of the Immigration Administration.  The GOI said that 
these investigations were complicated and that it was particularly 
hard to prove the causal connection between the coercion and the 
worker's continuing to work "in view of the heavy debts foreign 
workers incur, which in itself lead them to be willing to work under 
difficult conditions" and that under these circumstances it was 
"doubly hard to prove the case beyond reasonable doubt, as is 
required in criminal cases." 
 
In 2008, indictments were filed in 46 cases of fraud and another 37 
indictments were filed for fraud against the State and indirect 
fraud of a foreign worker, eight indictments were filed in cases of 
exploitation of vulnerable populations against foreign workers, and 
11 indictments were filed for withholding of a foreign workers' 
passport.  Criminal judgments the GOI deemed important are detailed 
beginning on page 79 of the GOI response, and a number of structural 
changes intended to improve investigations and prosecutions are 
explained beginning on page 81 of the GOI response. 
 
The Crime Unit in the Immigration Administration, working with the 
State Attorney's Office, opened 24 investigation cases concerning 
forced labor, and filed one indictment in November.  The GOI 
reported that four additional indictments were under various stages 
of preparation and review by the State Attorney's Office at the time 
of this report. 
 
During 2008, the Crime Unit in the Immigration Administration, the 
Crime Unit opened 450 investigation cases regarding different 
aspects of fraud against foreign workers, including 48 cases of 
withholding passports, 16 cases of exploitation of vulnerable 
populations, and 24 cases of forced labor.  Tables listing all the 
completed cases (12 in the reporting period) and pending indictments 
(5) during the reporting period are annexed (Annexes 3, 4) in the 
GOI response. 
 
Kav LaOved reported that that there are severe problems with law 
enforcement in the area of trafficking for labor, slavery and forced 
labor.  According to Kav LaOved, while the prohibition of 
trafficking for these purposes of labor was first introduced in 2006 
with the enactment of Israel's comprehensive anti-trafficking law, 
law enforcement agencies - particularly the "general" police and the 
immigration police - continue to demonstrate lack of awareness to 
these phenomena, resulting in "very poor investigation efforts and a 
complete disregard for victims."  Kav LaOved gave as an example a 
complaint filed by a slavery victim from India that has been 
investigated for nearly two years, with no result. The complaint was 
originally filed with the Tiberius police in March 2007, but Kav 
LaOved charged that the police did not conduct any investigation or 
even attempt to collect evidence beyond the victim's statement.  Kav 
LaOved claimed that after months of waiting and "futile" attempts by 
Kav LaOved to obtain information on this matter, the police station 
confirmed that they indeed did not investigate this case further, 
and that the suspects had not even been questioned.  After Kav 
LaOved filed a complaint with the Ministry of Justice, the 
investigation was transferred to the Immigration Police in Haifa, 
according to Kav LaOved.  Kav LaOved stated that it was difficult to 
see how an indictment can be successfully pursued under these 
circumstances, given the time that had passed since the crimes were 
committed.  Kav LaOved also criticized what they called a 
"disturbing phenomenon" of "the slow course of action taken by the 
police when a victim manages to contact the outside world while 
still in the perpetrator's home, and what appears to us as a lack of 
a much warranted sense of urgency" even when Kav LaOved brought the 
situation to the attention of the authorities. 
 
Kav LaOved complained that no indictments were filed during 2008 (or 
 
TEL AVIV 00000466  018 OF 036 
 
 
previous years) for charging brokerage fees above legal limit. 
Also, the decision of the Supreme Court of March 30, 2006 that found 
the "binding arrangement" of migrant workers to their employers 
unconstitutional has not been implemented so far, according to Kav 
LaOved. The result, in the words of Kav LaOved, is that a foreign 
worker who leaves an employer (including for reason of dangerous 
working conditions) faces the risk of losing his legal status, 
especially if they have already worked in Israel for a period of 
longer than 51 months. 
 
Hotline complained that more than two years after the enactment of 
the amendments to the trafficking law that criminalized labor 
trafficking, not a single indictment has yet been served on 
trafficking for the purpose of slavery.  Hotline said that cases 
they forward for the attention of the authorities are investigated 
slowly and negligently, and in most cases are closed.  Hotline 
reported that of the 11 suspected cases of trafficking for forced 
labor that they referred to the Immigration Authority during the 
reporting period, three had been closed, in five cases the 
authorities decided not to open an investigation (for trafficking), 
and two were still being investigated.  A detailed examination of 
the cases and Hotline's concerns regarding this issue can be found 
beginning on page 19 of the Hotline response. 
 
E3. Please note the number of convicted traffickers who received 
suspended sentences and the number who received only a fine as 
punishment. 
 
No such statistical breakdown provided.  Beginning on page 176 of 
the GOI response, annexes show results of individual cases, a number 
of which included suspended sentences. 
 
E4. Please indicate which laws were used to investigate, prosecute, 
convict, and sentence traffickers. 
 
See previous answers. 
 
E5. Also, if possible, please disaggregate numbers of cases by type 
of TIP (labor vs. commercial sexual exploitation) and victims 
(children under 18 years of age vs. adults). 
 
No such statistical breakdown provided. 
 
E6. If in a labor source country, did the government criminally 
prosecute labor recruiters who recruit workers using knowingly 
fraudulent or deceptive offers or by imposing fees or commissions 
for the purpose of subjecting the worker to debt bondage? 
 
N/A 
 
E7. Did the government in a labor destination country criminally 
prosecute employers or labor agents who confiscate workers' 
passports/travel documents for the purpose of trafficking, switch 
contracts or terms of employment without the worker's consent to 
keep workers in a state of service, use physical or sexual abuse or 
the threat of such abuse to keep workers in a state of service, or 
withhold payment of salaries as a means to keep workers in a state 
of service? 
 
Yes.  See previous answers.  Media coverage followed some cases. 
For example, on December 22 the press reported that a suit for 
compensation had been filed at the labor court by the Ministry of 
Justice's legal aid system on behalf of a victim of slavery. The 
suit was filed against the victim's employer, a resident of East 
Jerusalem.  According to the report, the victim was brought to 
Israel by her employer to work in his home seven days a week, 17 
hours a day, and was reportedly imprisoned in the house, subjected 
to threats, and did not receive medical attention she required.  She 
escaped and filed a complaint. 
 
E8. What were the actual punishments imposed on persons convicted of 
these offenses? 
 
See annexes beginning on page 176 of the GOI response. 
 
E9. Are the traffickers serving the time sentenced?  If not, why 
not? 
 
The GOI replied yes, "to the best of our knowledge, except those who 
fled justice." 
 
 
TEL AVIV 00000466  019 OF 036 
 
 
F1. Does the government provide any specialized training for 
government officials in how to recognize, investigate, and prosecute 
instances of trafficking? 
 
Yes, the GOI provided many forms of training on sex and labor 
trafficking to a wide variety of government agencies.  Numerous 
examples, including a seminar for prosecutors, courses at police 
training schools, seminars at the Immigration Authority on subjects 
like the right to dignity, five days of training on trafficking for 
Crime Unit investigators and prosecutors, training for the judges in 
the Tribunal for Detention Review, and various sessions directed by 
the National Coordinator, are provided beginning on page 86 of the 
GOI response.  Guidelines on identification of victims were created 
and disseminated. 
 
In its reply, Isha L'Isha said that the state showed more interest 
in arranging lectures and workshops than in identifying victims of 
sex trafficking. 
 
F2. Specify whether NGOs, international organizations, and/or the 
USG provide specialized training for host government officials. 
 
NGOs and UGS visitors participated in seminars and consulted on 
training, but the GOI did not report any specialized training in 
trafficking matters that was provided by NGOs, international 
organizations, and/or the USG.  Amnesty International Israel 
reported that it provided education ("meant to inform, give tools, 
change attitudes and arouse responsibility") to security forces with 
the support of a State Department grant. 
 
G1. Does the government cooperate with other governments in the 
investigation and prosecution of trafficking cases? 
 
The GOI reported that Israeli police cooperated with its colleagues 
from Former Soviet Union countries and Western Europe in 
international investigations of trafficking cases, focusing on 
Israeli felons abroad.  The Israeli Police also cooperated in 
assisting investigations abroad related to Israel, according to the 
GOI, which said that these investigations often resulted in the 
extradition of suspects for crimes committed in Israel.  The GOI 
reported that it maintained close cooperation with other governments 
in cases requiring extradition and legal assistance. 
 
Isha L'Isha praised the Tel-Aviv police for proving "again and again 
its vigor and initiative" in investigating sex trafficking, and 
noted that the unit collaborated with Russia and Ukraine on some 
cases. 
 
Hotline was less sanguine about efforts to combat labor trafficking. 
 It reported that on January 21, 2009, the Knesset Committee for 
Migrant Workers "blasted" the Cabinet for failing to regulate the 
entry of foreign workers into Israel.  Hotline quoted the Committee 
head, Ran Cohen, as saying "Foreign workers are being imported in 
the most corrupt way imaginable.  Millions, perhaps billions reach 
the black market in an illegal, immoral trade that blackens Israel 
in the world."  Hotline argued that over the past three years, the 
Cabinet has repeatedly decided to bring in migrant workers via the 
International Organization for Migration, but that its decisions 
have not been implemented, leaving the job to middlemen who charge 
each worker $5,000 to $20,000. 
 
G2. If possible, provide the number of cooperative international 
investigations on trafficking during the reporting period. 
 
The GOI reported that four international trafficking in person's 
investigations in 2008 led to the arrest of suspects and the 
locating of trafficking victims.  It did not provide a larger 
numerical survey on such investigations, but examples of cooperation 
are provided beginning on page 89 of the GOI response. 
 
¶H. Does the government extradite persons who are charged with 
trafficking in other countries?  If so, please provide the number of 
traffickers extradited during the reporting period, and the number 
of trafficking extraditions pending. In particular, please report on 
any pending or concluded extraditions of trafficking offenders to 
the United States. 
 
The GOI reported that according to Israel's Extradition Law 
5714-1954, the State may extradite Israeli nationals charged with 
any offense where the maximum sentence is one year or more.  No 
numerical breakdown or cases of extradition to the United States 
 
TEL AVIV 00000466  020 OF 036 
 
 
were reported, but examples are provided on pages 90 and 91 of the 
GOI response. 
 
¶I. Is there evidence of government involvement in or tolerance of 
trafficking, on a local or institutional level?  If so, please 
explain in detail. 
 
The GOI replied that Israeli government authorities unequivocally 
condemn all forms of trafficking, do not facilitate or condone 
trafficking, are not in any way complicit in these activities, and 
the Israeli Police and its agents vigorously combat the trafficking 
phenomenon. 
 
Isha L'Isha reported that it saw no involvement in or tolerance of 
trafficking by government officials. 
 
Kav LaOved complained about what it called a tolerance of 
trafficking "evident by the disregard for phenomena that facilitate 
the conditions for trafficking" but said that it was unaware of any 
direct government involvement in trafficking. 
 
Hotline stated that it had no information of any government 
involvement in trafficking, but reiterated complaints of what it 
considered the Government's lack of action, and suggested that 
reflected a tolerance of trafficking. 
 
J1. If government officials are involved in trafficking, what steps 
has the government taken to end such participation? 
 
The only relevant example we are aware is an old case that was 
detailed in a January 15, 2009 Haaretz article about a policeman who 
had been charged several years prior with nine different bribe 
indictments, but had all charges dropped in December 2008.  The 
policeman, Iliya Strashnoy, had been arrested in 2000 after the 
Police Investigation Unit at the Ministry of Justice acquired 
evidence according to which Strashnoy collected thousands of USD 
from pimps and in return "sold" the pimps trafficked women who were 
arrested in brothels.  In December 2006, the Public Attorney 
informed the court that their main witness disappeared, and on 
December 2008, after no success in locating him, he removed the 
indictments.  According to the article, Strashnoy submitted a 
request to rejoin the police force and his request is being 
considered. 
 
J2. Please indicate the number of government officials investigated 
and prosecuted for involvement in trafficking or trafficking-related 
corruption during the reporting period. 
 
Some cases of abuse of foreign workers were investigated, but no new 
cases of corruption were reported.  Details of the abuses cases can 
be found beginning on page 93 of the GOI response. 
 
J3. Have any been convicted? 
 
An indictment filed on March, 5, 2007 against a police officer and 
another 11 persons involved in a case of corruption, bribery, 
gambling and prostitution.  One defendant, an Immigration 
Administration officer who served on the relevant dates as a 
detective in the Ben-Gurion Airport, was accused of using his status 
and his authority as a police officer to commit serious criminal 
offenses.  On November 16, 2008, the defendant was convicted, among 
other offenses, of owning a brothel, owning a place for the purpose 
of gambling, bribe, conspiracy to commit a crime.  He was sentenced 
to 4.5 years imprisonment and 18 month conditional imprisonment. 
 
J5. Please specify if officials received suspended sentences, or 
were given a fine, fired, or reassigned to another position within 
the government as punishment. 
 
N/A 
 
J6. Please indicate the number of convicted officials that received 
suspended sentences or received only a fine as punishment. 
 
N/A 
 
K1. Is prostitution legalized or decriminalized?  Specifically, are 
the activities of the prostitute criminalized?  Are the activities 
of the brothel owner/operator, clients, pimps, and enforcers 
criminalized? 
 
 
TEL AVIV 00000466  021 OF 036 
 
 
Prostitution is not considered legal and is not regulated.  The 
activities of prostitutes and clients are not criminalized, but the 
activities of pimps, brothel owners/operators, and enforcers are 
criminalized, including crimes such as pandering for purpose of 
prostitution, causing a person to engage in one or more acts of 
prostitution, maintaining a place for the purpose of prostitution, 
renting out premises for prostitution, purchasing the prostitution 
services of minors, and publicizing the prostitution services of 
minors. 
 
K2. Are these laws enforced? 
 
Yes, although various sources disagreed on the level of vigor in the 
enforcement.  According to the GOI, "these laws are enforced when 
relevant." 
 
K3. If prostitution is legal and regulated, what is the legal 
minimum age for this activity?  Note that in countries with 
federalist systems, prostitution laws may be under state or local 
jurisdiction and may differ among jurisdictions. 
 
N/A 
 
¶L. For countries that contribute troops to international 
peacekeeping efforts, please indicate whether the government 
vigorously investigated, prosecuted, convicted and sentenced 
nationals of the country deployed abroad as part of a peacekeeping 
or other similar mission who engaged in or facilitated severe forms 
of trafficking or who exploited victims of such trafficking. 
 
N/A 
 
M1. If the country has an identified problem of child sex tourists 
coming to the country, what are the countries of origin for sex 
tourists? 
 
There are no reports of child sex tourists coming to Israel. 
 
M2. How many foreign pedophiles did the government prosecute or 
deport/extradite to their country of origin? 
 
None reported. 
 
M3. If your host country's nationals are perpetrators of child sex 
tourism, do the country's child sexual abuse laws have 
extraterritorial coverage (similar to the U.S. PROTECT Act) to allow 
the prosecution of suspected sex tourists for crimes committed 
abroad?  If so, how many of the country's nationals were prosecuted 
and/or convicted during the reporting period under the 
extraterritorial provision(s) for traveling to other countries to 
engage in child sex tourism? 
 
Sections 203C of the Penal Law criminalize purchase of prostitution 
services of a minor and Section 15(b) of the Penal Law allows 
extraterritorial coverage of "offenses of prostitution and obscenity 
performed against a minor or in relation to a minor regardless of 
the place of the commission of the offense, provided it was 
performed by an Israeli citizen."  The police reported no cases in 
2008 relating to section 203C. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
¶5. PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS 
--------------------------------------- 
 
A1.  What kind of protection is the government able under existing 
law to provide for victims and witnesses? 
 
In 2007, the Prime Minister approved two inter-ministerial plans, 
the first for the treatment of sexual assault victims, and the 
second for the rehabilitation and treatment of women and girls 
engaged in prostitution in order to assist them in breaking from the 
cycle of prostitution.  The GOI reported that each allocated with 
NIS 10 million ($2,500,000) and were initiated during 2008.  Details 
of the plan can be found beginning on page 173 of the GOI response. 
 
A2. Does it provide these protections in practice? 
 
Isha L'Isha reported that there is no witness protection program in 
Israel and therefore there is "not necessarily" protection for women 
who give evidence in trafficking cases. 
 
 
TEL AVIV 00000466  022 OF 036 
 
 
Kav LaOved noted that while the Ministry of the Interior's 
procedures published in July 2008 (for issuing work permits to 
victims of trafficking for slavery and forced labor authorized work 
permits to be given to eligible victims for a period one year) 
represents progress, certain provisions in the new procedure "raise 
concern."  According to Kav LaOved, the list of requirements and 
documents the victim needs to submit need the support on an NGO, 
which the victim might not have access to or even be aware of.  The 
procedure also requires the victim to declare if any family members 
are residing in Israel.  Kav LaOved called this information 
"completely irrelevant" and voiced concern that it would 
"undoubtedly deter victims from applying for work permits, given 
that Israeli law prohibits migrant workers' first-degree family 
members from residing in Israel."  Kav LaOved also complained that 
the procedure requires translations the victims often cannot afford, 
and stipulates that any extension of the "insufficient" one-year 
work permit will be granted in "exceptional" cases only. 
 
Kav LaOved reported that the Ministry of Interior's understanding of 
who may be recognized as an eligible trafficking victim is 
"extremely narrow."  They gave the example of an individual they 
described as a slavery victim from Indian caregiver who worked 7 
days a week, 16 hours a day, could not refuse any type of work 
(housekeeping for an extended family along with her caregiver 
duties), was not permitted to leave the home, was paid well below 
the minimum wage, was sexually assaulted by both the employer and 
his brother, and threatened with deportation and even death if she 
complained to the authorities. 
 
Kav LaOved filed a complaint with the police, and with MITL, who 
revoked the employer's permit.  According to Kav LaOved, despite all 
these facts - the ongoing police investigation, the MITL findings on 
the basis of which the employer's permit was revoked, and "even 
threat letters sent to Kav LaOved's attorney from the perpetrators, 
demanding the organization will stop providing legal assistance to 
the victim" - the Ministry of the Interior initially decided to 
reject the victim's application for a work permit "due to the fact 
that there was still not a decisive statement by the authorities 
that she is a trafficking victim." 
 
Hotline praised the idea behind the Ministry of Interior procedure 
(circulated July 1, 2008) for granting rehabilitation visas to 
victims of slavery and forced labor, but raised issues with the 
wording, process, and implementation.  A lengthy analysis of their 
concerns can be found beginning on page 30 of Hotline's response. 
 
B1.  Does the country have victim care facilities (shelters or 
drop-in centers) which are accessible to trafficking victims? 
 
The Maagan shelter in Tel Aviv, established in February 2004, 
provided shelter and services throughout the reporting period to 
victims of trafficking for prostitution. 
 
According to Isha L'Isha, the shelter is reluctant to accept women 
with children and rejected all of the NGO's applications to accept 
trafficked women with children.  Isha L'Isha reported that the 
shelter was under the supervision of the police, but complained that 
police have to get approval from the Ministry of Interior, which 
Isha L'Isha said rejects all applications, "especially if the woman 
has children and doesn't testify."  Isha L'Isha noted that the 
shelter for battered women is also reluctant to accept women with 
children.  According to Isha L'Isha, the government provides 
assistance to women in the Maagan Shelter, but woman outside the 
shelter "have no rights." 
 
Hotline was critical of what it said was the Shelter's reluctance to 
take women with serious illnesses.  Hotline also complained that 
authorities do not identify slavery victims, and that only victims 
that Hotline identifies and refer to the authorities receive some 
rights.  Hotline was positive on the legal aid system, which it said 
depends on the victims' affidavits and Hotline's contacts and does 
not wait for a police decision to proceed.  Hotline said that his 
was not the case with the Ministry of the Interior, however, and 
complained that until the Immigration Authority confirms that it has 
investigated the case and found a reasonable suspicion that the 
person was a trafficking victim, Interior will not grant rights. 
Hotline reported that in a petition it submitted on January 13, 2009 
in the case of a trafficking victim from Nepal (whose story is 
presented in Hotline's Appendix A case B2(2)), it argued that the 
administrative authority must apply its own discretion and cannot 
rely solely on the determination of the investigative authority, and 
 
TEL AVIV 00000466  023 OF 036 
 
 
noted that the investigative authority must produce evidence that 
can convict a defendant in criminal proceedings beyond all 
reasonable doubt, while an administrative authority is not 
restricted to such evidence. 
 
B2. Do foreign victims have the same access to care as domestic 
trafficking victims? 
 
The facilities described in B1 are designated to serve foreign 
trafficking victims, rather than domestic trafficking victims.  The 
GOI reported that it has not yet encountered Israeli victims who 
need such facilities. 
 
B3. Where are child victims placed (e.g., in shelters, foster care, 
or juvenile justice detention centers)? 
 
Israel does not have an identified child sex trafficking problem. 
Hotline reported that in the last two years, about 200 unaccompanied 
minors arrived in Israel through Egypt, with the majority arriving 
during the reporting period.  Hotline noted that "only lately" had 
they started to suspect that some of them might have been 
trafficking victims.  According to Hotline, 30 of the minors are 
still in prison "since no other place has been arranged for them 
outside of prison."  Further details can be found beginning on page 
6 of the Hotline response. 
 
B4. Does the country have specialized care for adults in addition to 
children? 
 
The staff of the Maagan Shelter includes a Director, three social 
workers, a housemother, seven counselors, a secretary, a maintenance 
manager, and a security officer.  A physician visits twice weekly 
and a psychiatrist visits when necessary (both the physician and 
psychiatrist speak Russian), teachers provide enrichment sessions, 
and numerous volunteers provide a variety of services.  The Director 
is a lawyer and a social worker and is well acquainted with the 
trafficking problem.  Her role is to operate the shelter and 
coordinate with the women, the staff, the Police, the Courts, the 
Legal Aid lawyers, and foreign embassies and consulates of the 
women's countries of origin. 
 
The GOI reported that the shelter operates according to the 
therapeutic community model, thus every intervention is performed 
with an overall holistic view to enable proper attention to be given 
to every aspect of the women's' needs.  The staff receives ongoing 
training on the treatment of victims of trafficking. 
 
Sex trafficking victims have the right to free legal aid in order to 
institute civil suits arising from the trafficking offenses 
committed against them or administrative procedures relating to the 
Entry to Israel Law.  They are also eligible for assistance with 
parenthood claims against Israeli partners.  The GOI reported that 
the aid is not contingent on economic criteria.  According to Courts 
(Fees) Regulations 5767-2007, victims of trafficking and slavery 
given legal aid are exempt from paying court fees.  Legal aid 
lawyers come to the shelter to interview the women and provide 
services. 
 
During 2008, seven children resided in the shelter with their 
mothers.  Four of the five children residing in the shelter at the 
time of this report were placed in educational programs outside the 
shelter. 
 
Isha L'Isha reported that women received medical care if she was in 
the Maagan Shelter, but that victims not in the shelter received no 
medical care unless she paid for the insurance.  In shelters for 
battered women there is no option of free medical care for foreign 
women, according to Isha L'Isha, which said that the Ministry of 
Health rejected all requests, even "severe humanitarian cases", and 
didn't permit medical treatment to be provided to women who were 
outside the shelter. 
 
B5. Does the country have specialized care for male victims as well 
as female? 
 
The GOI reported that it has not encountered any male victims of sex 
trafficking.  Regarding male victims of labor trafficking, the 
Ministry of Social Affairs and Social Services committed funds in 
2008 towards the operation of three facilities for victims of labor 
trafficking - a shelter for female trafficking victims, another 
shelter for male trafficking victims, and three short-term 
 
TEL AVIV 00000466  024 OF 036 
 
 
apartments for victims who do not require long term assistance.  NGO 
Keshet, which developed the Maagan Shelter for female victims of sex 
trafficking, was chosen to run the new shelter. Keshet located a 
suitable location that will include different divisions for men and 
women, and was renovating the facility at the time of this report. 
Kav LaOved confirmed the GOI's description. 
 
B6. Does the country have specialized facilities dedicated to 
helping victims of trafficking? 
 
See answers in B1. 
 
B7. Are these facilities operated by the government or by NGOs? 
 
The Maagan shelter operates under the responsibility and supervision 
of the Ministry of Social Affairs and Social Services, and is run by 
the non-profit association Keshet.  The shelter is financed by the 
Ministry of Social Affairs and Social Services as regards its 
rehabilitative function and by the Ministry of Public Security as 
regards security aspects (including guarding the shelter, providing 
protection for the women, and accompanying them to courts and the 
District Attorney's office.)  A steering committee for the shelter 
decides on matters of policy and practice.  The GOI reported that 
the same system will apply to the shelters for victims of 
trafficking for slavery and forced labor. 
 
B8. What is the funding source of these facilities?  Please estimate 
the amount the government spent (in U.S. dollar equivalent) on these 
specialized facilities dedicated to helping trafficking victims 
during the reporting period. 
 
The budget of the shelter comes from the Ministry of Social Affairs 
and Social Services and the Ministry of Public Security, while the 
Ministry of Justice provides legal assistance and the Ministry of 
Health finances health services. In 2008, the Ministry of Social 
Affairs and Social Services allocated NIS 3,766,000 ($911,500) for 
operating the shelter, the Ministry of Public Security allocated NIS 
1,000,000 ($250,000) for security, and the Ministry of Health 
allocated NIS 360,000 ($90,000) for medical care. 
 
C1.  Does the government provide trafficking victims with access to 
legal, medical and psychological services?  If so, please specify 
the kind of assistance provided. 
 
See answers in B4 for description of services to victims of 
trafficking for the purpose of prostitution.  According to Kav 
LaOved, victims of labor trafficking and slavery are entitled to 
state funded legal assistance, but not victims of forced labor.  Kav 
LaOved reported that no medical or psychological help is offered to 
victims of trafficking for labor, including victims of sexual crimes 
(other than prostitution) but there are plans to do so with the 
introduction of the shelters described in B5. 
 
C2. Does the government provide funding or other forms of support to 
foreign or domestic NGOs and/or international organizations for 
providing these services to trafficking victims? 
 
In conjunction with the Ministry of Justice, the International 
Organization for Migration (IOM), the United Nations High 
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), additional Israeli governmental 
organizations, and Israeli NGOs, the Center of International 
Migration and Integration (CIMI) launched a comprehensive Migration 
Management Capacity Building Program in 2008.  The two-year program 
(to be implemented during 2009 and 2010) is based on legislative and 
policy processes already underway and will provide training and 
awareness raising campaigns, bilateral exchanges, study-visits, and 
research to government officials working with migrant populations. 
Details on the program can be found beginning on page 112 of the GOI 
response. 
 
The GOI signed an agreement with IOM and the Government of Thailand 
regarding the recruitment of Thai agricultural workers for work in 
Israel.  This ongoing program is aimed at creating a climate 
unfriendly to trafficking, and to prevent the exploitation of 
workers by middlemen demanding high fees that leave the workers at 
the mercy of the manpower agencies and employers. 
 
Details on safe returns can be found beginning on page 104 of the 
GOI response. 
 
C3. Please explain and provide any funding amounts in U.S. dollar 
 
TEL AVIV 00000466  025 OF 036 
 
 
equivalent.  If assistance provided was in-kind, please specify 
exact assistance. 
 
No details provided. 
 
C4. Please specify if funding for assistance comes from a federal 
budget or from regional or local governments. 
 
No details provided. 
 
¶D. Does the government assist foreign trafficking victims, for 
example, by providing temporary to permanent residency status, or 
other relief from deportation?  If so, please explain. 
 
TRAFFICKING FOR THE PURPOSE OF PROSTITUTION 
 
The GOI described the process as follows: 
All trafficking victims in the Maagan Shelter receive temporary 
visas, plus work visas if they are in the process of testifying, or 
if they apply for humanitarian visas whether they choose to testify 
or not.  Women who choose to testify receive a visa for the duration 
of the court proceedings (which on average takes a year.)  After 
legal proceedings are concluded, the women are entitled to request a 
temporary visa for another year, as with victims who chose not to 
testify.  The set period for these visas is one year, though in 
special circumstances the period may be longer or shorter.  It is 
not a prerequisite that victims reside in the shelter in order to 
receive year long temporary visas. 
 
The GOI reported that in 2008, five women received a B1 visa (stay 
and work) for six months; one woman received a B2 visa (stay only) 
for three months; five women received an extension of their visa 
following their testimony; three women received an inter-visa 
allowing its holder to leave the country and return within a 
designated time (without needing to re-apply), during their 
testimonies; 11 women received a one-year visa for humanitarian 
reasons; and two women received a visa for an additional year. 
 
Isha L'Isha agreed that trafficked women received visas from the 
Ministry of Interior "under limited conditions", but complained that 
the Ministry of Interior didn't give permanent status to single 
foreign women with Israeli children.  Isha L'Isha described these 
women as being under great distress due to their lack of status and 
subsequent lack of benefits from the National Insurance Institute, 
and called the situation "a closed circle in which the Ministry of 
Interior doesn't allow women to live in dignity and welfare." 
 
TRAFFICKING FOR THE PURPOSE OF LABOR 
 
On July 1, 2008, the Ministry of the Interior published a written 
procedure for granting visas to victims of slavery, trafficking for 
slavery and forced labor.  The GOI reported that during 2008, the 
Ministry of the Interior granted three victims preliminary three 
month visas; nine victims received an extension of their visas; two 
victims received an "inter-visa"; two persons received a one-year 
visa for rehabilitation purposes, and one person received a visa for 
an additional year. 
 
Foreign workers who filed complaints regarding criminal offenses are 
not generally arrested.  According to the GOI, the Ministry of the 
Interior and the Immigration Administration try to place them in 
alternate employment during their stay for testimony, and they are 
released with a special document issued by the Immigration 
Administration - that need to be renewed monthly - indicating that 
they are witnesses in an ongoing investigation.  Following the 
completion of their testimony, foreign workers are given what the 
GOI called a "reasonable period to arrange for their departure." 
 
 
¶E. Does the government provide longer-term shelter or housing 
benefits to victims or other resources to aid the victims in 
rebuilding their lives? 
 
The GOI reported that women who are in the process of testifying or 
have been accorded visas for humanitarian reasons are entitled to a 
working visa.  Maagan Shelter personnel find employment for women 
"who are ready and willing to work", according to the GOI, which 
said that most of these women work outside the shelter in 
restaurants, clothing stores, cosmetics firms, bakeries, and other 
fields.  The GOI reported that as of December 2008, 20 women of the 
25 women residing in the shelter were employed outside the shelter. 
 
TEL AVIV 00000466  026 OF 036 
 
 
 
The GOI reported that while Israel does have a shelter for victims 
of trafficking for prostitution and is in the final stages of 
establishing shelters for victims of trafficking for slavery and 
forced labor, it is the policy of the State of Israel that after 
completion of the rehabilitation period, and following a risk 
assessment, trafficking victims should return to their countries of 
origin. 
 
¶F. Does the government have a referral process to transfer victims 
detained, arrested or placed in protective custody by law 
enforcement authorities to institutions that provide short- or 
long-term care (either government or NGO-run)? 
 
Kav LaOved reported that it was not aware of any such process. 
 
Regarding sex trafficking, the GOI reported that according to the 
procedures initiated by the Immigration Administration in 
conjunction with the Ministry of the Interior and the Police, 
trafficking victims are immediately referred to the Maagan Shelter 
without having to pass through detention facilities.  According to 
the GOI, every trafficking victim identified in 2008 was transferred 
to the Maagan Shelter unless she refused to go, or unless a court 
order to place them in a different location, mostly with Israeli 
partners. 
 
Regarding labor trafficking, the GOI reported that foreign nationals 
who were detained went through several screening and monitoring 
procedures.  When needed, the detainee receives medical treatment 
before being sent to a detention facility.  The detainee is also 
interviewed by a police officer, and is entitled to a hearing before 
a representative of the Ministry of the Interior, according to the 
GOI.  NGOs representatives are also given access to detention 
facilities where they can assist foreign workers, and can be present 
at Tribunal hearings, with the foreign worker's approval.  Six 
female labor trafficking victims were transferred to the Maagan 
shelter in 2008. 
 
Isha L'Isha reported that the police contacted them during the year 
and asked the NGO to explain proper procedures for admitting a woman 
into a shelter. 
 
G1. What is the total number of trafficking victims identified 
during the reporting period? 
 
The GOI reported that it is difficult to provide an exact number of 
persons trafficked into Israel every year for the purpose of 
prostitution "as most victims do not identify themselves as such, 
and, as a rule, do not immediately submit complaints to the law 
enforcement agencies unless encouraged to do so."  The GOI 
nevertheless claimed a sharp decline in the number of women 
trafficked for prostitution in Israel, which it said was evident in 
the number of trafficking victims located by law enforcement 
agencies, as well as by the Knesset Subcommittee on Trafficking and 
NGOs.  The GOI reported that 12 sex trafficking victims were 
transferred by the Police to the Maagan Shelter in 2008, and said 
that most of the victims had been trafficked several years ago.  The 
Maagan Shelter housed 25 women and 5 children (of women staying at 
the shelter) at the time of this report. 
 
Isha L'Isha reported that it identified 41 new cases of sex 
trafficking in 2008. 
 
Hotline reported that it we assisted a total of 45 trafficking 
victims in 2008, including 25 slavery victims and 20 prostitution 
victims, and that 16 of the 45 were new cases from 2008 (12 for 
slavery and 4 for prostitution) plus two victims identified in 
January 2009.  Hotline said that only one of these individuals was 
referred by the authorities (the Immigration Authority) for the 
NGO's assistance.  Hotline noted that five of the slavery victims 
are men, "for whom no appropriate framework is available." 
 
Six female victims of trafficking for labor resided in the Maagan 
Shelter in 2008.  The Crime Unit in the Immigration Administration, 
working with the State Attorney's Office, opened 24 investigation 
cases in 2008 concerning forced labor, of which one indictment was 
filed in November, and four additional indictments were under 
various stages of preparation and review by the State Attorney's 
Office at the time of this report. 
 
G2. Of these, how many victims were referred to care facilities for 
 
TEL AVIV 00000466  027 OF 036 
 
 
assistance by law enforcement authorities during the reporting 
period? 
 
The GOI reported that all women referred to the Maagan Shelter in 
2008 were referred by the Police. 
 
G3. By social services officials? 
 
None, according to the GOI. 
 
G4. What is the number of victims assisted by government-funded 
assistance programs and those not funded by the government during 
the reporting period? 
 
The Maagan Shelter provided services to 44 women and 7 children 
during 2008. 
 
H1. Do the government's law enforcement, immigration, and social 
services personnel have a formal system of proactively identifying 
victims of trafficking among high-risk persons with whom they come 
in contact (e.g., foreign persons arrested for prostitution or 
immigration violations)? 
 
Isha L'Isha noted some problems in identification.  They reported a 
few cases during 2008 where women (that Isha L'Isha considered 
trafficking victims) who had been arrested by the Immigration Police 
were not recognized as trafficking victims by the immigration 
judges.  Isha L'Isha also noted that there were some women who had 
been trafficked in earlier years that were not recognized as 
trafficking victims by the judges at the time, and presumably were 
not therefore eligible for services and legal support that they were 
entitled to. 
 
The Immigration Administration issued guidelines regarding the 
identification and location of sex trafficking victims both in the 
field and in the detention facilities, including specific training 
and circulation of the relevant guidelines, and kept in contact with 
relevant NGOs to improve identification efforts. 
 
A subcommittee appointed by the Committee of Directors General that 
deals with trafficking submitted recommendations on indicators and 
procedures for indentify labor trafficking victims. These 
recommendations were approved by the Committee of Directors General 
in May of 2008 and were disseminated to the Immigration 
Administration, the Police, the Ministry of the Interior, the State 
and District Attorney's Offices, NGOs, judges of the Detention 
Tribunal. 
 
The GOI reported that every officer of the Immigration 
Administration undergoes training and seminars on the identification 
and location of trafficking victims, and are required to be 
proactive because "often the victims themselves are not aware of 
their situation, and therefore proper training of the police 
officers engaging with them is crucial."  NGO representatives are 
allowed routine entry to the detention facilities to interview the 
inhabitants and to assess whether they are victims of offenses.  The 
NGOs inform the Immigration Administration of such cases, according 
to the GOI, which added that following their complaint, the foreign 
worker is interviewed by an officer to address these concerns.  The 
GOI noted that Special Detention Tribunal judges are "well informed 
of the characteristics of trafficking victims" and alert the 
Immigration Administration of cases they suspect are trafficking 
related. 
 
Kav LaOved confirmed that the inter-ministerial task force on 
trafficking in persons issued guidelines relating to the 
identification of labor trafficking victims in January 2008 and 
recommended that all relevant government agencies issue procedures 
for identifying trafficking victims for slavery and forced labor 
based on these guidelines.  Kav LaOved reported that their 
experience, however, demonstrated that these guidelines were not 
implemented in practice, and that there was a "general failure of 
the authorities to identify victims of trafficking, despite the fact 
that at junctions such as custody and deportation centers, if 
migrant workers were questioned properly, it would be possible to 
identify such victims." 
 
Kav LaOved also argued that according to MITL regulations, a 
manpower agency dealing with caregivers must send a social worker to 
check the suitability between the employer and employee from time to 
time.  Kav LaOved complained that these social workers are employees 
 
TEL AVIV 00000466  028 OF 036 
 
 
of the agency, and that impartial social workers (who are public 
officers) should pay such visits and make sure that the migrant 
worker is not being treated in a manner that constitutes slavery or 
forced labor. 
 
H2. For countries with legalized prostitution, does the government 
have a mechanism for screening for trafficking victims among persons 
involved in the legal/regulated commercial sex trade? 
 
N/A 
 
I1. Are the rights of victims respected? 
 
Yes.  Isha L'Isha reported "stereotyped responses" in some 
departments and said that a "lot of work is required with the 
police" but agreed that women's rights were respected.  Hotline 
agreed that the women's rights are respected. 
 
I2. Are trafficking victims detained or jailed?  If so, for how 
long? 
 
Kav LaOved reported that if the victim has no visa, he or she is 
detained in order to be deported and brought before the Custody 
Tribunal (located at the detention center) within four days.  Kav 
LaOved noted that the Tribunal might release the victim on bail if 
it is convinced that the victim has "a good chance of sorting out 
their status, and if it is convinced that they will leave the 
country if they fail to sort out their legal status." 
 
I3. Are victims fined? 
 
No. 
 
I4. Are victims prosecuted for violations of other laws, such as 
those governing immigration or prostitution? 
 
No. 
 
The GOI reported that it has been the policy of the Police and 
prosecutors from the State Attorney's Office not to indict victims 
of trafficking for crimes which are integral to trafficking, and 
said that trafficking victims are also not generally to be indicted 
on crimes integral to trafficking "even if they have been found to 
return to Israel illegally several times."  The GOI stated that it 
has been established that women answering the basic criteria of a 
victim should be presumed to be a victim unless proven otherwise. 
 
The GOI reported that labor trafficking victims are treated in a 
similar manner.  The Government perceives illegal migrants as 
victims and they are removed without being subject to criminal 
proceedings, according to the GOI, which said that emphasis is 
placed on prosecuting the employers and the manpower companies that 
facilitated the offenses.  The GOI reported that in many cases the 
Government subsidized the cost of the workers' ticket back to their 
countries of origin, and before they left the country aided them in 
collecting money owed to them. 
 
J1. Does the government encourage victims to assist in the 
investigation and prosecution of trafficking? 
 
The GOI reported that it was a matter of Police policy to encourage 
victims of trafficking to testify against traffickers and to "try to 
ensure that traffickers will be prosecuted and will not subject 
additional women to abuse."  Isha L'Isha agreed that Maagan Shelter 
("alone") provided such assistance, but said that if the woman was 
not in the shelter "she had no rights." 
 
For labor trafficking victims, the GOI said "if a foreign worker 
wishes to file a complaint, every effort is made to encourage 
him/her in doing so." 
 
Kav LaOved reported that they often find law enforcement agencies do 
not act "decisively and vigorously" to investigate and prosecute 
cases of labor trafficking, and that even when they do investigate, 
"there is no parallel assistance provided to the victims, which 
therefore does not encourage them to file complaints." 
 
Hotline said that, as a general rule, women slavery victims accepted 
to the Maagan Shelter received assistance in giving testimony. 
 
J2. How many victims assisted in the investigation and prosecution 
 
TEL AVIV 00000466  029 OF 036 
 
 
of traffickers during the reporting period? 
 
The GOI reported that 4 of the 12 victims of trafficking for 
prostitution referred to the Maagan Shelter in 2008 agreed to 
testify "but were eventually not required to do so" and that three 
women were "in the process of testifying" at the time of this 
report.  The GOI noted that the percentage of women staying in the 
shelter who choose to testify "continues to decline." 
 
J3. May victims file civil suits or seek legal action against 
traffickers? 
 
The GOI reported that sex trafficking victims have the right by law 
to receive free legal aid in order to initiate civil suits arising 
from the trafficking offenses committed against them, or 
administrative procedures relating to the Entry to Israel Law.  The 
GOI noted that these victims are also assisted with parenthood 
claims against Israeli partners, and that the aid is not contingent 
on economic criteria.  The Legal Aid Branch provides services 
regardless of the date of their victimization. The GOI reported that 
in 2008, Legal Aid lawyers assisted three individuals in requests 
for a work permit and a visa, and that in two cases temporary visas 
were granted and another request was being reviewed at the time of 
this report by the Ministry of the Interior.  The GOI reported that 
nine total requests for legal aid were received, eight in the Tel 
Aviv bureau and one in the Jerusalem bureau, including four cases of 
assistance in civil claims. 
 
Details on awards may be found beginning on page 124 of the GOI 
response. 
 
Kav LaOved reported that legally victims file civil suits or seek 
legal action against traffickers, but practically, they seldom do. 
Victims whose rights under employment laws are violated (e.g. paid 
below minimum wage) have good success rates in the Labor Court, 
according to Kav LaOved, who said that these violations are easily 
proven (the burden of proof being frequently on the employer), labor 
courts are relatively accessible (court fees are low), hearings are 
relatively swift, and there are many lawyers working in this field 
who are willing to work for a contingent fee.  Kav LaOved noted that 
when suing the traffickers for more serious harm resulting from 
slavery or forced labor, the Justice Ministry does provides legal 
assistance to victims of trafficking, but that the process is 
lengthy, requires additional funds (travel to court hearings, 
providing a translator) and the chances of winning a successful 
judgment are "very low." 
 
J4. Does anyone impede victim access to such legal redress? 
 
Kav LaOved reported that traffickers sometimes threaten victims 
and/or their family members abroad, and that recruitment agents 
often tell victims that if they seek legal redress they will not be 
able to find further employment (through them or other agencies) and 
will therefore be exposed to deportation.  But there were no 
complaints from NGOs of authorities impeding access to legal 
redress. 
 
J5. If a victim is a material witness in a court case against a 
former employer, is the victim permitted to obtain other employment 
or to leave the country pending trial proceedings? 
 
Sex trafficking victims residing at the Maagan Shelter were able to 
obtain employment.  The GOI did not comment on whether the victims 
were able to leave the country pending trial proceedings.  On July 
1, 2008, the Ministry of the Interior published a written procedure 
for granting visas to victims of slavery and trafficking for slavery 
and forced labor.  The GOI reported that under this new procedure, 
three persons received preliminary three months visas, nine persons 
received an extension of their visa, two persons received an 
"inter-visa", two persons received a one-year rehabilitation visa, 
and another person received a visa for an additional year. 
 
Hotline noted that victims may leave Israel during the civil 
proceedings, and added that these proceedings are not considered 
grounds for remaining in Israel by the Ministry of the Interior. 
Hotline said that if the state sues someone, they must remain in 
Israel, whatever their conditions, but when the individual sues, the 
state will not enable them to remain in Israel until the proceedings 
are completed if this is the only grounds for being present in 
Israel. 
 
 
TEL AVIV 00000466  030 OF 036 
 
 
J6. Are there means by which a victim may obtain restitution? 
 
Israel does not have a restitution program by which every victim may 
receive compensation without a court case, but domestic law accords 
victims of trafficking (as part of the group of people who can 
substantiate a case) the right to file civil and administrative 
suits.  Civil suits have been filed in the Labor Courts and the 
regular court system, claiming compensation by tort law, contract 
law or "unjust enrichment" law.  In addition to compensation in 
civil cases, trafficking victims are entitled to be compensated up 
to a sum of NIS 228,000 ($57,000) under Section 77 of the Penal Law, 
for each count. 
 
Kav LaOved noted that the October 2006 Anti Trafficking Law provides 
that money confiscated from traffickers will be put in a fund, and 
that at least half of the money in the fund will be used for the 
"rehabilitation" of victims of trafficking, with a portion of the 
money to be reserved to compensate victims who cannot collect their 
compensation from the trafficker ordered by a civil court.  Kav 
LaOved commented that regulations governing the operation of the 
fund were drafted, but have not been enacted into law yet. 
 
K1. Does the government provide any specialized training for 
government officials in identifying trafficking victims and in the 
provision of assistance to trafficked victims, including the special 
needs of trafficked children? 
 
See previous answers for government programs.  Isha L'Isha reported 
that the state also made an effort to establish databases of 
trafficking victims. 
 
K2. Does the government provide training on protections and 
assistance to its embassies and consulates in foreign countries that 
are destination or transit countries? 
 
A section about trafficking in persons is part of the training 
program that Israeli diplomats undergo before starting their mission 
abroad as head of consular departments at Israeli embassies.  The 
GOI reported that Israeli embassies are also in contact with NGOs as 
part of their routine work, including NGOs that deal with 
trafficking.  Israeli Embassies cooperated with NGOs in the 
distribution of information about the dangers of trafficking and in 
facilitating the safe return of victims to their countries. 
 
K3. What is the number of trafficking victims assisted by the host 
country's embassies or consulates abroad during the reporting 
period? 
 
The GOI said that as - apart from "a few isolated cases" - there is 
no identified problem of trafficking from Israel, such assistance 
was not required.  The GOI added that such a mechanism will be 
considered "if the need arises." 
 
K4. Please explain the type of assistance provided (travel 
documents, referrals to assistance, payment for transportation 
home). 
 
The GOI reported that representatives of the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs participated in conferences, working groups, and other 
events organized on the topic of trafficking in persons by civil 
society, and that the Ministry, through its Embassies, assisted NGOs 
in various administrative and consular matters. 
 
¶L. Does the government provide assistance, such as medical aid, 
shelter, or financial help, to its nationals who are repatriated as 
victims of trafficking? 
 
N/A 
 
M1. Which international organizations or NGOs, if any, work with 
trafficking victims? 
 
Israeli NGOs work cooperatively with The International Organization 
for Migration (IOM) and numerous NGOs in other countries, including, 
Winrock International, La Strada, The Assistance Center of St. 
Petersburg, and local NGOs in Ukraine. 
 
Numerous Israeli NGOs work with trafficking victims.  The following 
is only a partial listing. 
 
Kav LaOved assists victims of trafficking for slavery and forced 
 
TEL AVIV 00000466  031 OF 036 
 
 
labor.  It provides mainly information and legal and paralegal 
assistance. 
 
The Hotline for Migrant Workers assists both victims of trafficking 
for sexual exploitation and victims of labor exploitation (including 
minors.)  It provides legal and paralegal assistance and visits 
detainees in detention centers. 
 
Isha L'Isha assists victims of trafficking for sexual exploitation. 
 
Physicians for Human Rights assists foreign workers by providing 
humanitarian health assistance, including to victims of 
trafficking. 
 
The Israeli AIDS Task Force provides medication to victims that have 
AIDS, as well as emotional aid as necessary. 
 
Machon Todaa works with Israeli prostitutes. 
 
Kav LaOved reported that it continues to receive excellent 
cooperation from the National Coordinator, and some cooperation from 
the Immigration Police, but almost no cooperation from the Ministry 
of Interior.  It reported some cooperation from MITL with regard to 
revoking licenses and permits and with employers and recruitments, 
but very little cooperation with regard to the issuance of 
indictments. 
 
Hotline stated that the authorities rely heavily on NGOs for the 
provision of various services, such as identification and healthcare 
in HIV cases.  Hotline reported that it received no government 
funding, and as far as they knew, neither did any other NGOs, other 
than the Maagan Shelter. 
 
M2. What type of services do they provide? 
 
Services in Israel are provided by Israeli NGOs, but NGOs in other 
countries are important partners in gathering information (including 
evidence) and reintegrating victims.  The local offices of 
International organizations such as Amnesty International and 
Physicians for Human Rights operate essentially as Israeli NGOs. 
The GOI initiated an agreement between Thailand and IOM to supervise 
recruitment of foreign workers from Thailand. 
 
M3. What sort of cooperation do they receive from local 
authorities? 
 
This varies depending on the country.  They receive good cooperation 
from the GOI when called for, but normally work through Israeli 
NGOs. 
 
------------- 
¶6. PREVENTION 
------------- 
 
A1. Did the government conduct anti-trafficking information or 
education campaigns during the reporting period?  If so, briefly 
describe the campaign(s), including their objectives and 
effectiveness. 
 
According to the GOI, the National Coordinator emphasized education 
and information.  On various occasions she lectured army units, the 
city of Kfar Saba, municipality workers in Beer Sheva, university 
students, and social workers for the Ministry of Social Affairs and 
Social Welfare, among others.  The National Coordinator also 
disseminated information on trafficking via an internet site and via 
a weekly digest sent to entities within and outside of the 
Government.  She prepared an annual document on Government 
anti-trafficking efforts that is posted on her office's website, and 
wrote articles for publication. 
 
Members of the State Attorney's Office and the Legal Aid Branch of 
the Ministry of Justice gave several public lectures on trafficking. 
 The Authority for the Advancement of Women sponsored several 
anti-trafficking seminars throughout the country.  The Ministry of 
Education prepared a booklet on trafficking in women that is 
scheduled for distribution to the members of the secondary education 
system.  The Ministry of Education also held four conferences on 
human dignity and trafficking for 517 members of the education 
system.  4,072 students and 258 teachers participated in a program 
on gender equality.  1,500 students and 104 educators participated 
in a program on trafficking, which also involved activities 
 
TEL AVIV 00000466  032 OF 036 
 
 
involving parents in the issue.  The Authority for the Advancement 
of the Status of Women funded approximately 200 lectures that were 
given in schools throughout the country on the prevention of 
violence towards women and on the prevention of prostitution and 
trafficking in women.  On the International Day commemorating the 
abolition of slavery (December 2, 2008), the Ministry of Education 
circulated a lesson plan focused on the possibility that a girl 
engaging in prostitution might be a girl from the class or from the 
neighborhood. 
 
The Israel Broadcasting Authority (IBA) addressed the issue of 
trafficking in women via topics such as the State Department's TIP 
Report, activities of the Knesset Trafficking in Women Subcommittee, 
the extent of trafficking in women for prostitution in Israel, and 
investigative reports on pandering practices.  IBA also addressed 
labor trafficking in a similar manner.  The issue was also debated 
in the IBA's radio channels, including ongoing reports on Police 
raids on brothels and the Police treatment of the women. 
 
A special workers' rights brochure ("Zchuton") on the rights of 
foreign workers in the construction field is routinely updated by 
MITL in English, Russian, Romanian, Turkish, Thai and Chinese. 
Licensed manpower companies are required to distribute "Zchuton" to 
each  foreign construction worker on a yearly basis and on renewal 
of the worker's employment contract.  The GOI reported that a 
brochure describing all the general labor rights of foreign workers 
in Israel is distributed to each foreign worker who arrives at Ben 
Gurion airport, and said the brochure is routinely updated and 
posted on the MITL website in English, Hebrew, Chinese, Thai, 
Russian, Romanian and Turkish. 
 
The Authority for the Advancement of the Status of Women conducted a 
survey designed to examine public attitudes regarding trafficking in 
women and prostitution. 
 
The Government approved an annual National Award (the first will be 
awarded in March 2009) for individuals and bodies who have made 
outstanding contributions to the battle against trafficking in 
persons. 
 
Isha L'Isha agreed that the government established a program this 
year to prevent women from being trafficked, gave various lectures 
on the issue, and invited the NGO to share its knowledge by 
lecturing to more than 1,300 professionals and various audiences. 
Isha L'Isha also noted that the Office for the Advancement of Women 
established campaigns and seminars in the issue of trafficking, and 
the Ministry of Education's brochure.  Isha L'Isha praised the 
efforts, but still called the actions inadequate "because there is 
no in-depth work with professionals in regard to the problematic 
institutions, like the Ministry of Interior."  Isha L'Isha 
complained that the Ministry of Interior decided on a seminar 
without the participation of NGO representatives. 
 
A2. Please provide the number of people reached by such awareness 
efforts, if available. 
 
No overall figures were available.  Numbers for some specific 
programs are indicated in the program descriptions that begin on 
page 138 of the GOI response. 
 
A3. Do these campaigns target potential trafficking victims and/or 
the demand for trafficking (e.g. "clients" of prostitutes or 
beneficiaries of forced labor)?  (Note: This can be an especially 
noteworthy effort where prostitution is legal. End Note.) 
 
The GOI reported that, along with promoting general awareness of the 
problem, the Ministry of Education, Kibbutzim, Israel Broadcasting 
Authority, and IDF campaigns targeted potential clients of 
prostitution/trafficking victims.  In addition, according to the 
GOI, most of the programs promoted sensitivity to the humanity and 
dignity of prostitution/trafficking victims, and such awareness 
helps reduce demand. 
 
B1. Does the government monitor immigration and emigration patterns 
for evidence of trafficking? 
 
Due to security concerns, Israel guards its borders very carefully, 
although stretches of the Egyptian border have can be difficult to 
control.  Due to attempts of foreign nationals to enter Israel 
without proper visas through Ben Gurion airport in recent years, 
supervision at the airport was also tightened, according to the GOI. 
 
TEL AVIV 00000466  033 OF 036 
 
 
 Border control is conducted by special units of the Israel Police 
acting under the authority of the Ministry of the Interior. The GOI 
reported that during 2008, the Ministry of the Interior "continued 
its heightened awareness" and monitored new patterns of trafficking 
using forged documents and fictitious marriages.  The GOI reported 
that the change in sex trafficking patterns noted in paragraph 2 
section B7 prompted the Committee of Directors General dealing with 
TIP to appoint a subcommittee headed by the Deputy Director General 
of the Ministry of Public Security to examine changing patterns of 
prostitution and trafficking for prostitution.  At the time of this 
report, the committee had heard from NGOs on various issues 
(including trafficking of Israeli women abroad, using drugs to 
control women, prostitution of Philippine and Chinese women, and 
entry via forged passports rather than via the Egyptian border) but 
had not yet arrived at conclusions and recommendations.  A recent 
case example was cited on page 32 of the GOI response. 
 
B2. Do law enforcement agencies screen for potential trafficking 
victims along borders? 
 
The GOI reported that traffickers are detained upon entry into or 
exit from Israel "in cases where intelligence information exists" 
and said that every trafficking suspect is referred to the police 
unit stationed in Ben Gurion Airport. 
 
Kav LaOved noted that border patrols are primarily for the purpose 
of preventing people from illegally crossing the borders rather than 
for the purpose of screening for potential trafficking victims. 
 
¶C. Is there a mechanism for coordination and communication between 
various agencies, internal, international, and multilateral on 
trafficking-related matters, such as a multi-agency working group or 
a task force? 
 
The National Coordinator, who works out of the Ministry of Justice, 
has the lead for international and inter-governmental communication 
and coordination.  Other important mechanisms are the Knesset 
Subcommittee on Trafficking in Women and the Knesset Special 
Committee on Foreign workers, and the Permanent Round Table.  The 
Knesset subcommittees provide forums for discussion of trafficking 
issues, monitors measures to address trafficking, and members are 
often the source of legislative initiatives to combat trafficking. 
The Permanent Round Table is a subcommittee that was established to 
recommend a National Plan to combat slavery and trafficking for 
slavery and forced labor and serve as a permanent round table to 
meet periodically in order to study problems and map out strategies. 
 The entire round table was not convened in 2008, although various 
representatives met at different times to deal with specific 
problems. 
 
In June 2008, a 13-member delegation visited Moldova, one of the 
main source countries for trafficking in persons for prostitution in 
Israel.  Israeli participants included representatives of the 
Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of Social Affairs and Social 
Services, the State and District Attorney's Office, the Police, the 
National Coordinator, Hotline, and Isha L'Isha.  The visit was 
sponsored by the European TAIEX project, and included a seminar and 
meetings with representatives from Moldovan and the Ukrainian 
government agencies and NGOs, as well as on-site visits in rural 
Moldova. 
 
Staff members from the Maagan Shelter, a representative from the 
Ministry of Social Affairs and Social Services, and representatives 
from Isha L'Isha and Machon Todaa visited in April and May 2008 and 
met with representatives of the Italian Government and Italian NGOs, 
and toured a street prostitution area.  This trip was also sponsored 
by TAIEX. 
 
The Police also attended various international seminars and 
conferences on trafficking to improve international and regional 
cooperation to combat TIP and to establish and strengthen 
relationships with counterparts in other national police agencies 
and in Interpol. 
 
There is strong cooperation between most government agencies and 
NGOs.  The GOI highlighted cooperation between NGOs and MITL, the 
Immigration Administration, the Police, and the National 
Coordinator.  The Ministry of the Interior again received the lowest 
marks from NGOs, who generally found it the least cooperative branch 
of the Government. 
 
 
TEL AVIV 00000466  034 OF 036 
 
 
According to Isha L'Isha, every relevant government office has a 
representative familiar in depth with the subject that they could 
approach when needed. 
 
Further details of cooperation between specific GOI and NGO entities 
can be found beginning on page 146 of the GOI response. 
 
D1. Does the government have a national plan of action to address 
trafficking in persons? 
 
Yes.  A National Plan was adopted by the Government on December 2, 
2007, according to Government Resolution number 2670.  The Committee 
of Directors General decided to promote five goals as the highest 
priorities in combating trafficking for the purpose of prostitution: 
in the realm of prevention, to strengthen supervision of the 
Egyptian border; in the realm of prosecution, to encourage awareness 
of possible changes in patterns of criminal activity and act 
accordingly; in the realm of protection, to fashion a tool kit to 
facilitate the identification of victims of trafficking; in the 
realm of protection, to promote the safe return of victims of 
trafficking to their countries of origin; and in the realm of 
protection, to make efforts to ensure medical treatment to all 
victims of trafficking who have legal status in Israel. 
 
The Committee of Directors General decided to promote six goals as 
the highest priorities in combating trafficking for the purpose of 
labor: in the realm of prevention, to undertake information 
campaigns in the countries of origin of foreign workers in order to 
equip them with basic information about their conditions of 
employment and rights; in the realm of prosecution, to coordinate a 
clear division of labor among the law enforcement agencies in regard 
to investigation and prosecution of regulatory offenses versus Penal 
Law offenses like trafficking and slavery; in the realm of 
prosecution, to design a guide by which to identify victims of 
trafficking and slavery (otherwise known as a national referral 
mechanism) to be used at relevant crossroads; in the realm of 
prosecution, to build a comprehensive network of translators to be 
utilized at all relevant junctions where foreign workers come into 
contact with government representatives; in the realm of protection, 
to establish supportive frameworks and an array of services for 
victims of trafficking and slavery, including residence solutions, 
if necessary, and medical insurance; and in the realm of protection, 
to design a visa procedure for victims of slavery and trafficking 
for slavery and forced labor. 
 
Further details of the plan, for both sex and labor trafficking, can 
be found beginning on page 158 of the GOI response.  An analysis of 
the progress of the different teams working on various aspects of 
the plan can be found beginning on page 44 of Hotline's response. 
 
D2. If the plan was developed during the reporting period, which 
agencies were involved in developing it? 
 
The National Coordinator served as chairman for development of the 
National Plan to Combat Trafficking for Prostitution. 
Representatives of the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of Social 
Affairs, the Ministry of Social Services, the Ministry of the 
Interior, the Ministry of Public Security, the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs, the Ministry of Health, the Police, the Immigration 
Administration, and the director of the Maagan Shelter all 
participated in the process. 
 
The National Coordinator also served as chairman for development of 
the National Plan to Combat Trafficking for Labor.  Representatives 
of the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of Social Affairs, the 
Ministry of the Interior, the Ministry of Public Security, the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, MITL, the Ministry of Health, the 
Police, and the Immigration Administration all participated in the 
process. 
 
D3. Were NGOs consulted in the process? 
 
Yes, representatives from Hotline, Isha L'Isha, Machon Todaa, the 
Women's Court, Anachnu Shavot, and Atzum participated in the 
development of the National Plan to Combat Trafficking for 
Prostitution. 
 
Representatives of Hotline, Kav LaOved, Amnesty International 
Israel, Physicians for Human Rights Israel participated in the 
development of the National Plan to Combat Trafficking for Labor. 
 
 
TEL AVIV 00000466  035 OF 036 
 
 
Isha L'Isha described the National Plan as a plan that was built in 
cooperation with the NGOs, and said that "all the representatives of 
all the authorities were involved in this plan."  In the words of 
Isha L'Isha, "there have been many dilemmas, but we have overcome 
most of them, and in some we had to compromise." 
 
D4. What steps has the government taken to implement the action 
plan? 
 
The GOI reported that the following steps have been taken. 
 
MITL formulated procedures for new employment methods in the nursing 
care and agriculture fields.  In nursing care, the procedure 
regarding private bureaus geared towards bringing, mediating and 
caring for foreign workers came into force in September 2008, and 
the GOI reported that implementation had already began.  Licenses 
and permits for private bureaus were granted solely to corporations 
that adhered to all the special provisions set for a license and a 
permit according to the Employment Service Law.  The details of the 
140 licensed bureaus were published in the MITL website in Hebrew 
and English. 
 
In agriculture, a draft procedure was completed at the beginning of 
March 2008 and published on the website of the Foreign Workers 
Department.  The GOI reported that the general public was invited to 
address the draft and several responses were submitted.  Following 
these responses, a conference was held in May 2008.  The GOI 
reported that this new method is to be implemented in the upcoming 
months. 
 
In the area of international cooperation, relevant ministries met 
throughout 2008 with members of the origin countries that send 
foreign workers to Israel in order to improve coordination on these 
issues.  Members of MITL met with representatives from the 
Governments of Nepal, the Philippines, China, Turkey, and other 
countries. 
 
In one notable case in 2008, the Labor Court acknowledged the status 
of a trafficking victim for prostitution as an "employee" and 
granted her minimum wages.  In the appeal process, the Attorney 
General was asked to provide an opinion regarding the existence of 
employer-employee relations between a person engaging in trafficking 
and her employer, whether a trafficking victim or not.  The case has 
stirred debate among trafficking opponents who have differing views 
on whether establishing an employer/employee relationship helps or 
hurt, whether the Labor Court is the proper venue for this decision, 
how this affects questions of compensation, whether this decision 
agrees with international standards, and other issues.  A full 
explanation of the case can be found beginning on page 170 of the 
GOI response. 
 
Further details on implementation can be found beginning on page 169 
of the GOI response. 
 
Kav LaOved emphasized that the objectives have not been implemented, 
but rather that work plans to achieve these objectives were drafted. 
 Kav LaOved said that they were not aware of an increase in the 
number of lawsuits against employers, information campaigns for 
workers, or assistance to victims wishing to return to their 
counties. 
 
E: What measures has the government taken during the reporting 
period to reduce the demand for commercial sex acts? 
 
According to the National Plan to Combat Trafficking for 
Prostitution, comparative research was undertaken to consider 
legislation to criminalize purchasing prostitution services.  The 
GOI reported that the research was completed in early 2009 by the 
Office of the National Coordinator and is to be edited and submitted 
to the Deputy Attorney General for Criminal Matters for 
deliberation. 
 
A private bill "The Prohibition of the Use of Paid Sexual Services 
Law, calling for criminalization of all clients of the sex industry" 
was drafted in the Knesset.  According to the bill, a client would 
be liable for six months imprisonment or an educational program upon 
his first arrest for this offense.  Aggravating circumstances (such 
as receiving prostitution services from a minor, a victim of 
trafficking, or an addict, or if the client is a public official) 
could raise the penalty to five years imprisonment.  The National 
Coordinator convened a series of meetings to examine the bill.  The 
 
TEL AVIV 00000466  036 OF 036 
 
 
inter-ministerial committee (which also included NGOs and academics 
for most of its meetings) decided to delay a final decision for a 
year to allow for further study. 
 
¶F. Required of all Posts: What measures has the government taken 
during the reporting period to reduce the participation in 
international child sex tourism by nationals of the country? 
 
Child sex tourism does not constitute a significant problem in 
Israel, according to both the GOI and NGOs.  Sections 203C of the 
Penal Law criminalizes purchase of prostitution services of a minor, 
and Section 15(b) of the Penal Law allows for extraterritorial 
coverage of offenses of prostitution and obscenity performed against 
a minor or in relation to a minor regardless of the place of the 
commission of the offense, provided it was performed by an Israeli 
citizen. 
 
According to the Police, in 2008, there were no cases according to 
Section 203C of the Penal Law.  The Police also reported that they 
did not receive any requests in 2008 to investigate cases regarding 
sex tourism of Israelis abroad.  The National Coordinator discussed 
this question with the Lahav Unit of the Police, which is 
responsible for investigating international crime, and reported that 
she was told they would be willing to consider undertaking these 
kinds of investigations, but that they would require the cooperation 
of police in the countries of origin.  In order to forward this 
initiative, the National Coordinator approached the U.S. Embassy 
with a request to hold a video conference between the Lahav Unit and 
relevant U.S. law enforcement agencies in order to learn from the 
U.S. experience.  The National Coordinator also approached the U.S. 
Embassy asking for police contacts in relevant countries of origin 
such as India and Thailand.  Those initiatives were in process at 
the time of this report. 
 
¶G. Required of posts in countries that have contributed over 100 
troops to international peacekeeping efforts: What measures has the 
government adopted to ensure that its nationals who are deployed 
abroad as part of a peacekeeping or other similar mission do not 
engage in or facilitate severe forms of trafficking or exploit 
victims of such trafficking?  If posts do not provide an answer to 
this question, the Department may consider including a statement in 
the country assessment to the effect that "An assessment regarding 
Country X's efforts to ensure that its troops deployed abroad for 
international peacekeeping missions do not engage in or facilitate 
trafficking or exploit trafficking victims was unavailable for this 
reporting period." 
 
N/A 
 
--------------------------------------- 
NOMINATION OF HEROES AND BEST PRACTICES 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (U) HEROES:  The introduction to the past four TIP Reports has 
included a section honoring Anti-Trafficking "Heroes" These 
individuals or representatives of organizations demonstrate an 
exceptional commitment to fighting TIP above and beyond the scope of 
their assigned work.  The Department encourages post to nominate one 
or more such individuals for inclusion in a similar section of the 
2009 Report.  Please submit, under a subheading of "TIP Hero(es)," a 
brief description of the individual or organization's work, and note 
that the appropriate individual(s) has been vetted through databases 
available to post (e.g. CLASS and any law enforcement systems) to 
ensure they have no visa ineligibilities or other derogatory 
information. 
 
Post nomination(s) of Anti-Trafficking Hero(es) will follow 
separately. 
 
¶8. (U) BEST PRACTICES.  For the past five years the Report has 
carried a section on "Best Practices" in addressing TIP.  This 
section highlights particular practices used by governments or NGOs 
in addressing the various challenges of TIP and serves as a useful 
guide to foreign governments and posts as they design anti-TIP 
projects and strategies.  The Department encourages post to nominate 
"best practices" from their host countries for showcasing in the 
2009 Report.  Please submit, under a "Best Practice" subheading, a 
brief summary of the activity or practice, along with the positive 
effect it has had in addressing TIP. 
 
CUNNINGHAM