09TELAVIV1337
OPPOSITION LAWMAKERS BOYCOTT KNESSET TO PROTEST
Fri Jun 19 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXRO4180
PP RUEHROV
DE RUEHTV #1337 1701354
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 191354Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2259
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 001337 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV IS
SUBJECT: OPPOSITION LAWMAKERS BOYCOTT KNESSET TO PROTEST 
LEGISLATION 
 
¶1.  (U) The Kadima-led opposition this week united to oppose 
the government's attempts to pass several measures aimed at 
increasing the long-term stability of Israeli governments, 
but also specifically intended to assist Prime Minister 
Netanyahu.  Opposition leader Livni pushed to have the six 
opposition parties -- encompassing 46 seats in the 120-seat 
Knesset -- boycott the Knesset's plenum sessions and 
committee meetings, including the first reading of the budget 
bill.  Some Israeli commentators have called the opposition's 
tactics unprecedented, and the moves were especially notable 
because they united such disparate factions as the extreme 
right-wing National Union and the anti-Zionist Arab-Israeli 
parties.  None of the bills have been presented to the 
Knesset for their first readings, though reports say that 
could change as early as June 22. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) The most controversial bill would make it easier 
for members of larger parties to split off and form a new 
party.  Current law requires that one-third of a party's MKs 
must split in order to avoid punitive measures that most 
likely would keep the rebellious MKs from being elected to 
the next Knesset.  The proposal would change the law to 
instead require one-third or seven seats, whichever is 
easiest.  The bill appears to target Kadima's 
second-in-command, former Likud member Shaul Mofaz, who 
challenged Livni for the Kadima chairmanship and has publicly 
advocated for Kadima to be in the government.  Some in Likud 
hope the change would encourage and allow Mofaz to recruit 
six more Kadima MKs to split with the party and join the 
coalition.  According to Israeli press reports, both Kadima 
and Likud officials have said they can reach a compromise on 
other contentious legislation, but would not be flexible on 
the so-called "Mofaz" bill. 
 
¶3.  (U) Another bill would allow a minister who gave his or 
her seat to someone else from that party to regain it should 
the party leave the coalition.  The measure would alleviate 
strains in coalition party the Jewish Home that center on 
former MK Nissan Slomiansky's request that party Chairman and 
now Science Minister Daniel Hershkovitz step down so that 
Slomiansky could re-enter the Knesset.  Furthermore, the 
measure would strengthen the coalition's presence in the 
plenum, as most ministers now spend considerable time running 
their ministries rather than engaging in parliamentary debate. 
 
¶4.  (U) The opposition also has railed against the government 
for proposing a change to the law governing votes of no 
confidence.  Presently, if a simple majority of the Knesset 
votes no confidence in the government, the named MK in the 
original petition is allowed to try to form a government and 
if he or she fails there are elections.  The new legislation 
would change the procedure so that if the named MK cannot 
form a government, the original no confidence vote is null 
and void and the government continues to function. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) While some of the measures -- most notably the 
Mofaz bill -- face opposition on the substance of the 
legislation alone, it seems that the intensity of the 
opposition's response has more to do with a perception that 
the government is aggressively moving to change the rules 
solely to ensure its survival.  Each of these bills on its 
own might pass without a full-blown crisis, but when taken 
together, and when considering that Netanyahu already has won 
approval for a two-year budget that allows him to avoid a 
bruising battle next year, it appears to be too much for the 
opposition to take.  Livni's willingness to flout Knesset 
tradition by leading a parliamentary boycott also could be 
geared toward accentuating differences with the government so 
that she can fend off pressure by some in Kadima to join the 
majority. 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
********************************************* ******************** 
CUNNINGHAM