04MANAMA399
MEPI'S "MY ARABIC LIBRARY" - BAHRAIN MINISTRY
Tue Mar 23 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Manama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MANAMA 000399 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA/PI-CBOURGEOIS; NEA/PPD-MQUINN AND APENDLETON; 
NEA/ARN, NEA/ARP CKANESHIRO 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OEXC SCUL KMPI KPAO KDEM BA
SUBJECT:  MEPI'S "MY ARABIC LIBRARY" - BAHRAIN MINISTRY 
OF EDUCATION REQUESTS MORE INFO 
 
REFS:  A) STATE 15320, B) BEIRUT 623, 
       C) WENGER/BOURGEOIS EMAILS, D) MANAMA 375 
 
¶1.  (U)  This is an action request for NEA/PI; please 
see para 6. 
 
¶2.  (U)  PAO has met twice with senior Ministry of 
Education officials in Bahrain about the MEPI Arabic 
language early reading book program (on February 22 and 
March 16).  The Assistant Undersecretary for Curriculum 
and Training told PAO and APAO on March 16 that the 
Ministry had not yet made a decision about 
participating in the program.  The Ministry would 
welcome a visit from a Scholastics Book Representative 
who would provide further information about the books, 
including a proposed list of titles and sample 
translations. 
 
¶3.  (U)  It is post's understanding that Ms. Michelle 
Alwan, Middle East Area Sales Manager of Scholastics 
Books, will visit the region in April/May.  Post 
recommends that she visit Bahrain with further 
information about the project, including the proposed 
list of books and samples of books that have already 
been translated. 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  It seems that "My Arabic Library" has been 
the talk of the Ministry.  The Assistant Undersecretary 
told the PAO that a number of Ministry staff have 
expressed serious concerns about the project during 
internal meetings, and some have come out completely 
against the project.  The Assistant Undersecretary 
supports the project, stating, "These people are living 
in the past - aren't these just children's bedtime 
stories?"  He cautioned, however, that the Minister 
will decide only after he has met with Alwan and seen a 
list of the books.  During a separate meeting about the 
GLOBE Program on March 21, the Director of Intermediate 
and Secondary Education in Bahrain, the official 
responsible for all public high schools and middle 
schools in the country, surprised the APAO and PAS FSN 
by bringing up "My Arabic Library" and stating that he 
was not supportive of the idea.  He said, "We have been 
discussing this new Arabic Books Program from America. 
We have our own books that reflect our culture and 
traditions, there is little need for us to import." 
(Comment:  This individual has been extremely 
supportive of the GLOBE Program, and is not anti- 
American.)  Further, during a round table discussion at 
Al Wasat Arabic newspaper two weeks ago, Charge and 
Emboffs were surprised when a representative from an 
Islamist political society who works at the Ministry of 
Education, used "My Arabic Library" as an example of an 
educational reform program being imposed by the USG on 
the Gulf, as reported in reftel D. 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  PAO informed the Assistant Undersecretary 
that per ref A, para 7, "acknowledgement of MEPI 
sponsorship of the Program would likely be printed on 
the inside of the books."  Given the sensitivities 
surrounding the program, he recommended not overtly 
identifying the books as receiving U.S. funding.  He 
stated, "Good work speaks for itself and teachers, 
parents, and students could react negatively to this 
program if it seemed to have political connotations. 
Stamping the book cover would be counterproductive to 
the purpose of the program.  Arabs want to preserve 
their cultures and politicizing a reading program 
equals indoctrination in the viewpoint of many. 
Politicizing a reading program takes away its 
substance."  (Comment:  This official has been 
extremely supportive of all MEPI initiatives, and he 
personally supports My Arabic Library.  End Comment.) 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  ACTION REQUEST:  Please advise Alwan's 
travel dates to Bahrain so post can request a meeting 
with the Minister of Education for Alwan to present the 
requested information.  Charge Ford and PAO will 
accompany Alwan on the meeting.  Post further requests 
that Alwan be prepared to inform the Minister exactly 
how U.S. support/funding for the books will be 
identified. 
 
FORD