04MANAMA386
LESSONS LEARNED - MANAMA CRISIS MANAGEMENT EXERCISE
Mon Mar 22 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Manama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MANAMA 000386 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR DIR FSINFATC, FSI/LMS/CMT, S/ES-O/CMS, NEA/EX, 
DS/IP/NEA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AEMR AFSI ASEC BA CASC KESS OTRA
SUBJECT: LESSONS LEARNED - MANAMA CRISIS MANAGEMENT EXERCISE 
 
REF: FSINFATC 00912 
 
¶1. Post benefited from the Crisis Management Exercise (CME) 
by applying the skills and experience of the Emergency Action 
Committee (EAC) and participants (LES and non-EAC members) 
with the Emergency Action Plan and Emergency Planning 
Handbook to manage the scenario. Ruth Abramson and Lawrence 
Petroni presented a valuable training evolution for Embassy 
Manama. The following responses are keyed to reftel. 
 
¶A. Format of the CME: Post recommends changing the CME from 
the no-fault format to assigning a mission capable or 
not-mission capable rating. Embassy employees live and work 
in a dangerous world beset by terrorism, civil unrest and 
crime. At the end of a CME the facilitators should determine 
that a standard of knowledge and competence has been 
demonstrated by the post. This may require a technical person 
be added to the two-person team to inspect equipment, observe 
drills and review plans. Four hours is satisfactory for the 
exercise in its present form. 
 
¶B. Selection of Scenarios: The scenario was well developed. 
Ruth Abramson did an excellent job of coordinating with post 
to create a well thought out civil unrest, anthrax and soft 
target bombing exercise. The scenario of most concern for the 
EAC is an attack on a housing compound or apartment complex. 
The exercise provided a timely opportunity to test our 
personnel and plans. 
 
¶C. Appropriateness of intervention by the controller: The 
controller established guidelines and set the tone for the 
scenario. The A/DCM led the 30 plus participants through the 
CME on pace, included all sections in discussions and 
delegated action/responsibility. The controller responded 
promptly to questions and explained situations well. 
 
¶D. What would post do differently in response to a real 
crisis as a result of this training? More effectively plan 
shift schedules for personnel to reduce exhaustion and 
stress, include U.S. Navy personnel earlier in the crisis and 
consider requesting FEST, SST and Consular assets from 
Washington. 
 
¶E. What lessons did post take away from the CME? Security for 
the Bahrain School (30/750 students are from the Embassy) is 
managed by the U.S. Navy. Post also has two dependent 
children at the St. Christopher School. Post will obtain 
copies of emergency procedures from both schools to share 
with parents. Post will widen the distribution of 
responsibilities for Emergency Action Functions (section 121) 
to include all agencies represented at the Embassy. What best 
practices for crisis management emerged? Post prepared well 
for Operation Iraqi Freedom last year acquiring sufficient 
quantities of medical supplies and chem-bio equipment and 
conducting frequent drills. Embassy Manama requested and was 
granted authorized departure status in February 2003. Long 
before going on authorized departure status, all personnel 
had gone through a series of dry run training evolutions to 
assemble individual evacuation paperwork, create evacuation 
orders, discuss State regulations and complete applications 
for allowances. This level of readiness prepared the Embassy 
well for a variety of emergency situations. Have you 
formulated an action plan to deal with issues that arose 
during the CME? The A/DCM assigned section heads to address 
the issues noted above and report their findings to the EAC. 
 
¶F. What aspects of the stand-alone CMT Overview Training did 
post find useful? The stand-alone CMT Overview Training was 
deferred at the Charge's request to conduct a CME 
seminar/question and answer session for the abundant first 
tour and junior officers at post. The CME team reviewed the 
USG assets available to posts and answered questions. The 
junior officers unanimously requested the DS Anti-terrorism 
(crash and bang) course as a prerequisite for overseas 
assignment. Post will institute an in-house CME twice a year 
for the EAC and staff. The CME will familiarize personnel 
with the EAP and EPH, update assignments and contact 
information, allow post to acquire equipment for emergencies 
and develop bench strength. 
 
¶G. Frequency of CME: Every two years is appropriate. Posts 
with the highest threat levels should exercise annually. 
 
¶H. Comments: Preparing for the CME was a benefit. RSO 
conducted a CME overview for all employees and held a 
compressed table top exercise to get people in a CME state of 
mind. Post recommends USG personnel assigned overseas attend 
the two-day CME leadership workshop once every five years. 
FSI should create a best practices site on the web page based 
on controller observations from previous exercises. The web 
site is very good and has useful information. 
FORD