04TELAVIV1259
THE SITUATION ON THE GROUND: MARCH 1, 2004 (1400
Mon Mar 01 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEL AVIV 001259 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR BURNS/SATTERFIELD 
NEA/SA/EX FOR AUSTIN-FERGUSON; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; 
DEPT FOR DS/IP/ITA; DRL FOR A/S CRANER; 
NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN; 
USAID FOR DCHA, DCHA/FPP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG PTER ASEC PHUM CASC KPAL IS GZ
SUBJECT: THE SITUATION ON THE GROUND: MARCH 1, 2004 (1400 
HOURS LOCAL) -- IAF KILLS THREE MILITANTS AND WOUNDS NINE 
BYSTANDERS IN GAZA CITY FEBRUARY 28; ISRAELI COUPLE KILLED 
NEAR HEBRON FEBRUARY 27 
 
THIS IS A JOINT MESSAGE FROM EMBASSY TEL AVIV AND CONGEN 
JERUSALEM. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: The IAF killed three militants from 
Palestinian Islamic Jihad February 28 in a missile attack in 
the Shaykh Radwan neighborhood of Gaza City.  Nine passersby, 
including a 10-year-old child, were wounded.  The IDF 
demolished 85 kiosks and small vending stands near the Erez 
Industrial Zone February 27 while searching for a tunnel 
reportedly used by the gunmen who carried out the February 26 
shooting attack at Zone.  One tunnel was found.  An Israeli 
couple was shot and killed February 27 when their vehicle was 
ambushed by two gunmen on the green line near Hebron.  In the 
West Bank, one Palestinian was killed in clashes in the 
Balata refugee camp, and a second Palestinian was killed in 
violence that erupted during funeral  of the person killed 
earlier.  A total of 19 Palestinians were arrested February 
27-29 in the West Bank.  End Summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: The IDF February 29 killed one Palestinian during 
clashes in the Balata refugee camp.  Another Palestinian was 
killed in violence that erupted during the funeral of the 
person killed earlier. 
 
-- Injury:  The IDF February 27 shot and seriously wounded a 
Palestinian boy during a raid near Nablus that also netted 
three arrests. 
 
-- Injury: One Palestinian was seriously wounded by an 
explosion in Tulkarem February 29, in an apparent "work 
accident." 
 
¶3.  (SBU) ARRESTS: 
 
-- The IDF February 27 arrested three Palestinians near 
Nablus (see "Injury" above). 
 
-- The IDF February 28 arrested four Palestinians near 
Hebron. 
 
-- The IDF February 29 arrested 12 Palestinians throughout 
the West Bank. 
 
---------- 
Gaza Strip 
---------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Death: UNRWA reported that a Palestinian suicide bomber on 
a bicycle exploded his charges near an IDF outpost east of 
Kfar Darom settlement February 27 after he was stopped by IDF 
soldiers.  The bomber was killed; no other injuries were 
reported.  PIJ claimed responsibility for the attack. 
 
-- Deaths/Injuries: UNRWA reported that at 1850 hours 
February 28, IAF helicopters fired two missiles at a car 
traveling in the Shaykh Radwan neighborhood of Gaza City, 
killing three members of the al-Quds Brigades, the militant 
arm of PIJ.  In addition, nine passersby, including a 
10-year-old child, were injured, according to UNRWA. 
 
-- Injury: UNRWA reported that a Hamas activist was seriously 
wounded February 28 near Khan Yunis when the bomb upon which 
he was working exploded prematurely. 
 
-- Injury: A 13-year-old Palestinian boy was wounded by 
shrapnel February 28 while sitting at his desk in school when 
IDF soldiers opened fire near the Khan Yunis refugee camp, 
according to UNRWA. 
 
-- Injury: A Palestinian woman was shot in the hand during an 
exchange of fire between Palestinian militants in the Zurub 
area of Rafah and IDF soldiers stationed near at the border 
fence with Egypt. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: The IDF reported that an anti-tank 
missile struck and damaged a house in Neve Dekalim settlement 
February 27.  No injuries were reported.  Israeli media 
reported that the missile was "more advanced" in type than a 
Qassam rocket. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: The IDF reported that two mortars were 
fired on Netzarim February 29 and one anti-tank missile was 
fired at an IDF outpost east of Khan Yunis March 1. 
 
-- Shootings: The IDF reported a total of four shooting 
incidents February 27-28: two near Netzarim, and one each 
near Khan Yunis and Karni. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) SECURITY INCIDENTS: 
 
-- UNRWA reported that masked and armed militants from the 
al-Aqsa Brigades took over PA television offices and 
repeaters near Ma'en February 28, demanding that they be 
given jobs.  After several hours of negotiation with PA 
officials, the militants left the station.  No injuries were 
reported. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) INCURSIONS/DEMOLITIONS: 
 
-- On February 27, an IDF APC, three jeeps and two bulldozers 
entered the area west of the Salahadeen Road to search for a 
tunnel reportedly used by the two gunmen who carried out the 
February 26 shooting attack at the Erez Industrial Zone.  At 
least 85 kiosks and vending stands were destroyed, and 
Israeli media reported that one tunnel containing PA police 
uniforms and excavation equipment was found. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS/CHECKPOINTS 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was open for Palestinians February 28-March 1. 
 
-- The Erez Crossing was largely open (with sporadic closures 
- see "Incursions/Demolitions") February 28-March 1, and on 
February 28, 288 Palestinian laborers crossed into Israel; on 
February 29, 10,066 laborers crossed, and on March 1, 9,176 
laborers crossed.  All workers must be married and over age 
¶35.  The Erez Industrial Zone was closed February 28-29 due 
to the February 26 shooting attack at the entrance to the 
Zone.  The Zone re-opened March 1, and 3,037 workers entered 
the Zone for work. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was open for Palestinian workers February 28 
and 113 workers crossed.  On February 29 the Crossing was 
closed for laborers, but the Crossing re-opened March 1 and 
285 laborers crossed.  Sufa was closed for the import into 
Gaza of aggregates used in construction on February 28, but 
open February 29 and March 1. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was closed February 28, but open February 
29-March 1 for the import and export of goods into the Gaza 
Strip. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open for Palestinian travelers February 
28-March 1. 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan checkpoint was closed February 28-March 1. 
Toufah checkpoint was open for the passage of al-Mowassi 
residents all three days. 
 
------ 
Israel 
------ 
 
¶8.  (SBU) An Israeli couple was shot and killed February 27 
when their vehicle was ambushed by two gunmen along the green 
line on Lahav-Ashkelon Road near Hebron.  The two gunmen 
escaped.  The PFLP General Command and the al-Aqsa Brigades 
both claimed responsibility for the attack. 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
KURTZER