09KABUL969
THE WEEK IN PARLIAMENT, 4/10-4/16:  CIVILIAN
Sat Apr 18 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO3322
PP RUEHDBU RUEHPW
DE RUEHBUL #0969 1080522
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 180522Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8446
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS KABUL 000969 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL AF
SUBJECT: THE WEEK IN PARLIAMENT, 4/10-4/16:  CIVILIAN 
CASUALTIES DOMINATE DEBATE 
 
¶1. Outrage against civilian casualty incidents in Khost and 
Kunar provinces dominated Parliamentary debate and action (or 
in some cases inaction), stalling most other legislation in 
Parliament during the week of April 10-16.  MPs in both 
houses tabled work on laws or resolutions concerning private 
security companies, possible impeachment of the Information 
Minister for refusing to enforce the media law, and the 
Supreme Court statement in support of President Karzai 
remaining in office after the May 22 constitutional 
expiration of his term.  Instead, MPs lashed out against US 
and Coalition forces for the reported deaths of civilians 
during operations in Khost and Kunar.  Lower House Khost MPs 
staged a boycott on April 11, stating they would not attend 
parliamentary sessions until the government negotiated a 
strategy to limit civilian casualties with Coalition military 
leaders.  Upper House Khost MPs led a one-day walkout on 
April 12, supported by nearly three-quarters of all 
parliamentarians, ending the Upper House's session. 
 
¶2. MPs like Mawlawi Ludin (Nangarhar, Pashtun) accused US 
forces of not respecting international laws.  Ludin called 
for the government to prohibit foreign forces from entering 
the homes of Afghans or conducting operations without the 
coordination of Afghan security forces.  MP Abdul Jabbar 
Shulgari (Ghazni, Pashtun) agreed, comparing Coalition 
operations to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.  "Civilians 
were killed during Russian airstrikes, but even the Russians 
never entered our homes," he said.  Other MPs called for a 
status of forces agreement and a withdrawal timeline for 
international forces.  Only a few MPs spoke in favor of 
Coalition forces, pointing out that Taliban and other 
insurgent groups purposely targeted civilians, whereas 
Coalition-caused incidents were accidental.  Speaker Qanooni, 
generally a supporter of foreign forces' presence in 
Afghanistan, ended two of the week's sessions early as MPs' 
speeches grew more emotional.  Qanooni assured MPs that 
Parliament and the government would strike an agreement with 
Coalition military leaders to reduce civilian casualty 
incidents. 
 
¶3. In between civilian casualty debates, Parliament's houses 
moved some legislation forward.  The Lower House passed a law 
codifying relations between the three branches of government, 
and began work on a law regulating the national Chamber of 
Commerce.  The Upper House passed a law on the structure of 
the judicial system.  A personal rivalry among female MPs has 
kept the Lower House Women's Committee leaderless since 
January, stalling work on a number of bills.  This week, 
Qanooni threatened to fold the committee into the Auditing 
and Oversight Committee if Women's Committee members did not 
resolve their differences and elect a chair. 
RICCIARDONE