09PANAMA330
PANAMA: POLITICAL ANALYST WARNS OF ROUGH
Thu Apr 23 00:00:00 +0200 2009
SECRET//NOFORN
Embassy Panama
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHZP #0330/01 1132223
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
R 232223Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY PANAMA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3311
INFO RHEFDIA/DIA WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHMFISS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RHMFISS/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDCS E C R E T PANAMA 000330 
 
NOFORN 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DNG: CO 04/21/2019 
TAGS: ECON PGOV PM PREL
SUBJECT: PANAMA: POLITICAL ANALYST WARNS OF ROUGH 
POST-ELECTION PERIOD 
 
Classified By: Classified by: Ambassador Barbara J. Stephenson for reas 
ons 1.4(b) and (d). 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (S//NF) Ruling Revolutionary Democratic Party (PRD) 
leaders expect Alliance for Change presidential candidate 
Ricardo Martinelli to win the May 3 presidential election, 
pro-PRD political commentator Jose Blandon, Sr. told POLOFFs 
on April 20. 
 
--The Torrijos administration's own internal PRD polls showed 
that Martinelli might win by as much as fifteen points--an 
unprecedented margin--over the PRD presidential candidate 
Balbina Herrera and secure more than fifty percent of the 
presidential vote for the first time in Panama, Blandon 
explained. 
--Furthermore, Blandon said that polling at the circuit and 
precinct level indicated that the PRD would lose control of 
the National Assembly.  Some PRD National Assembly Deputies 
such as former National Assembly President Pedro Miguel 
Gonzalez and Majority Leader Leandro Avila who were believed 
to have had safe seats would be defeated; "They have tough 
races that are too close to call and the momentum seems to be 
with the opposition," Blandon explained. 
--Blandon also commented that if Martinelli won and if his 
alliance took control of the National Assembly, President 
Martin Torrijos would face an extraordinarily difficult 
political situation both inside the PRD and the National 
Assembly for the duration of the transition period that would 
culminate with the July 1 inauguration of Martinelli. 
--A Martinelli victory would also present major challenges 
for Martinelli's alliance partner, the Panamenista Party, as 
this party that was accustomed to top billing grappled with 
its second string status. 
 
A Martinelli victory has the potential to be a seismic event 
that will realign the tectonic plates that compose Panama's 
political geology.  Panama faces the prospects on July 1 of a 
Martinelli force that is striving to find its sea legs while 
Panama's major political parties- the PRD and the Panamenista 
Party- struggle to re-orient themselves to the new political 
reality.  The Torrijos Administration's final weeks in office 
may present the best opportunity to grapple with tough 
bilateral issues, most notably the U.S.-Panama Free Trade 
Agreement (FTA), as it may be up to a year before a 
Martinelli Administration would even have the capacity to do 
so itself.  End summary. 
 
 
------------------------------ 
PRD Expects Opposition Victory 
------------------------------ 
 
¶2. (S//NF) "Martinelli will win the May 3 presidential 
election, and possibly by as much as fifteen points over 
Balbina Herrera, which would be a historic accomplishment for 
Panamanian politics," pro-PRD political commentator Jose 
Blandon, Sr. told political officers during lunch on April 
¶20.  Blandon added that for the first time in Panamanian 
history, Panama might elect its President with more than 
fifty percent of the vote.  (Note: In Panama, the candidate 
who receives the most votes wins an election; there are no 
provisions for subsequent rounds of voting in the quest for 
fifty percent plus one majorities.)  He commented that 
internal PRD polls foreshadowed a bleak picture for Panama's 
largest party as the PRD expected to lose the presidency and 
would likely lose control of the National Assembly.  He 
predicted that the "pendular effect" in Panama--in which the 
PRD and the opposition (read: Panamenista) party alternated 
control of the executive every five years--would hold true 
this year. 
 
¶3. (S//NF) Blandon explained that in-fighting within the 
ruling PRD had prompted several internal divisions and 
factions that had complicated the PRD's ability to advance a 
unified campaign to support PRD presidential candidate 
Balbina Herrera.  Furthermore, Blandon asserted that these 
factional and internal divisions affected National Assembly 
races and even local contests.  Positioning themselves for 
the most advantageous position in the party after the May 3 
general elections, PRD VP candidate Juan Carlos Navarro had, 
for example, allied with former President Ernesto "El Toro" 
 
Perez Balladares, standard bearer of the party's right wing, 
and was attempting to draw centrist party members toward him 
and away from President Torrijos and First VP and FM (and 
Navarro's cousin) Samuel Lewis.  President Torrijos and his 
centrist followers, particuarly Lewis, constituted the PRD's 
moderate center.  (Note: Later the same day in a radio 
interview in a response to a question about his post-July 1 
plans, Lewis said he planned to return to his businesses and 
to lay the ground work for a political future, remarks widely 
interpreted as the first sign that he plans to run for 
president in 2014).  Even the left-leaning Tendency 
(Tendencia) faction of the PRD had been split, Blandon said, 
between followers of National Assembly Deputy Hector Aleman 
and of Herrera. 
 
 
------------------------------------ 
Martinelli's Uncertainty as a Leader 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶4. (S//NF) "Martinelli's greatest strengths are his 
management skills.  He knows how to run a smart campaign, but 
as President he may make hasty decisions," Blandon commented, 
contrasting Martinelli's perceived hands-on, man of action 
style with Torrijos' more pensive and deliberate style. 
Unlike Torrijos who vacillated while trying to make up his 
mind, Blandon said, Martinelli knew how to act decisively but 
lacked political experience.  Blandon cautioned that 
Martinelli's decisionmaking style might hurt him in the end, 
especially if he made decisions too quickly about critical 
issues such as strengthening Panama's economy during the 
global economic downturn.  Blandon said that Martinelli's 
campaign manager, Jimmy Papadimitriu, might help him to step 
back and analyze situations before making rash decisions. 
"Jimmy is Martinelli's most influential advisor and the only 
one who can talk sense to him and get him to slow down," 
Blandon added.  Nonetheless, Panama's next President would 
need to address several looming problems such as public 
transportation, inadequate healthcare, and a poor education 
system.  Blandon commented that insecurity was a problem in 
Panama, but it has become overemphasized by the local press. 
 
 
--------------------------- 
Difficult Transition Period 
--------------------------- 
 
¶5. (S//NF) Blandon commented that if Martinelli wins the 
presidency on May 3, Torrijos would come under immediate 
pressure from within the PRD and would face a challenging 
transition period.  Nonetheless, Blandon said that Martinelli 
and Torrijos had an open line of communication, a channel 
that would be critical for managing a way ahead through 
Panama's two-month transition period from May 3 to July 1. 
If the PRD lost both the presidency and a majority in the 
National Assembly, Torrijos' days as Secretary General of the 
party would be numbered.  "He would not survive as Secretary 
General of the PRD.  Balbina would not last as the party's 
President.  Basically, election night could be the 'night of 
the long knives' in the PRD," according to Blandon. 
 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Disarray and Challenges in Martinelli's Camp 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (S//NF) "A strong Martinelli victory will be like a shock 
wave across Panama's political structure," Blandon posited. 
While it would touch off an internal power struggle in the 
PRD, it was also having an impact on the Panamenista Party, 
Panama's largest opposition party.  Life-long Panamenista 
Party member former President Guillermo Endara had already 
bolted the party to establish his own Moral Vanguard of the 
Nation (VMP) party, taking with him many old-line 
Panamenistas.  Former President Mireya Moscoso and her camp 
followers had not only been tangling with current Panamenista 
Party President and Martinelli VP running mate Juan Carlos 
Varela over his efforts to "reform" the party following the 
Moscoso years, but were having difficulty fathoming how it 
came to be that the "glorious" Panamenista Party accepted 
second billing in the Alliance for Change grand opposition 
alliance.  Finally, Varela and Panamenista Party primary 
challenger Alberto Vallarino had only just smoothed over 
their differences; "They remain competitors too though." 
(Note: Varela is rumored to be penciled in to be FM while 
 
Vallarino may be slotted for Minister of Economy and Finance.) 
 
¶7. (S//NF) Though Martinelli was shaking the foundations of 
Panama's political order, Blandon explained that Martinelli 
lacked the personnel and political capability to put in place 
a new political structure.  The Martinelli administration 
would be challenged to manage the competing interests of his 
opposition alliance.  "It will be at least a year before the 
Martinelli Administration is fully operational," Blandon 
assessed.  "I'm worried about governability as Panama 
transitions from one political order to an undefined new 
order." 
 
--------------------------- 
Navarro's Political Advisor 
--------------------------- 
 
¶8. (S//NF) "The evening of May 3 will be a very interesting 
night in the PRD," PRD VP candidate Juan Carlos Navarro's 
political advisor Ivan Gonzalez told POLCOUNS on April 22. 
While asserting that Herrera still had a chance at winning on 
May 3 - "Our tracking polls show us closing the gap.  If we 
are within 5-6 points by next Wednesday, we can be 
competitive," - Gonzalez acknowledged that a PRD victory was 
increasingly becoming a long-shot.  He also acknowledged that 
the PRD would likely lose control of the National Assembly. 
Gonzalez confirmed that Navarro was allying himself with 
former President Ernesto "El Toro" Perez Balladares and 
trying to pull moderates away from Torrijos and Lewis.  He 
predicted that the Tendency (Tendencia) faction would split 
between Aleman and Herrera. 
 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶9. (S//NF) Martinelli's likely victory on May 3 is shaping up 
to be a seismic event that could cause the tectonic plates of 
Panamanian politics to shift dramatically.  This seismic 
event will set off fissures and after shocks in the two 
plates that have dominated Panamanian politics for the past 
forty or more years, the PRD and the Panamenista Party.  PRD 
insiders are clearly preparing for an electoral drubbing and 
key party movers and shakers are maneuvering for the best 
position possible for the post-May 3 world.  While generally 
perceived as a pro-PRD analyst, Blandon's assessment of the 
impact of a Martinelli victory on Martinelli's alliance 
partner is on the mark.  Going forward, however, the Torrijos 
Administration, until its final day in office on June 30, 
will be the most viable partner for advancing key U.S. 
interests, such as the bilateral Free Trade Agreement (FTA). 
The new era of Panamanian politics that will open on July 1 
will be characterized by a new Martinelli force striving to 
find its sea legs while two powerful forces with deep roots 
in Panamanian politics -- the PRD and the Panamenista Party 
-- will be looking for their bearings too. 
STEPHENSON