09STATE37297
GUIDANCE: MIDDLE EAST CONSULTATIONS, APRIL 20
Wed Apr 15 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0009
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #7297 1052029
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 152010Z APR 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000UNCLAS STATE 037297 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNSC PREL IS LE KPAL
SUBJECT: GUIDANCE: MIDDLE EAST CONSULTATIONS, APRIL 20 
 
¶1. (SBU) This is an action message.  USUN is authorized 
to draw from the points in para 2 below as a basis for 
its participation in Security Council consultations on 
the Middle East scheduled for April 20, and for its 
public statements on the consultation. 
 
¶2. (U) Talking points: 
 
-- It is the policy of the United States to move quickly 
and actively to seek a lasting peace between Israel and 
its neighbors.  We envision two states, Israel and 
Palestine, living side by side in peace and security; a 
Palestinian Authority that can realize the Palestinian 
people's legitimate aspirations and be a genuine party 
to peace by continuing to recognize Israel, renounce 
violence, and accept previous agreements and 
obligations; and a comprehensive peace between Israel 
and all its neighbors that respects Israel's rightful 
place in the community of nations. 
 
-- With Special Envoy Mitchell leading our efforts, we 
are engaged in determined and vigorous diplomacy to 
achieve this vision.  The Special Envoy began his 
current visit to the region on April 13 to launch 
discussions with the new Israeli government, with the 
Palestinians, and with regional governments about 
creating the context for successful negotiations toward 
the achievement of a two-state solution and a 
comprehensive peace. 
 
-- The Quartet should remain the pre-eminent mechanism 
for coordinating international support for Middle East 
peace.  We urge all parties to respect their obligations 
under the Roadmap and refrain from any activities that 
do not help the cause of peace in the Middle East. 
 
-- The United States appreciates the ongoing efforts of 
President Mubarak and the Government of Egypt in hosting 
Palestinian reconciliation talks on the basis of 
achieving a Palestinian authority that abides by all PLO 
commitments, and in promoting a durable ceasefire in 
Gaza and southern Israel.  The United States values 
Egypt's leadership in the region and its support for 
peace. 
 
-- The United States is deeply committed to relieving 
the suffering of the people of Gaza.  Following the 
recent conflict there, we have contributed more than $72 
million in food, water, medicine, and shelter.  At the 
Sharm el Sheikh donors' conference, Secretary Clinton 
announced our intention, pending Congressional approval, 
to support Gaza's recovery and the Palestinian 
Authority's efforts to develop the Palestinian economy 
with more than $900 million in assistance.  This 
includes up to $300 million in urgent humanitarian 
assistance provided through USAID, UN agencies, and 
other international organizations; $200 million in 
direct budgetary support for the PA; and up to $400 
million to support priorities identified in the 
Palestinian Reform and Development Plan, including 
development projects and security assistance under the 
coordination of the U.S. Security Coordinator (USSC). 
 
-- Budget assistance to the Palestinian Authority will 
assist it in its single highest priority of avoiding 
fiscal insolvency, and will ensure that it remains a 
credible government able to foster the conditions for a 
future viable, peaceful Palestinian state. We urge other 
states also to provide such support immediately. 
 
-- We continue to engage the Government of Israel on a 
daily basis on the volume and range of humanitarian 
items and humanitarian workers entering Gaza.  We 
encourage Israel to make it easier to bring humanitarian 
goods into Gaza and to ease restrictions on urgently 
needed items, including critical building supplies.  As 
part of a lasting cease-fire, Gaza's border crossings 
should be opened to permit the robust flow of aid and 
commerce, with an appropriate monitoring regime joined 
by both the international community and the Palestinian 
Authority. 
 
-- Our response to the urgent needs in Gaza cannot be 
separated from our broader, long-term efforts to achieve 
a comprehensive peace.  We are determined to 
aggressively work for a lasting peace that provides a 
secure and prosperous future for Israelis and 
Palestinians alike. 
 
-- We have made it clear to Israel that settlement 
activity is unhelpful, and we call on Israel to 
dismantle outposts erected since March 2001.  We also 
call on the Arab states, building on the Arab peace 
initiative, to reach out to Israel to demonstrate in 
both word and deed that Israel has a permanent and 
secure place in the region. 
 
-- The smuggling of weapons into Gaza constitutes a 
serious and immediate threat to regional peace and 
security, putting innocent lives at risk and threatening 
to set off another deadly round of violence.  All 
states, particularly those in the region, must do 
everything they can to prevent this smuggling activity. 
Building upon relevant UN Security Council resolutions, 
and taking into account counterterrorism and 
nonproliferation conventions and regimes, nine nations 
endorsed the Gaza Counter Arms Smuggling Initiative 
Program of Action in London in March to address this 
threat. 
 
-- In Lebanon as in Gaza, arms smuggling is a continuing 
threat to peace and security in the region.  We remain 
deeply concerned about Hizballah's continuing efforts to 
rearm in defiance of Security Council Resolution 1559, 
which called for the disbanding and disarmament of all 
militias in Lebanon, and of the arms embargo enacted 
under Resolution 1701.  We welcome pledges by the 
governments of Syria and Lebanon to begin demarcating 
their shared border, which will facilitate steps needed 
to stop smuggling.  As provided in resolution 1701, 
there must be no weapons in Lebanon other than those 
authorized by the state.  We continue to call upon 
Hizballah and all militant groups in Lebanon to disarm 
and note we will continue our no-contact policy until 
they do so, whatever their involvement in the Lebanese 
government. 
 
-- I wish to convey our condolences to the Lebanese 
Armed Forces and the families of those soldiers killed 
in the April 13 attack on their patrol in the Bekaa 
Valley and our support for the Lebanese government's 
efforts to bring the perpetrators of this terrible 
attack to justice.  We continue to strongly support the 
Lebanese Armed Forces as the legitimate protector of 
Lebanon's security and remain firmly committed to 
continuing our support for the Lebanese governments, its 
democratic institutions, and its security services. 
 
-- The United States continues to press all parties in 
Lebanon to support the conduct of free, fair, and 
transparent parliamentary elections this June, unmarred 
by political violence.  The shape and composition of 
Lebanon's next government must be decided by the 
Lebanese themselves, on behalf of an independent 
Lebanon, free from outside interference. 
 
--  We remain confident that the Special Tribunal for 
Lebanon will bring to justice those who financed, 
planned, and perpetrated the assassinations of former 
Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri and others, and we will 
continue to support its important work to help end the 
era of impunity for political assassinations in Lebanon. 
 
-- The United States remains resolute in its support for 
a free, sovereign and independent Lebanon, as called for 
in Resolutions 1559, 1680 and 1701.  The United States 
will continue to support the full implementation of each 
of these resolutions, including the cooperation of all 
parties with their mechanisms and interlocutors.  And we 
will continue to support the forces of freedom, 
sovereignty and democracy in Lebanon. 
 
End talking points. 
CLINTON