09MANAGUA929
NICARAGUA: BANCENTRO DENIES ROLE IN MICROFINANCE
Thu Sep 24 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0005
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #0929/01 2672141
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 242141Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4587
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 000929 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS OPIC 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/23/2029 
TAGS: EFIN ECON NU
SUBJECT: NICARAGUA: BANCENTRO DENIES ROLE IN MICROFINANCE 
EMBEZZLEMENT 
 
REF: MANAGUA 625 
 
Classified By: DCM Richard M. Sanders for reasons 1.4 b & d. 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: In a conversation with the DCM and Econcouns 
on September 18, BANCENTRO Managing Director Julio Cardenas 
defended his bank's handling of microfinance institution 
ACODEP's accounts in the wake of allegation that a former 
ACODEP president embezzled more than $3 million from the 
microfinance institution in February and March 2009.  He said 
BANCENTRO complied with all regulatory and legal requirements 
in denying the new ACODEP president access to accounts held 
at BANCENTRO until September 2009.  Cardenas reported that 
twelve checks cashed at BANCENTRO by accomplices of the 
former ACODEP president were "routine transactions" that 
merited no additional scrutiny, despite the fact that 
infighting at ACODEP was well known at the time.  Finally, 
Cardenas expressed some reluctance to formally investigate 
whether there was any wrongdoing on the part of a senior 
BANCENTRO employee whose husband is alleged to have cashed 
one of those twelve checks for $250,000 at BANCENTRO as an 
accomplice to the embezzlement scheme, suggesting there was 
no reason to sully the bank employee's reputation.  The DCM 
encouraged Cardenas to fully investigate and document these 
issues.  End summary. 
 
¶2. (C) Banco de Credito Centroamericano (BANCENTRO), the 
second largest bank in Nicaragua, provides banking services 
for the U.S. Embassy and benefits from lines of credit 
totaling $37 million with the Overseas Private Investment 
Corporation (OPIC).  In a conversation with the DCM and 
Econcouns on September 18, 2009, Managing Director of 
BANCENTRO Julio Cardenas addressed, in his words, "questions 
raised about whether BANCENTRO had a role in the embezzlement 
of funds from microfinance institution ACODEP."  He said 
BANCENTRO President Roberto Zamora had tasked him with 
providing the Embassy complete information on the issue. 
Zamora had provided information on the case earlier in the 
week to OPIC officials, Cardenas advised. 
 
¶3. (C) Cardenas began with a lengthy defense of BANCENTRO's 
refusal to provide Julio Paniagua access to accounts at the 
bank after he became president of ACODEP in the wake of the 
removal of his predecessor, Armando Garcia, over charges that 
he embezzled more than $3 million from the microfinance 
institution (Ref A and septel).  The Interior Ministry 
recognized Paniagua's appointment in May 2009, but it was not 
until September 2009 that BANCENTRO gave him access to 
ACODEP's accounts.  Cardenas read most of a five-page 
chronology of BANCENTRO's actions on this point, referencing 
extensive correspondence among the bank, ACODEP, the 
Superintendency of Banks and Financial Entities, and the 
Ministry of the Interior.  He concluded that his bank had 
complied with all regulatory and legal requirements in this 
matter. 
 
¶4. (C) The DCM asked Cardenas to address allegations that 
BANCENTRO had cashed checks presented by accomplices of 
Garcia in February and March 2009, despite the fact that 
infighting over control of ACODEP had already become well 
known in the financial industry and was the subject of 
several press reports.  Cardenas acknowledged that twelve 
checks -- lucrative severance payments that Garcia paid out 
to his accomplices -- were cashed at BANCENTRO branches.  He 
called these "routine transactions" and said he did not know 
at which branches the checks were cashed.  Cardenas explained 
that nothing about the transactions would have aroused the 
suspicion of bank tellers, since Garcia had legal authority 
to access ACODEP's accounts at that time.  Cardenas claimed 
that to have refused these checks could have created legal 
difficulties with Garcia for BANCENTRO. 
 
¶5. (C) Cardenas acknowledged that one individual implicated 
in the embezzlement scheme, Alfonso Llanes, was married to 
the manager of BANCENTRO's headquarters Managua branch, 
Sheila Llanes.  Cardenes said Alfonso Llanes was one of the 
twelve Garcia accomplices who cashed a check at BANCENTRO. 
(Note: In a separate conversation with Econcouns, ACODEP 
President Paniagua said Llanes' severance payment was 
$250,000 for three-weeks of work.  End note.)  Nonetheless, 
Cardenas said BANCENTRO had no reason to believe that the 
marital relationship between Alfonso and Sheila Llanes played 
any role in the embezzlement.  When asked about whether the 
bank had launched an internal investigation into the matter 
to determine whether there was any wrongdoing on the part of 
Sheila Llanes, Cardenas responded that there was no need to 
sully the reputation of a BANCENTRO employee who had achieved 
a stellar record over the past 15 years. 
 
 
¶6. (C) The DCM thanked Cardenas for his explanation of 
BANCENTRO's relationship with ACODEP but encouraged him to 
fully investigate and document these issues.  The DCM 
suggested that such a report would help set the record 
straight and once and for all assuage concerns that BANCENTRO 
or one of its employees had somehow facilitated the 
embezzlement of funds from ACODEP.  Cardenas said he would 
consult with bank President Roberto Zamora about the idea. 
 
¶7. (C) Comment: We are surprised that, despite the well-known 
controversy surrounding ACODEP, the presentation of twelve 
checks for large sums, including one for $250,000, did not 
arouse suspicion.  By contrast, at the time the checks where 
cashed at BANCENTRO, local bank BANPRO had already frozen 
ACODEP accounts pending resolution of the fight for control 
of the institution.  Furthermore, we are surprised that 
BANCENTRO did not investigate the relationship between its 
branch manager and one of the alleged beneficiaries of the 
embezzlement of funds from ACODEP.  We hope that BANCENTRO 
takes on board our suggestion to fully investigate and 
document these issues.  End comment. 
CALLAHAN