05JERUSALEM1987
WB/G SITREP: PALESTINIAN KILLED AT WEST BANK
Mon May 16 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Jerusalem
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 JERUSALEM 001987 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FRONT OFFICE; NEA/SA/EX FOR AUSTIN-FERGUSON; DEPT 
FOR DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PBTS PHUM KWBG CASC IS
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: PALESTINIAN KILLED AT WEST BANK 
CHECKPOINT; 14 PALESTINIANS ARRESTED IN WEST BANK AND GAZA: 
MAY 13-16, 2005 (1800 HOURS LOCAL) 
 
 
This is a joint Embassy/ConGen cable. 
 
¶1.   (SBU) Summary: In the West Bank, the IDF on May 16 shot 
and killed a Palestinian as he approached an Israeli 
checkpoint on foot near Tulkarm.  The IDF on May 15 shot and 
wounded two Palestinians who had thrown firebombs near 'Abud 
village, northwest of Ramallah.  In the Gaza Strip, four 
Israeli civilians employed by the IDF and working on the 
fence along the Gaza-Egyptian border in Rafah suffered from 
shock and bruises on May 15 when Palestinian militants fired 
an anti-tank rocket towards an IDF tank stationed along the 
barrier.  There were also reported instances of rocket, 
mortar, and exchanges of gunfire between the IDF and 
Palestinian militants, but no reported injuries.  Some 5,000 
Hamas supporters demonstrated May 13 in Jabaliya protesting 
the alleged desecration of a Koran at the U.S. detention 
center in Cuba.  End summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2.   (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Death: A Palestinian woman on May 13 died during an IDF 
operation in the vicinity of her home in Hebron.  The 
circumstances of the death are in dispute.  Family members 
claim that she died when the IDF raided her home, but IDF 
sources claim that she died of a heart attack as they 
attempted to evacuate her. 
 
-- Death: The IDF on May 16 shot and killed a Palestinian as 
he approached an Israeli checkpoint on foot near Tulkarm. 
According to Israeli security sources, the Palestinian pulled 
out a knife and attempted to stab one of the soldiers. 
Palestinian sources deny the Israeli version of events. 
 
-- Injuries: The IDF on May 15 shot and wounded two 
Palestinians who had thrown firebombs near  Abud village, 
northwest of Ramallah.  Both Palestinians were taken to an 
Israeli hospital, where one of the injured Palestinians was 
reported to be in serious condition. 
 
-- Protest/Injuries: Israeli and Palestinian activists on May 
15 demonstrated against the construction of the separation 
barrier near Bil'in village, west of Ramallah.  Several 
demonstrators suffered tear gas inhalation during the 
protest.  (See &Arrests8.) 
 
-- Shooting: An Israeli settler on May 14 fired at a 
Palestinian in the vicinity of settler agricultural fields 
near Salim village, east of Nablus.  The settler claimed that 
the Palestinian, who managed to escape uninjured, had 
attempted to set fire to the agricultural fields. 
 
-- Shooting: Unknown gunmen on May 15 fired shots at the main 
Palestinian Authority (PA) police station in Ramallah.  There 
were no reported injuries from this incident.  PA police are 
conducting an investigation, but suspect that the shooting 
may be related to a scuffle between PA police and wanted 
activists earlier that day. 
 
¶3.   (SBU) ARRESTS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Arrests: The IDF on May 15 took into custody five Israeli 
and one foreign activist during demonstrations in protest of 
the construction of the separation barrier near Bil'in 
village, west of Ramallah.  The IDF also arrested the 
coordinator of a Palestinian committee opposed to the 
construction of the barrier.  (See &Protest/Injuries8.) 
 
-- Incursion/Arrest: The IDF on May 15 entered the Askar 
refugee camp near Nablus and arrested two Fatah members. 
 
-- Arrest: The IDF on May 15 arrested a Palestinian woman 
when she pulled out a knife near an IDF checkpoint in Hebron. 
 
 
-- Arrest: The IDF on May 15 arrested a PFLP activist in 
Samu' village, south of Hebron, for reportedly planning to 
carry out a terrorist attack. 
 
-- Incursion/Arrests: The IDF on May 15 entered Tubas 
village, northeast of Nablus, and arrested three 
Palestinians.  The IDF also confiscated a makeshift rifle and 
ammunition. 
 
-- Arrest: The IDF on May 15 arrested a Palestinian in Kafr 
Qaddum, west of Nablus, who was among the 500 prisoners 
released in February.  The circumstances of the arrest are 
unknown. 
 
-- Arrest: The IDF on May 15 arrested a Palestinian at the 
entrance of al-Khadr village, west of Bethlehem.  The 
Palestinian was in possession of an explosive device at the 
time of the arrest. 
 
-- Closure lifted: The IDF, with the exception of the Jenin 
and Nablus areas, on May 15 lifted the total closure on the 
West Bank that had been imposed in conjunction with Israeli 
Memorial and Independence Day celebrations. 
 
-- Security: The IDF on May 13 set up flying checkpoints on 
the Wadi al-Bathan road, which links Nablus with the Jordan 
Valley. 
 
¶4.   (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- PA President Abbas denied press reports, attributed to a 
senior Fatah official, of any plans to delay PLC elections 
scheduled for July. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶5.   (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injury: The IDF reported that the IDF shot and wounded a 
Palestinian May 15 during riots that broke out near the 
Israeli settlement of Neve Dekalim.  UNRWA reported that the 
injured Palestinian was a 12-year-old boy who was shot while 
trying to raise a Palestinian flag over an IDF observation 
post. 
 
-- Injuries: Israeli media and UNRWA reported that four 
Israeli civilians employed by the IDF and working on the 
fence along the Gaza-Egyptian border in Rafah suffered from 
shock and bruises May 15 when Palestinian militants fired an 
anti-tank rocket towards an IDF tank stationed along the 
barrier.  The Popular Resistance Committees (PRC) took 
responsibility for the attack. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: The IDF reported that Palestinian 
militants fired two mortar shells at Netzer Hazani May 14, 
and two more at Neve Dekalim May 15. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: UNRWA reported that Palestinians fired 
three mortar shells into the western Negev overnight May 
15-16 from the area around the Sufa Crossing. 
 
-- Shootings: The IDF reported that Palestinians and IDF 
soldiers exchanged fire near Rafiah Yam May 15 and again May 
16 west of Khan Yunis.  Two more exchanges of fire occurred 
May 14, one near Rafah and the other near Neve Dekalim.  IDF 
soldiers and Palestinians also exchanged fire May 13 near 
Neve Dekalim. 
 
-- Explosions: UNRWA reported that IDF soldiers discovered 
and destroyed a tunnel near the border fence with Egypt 
opposite Bloc J of the Rafah refugee camp. 
 
¶6.   (SBU) ARRESTS: 
 
 -- The IDF reported that IDF soldiers arrested three unarmed 
Palestinians May 15 as the three attempted to infiltrate into 
Israel across the barrier fence. 
 
-- UNRWA reported that two Palestinians were arrested May 14 
trying to cross into Israel illegally. 
 
¶7.   (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS: 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was open May 14-16, with a major detour at Netzarim 
Junction. 
 
-- Erez Crossing was closed May 14, but re-opened for 
Palestinians May 15.  A total of 3,770 laborers and 60 
merchants crossed into Israel. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone was closed May 14-15. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers May 
14-16, but was open for the import of aggregates used in 
construction May 15-16. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was open May 14-16. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open for arrivals and departures May 
14-16. 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan checkpoint was closed May 14-16.  Toufah 
checkpoint was open for residents of al-Mowassi, except males 
aged 16-30. 
 
¶8.   (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- UNRWA and media reported that demonstrations took place 
throughout the Gaza Strip May 15 to commemorate the 57th 
anniversary of al-Nakba, or the Catastrophe, as Palestinians 
term the establishment of the state of Israel.  Rallies also 
took place in the West Bank.  Approximately 4,000 people 
participated in the demonstration in Gaza City, according to 
UNRWA. 
 
-- UNRWA reported that some 5,000 Hamas supporters 
demonstrated May 13 in Jabaliya protesting the alleged 
desecration of a Koran at the U.S. detention center in Cuba. 
Israeli and American flags were burned, according to UNRWA 
reports. 
Pearce