05JERUSALEM2461
WB/G SITREP: JUNE 16, 2005 (1300 HOURS LOCAL) --
Thu Jun 16 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Jerusalem
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 JERUSALEM 002461 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FO; NEA/SA/EX FOR AUSTIN-FERGUSON; DEPT FOR 
DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PBTS PHUM KWBG KPAL IS ASEC
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: JUNE 16, 2005 (1300 HOURS LOCAL) -- 
FOUR MEMBERS OF PALESTINIAN ISLAMIC JIHAD ARRESTED IN THE 
WEST BANK, PALESTINIAN MILITANTS FIRE FIVE MORTAR SHELLS IN 
THE GAZA STRIP 
 
 
This is a joint ConGen Jerusalem/Embassy Tel Aviv cable. 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  In the West Bank, the IDF arrested four 
members of Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ) June 15.  Israeli 
settlers uprooted or set on fire 140 Palestinian-owned olive 
trees near Nablus-area settlements.  In the Gaza Strip, IDF 
forces entered al-Mughragha overnight June 15-16 and arrested 
one Palestinian.  Palestinian militants fired five mortar 
shells at IDF and settler targets in the Gaza Strip overnight 
June 15-16, but no injuries were reported.  End Summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) ATTACKS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Deaths/Injuries: Nil. 
 
-- Arrests: Palestinian media sources reported that the IDF 
on June 15 arrested three members of Palestinian Islamic 
Jihad (PIJ) in Bani Zayd village, north of Ramallah, while 
another PIJ member was arrested at a roadblock in the same 
area. 
 
-- Security Incidents: According to Palestinian sources, 
Israeli settlers uprooted 40 olive trees near the village of 
Qaryout, south of Nablus, June 15. 
 
-- Security Incidents: According to Palestinian sources, 
Israeli settlers set on fire about 100 olive trees near the 
village of Kufr Qalil, near Nablus, June 15. 
 
¶3. (SBU) DEMOLITIONS/CONFISCATIONS: 
 
-- According to Israeli and Palestinian reports, Jerusalem 
municipality bulldozers demolished two Arab homes in the East 
Jerusalem neighborhoods of Al-Tur and Abu Tur June 15. 
According to the municipality, the buildings were constructed 
without permits. 
 
¶4. (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS 
 
-- Palestinian media reported that an IDF commander in charge 
of the Ramallah area, Col. Miki Idestein, announced that East 
Jerusalem residents would be allowed to enter Ramallah and 
any Area 'A' city in the West Bank without permits.  The 
commander's statements were reportedly made to refute rumors 
that Israeli blue ID holders will be forced to apply for 
permits in order to move to and from Ramallah, effective at 
the end of July.  The IDF commander also reportedly said that 
four terminals for vehicles and seven for pedestrians to 
check West Bank residents entering Jerusalem would be open by 
August.  The checkpoints at Atarot and Al-Ram would be 
removed by the end of August, once the Qalandiya terminal is 
completed, according to the media report. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶5. (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Death: Nil. 
 
-- Injury: Nil. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets/Shootings: The IDF reported that 
Palestinian militants fired a total of five mortar shells in 
four separate attacks on IDF and Israeli settler targets in 
the Gaza Strip overnight June 15-16. 
 
¶6. (SBU) ARRESTS: 
 
-- UNRWA reported that IDF forces entered al-Mughragha 
overnight June 15-16 and arrested one Palestinian. 
 
¶7. (SBU) PALESTINIAN SECURITY FORCES: 
 
-- Palestinian sources reported that Gaza IDF commander BG 
Kochavi met with Gaza NSF commander Sulayman Hillas June 15 
in Gaza.  The two discussed the increase in mortar and rocket 
attacks and agreed to enhance cooperation at the field 
commanders, level, according to Palestinian sources. 
 
¶8. (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS: 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was open June 16, with a major detour at Netzarim 
Junction. 
 
-- Erez Crossing was open June 15 and 3,376 laborers and 324 
merchants crossed into Israel. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone was open June 15, and 324 
laborers entered. 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinians June 16, but was 
open for the import of aggregates used in construction. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was open June 16. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open for arrivals and departures June 
¶16. 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan checkpoint was closed June 16.  Toufah 
checkpoint was open for residents of al-Mowassi, except males 
aged 16-30. 
 
¶9. (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- UNRWA reported that Fatah supporters demonstrated the 
evening of June 15 in Khan Yunis in protest against the 
reported desecration of the Koran in an Israeli prison. 
PEARCE