05JERUSALEM1655
WB/G SITREP: APRIL 21, 2005 (1600 HOURS LOCAL) --
Thu Apr 21 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Jerusalem
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 JERUSALEM 001655 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FO; NEA/SA/EX FOR AUSTIN-FERGUSON; DEPT FOR 
DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PBTS PHUM KWBG KPAL IS ASEC
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: APRIL 21, 2005 (1600 HOURS LOCAL) -- 
IDF SOLDIER INJURED IN THE GAZA STRIP, SIX PALESTINIANS 
ARRESTED IN THE WEST BANK 
 
This is a joint ConGen Jerusalem/Embassy Tel Aviv cable. 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: In the West Bank, a Palestinian shepherd 
was attacked by a number of settlers from Betar Illit 
settlement, near Husan village by Bethlehem on April 20.  Six 
Palestinians were arrested in various areas of the West Bank 
April 20.  In the Gaza Strip, one IDF soldier was moderately 
injured when an RPG struck the vehicle in which he and 
several other soldiers were traveling north of Nahal Oz. 
Palestinian militants attempted unsuccessfully to fire one 
homemade rocket towards the Green Line from the Sheja'ya 
neighborhood of Gaza City overnight April 20-21.  End Summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) ATTACKS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Deaths/Injuries: Nil. 
 
-- Arrests: According to Palestinian sources, IDF soldiers 
arrested three Palestinian minors in al-Arroub refugee camp, 
near Hebron, April 20. 
 
-- Arrests: According to Palestinian media, the IDF arrested 
two Palestinian militants in Surif village, near Hebron, 
April 20. 
 
-- Arrests: According to Palestinian sources, the IDF 
arrested Palestinian youth at Bayt Eba checkpoint, near 
Nablus, with a bag containing ammunition and explosives, 
April 20. 
 
-- Attacks: According to Palestinian media, a Palestinian 
shepherd was attacked by a number of settlers from Betar 
Illit settlement, near Husan village, in the Bethlehem area, 
April 20. 
 
-- Security Incidents: According to Palestinian reports, IDF 
soldiers found and defused explosive device near Qalqiliya, 
April 21. 
 
¶3. (SBU) CONFISCATIONS: 
 
-- According to Palestinian media, the IDF turned a rooftop 
of a Palestinian house into a military outpost in the village 
of Bet Marsam, west of Hebron, April 20. 
 
-- According to Palestinian reports, the IDF issued 
confiscation orders for military purposes for three houses in 
the village of Al-Aqaba, near Taysir, in the northern West 
Bank, April 19. 
 
¶4. (SBU) PROTESTS: 
 
-- According to Palestinian sources, a demonstration against 
the construction of the separation barrier took place in 
Bil,in village, west of Ramallah, April 21. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶5. (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injuries: Israeli media reported that one IDF sodlier was 
moderately injured, April 21, when an RPG struck the vehicle 
in which he and several other soldiers were traveling north 
of Nahal Oz.  Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ) reportedly took 
responsibility for the attack. 
 
-- Catch-up item: Injuries/Arrests: UNRWA reported that two 
Palestinians were injured April 19 during a violent dispute 
that reportedly broke out between Fatah supporters at al-Aqsa 
University in Gaza City.  PA police reportedly broke up the 
dispute and arrested several combatants. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: UNRA reported that Palestinian militants 
attempted unsuccessfully to fire one homemade rocket towards 
the green line from the Sheja'ya neighborhood of Gaza City 
overnight April 20-21.  The rocket exploded prematurely, in a 
Palestinian area.  No injuries were reported. 
 
¶6. (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS: 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was open April 21, with a major detour at Netzarim 
Junction. 
 
-- Erez Crossing was open April 20, and 4,571 laborers and 
408 merchants crossed into Israel. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone open April 20, and 667 laborers 
entered. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers but open 
for the import of aggregates used in construction April 21. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was open April 21. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open for arrivals and departures April 
¶21. 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan checkpoint was closed April 21.  Toufah 
checkpoint was open for residents of al-Mowassi. 
Pearce