05JERUSALEM2059
WB/G SITREP: ONE PALESTINIAN KILLED IN GAZA STRIP;
Fri May 20 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Jerusalem
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 JERUSALEM 002059 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FRONT OFFICE; NEA/SA/EX FOR AUSTIN-FERGUSON; DEPT 
FOR DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PBTS PHUM KWBG CASC IS
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: ONE PALESTINIAN KILLED IN GAZA STRIP; 
35 MORTARS/ROCKETS FIRED AT ISRAELI TARGETS: MAY 20, 2005 
(1600 HOURS LOCAL) 
 
 
This is a joint Embassy/ConGen cable. 
 
¶1.   (SBU) Summary: In the Gaza Strip, IDF soldiers shot and 
killed one Palestinian militant overnight May 19-20 and 
wounded another during an early morning attack on the Kfar 
Darom settlement with anti-tank rockets and mortar fire.  No 
Israelis were reported injured.  The IDF and UNRWA reported 
that Palestinian militants also fired some 35 mortars and 
rockets at Israeli settler and IDF targets May 19-20.  At 
least one Qassam rocket was fired into Israel landing near 
the Israeli town of Sderot.  No Israeli injuries were 
reported in any of these attacks.  In the West Bank, the IDF 
arrested five Palestinians during an early morning incursion 
on May 20 into Nablus.  The IDF confirmed on May 20 that 
settler extremists stole ammunition and other equipment from 
an IDF outpost in the Yizhar settlement.  End summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2.   (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Death: Nil. 
 
-- Injury: Israeli settlers from the Ramat Yashai settlement 
in Hebron on May 19 assaulted and injured an elderly 
Palestinian woman.  The woman was treated at a local hospital 
with moderate injuries. 
 
¶3.   (SBU) ARRESTS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Incursion/Arrests: The IDF on the morning of May 20 
entered Nablus and arrested five Palestinians, three from the 
Askar refugee camp and two from the Balatah refugee camp. 
The IDF withdrew its forces from the city that same morning. 
 
-- Demonstration: Palestinians in Nablus planned to hold a 
demonstration May 20, following noontime prayers, to protest 
the reported desecration of the Koran in Guantanamo Bay, 
Cuba. 
 
-- Ammunition/equipment stolen: IDF officials confirmed to 
the Israeli daily Ha'aretz on May 20 that ammunition and 
night-vision equipment had disappeared from the IDF post at 
the Yizhar settlement on several occasions.  The IDF 
suspected that settler extremists took the ammunition and 
other equipment in an attempt to carry out future attacks 
against Palestinians.  The IDF Central Command removed the 
IDF outpost from the settlement several months ago. 
 
-- Border Police sentenced: According to Israeli media 
reports, the Jerusalem district court on May 19 sentenced two 
Israeli Border policemen for their participation in the 
beating and physical abuse of two Palestinians at a Border 
Police post in Abu Dis last year.  One of the two policemen 
received a sentence of eight months in prison, while the 
other was ordered to four months of community service.  Two 
other Border Police were previously sentenced, while a fifth 
is currently awaiting sentencing. 
 
¶4.   (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- Fatah candidates on May 19 won at least 14 out of the 15 
contested seats in municipal elections held in Al-Ram, north 
of Jerusalem.  Hamas did not win any seats. 
 
-- PLO Negotiations Affairs head Sa'eb Erekat on May 19 held 
talks with PM Sharon's chief of staff Dov Weissglas. 
According to Israeli media reports, Erekat and Weissglas 
agreed "in principle" to a June meeting between PM Sharon and 
PA President Mahmud Abbas. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶5.   (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Death/Injury: UNRWA reported that IDF soldiers shot and 
killed one militant overnight May 19-20 and wounded another 
when a group of three attacked Kfar Darom settlement with 
anti-tank rockets and mortar fire.  No Israelis were reported 
injured; the third militant escaped.  According to UNRWA and 
the IDF, the attack was launched from an unused UNRWA school 
on the outskirts of the settlement.  The school was heavily 
damaged and the surrounding wall demolished by IDF responsive 
tank fire (see "Mortars/Rockets"). 
-- Mortars/Rockets: The IDF and UNRWA reported that 
Palestinian militants fired some 35 mortars and rockets at 
Israeli settler and IDF targets in the Gaza Strip May 19-20. 
At least one Qassam rocket was fired into Israel, landing 
near the Israeli town of Sderot.  Palestinian militants fired 
at least three anti-tank rockets at IDF outposts near Rafah 
overnight May 19-20 according to the IDF.  No Israeli 
injuries were reported in any of these attacks. 
 
-- Shootings: UNRWA and Israeli media reported numerous 
instances of exchanges of fire as IDF soldiers responded to 
mortar and shooting attacks overnight May 19-20. 
 
-- Explosions: The IDF reported that IDF sappers found and 
safely disposed of one IED north of Nahal Oz Crossing May 19, 
and another near an IDF outpost southwest of Khan Yunis the 
same day. 
 
¶6.   (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS: 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was open May 20, with a major detour at Netzarim 
Junction.  Abu Khouli checkpoint closed at midday, according 
to local sources. 
 
-- Erez Crossing was closed May 20. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone was closed May 20. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers May 20, 
but was open for the import of aggregates used in 
construction. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was closed May 20, after two mortar rounds 
fell nearby. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open for arrivals and departures May 
¶20. 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan checkpoint was closed May 20.  Toufah 
checkpoint was open for residents of al-Mowassi, except males 
aged 16-30. 
 
¶7.   (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- Media and Palestinian sources reported that a Palestinian 
Appellate court invalidated municipal election results in 
Bayt Lahiya and al-Bureij May 19, in response to suits 
brought by Fatah alleging election fraud.  The court ruled 
that all results from all polling stations that used their 
basis and four regular polling stations in al-Bureij should 
be annulled.  Results from two civil registry stations and 
three regular stations were annulled in Bayt Lahiya. 
Election results in al-Mughragha were reportedly upheld after 
a separate appeal against the results there was found to be 
without basis by the court. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Connelly