08SANJOSE263
BERROCAL STEPS DOWN AS MINISTER OF PUBLIC
Mon Apr 07 00:00:00 +0200 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy San Jose
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHSJ #0263/01 0982016
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 072016Z APR 08
FM AMEMBASSY SAN JOSE
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9581
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA PRIORITY 4225
RUEHQT/AMEMBASSY QUITO PRIORITY 1333
RUEABND/DRUG ENFORCEMENT ADMIN HQ WASHINGTON DC PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SAN JOSE 000263 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/AND, INL AND INR 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/03/2018 
TAGS: CS PREL PGOV SNAR MASS PINR
SUBJECT: BERROCAL STEPS DOWN AS MINISTER OF PUBLIC 
SECURITY; ALLEGES FARC TIES TO COSTA RICA 
 
REF: A. 07 SAN JOSE 2073 
     ¶B. 07 SAN JOSE 1999 
 
Classified By: CDA Peter M. Brennan for reasons 1.4 (d). 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY. Minister of Public Security Fernando Berrocal 
stepped down on March 30 after asserting that the 
FARC was connected to elements of the "political sector" in 
Costa Rica.  Berrocal's comments came in the aftermath of a 
March 14 raid on a suspected FARC safe house.  His departure 
came less than 24 hours before he was to testify on the issue 
before the National Legislature, fueling political and media 
speculation.  In public and private, President Arias and 
Minister Arias reiterated that there were no Costa Rican 
links to the FARC, that the GOCR had nothing to hide, and 
that Berrocal's unfounded comments had gone too far.  An 
exculpatory letter from President Uribe buttressed their 
arguments.  This controversy may not die quickly; Berrocal 
has provided documents supporting his claims to President 
Arias who turned them over to the Legislature.  Berrocal 
wants to testify as a "private citizen" in mid-April.  For 
our part, we will engage the new Minister (Janina del 
Vecchio, septel) to continue the successful partnership 
developed with Berrocal and his ministry.  We will also urge 
the GOCR to harden the permissive environment which has 
tolerated FARC supporters and activities for too long.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
========================================= 
BERROCAL IS OUT, BUT HE DIDN'T GO QUIETLY 
========================================= 
 
¶2. (SBU) On March 30, Fernando Berrocal stepped down as the 
Minister of Public Security, in a not-so-amicable political 
divorce from the President and his brother, Minister of the 
Presidency Rodrigo Arias.  According to Casa Presidencial, 
the GOCR did not want to "politicize" the "sensitive" 
FARC-Costa Rica issue by having Berrocal testify on the 
matter before the Legislature the next day.  Berrocal 
insisted to the media that he neither resigned nor was asked 
to resign.  He said that he and President Arias had agreed 
that he should leave office "for reasons of state." 
 
¶3. (SBU) Berrocal ignited this political firestorm on March 
15, by asserting publicly that information obtained from 
the laptop computer of deceased FARC leader Raul Reyes linked 
members of the "Costa Rican political sector" to the 
FARC.  Led by the PUSC party (part of the Arias 
administration's own pro-CAFTA coalition), incensed 
legislators summoned Berrocal to appear on March 31 and to 
"name names."  Berrocal's comments followed a raid on an 
alleged FARC safe house near San Jose on March 14, where 
$480,000 of FARC cash was found.  As the media has widely 
reported here, the stashed cash was described in detail by 
information obtained from Reyes' laptop, and discovered in 
the home of long-time FARC collaborators Francisco Gutierrez 
and Cruz Prado. 
 
¶4. (U) Since his departure, Berrocal has written two letters 
to President Arias, which he released to the media and posted 
on the internet.  In the first letter (dated March 31), which 
also ran as an Op-ed in leading daily La Nacion, Berrocal 
asked to exercise his "constitutional right" to speak to the 
Legislature, anyway, as a private citizen.  In the second 
letter (dated April 1 and published April 3), Berrocal said 
he had documents from the Drug Control Police (PCD), the 
intelligence service (DIS), the National Police of Colombia, 
and other sources which he planned to share with the 
Legislature.  Berrocal's document package is to be reviewed 
by a special commission (see below). 
 
¶5. (U) The second letter, titled "The Country Must Know", 
described the FARC as having made Costa Rica a "safe haven" 
for their operatives, and stressed that the FARC and 
narcotrafficking were one and the same, at least since 2000. 
While Costa Rican contact with the FARC before that date was 
part of the country's long tradition of offering asylum and 
political refuge, contact after the FARC turned to 
narcotrafficking reflected "unacceptable indifference," 
"ingenuity" or "virginal complicity," according to Berrocal. 
His letter insisted that he never claimed to have a specific 
"list" of Costa Rican politicians with links to the FARC. 
 
============================================ 
ARIAS BROTHERS: BERROCAL WENT TOO FAR, AGAIN 
============================================ 
 
¶6. (C) During his April 1 meeting with visiting WHA DAS 
Kirsten Madison, President Arias denied there was any list 
of Costa Rican politicians associated with the FARC, despite 
Berrocal's assertions.  Arias said that Berrocal is welcome 
to testify to the Legislature as a private citizen, but not 
as Minister.  Minister Arias and the President echoed a 
similar message all week, in press releases, press 
conferences and interviews.  Both reiterated that the there 
were no Costa Rican political links to the FARC, that the 
GOCR had nothing to hide, and that Berrocal stepped down 
because the GOCR did not share his "unfounded" views, which 
"raised false expectations," and "jeopardized current and 
future investigations."  Minister Arias has also stressed 
publicly that Berrocal was set to leave government on May 1, 
anyway; all the Arias administration did was accelerate his 
departure by a few weeks. 
 
¶7. (U) On April 2, President Arias told a press conference 
that he had called Colombian President Uribe, generating a 
letter from Uribe denying that any material discovered from 
the Reyes's laptop "up to now" linked the FARC to Costa Rican 
politicians.  Arias' comments and the text of the Uribe 
letter have received wide media coverage.  So have comments 
by Colombian VP Santos, insisting to a Costa Rican journalist 
that the FARC is a "real threat" to Costa Rica, suggesting 
that the GOC may discover additional information about 
FARC-Costa Rican ties in the future, and labeling the FARC a 
threat to the entire continent.  Meanwhile, the GOCR 
dispatched a delegation including VP (and Justice Minister) 
Laura Chinchilla, FonMin Bruno Stagno and Attorney-General 
Francisco Dall'Anese on a fact-finding mission to Bogota 
April 4. 
 
=============== 
THIS AIN'T OVER 
=============== 
 
¶8. (SBU) This controversy may not die quickly.  The special 
legislative commission formed to investigate Berrocal's 
allegations and hear his testimony intends to meet.  Berrocal 
has announced he would be available to appear before the 
Legislature in mid-April.  A skeptical media has focused on 
the "up to this point" caveat of Uribe's letter, while 
opinion polls taken the week of March 31 depict a suspicious 
public.  Over 75 percent in one poll believe Berrocal's exit 
was wrong and do not believe they have the full story yet 
about his departure.  Over 90 percent believe the 
Attorney-General should fully investigate the entire affair. 
 
¶9. (C) PUSC and opposition PAC legislators have been asking 
in public and private for more information, while Berrocal's 
predecessor as minister, Rogelio Ramos, has asked to meet 
with the Embassy.  (A PUSC party member, Ramos's activities 
while minister have been regularly questioned by Berrocal, 
the media and others.)  President Arias publicly acknowledged 
that Ramos came to see him the day before Berrocal was 
sacked.  Ramos has threatened to us that if the GOCR (or we) 
criticize his performance, he will publicize dirt he has on 
the Arias Administration. 
 
======= 
COMMENT 
======= 
 
¶10. (C) Both sides have mishandled this affair.  Berrocal's 
poorly-timed and unsupported allegations of FARC links to 
Costa Rica apparently were the last straw for the Arias 
brothers.  The ex-minister's talk-first, think-later approach 
on sensitive law enforcement and counter-narcotics issues had 
gotten him in trouble before.  On the other hand, if the 
Arias administration team hoped the furor would fade quickly 
and quietly, they have thus far been proved wrong. 
 
¶11. (C) There may be some truth on both sides, however. 
Berrocal is correct, in our view, to highlight the 
permissive, it-can't-happen-here atmosphere that has allowed 
FARC ties to continue for years, including direct contact 
with left-of-center political elements in the country.  The 
brothers Arias were probably also correct in assuming that 
the political distraction from Berrocal's testimony would be 
harder to manage than the fallout from his hasty departure. 
At least one PUSC legislator reportedly was conditioning his 
continued support for CAFTA on the GOCR not permitting 
Berrocal to testify as minister and/or his removal from 
office. 
 
¶12. (C) We will quickly engage with new Minister del Vecchio 
 
to maintain the excellent counter-narcotics and law 
enforcement cooperation set in motion by Berrocal.  It took 
some time to overcome his skepticism about confronting the 
international drug trade, but he became a full and successful 
partner in the end.  We will also urge the GOCR to stand firm 
against the FARC.  Gutierrez and Prado may have violated 
Costa Rican money laundering laws, for example, in their 
house purchase.  Vice Minister of Public Security Lascarez 
told us (during DAS Madison's visit/call last week) that he 
felt this provided grounds for prosecution.  Media reports 
over the April 5-6 weekend suggest Bogota may ask for 
extradition of the couple.  New terrorism financing 
legislation, which might have been more easily used against 
them, has not been passed, however.  This affair strengthens 
our regularly-repeated argument that the GOCR needs to 
improve its counter terrorism laws. 
BRENNAN