08RIODEJANEIRO172
AMB. LAGON VISITS RIO DE JANEIRO TO DISCUSS TRAFFICKING IN
Tue Jul 01 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Rio De Janeiro
VZCZCXRO7200
RR RUEHRG
DE RUEHRI #0172/01 1831205
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 011205Z JUL 08
FM AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4534
INFO RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA 0875
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULO 5166
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE 3438UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 RIO DE JANEIRO 000172 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/BSC BEN CHIANG, WHA/PPC, G/TIP BARBARA FLECK 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PREL SOCI BR
SUBJECT: AMB. LAGON VISITS RIO DE JANEIRO TO DISCUSS TRAFFICKING IN 
PERSONS 
 
¶1. (U) Summary.  Ambassador Mark Lagon, Director of the State 
Department's Office to Monitor and Combat Trafficking in Persons 
(G/TIP) visited Rio de Janeiro on June 21-23 as part of a multi-city 
trip to Brazil.  He consulted with various members of the NGO and 
academic community on the sexual exploitation of women and children 
and on forced labor issues.  Amb. Lagon also visited a local girls 
shelter which received financial support from the U.S. Government as 
part of President Bush's Anti-Trafficking in Persons Initiative. 
End Summary. 
 
SEXUAL EXPLOITATION 
 
¶2. (U) Sexual exploitation of women and children in Rio de Janeiro 
is fueled by high demand from American and European tourists as well 
as from Brazilians of all social classes, explained Dr. Naanko Van 
Buuren, head of NGO Brazilian Institute for Innovation in Social 
Health (IBSS).  Dr. Van Buuren further explained to Amb. Lagon how 
rampant police corruption compounds the problem. Corrupt Military 
Police officers regularly demand monetary bribes or sexual favors 
from prostitutes in exchange for allowing them to work on the 
streets; they also demand bribes from bar and club owners to avoid 
raids - failure to pay bribes can result in death. (Note: The very 
evening that Dr. Van Buuren made these comments, corrupt Military 
Officers killed seven people in one of Rio's slums for reportedly 
failing to pay tributes/bribes. End Note.)  Civil Police officers, 
from the investigative arm of state law enforcement, are frequently 
involved in running brothels or other organized sexual services. 
Amb. Lagon suggested that Brazil's hosting of the "World Congress 
III Against the Sexual Exploitation of Children and Adolescents" in 
Rio de Janeiro on November 25-28, 2008, could be an excellent 
opportunity to "shine a light" on police corruption in Rio. 
 
¶2. (U) Amb. Lagon's further discussions with Projeto Trama (an 
anti-trafficking NGO consortium), Projeto Excola (rehabilitation of 
street children NGO), and UNICEF revealed further insights. 
Interlocutors explained how corrupt police officers run brothels in 
which sexual services are sold for as little as 40 cents per minute, 
planned raids are often thwarted due to leaks of information within 
the law enforcement community, and victims' contact information is 
sometimes released as part of the official court record in a 
prosecution case which then makes them targets for retribution.  The 
NGO representatives welcomed U.S. interest in the issue and 
expressed general approval of the Brazil's anti-trafficking efforts, 
but reported some problems such as getting officials statistics from 
the Federal Police to track trafficking crimes.  NGO representatives 
also expressed concern that Brazil's anti-trafficking laws are 
outdated, and that the criminal-justice system does not provide 
sufficient attention to victims and protection to witnesses. 
 
¶3. (U) Rio-based NGOs concentrate their efforts on victim assistance 
and other programs to rehabilitate children who have been exploited. 
 Amb. Lagon visited one such project run by the City of Rio de 
Janeiro which received funding as part of the U.S. Anti-Trafficking 
in Persons Initiative, the Dalva de Oliveira Shelter for Adolescent 
Girls.  The shelter is part of a municipal network, but specializes 
in severe cases.  Housing eight girls ranging in age from 13-17, the 
shelter provides temporary refuge for girls who have been abused or 
sexually exploited.  In many cases, the girls have worked as 
prostitutes or have otherwise been victims of trafficking. 
Counselors work with the girls as well as their families to 
eventually reintegrate them into their communities and prevent 
further exploitation. 
 
INTERNATIONAL TRAFFICKING 
 
¶4. (U) Rio de Janeiro is not a main center from which to traffic 
children internationally, according to Dr. Van Buuren.  Rather, the 
trend is for Brazilian boys to be sent to the Northeast region of 
Brazil as a staging point, then onward to countries like Suriname 
and Guyana where they receive false travel documents to enter the 
Netherlands or other European countries.  From Rio de Janeiro, a 
large number of transvestites are trafficked to Europe, in 
particular to Milan, Italy. Some boys reportedly receive surgical 
procedures in Sao Paolo before being transported to Italy. 
 
FORCED LABOR 
 
¶5. (U) According to Father Ricardo Rezende, an academic expert on 
forced labor issues who heads the Slave Labor Research Group (SLRG) 
of the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), Brazil's efforts 
regarding forced labor have progressed significantly in recent years 
and the number of people rescued from forced labor conditions is 
increasing.  Father Rezende told Amb. Lagon that the government's 
national strategy is a major step forward and reported that a 
revision of the plan is currently underway.  Though Brazil's slave 
labor law could be "stricter" and criminal punishment is still weak 
(offenders often avoid prison terms by providing "family baskets"), 
economic pressure on offenders is showing some positive results. 
 
RIO DE JAN 00000172  002 OF 002 
 
 
The government's "dirty list," an official listing of companies and 
individuals involved in the commercial trade of goods produced by 
forced labor, motivates suppliers to disassociate themselves from 
producers who use forced labor since banks are not allowed to lend 
money to listed entities. 
 
¶6. (U) Amb. Lagon mentioned that the U.S. is also working on its 
own, more general "dirty list" which identifies commodities from 
certain countries as possibly using forced labor such as cocoa from 
Ghana and the Ivory Coast.  Father Rezende viewed the U.S. approach 
as too broad, arguing that it negatively slurs an entire industry 
for the actions of individual producers.  Notably in Brazil, he 
explained, some production of sugarcane, cotton, meat, and charcoal 
uses forced labor - but it would be misleading to say that these 
industries as a whole use forced labor.  Regarding the question of 
whether Brazil's rapidly expanding ethanol production is responsible 
for an increase in forced labor on sugarcane farms, Father Rezende 
noted the possibility of increased pressure on production volume but 
said that oversight in Sao Paulo (where most sugarcane production 
takes place) is more persistent, and that unscrupulous practices 
such as using child labor are usually not present.  A more serious 
problem in Sao Paolo in over-exploitation of workers, who are paid 
based on productivity and subjected to high production requirements. 
 Some workers have died as a result. 
 
¶7. (U) This message was cleared/coordinated with Embassy Brasilia 
and the Office to Monitor and Combat Trafficking in Persons. 
 
MARTINEZ