10KABUL216
FEBRUARY 16 CIV-MIL ROC DRILL IN DOHA: PURPOSE AND
Fri Jan 22 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO5613
PP RUEHDBU RUEHPW RUEHSL
DE RUEHBUL #0216/01 0221826
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 221826Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4887
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHDO/AMEMBASSY DOHA PRIORITY 0511
RHMFIUU/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KABUL 000216 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV EAID ECON NATO AF
SUBJECT: FEBRUARY 16 CIV-MIL ROC DRILL IN DOHA: PURPOSE AND 
PARTICIPATION 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action request; please see para 10. 
 
¶2. (SBU) SUMMARY:  In preparation for the February 16 
CENTCOM/SRAP/ISAF/Embassy Rehearsal of Concept (ROC) civ-mil 
planning exercise in Doha, post has consulted extensively 
with ISAF over format, content, participation, and logistics. 
 Post and ISAF have reached consensus on many aspects of 
conference - e.g. the need for a more strategic-level view 
than originally formulated, with more time for discussion; 
and the value of senior Afghan and U.S. agency participation. 
 We invite SRAP guidance.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶3. (SBU) As post understands, the purpose of the Feb 15-16 
conference is to present a comprehensive outlook of USG 
activities and strategy in Afghanistan, both geographically 
and over time through December 2010, in order to share 
information, ensure actions are complementary and identify 
and resolve issues and gaps.  Day 1 (Feb 15) will be a dress 
rehearsal for the Day 2 (Feb 16) main event.  We have 
anticipated that the topic leads will be Embassy or ISAF 
subject matter experts who present the activities planned in 
country.  To maximize benefits from the presentation and 
discussion, preparation materials such as presentation 
slides, speakers, notes, and additional information papers 
will be consolidated and provided to senior participants 
prior to the conference. 
 
Format: Two six-month rounds over 19 substantive areas 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶4.  (U) Post has agreed with ISAF jointly to recommend that 
the format of the conference should consist of two six-month 
iterations (vice four three-month turns).  Longer segments 
offer an opportunity to think more strategically and should 
allow for more discussion.  We have also agreed with ISAF on 
nineteen lines of effort as topics for presentation and are 
awaiting formal response from CENTCOM and SRAP: Situation 
Update, Military Deployments, Non-US Military Deployments, 
Civilian Deployments, ANSF Force Generation, Communication, 
Major Military Operations, CT Operations, ANSF 
Development/Employment, Reintegration, Governance, 
Sub-National Governance, Anti-Corruption, Rule of Law, Threat 
Finance, Economic Development, Agriculture, Counter-Narcotics 
and Borders.  We understand that SRAP and CENTCOM also are in 
agreement with this framework. 
 
Participation 
------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Participation in the event is pending final 
confirmation but will include senior representatives and 
subject matter experts from SRAP, CENTCOM, ISAF, and Embassy 
Kabul.  Post, together with ISAF, recommends that attendees 
include selected GIRoA ministers and key international 
observers. The Ambassador and COMISAF will finalize a 
proposed list over the next several days, together with 
suggestions for invitation timing and procedures.  Post and 
ISAF further recommend that the Kabul-based NATO Senior 
Civilian Representative (Italy,s Amb. Gentilini) and the 
Deputy Commander from JFC Brunssum (British AVM Harper) 
should be invited.  UNAMA has expressed interest in 
attending, and while Post encourages their participation, 
more discussion is needed to ensure invitations are extended 
to the right persons. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Ambassador Eikenberry and GEN McChrystal are 
expected to finalize a joint recommendation on GIRoA invitees 
by January 24.  Including key ISAF/NATO partners reinforces 
President Obama's strategic vision for transferring 
responsibility to the Afghans and building long-term 
relationships in Afghanistan across the international 
community.  The following heads of ministerial  "clusters" 
are under consideration: MOD (Minister Wardak), MOF (Minister 
 Zakhilwal), MAIL (Minister Rahimi).  Others include: MOI 
(Minister Atmar), NDS (Director General Saleh), IDLG 
(Director General Popal), Reconciliation and Reintegration 
(Minister Stanekzai), FM Rassoul, and a ROL representative. 
Post is also considering whether to invite MRRD Minister 
Mansoori and/or Minister of Education Wardak. 
 
¶7. (SBU) As President Karzai may be uncomfortable with having 
almost all of his most important ministers absent from Kabul 
at the same time, we are willing to accept specific deputy 
ministers on a case-by-case basis.  Post also recommends 
arranging for the Ministers to attend the day of the 
conference only, arriving in the morning and returning to 
Kabul the same evening, and/or having those who do not travel 
to Doha watch the conference on SVTC along with senior Kabul 
staff.  We recommend not engaging President Karzai on the 
 
KABUL 00000216  002 OF 002 
 
 
Doha Conference or extending invitations to Afghan officials 
until after the London Conference given his overfull agenda. 
 
Logistics 
--------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Logistical factors surrounding the conference 
require attention now.  CENTCOM is arranging lodging and 
meals for conference attendees at Al Udeid Air Base and 
ensuring access to the facility and specific conference 
rooms.  ISAF is coordinating military air from Kabul to Al 
Udeid Air Base.  The Embassy has the lead on coordinating 
visas for all civilian and non-DOD attendees from 
Afghanistan.  Visas are necessary for non-U.S. citizens and 
difficult to obtain on short notice, and will likely require 
a diplomatic note (and possibly other assistance from Embassy 
Doha; we will follow up directly with Doha). Visas for 
Afghans will be particularly difficult, especially if the 
attendance list is not confirmed until after the London 
Conference.  CENTCOM has not indicated a restriction on the 
number of people to attend, but reinforced that lodging is 
limited and the briefing room seats only 90 personnel.  Post 
anticipates requiring 20 seats in the main briefing room, not 
including Afghan or international observers.  Additional 
attendees will observe from an overflow room via 
video-teleconference.  Therefore, a final list of SRAP and 
other attendees would be appreciated as soon as available. 
We expect that SVTC links to Washington will be available, 
limiting the need for travel by Washington-based staff 
without speaking roles. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) The conference will be conducted in the 
time-honored military "Rehearsal of Concept"(ROC) drill 
format.  An initial scenesetter will describe the current 
state of play.  Then, each of the topic leads will provide an 
approximately five-minute description of the activities 
planned during the timeframe Feb 16 - Jun 30, followed by a 
discussion period.   The leads will repeat the process for 
Jul 1 - Dec 31, followed by a second discussion period.  The 
rehearsal concludes with an endstate overview describing the 
projected state of play in December 2010.  A wrap-up/final 
comments section by principals completes the conference. 
Notes will be captured throughout the conference on a 
synchronization matrix. 
 
Washington Agency Participation 
------------------------------- 
 
¶10.  (SBU) Action Request:  Post requests Department solicit 
senior policy level representation from the interagency. 
Senior representation from the following agencies would allow 
valuable coordination for the Mission: USAID, DEA, FBI, USDA, 
Treasury, DOJ, and NSC.  In view of the limited seating in 
the conference room, participants and attendees from SRAP and 
other civilian agencies would be appreciated soonest.  ISAF 
and CENTCOM advise that seats in the conference room will be 
limited to senior representatives and subject matter 
briefers. 
EIKENBERRY