04BRASILIA1097
GOB NOTIFICATION OF DUMPING INVESTIGATION: METHYL
Thu May 06 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Brasilia
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS BRASILIA 001097 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PLS PASS USTR FOR SCRONIN, LYANG 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/OLAC/WBASTIAN/JANDERSEN/DMCDO UGALL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD ECON BR
SUBJECT: GOB NOTIFICATION OF DUMPING INVESTIGATION: METHYL 
METHACRYLATE 
 
 
¶1.  Post received a letter dated April 13, 2004 from the 
Department of Commercial Defense of the Ministry of 
Development, Industry and Foreign Trade's Secretariat of 
Foreign Trade (SECEX) notifying the USG of the receipt of a 
petition from the Brazilian company Proquigel Quimica S.A. 
requesting the opening of a dumping investigation regarding the 
importation of U.S. origin methyl methacrylate.  The letter 
states that Ministry officials determined that the petition met 
the necessary Brazilian requirements and a case number 
MDIC/SECEX/RJ N.52100.000112/2004-78 was opened.  The letter 
requests the addresses of the following U.S. companies, 
identified as exporters to Brazil of methyl methacrylate:  CyRo 
Industries, Ineos Acrylics Inc., Lucite International Inc. and 
Multicolor Inc. 
 
¶2.  Post received a subsequent letter dated April 27, 2004 
notifying the USG of the opening of a dumping, damage and 
causal relation investigation of U.S. origin methyl 
methacrylate exported to Brazil.  Post received a copy of the 
petition and the April 20, 2004 SECEX circular publicly opening 
the investigation as attachments to the letter.  The letter 
notes that questionnaires were sent to the following companies: 
CyRo Industries, Ineos Acrylics UK Limited, Lucite 
International Inc., Multicolor Inc. and Rohm and Hass Texas 
Inc.  Post had not responded to the first letter's request for 
company addresses before receiving the second letter.  The 
April 27 letter also asks that Post inform the Ministry of any 
other U.S. companies that exported methyl methacrylate to 
Brazil during the period under investigation, April 2003 to 
March 2004. 
 
HRINAK