04BRASILIA2745
FEAR AND INTIMIDATION EVIDENT IN MURDER CASE OF
Mon Nov 01 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Brasilia
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRASILIA 002745 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV ELAB KCRM KJUS CASC SOCI BR
SUBJECT: FEAR AND INTIMIDATION EVIDENT IN MURDER CASE OF 
BRAZILIAN LABOR INSPECTORS 
 
REF: A. A) RIO 1001 
 
     ¶B. B) RIO 111 
     ¶C. C) RIO 90 
     ¶D. D) BRASILIA 248 
     ¶E. E) RIO 1287 
 
¶1. (SBU) INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY:  In an October 15, 2004 
meeting with poloff, a Brazilian Ministry of Labor (MOL) 
Inspection Counselor agreed with recent press reports that 
finger local agricultural magnates in the January 28, 2004 
assassination of three MOL labor inspectors and their driver 
near the rural city of Unai, Minas Gerais (reftels). 
Stepping beyond views expressed by the media, MOL Inspection 
Counselor Marcelo Campos speculated that tax evasion could 
have been the principal motive, since relatively low 
labor-related fines were hardly worth a crime of this scale. 
When separately interviewed by poloffs on October 25, 2004 
the Labor Inspector responsible for Unai was more 
circumspect, characterizing the evidence in the case to date 
as "circumstantial."  Despite her denials and repeated 
professions of faith in higher powers, poloffs sensed that 
fear and intimidation played a role in her evasiveness.  The 
major suspects in the killings are currently in custody and 
awaiting trial in the state capital of Belo Horizonte.  END 
SUMMARY 
 
TAX EVASION A POTENTIAL MOTIVE? 
------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) In an October 15, 2004 meeting in Brasilia, 
Ministry of Labor (MOL) Inspection Counselor Marcelo Campos 
shared his views about the murder of three MOL inspectors and 
their driver in January 2004.  The four were ambushed in 
their car on a rural road in western Minas Gerais state, near 
the small town of Unai.  Campos concurred with recent 
indictments that placed responsibility for the killings on 
local Unai agriculture magnate Noberto Manica, a longtime 
violator of Brazilian labor laws.  An indictment has also 
been issued against his brother Anterio, who was recently 
elected mayor of Unai in spite of his bad press. 
Characterizing the Unai region as "lawless," Campos was 
unflinching in his belief that Norberto Manica was guilty and 
asserted that the government possessed "robust proof" to that 
effect. Going beyond all previously released information, 
Campos speculated that Manica feared the inspectors would 
discover tax evasion in which penalties would far exceed 
fines levied for labor violations. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) According to Campos, the murder case is currently 
being handled by a federal court in Belo Horizonte, the state 
capital.  Eight indictments have already been issued against 
Noberto Manica, the alleged triggermen, and their 
accomplices.  The suspects (save Anterio Manica) await trial 
at a detention facility in Belo Horizonte.  As an elected 
official, Anterio Manica will be tried by the federal 
Superior Court of Justice in Brasilia.  He was recently freed 
pending further investigation concerning the scope of his 
involvement. 
 
EVASIVENESS AND FEAR 
-------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Unlike Campos, MOL Chief Inspector in charge of the 
region (including Unai) Dalia Maria Chaves Ulhoa was evasive 
and offered little substantive information about the case 
when interviewed on October 25, 2004 in her Paracatu office. 
Paracatu is a small town that sits approximately 90 km away 
from Uani in rural Minas Gerais.  When asked whether tax 
evasion could have prompted the killings, Ulhoa instead 
declared that a "lack of love and understanding" along with a 
"capital-labor mismatch" were the causes.  Ulhoa acknowledged 
that she herself was a suspect in the investigation and 
emphatically dismissed the accusation as "slander."  Pressed 
for more information, Ulhoa emphasized her faith in divine 
forces and evaded any reference to the pertinent facts of the 
case.  The Labor Inspector admitted she had received death 
threats and now traveled to Unai only with police escort. 
Denying she was personally afraid, Ulhoa asserted that her 
faith kept her going. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) COMMENT: Despite Chief Inspector Ulhoa's 
professions of faith, her seeming unwillingness to provide 
direct answers suggests fear -- in sharp contrast with the 
Brasilia-based Campos, whose distance from agricultural 
magnates in Unai granted him the ability to speak frankly. 
Federal jurisdiction over the case has allowed it to come 
closer to resolution by removing it from the "lawless" 
hinterlands where, as poloffs observed, fear often trumps 
justice.  END COMMENT 
 
¶6.  (U)  AmConsulRio and poloff Kathleen List provided 
information and support for this report. 
 
DANILOVICH