09BRASILIA771
BRAZIL: CODEL THOMPSON DISCUSSES TERRORISM,
Thu Jun 18 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Brasilia
VZCZCXRO2496
RR RUEHRG
DE RUEHBR #0771/01 1691909
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 181909Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4524
INFO RUEHAC/AMEMBASSY ASUNCION 7567
RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA 4943
RUEHBU/AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES 6266
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 4398
RUEHLP/AMEMBASSY LA PAZ 6912
RUEHPE/AMEMBASSY LIMA 4267
RUEHMN/AMEMBASSY MONTEVIDEO 7779
RUEHQT/AMEMBASSY QUITO 2738
RUEHSG/AMEMBASSY SANTIAGO 0978
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE 9669
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO 7882
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULO 4227UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 BRASILIA 000771 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PTER OREP PGOV BR
SUBJECT: BRAZIL: CODEL THOMPSON DISCUSSES TERRORISM, 
CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE WITH BRAZILIAN OFFICIALS 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:   Chairman of the House Homeland Security 
Committee Bennie Thompson (D-MS), accompanied by other 4 
Committee Members and some 20 staff, visited Brasilia on May 
¶28.  In addition to a country team and special session with 
Department of Homeland Security representatives (ICE, CBP, 
USSS) to discuss their work here, Thompson participated in a 
special closed session of the Chamber of Deputies Public 
Security Committee where both sides expressed their desire 
for expanded bilateral cooperation and information sharing on 
terrorism issues.  Deputy Committee Chairman Raul Jungmann 
called for a national dialogue on international terrorism 
focused on how it can affect Brazil and what type of 
legislation is needed to give the GOB more effective tools to 
deal with terrorist threats that could arise in the future. 
Members also met with Senators Fortes, Torres, and Tuma over 
lunch at the Charge,s residence to hear their views on 
Brazilian internal security, regional security issues, 
terrorism, and counterterrorism legislation ) that already 
on the books and that needed.  Members were briefed by GSI 
Minister Jorge Felix on his organization,s mission, 
particularly in the areas of critical infrastructure 
protection, cyber security, and counterterrorism.   CODEL 
Members stressed the importance of the fight against 
terrorism to the USG and American people, thanked Felix for 
those areas where there is already fruitful cooperation 
between USG agencies and their Brazilian counterparts that 
fall under his authority, and noted the need for Brazil to 
strengthen counterterrorism legislation.  General Felix 
stated that there was no evidence of terrorist activity in 
Brazil, but stressed that the security of both countries 
could be only be assured by working together.  The message 
that CODEL Thompson heard consistently from Brazilian 
interlocutors was that there is no current terrorist threat 
to Brazil and therefore counterterrorism is not as high a 
national security priority for Brazil as it is for the United 
States.  End Summary. 
 
---------------------------- 
Chamber of Deputies Meeting 
---------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) Chairman Thompson and other Members and Staff 
participated in a special closed session meeting with the 
Chamber of Deputies Committee on Public Safety and Combat 
against Organized Crime.  In attendance for the Brazilians 
were Chairman Alexandre Silveira (Socialist People,s Party - 
PPS, opposition, of Minas Gerais), First Vice chairman Raul 
Jungmann (PPS - Pernambuco), Third Vice Chairman William Woo 
(Brazilian Social Democracy Party - PSDB, opposition, of Sao 
Paulo), Federal Deputies Joao Campos (PSDB - Goias), 
Guilherme Campos (Democrats - DEM, opposition, of Sao Paulo), 
and Antonio Carlos Biscaia (Worker,s Party - PT, government 
coalition, of Rio de Janeiro), and some staff members. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Chairman Thompson told the Brazilians deputies he 
was on a fact-finding mission and there is concern in the 
United States that terrorists might exploit the 
vulnerabilities of our friends to create challenges for us. 
After briefly describing the origins of his committee and the 
Department of Homeland Security in the September 11, 2001 
attacks, Chairman Thompson said he and his colleagues respect 
Brazil,s sovereignty and were not there to lecture but to 
find out what Brazil is doing that might be useful to the 
U.S. in security policy. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Deputies asked questions about changes in U.S. 
policy from the Bush administration to the Obama 
administration.  They were interested in what has changed and 
whether there is a change in emphasis and approach on issues 
such as drugs and terrorism, while some expressed an interest 
in counter-narcotics efforts.  CODEL Members noted that their 
point of departure is one of appreciation for other nations 
in the hemisphere as our partners in facing global 
challenges.  The Obama Administration shares this approach, 
and U.S. policy has matured after the initial "reflex" 
response immediately after 9/11. 
 
¶5. (SBU) In response to CODEL inquiries about the adequacy of 
Brazil,s anti-terrorism legislation, Federal Deputy Jayme 
Campos, a past chairman of the committee, noted that Brazil's 
 
BRASILIA 00000771  002 OF 005 
 
 
legislation on this dates from the 1960s and Deputy Raul 
Jungmann, immediate past chairman of the committee, added 
that Congress needed to have a debate on the issue.  Deputies 
noted that as Brazil is projecting itself globally, global 
governance is being transformed, and Brazil,s 
responsibilities are growing.  It needs to assume greater 
responsibility domestically, for which it needs legislation 
and partnerships on terrorism.  Jungmann noted that UNASUL 
and the South American Defense Council (SADC) are among the 
key areas for work.  He added that that Brazil has signed all 
UN anti-terrorism conventions. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Deputy William Woo (PSDB-SP) said Brazil could be a 
close partner of the U.S. on homeland security issues.  He 
noted that Paraguay poses a significant challenge because of 
its lax controls of illegal arms that enter Brazil.  He also 
pointed to port security, money laundering, cybercrime, and 
critical infrastructure protection as areas Brazil needs to 
focus on. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
CODEL Hears of Threats from Northern Border, Iran, Russia 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Members of CODEL Thompson heard a sobering 
assessment of threats to Brazilian and regional security from 
three conservative senators.  Senators Herclito Fortes (DEM 
- Piaui), Romeu Tuma (Brazilian Labor Party - PTB, government 
coalition, of Sao Paulo), and Demstenes Torres (DEM - Goias) 
told members of the CODEL that they have grave concerns about 
threats to Brazilian security from the northern border more 
than from the tri-border area (Brazil-Argentina-Paraguay, 
described as "more or less under control"), because drug 
trafficking has been wedded to ideology and put into the 
service of narco-terrorists.  Other threats from the north 
include Venezuelan president Hugo Chavez's progressive 
erosion of free market conditions, press freedoms, and 
political freedoms, which in turn threaten to Mercosul's 
integrity, should Venezuela be admitted as a full member. 
They also pointed to the growing closeness between Iran and 
Venezuela as a threat to regional stability.  This 
relationship, complicated by Russian arms sales, has 
stimulated arms acquisitions by other South American 
countries. 
 
¶8. (SBU) The senators noted with concern that Hugo Chavez has 
become a leading figure for leftists throughout the region, 
even in Cuba, where he, not Fidel Castro, is becoming a point 
of reference.  The lack of border security, particular in the 
Amazon region, also was highlighted as a danger that needs 
attention from regional governments.  The Brazilian 
intelligence service, in the words of one senator, is a 
"torpedoed organization" that is "going through an 
institutional crisis" because mismanagement has detoured 
intelligence officers into the wrong tasks, while ignoring 
real threats, in spite of Congress's best oversight efforts. 
They said there has been an alarming increase in drug abuse 
throughout Brazil, and cooperation with the U.S. on this and 
other law enforcement matters is welcome and valuable. 
Finally, the senators urged the U.S. to reassert itself as 
the regional geopolitical leader by seeking partnership 
throughout the region with all democratic countries. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
Discussing Infrastructure Protection, Counterterrorism 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) CODEL Thompson also had the opportunity to discuss 
counterterrorism and critical infrastructure protection with 
General Jorge Felix, Minister for Institutional Security and 
head of the Institutional Security Cabinet (GSI)*an office 
within the presidency equivalent to a combined Director of 
National Intelligence, Office of National Drug Control 
Policy, and infrastructure Protection czar.  Felix was 
accompanied by Alberto Cunha Couto, Secretary for 
Institutional Studies, Raphael Mandarino Jnior, Director of 
the Department of Information and Communications Security, 
General Reinaldo Cayres Minati and Mrcio Paulo Buzzanelli, 
both advisers to General Felix.  Chairman Thompson noted that 
it is critical for Brazil and the United States to work 
 
BRASILIA 00000771  003 OF 005 
 
 
together to stop activities that may threaten "our friends", 
Felix agreed, noting that dialogue is important to learn from 
each other and stating that, "we can only have security if we 
have security together." 
 
STRUCTURE AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
 
¶10. (SBU) Felix began the meeting by explaining to CODEL 
members the structure and responsibilities of GSI and how it 
had developed national strategies on critical infrastructure, 
intelligence, and nuclear protection.  GSI is charged with 
providing protection for the president and high level 
officials within the office of the president, protecting the 
government,s computer systems, providing crisis management, 
and advising the president on matters pertaining to security, 
counterterrorism, and intelligence.  As secretary of the 
government,s National Defense Council and chair of the 
Government Council,s Subcommittee on National Defense, the 
Minister and GSI have a role in coordinating military policy 
in conjunction with the Ministry of Defense.  GSI is also 
responsible for the Brazilian Intelligence Agency (ABIN), and 
the National Anti-Drug Secretariat (SENAD).  Through the 
latter, GSI takes a leading role within the Brazilian 
government  establishing anti-drug policy (but not 
enforcement, which is handled by the Brazilian Federal 
Police, or DPF).  In addition, Felix added, GSI will soon 
have responsibility over the Nuclear Protection System 
(SIPRON), which is being transferred over from the Ministry 
of Science and Technology.  Unfortunately, Felix noted, while 
GSI has been given control over SIPRON, the budget remains 
with the Science and Technology Ministry, and not with GSI. 
 
CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE 
 
¶11. (SBU) Felix also discussed Brazil,s critical 
infrastructure protection plan, which is focused on ensuring 
continuity of services in the areas of energy, water, 
transportation, financial services, and telecommunications. 
One particular area of concern is information security.   The 
Department of Information Security within GSI is working to 
develop policies for security of information, system 
management, cryptology, and risk management.  GSI chairs a 
steering committee for information security in which every 
entity in the government participates, including 37 
ministries, 6000 government departments, 320 networks, and 
900,000 federal employees.  According to Felix, Brazilian 
networks suffer more than 2000 computer intrusions a day, 
which they believe represents 1 percent of total incidents. 
The intrusions come mainly from China and Eastern Europe. 
 
¶12. (SBU) Another critical infrastructure and 
counterterrorism measure is Brazil,s implementation of the 
International Shipping and Port Facility Security (ISPS) 
Code.  According to Felix, Brazil has developed a 
comprehensive plan to implement ISPS, which includes 
multi-layered response plan for each level of threat.  For 
example, at the lowest threat level, the response is handled 
at the port.  For this, training was provided to four 
officers in every port (237) and in every ship in Brazil,s 
merchant marine (82 ships).  At the next level, state 
commissions for the security of ports have been established; 
and in level 3, a commission headed by GSI and composed of 
representatives from the Ministry of Justice, Ministry of 
External Relations, the Presidency,s Civilian Household, and 
the DPF convenes for the purpose of handling the crisis.  At 
signs of trouble, merchant marine vessels are instructed to 
contact Brazilian Naval vessels and the National Command 
Center.  The most common type of incident at sea involves the 
travel of clandestine passengers. 
 
INTELLIGENCE 
 
¶13. (U) Chairman Thompson and CODEL members praised Brazil,s 
efforts on critical infrastructure protection and asked, in 
light of the United states, own experience 9-11 attacks, 
whether Brazil had similar issues as in the United States 
with different agencies not talking to each other.  Felix 
recounted how they have found that despite the creation of a 
Department for the Integration of the Brazilian Intelligence 
System (DISBIN) within ABIN, the same is true in Brazil.  The 
 
BRASILIA 00000771  004 OF 005 
 
 
DISBIN was created in 2008 as a means of establishing an 
entity within ABIN capable of coordinating and sharing 
information across the Brazilian government related to 
security, but so far without much success.  As a result of 
the continuing confusion, the government is currently 
studying and drafting a new national intelligence policy that 
will the define roles and the scope of activity of the 
different government entities tied to intelligence and 
security.  The draft of the policy should be ready "within 
weeks," according to Felix. 
 
COUNTERTERRORISM 
 
¶14. (SBU) CODEL members expressed keen interest in Brazil,s 
posture on countering terrorist activity.  Felix explained 
that counterterrorism is an important component of GSI,s and 
ABIN,s work.  Last year, told Felix, ABIN underwent a 
reorganization that created within ABIN a Department for 
Counterterrorism.  Asked by the CODEL if Brazil was concerned 
about terrorism within its territory, Felix hewed to the 
standard GOB line and observed that Brazil faces only a small 
risk of suffering terrorist attacks, but that it works 
together with its neighbors and with the United States to 
monitor activities of individuals that could be linked to 
terrorism.  Despite this, Felix noted that so far there has 
been no proof of links to terrorism of anyone within 
Brazilian territory.  There are allegations that individuals 
in the Triborder Area of Brazil, Argentina and Paraguay are 
sending money to Lebanon, particularly for Hizballah and 
HAMAS, but these amounts are consistent with remittances that 
are sent from abroad to family members.  He further added 
that there are people within Brazilian territory who are 
accused of having links to terrorist groups, but unless they 
are in UN or Interpol lists or commit crimes within Brazilian 
territory, Brazil can,t do anything about them.  Brazil does 
not have anti-terrorism legislation, so it cannot combat mere 
membership in a terrorist organization, much less in the case 
of Hizballah or HAMAS, which are legitimate political parties 
in their home countries.  In fact, Lebanese legislators who 
belong to Hizballah visit Brazil to maintain contact with the 
Lebanese community here in Brazil. 
 
¶15. (SBU) The CODEL asked for Felix,s reaction to news that 
Brazil that week had released a suspected al-Qaeda affiliated 
individual involved in communications and online propaganda 
for the group after detaining him for several weeks. (Note: 
The individual had been arrested for hate crimes, formation 
of a gang, and incitement to violence, but had to be released 
after the prosecutor failed to file charges in time. The 
individual has been stripped of his passport and is 
prohibited from departing the country, but remains free 
pending the prosecutor,s decision on whether to try the 
individual in court. End note.)  Felix observed that the 
arrest had been a Federal Police effort in conjunction with 
the FBI and as a result GSI kept an eye out on the case from 
a distance.  But, Felix added, their understanding was that 
it was a crime of opinion involving racist comments about 
President Obama and Israel, and that there was no evidence of 
a link to al Qaeda. 
 
WMD 
 
¶16. (SBU) Responding to a question from Representative Harman 
about Brazil,s measures to counteract the possibility of 
smuggling nuclear or other WMD material through Brazilian 
territory, Felix noted that because Brazil has a policy of 
integration with its neighborhoods and has borders with 10 
countries, it is increasingly vulnerable, but to mitigate 
this it is increasing its information sharing with other 
countries to monitor supplies and purchases of materials. 
Asked specifically about the possibility that individuals 
tied to terrorist groups in the Middle East could transit 
through Brazil, Felix replied that Brazil has good relations 
with the Arab world and that Brazil would hope that those 
countries would want to maintain good relations with Brazil 
and would be on guard to prevent such activity taking place. 
 
¶17. (U) This cable has been cleared by CODEL Thompson. 
 
 
 
BRASILIA 00000771  005 OF 005 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SOBEL