10BRASILIA16
Brazil: Scenesetter - DHS Deputy Secretary Lute visit
Wed Jan 06 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Brasilia
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBR #0016/01 0061357
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O R 061355Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
TO RHEFHLC/HOMELAND SECURITY CENTER WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RHMFIUU/TSA HQ WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0265
INFO RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULOUNCLAS BRASILIA 000016 
 
SIPDIS 
DHS FOR DEPUTY SECRETARY JANE HOLL LUTE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR ASEC BR
SUBJECT: Brazil: Scenesetter - DHS Deputy Secretary Lute visit 
January 12-13 
 
REF: BRASILIA 1340; BRASILIA 1267; BRASILIA 1526; MDA 6180 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 
 
 
1.(SBU)  SUMMARY: Your visit to Brazil provides an opportunity to 
engage directly with the Government of Brazil (GOB) on aviation 
security issues and to reinforce the importance the USG attaches to 
deepening and expanding the positive security agenda between the 
United States and Brazil.  While first and foremost addressing the 
immediate issue of enhancing security for flights going to the 
United States, this visit also will permit us to advance a broader 
partnership on security issues.  While operational cooperation 
between the Transportation Security Administration (TSA) and the 
Brazilian civil aviation authority (ANAC) and the airport authority 
(INFRAERO) has been excellent, including numerous recent TSA 
airport visits in Brazil, the Ministry of External Relations (MRE) 
has resisted TSA's proposal to introduce a TSA attach???? at the 
Embassy.  GOB, while increasingly open to working with the United 
States on bilateral, regional and global areas of mutual interest, 
retains long-held sensitivities regarding both Brazilian 
sovereignty and any reference to the possibility that "terrorism" 
exists in Brazil.  It is important to approach Brazil as an equal 
partner, and not as either a junior partner or assistance 
recipient, in designing joint cooperation.  In the near-term, we 
have found focusing on countering illicit activity, without 
labeling the cause as "terrorism," and focusing on positive 
concrete outcomes, such as enhanced security or trade facilitation, 
as most productive in yielding effective cooperation.  Regarding 
the response to the current threat to aviation security, the 
primary challenge in Brazil remains pat-down authority.  Only the 
Federal Police currently have this authority, and only in specific 
cases of "suspicion."  GOB approaches the issue of pat-down 
authority extremely cautiously.  The Brazilian Constitution is a 
direct result of Brazil's recent history as a military dictatorship 
(1964-1985), where there was substantial government disrespect and 
abuse of civil liberties.  The current government (many members of 
which fought against the military dictatorship), while recognizing 
that responding to global threats require a coordinated and 
effective response, is inclined to tread carefully in this area. 
While manpower to perform pat-downs is obviously a concern, the 
Constitutional issue remains the fundamental circle the GOB is 
seeking internally to square.  Your visit provides an excellent 
opportunity to approach the issue with sensitivity to this context 
and to brainstorm workarounds within Brazilian law in order to find 
a solution.  END SUMMARY 
 
 
 
OVERVIEW 
 
 
 
2.(SBU)  Brazil is a developing country moving onto the global 
stage.  The world's tenth largest economy, Brazil has evolved from 
IMF creditor to donor, from development assistance recipient to 
provider, and from a country that suffered extreme economic shocks 
to a country emerging early from the global crisis and confident in 
its macroeconomic policy.  New offshore pre-salt finds could 
eventually make Brazil a significant oil and gas exporter.  The 
Mission continues to seek opportunities to deepen investment and 
trade ties with Brazil bilaterally in order to increase business 
opportunities, job growth, and economic development.  Economic 
issues are proving to be the pathway to increasingly productive GOB 
engagement - both because as a large emerging economy it is 
beginning to have a natural seat at the table and because the GOB 
most easily sees how global economic issues directly impact its own 
well-being and national security.  Brazil's interest in taking on 
the leadership mantle economically offers numerous opportunities 
for engagement, encouraging Brazil to take on increasingly 
responsible roles globally.  It is important to frame approaches to 
GOB as an equal partner, and not a junior partner.  GOB takes 
particular pride that, having been through many developing country 
experiences (previous financial crises, addressing GINI 
inequalities, infrastructure impact on growth, etc), it is uniquely 
placed to help developing countries tackle their own challenges, 
drawing on Brazilian "lessons learned."  GOB has been receptive to 
partnering with the United States on development cooperation, 
including a newly developing initiative in Mozambique and Haiti on 
agriculture, health and infrastructure development.   Cooperation 
 
on political and security issues remains more difficult to 
navigate, where GOB is less persuaded that playing an active role 
on issues beyond its borders has implications for its own domestic 
and global security and tends sometimes to stress a "no judgment" 
approach on many issues that reflect in part its own sovereignty 
sensitivities.  This, too, is evolving, though more slowly than on 
the economic side.  Specifically, on aviation security, when TSA 
Director of Operations Robert Rottman met in October with ANAC, 
INFRAERO, and MRE, agencies expressed enthusiasm for a deeper 
partnership that could enhance Brazil's role as a role model for 
other countries in the region.  Brazil will host the 2014 soccer 
World Cup and 2016 Olympics, which may provide specific additional 
cooperation opportunities in areas ranging from security issues to 
infrastructure needs. 
 
 
 
POLITICAL CONTEXT 
 
 
 
3.(SBU)  The Brazilian political elite and media are already 
focused on the October 2010 national elections for president, 
governors of all 26 states and the federal district, two-thirds of 
the senate, and all federal deputies.  Ministers who intend to run 
for any of these offices must, under Brazilian law, resign by early 
April 2010 (six months before elections), and some will leave in 
March or earlier.  Although many Ministers are expected to leave, 
External Affairs Minister Amorim is expected to remain in place for 
the duration of the Lula Administration.  Lula is constitutionally 
barred from seeking a third term and has supported Civil Household 
Minister (Prime Minister-equivalent) Dilma Rousseff as his party's 
candidate.  Rousseff is currently a distant second in the polls to 
likely opposition candidate Sao Paulo Governor Jose Serra, but the 
race remains unpredictable this early in the process.  The terms of 
ANAC President Solange Vieira and INFRAERO President Murilo Barboza 
run past the end of the current Administration and both now are 
expected to remain in place. 
 
 
 
4.(SBU)  The United States and Brazil share the basic goals of 
fostering hemispheric stability and integration, promoting 
democracy and human rights, and preventing transnational illicit 
activity.  The attainment of a permanent seat on the UN Security 
Council has been a central goal of Brazil's foreign policy under 
President Lula's government.  Regionally, Lula has maintained 
Brazil's historic focus on stability, seeing good relations with 
all parties as the best way to achieve this goal.  As a result, 
Brazil maintains an active dialogue with Venezuela and Cuba, has 
worked to foster good relations with Bolivia and Ecuador, and has 
stood firmly on the principle of respect for sovereignty in the 
region.  In line with Lula's demonstrated interest in Brazil 
playing a larger role in global issues, as well as expanding 
Brazil's commercial ties, Lula hosted separate visits from Iranian 
President Ahmadinejad, Israeli President Peres, and Palestinian 
President Abbas, among others, in November. 
 
 
 
Â¶5. (SBU) There have been impressive strides over the last 25 years 
since the ending of the military dictatorship toward establishing 
stable democratic institutions.  Nonetheless, progress remains 
constrained by an inefficient judicial system, lack of enforcement 
capability, and persistent and widespread corruption.  Though proud 
of its status as a "melting pot" where different cultures and 
ethnic backgrounds coexist, racism remains a real and largely 
unacknowledged problem where prejudice, violence and 
marginalization continue.  Brazil continues to struggle with 
unresolved military dictatorship-era human rights violations.  It 
nonetheless is moving successfully to integrate the military into 
the mainstream of national policy making.  Organized crime, urban 
murder rates often ten times the average in U.S. cities, and the 
second largest cocaine consumption in the world require urgent 
attention.  Brazil's professional, well-trained Federal Police work 
as an effective partner with USG law enforcement agencies. 
 
 
 
ECONOMIC CONTEXT 
 
 
 
6.(SBU)  Brazil's annual Gross Domestic Product (GDP) grew 5.1 
 
 
percent in 2008, and inflation was 5.8 percent.  The global 
economic crisis eroded predictions for annual GDP growth for 2009 
to essentially flat or slightly negative.  Despite this decline in 
immediate prospects, Brazil has weathered the crisis better than 
most major economies and shows signs of a recovery, led by strong 
domestic demand and a growing middle class.  Conservative 
macroeconomic policies in the years prior to the crisis, and 
targeted responses during the crisis, played a role in lessening 
the impact of the global crisis on Brazil.  Growth in 2010 is 
expected to return to approximately 5%.  Brazil is a leading 
exporter of soybeans, beef, sugar, coffee, and orange juice. 
Brazil also distinguishes itself as a major exporter of civilian 
aircraft, steel, and petrochemicals.  The United States is Brazil's 
top trading partner overall, although in March China became 
Brazil's primary export destination.  In recent years, U.S. Foreign 
Direct Investment (FDI) in Brazil has averaged around USD 4 billion 
per year.  In the second quarter of 2009 (the most recent available 
data), the Bureau of Economic Analysis reported U.S. FDI into 
Brazil of USD 1.2 billion.  The Economist noted recently that FDI 
into Brazil from all sources increased 30% last year, while overall 
FDI worldwide contracted 14%.  At the same time, Brazil has 
significant offensive investment interests.  Illustrating a trend 
of increasing external investment, Brazilian Central Bank figures 
show that the stock of Brazilian FDI in the United States increased 
from USD 3.9 billion in 2006 to USD 6.025 billion in 2007 (the last 
year for which figures are available).  Brazil holds investment 
grade status from the major rating entities.  Reflecting growing 
Brazil-United States ties, Brazil is now one of the four largest 
U.S. visa adjudication and issuance missions worldwide. 
 
 
 
AVIATION CONTEXT 
 
 
 
Â¶7. (U) In 2009, according to ANAC statistics, the airline industry 
in Brazil demonstrated significant growth and also increased 
efficiency in providing services.  ANAC's figures show more than 
126 million passengers' departures and arrivals in 2009, which 
represents almost 13 million more than in 2008 and 15.4 million 
more than in 2007.  Delays (defined as more than 30 minutes) 
decreased from 2007, where the average yearly delays were 28.6%, to 
17.5% in 2008, and down to 11% for 2009.  ANAC coordinates with the 
Ministry of Defense, the Brazilian Air Force, and INFRAERO to track 
the movement of passengers at airports and follow all flights from 
the Brazilian Air Force Control Flight Center in Rio. In Brazil, 
multiple agencies have a role in civil aviation.  These entities 
include: 
 
ANAC (Brazilian National Civil Aviation Agency) - ANAC was created 
by law # 11.182, dated Sep 27, 2005, with regulatory responsibility 
for air safety and air security.  According to this law, ANAC  1) 
Represents Brazil in conventions, treaties, agreements and acts of 
international air transportation with other countries or 
international organizations of civil aviation, with the exception 
of air traffic control and aircraft accident investigations; 2) 
Establishes the model of concession for airport infrastructure, to 
be submitted to the President of Brazil; 3) Provides concession of 
aeronautical services;  4) Provides resources to airports on 
strategic, economic, or tourist interest; 5)  Provides grants or 
permissions for commercial exploration of aeronautical services. 
ANAC is under dotted line authority of the Ministry of Defense. 
 
INFRAERO (Brazilian Company of Airport Infrastructure) - Airports 
in Brazil are operated by a single state-owned company, the 
Brazilian Airports Authority or INFRAERO.  INFRAERO manages all of 
the major airports (67 total).  These airports handle the vast 
majority of passengers and cargo traffic.  INFRAERO is a 
government-owned company under the Ministry of Defense. 
 
DECEA (Department of Air Traffic Control, Brazilian Air Force) - 
DECEA handles air traffic control operations and oversight, 
including the necessary infrastructure, for all aircraft in 
Brazilian airspace.  DECEA is responsible for activities of air 
traffic management, meteorology, communications, aeronautical 
information, cartography, implementation and flight inspection of 
navigational aids, and staff training for all ATC systems. 
 
SAC (Civil Aviation Secretariat, Ministry of Defense) - SAC is 
responsible for the coordination and supervision of the agencies 
and other Brazilian civil aviation entities in charge of 
management, regulation and inspection, airport infrastructure, and 
infrastructure of air navigation.  SAC prepares studies, forecasts, 
E 
 
 
and other information related to civil aviation, airport and air 
navigation matters, ensuring guidelines to Brazilian civil aviation 
policy.  SAC is also the executive-secretariat of the Council of 
Civil Aviation. 
 
CONAC (Civil Aviation Council) - CONAC is the advisory council for 
the President of Brazil in the elaboration of the national civil 
aviation policy.  CONAC establishes the guidelines for the 
representation of Brazil in conventions, agreements, treats and 
acts of international air transportation with other countries or 
international organizations of civil aviation.  Other attributions 
are those related to airport infrastructure concession model; the 
approval of resources guidelines for airlines and airports of 
strategic, economic or tourist interest; the coordination of the 
activities of air traffic control and air regulation; the approval 
of the general plan of airline subsidies; and the establishment of 
airlines concession policies.  Members of CONAC include:  Minister 
of Defense (President); Minister of External Relations; Minister of 
Treasury; Minister of Development, Commerce, and Industry; Minister 
of Tourism; Chief of Staff of the Presidency; Minister of Planning 
and Budget; Minister of Justice; Minister of Transport, and the 
BRAF Commander. 
 
SPECIFIC AGENCIES COOPERATION 
 
DHS/TSA: 
 
 
 
8.(SBU) Beginning in November 2008, in cooperation with the U.S. 
Embassy Brasilia, TSA began engaging in discussions with ANAC in an 
effort to re-start Foreign Airport Assessment Program (FAAP) visits 
to Brazil after an approximate 2.5 year hiatus.  After arriving at 
a mutually agreed upon diplomatic note format for the proposed FAAP 
visits, visits began in August 2009.  As of December 2009, all 
eight international Last Point of Departure (LPD - direct to USA) 
airports have been successfully assessed in cooperation with ANAC 
personnel.  In early August 2009, the Department of Homeland 
Security (DHS) and TSA approved the commitment of resources for the 
establishment of a new TSA Representative (TSAR) position in 
Brazil.  Embassy Brasilia approved the NSDD-38 on November 20, 2009 
(ref A). 
 
 
 
Â¶9. (SBU) Mr. Rob Rottman, TSA Office of Global Strategies, Director 
for International Operations, visited Brazil October 5-8 in support 
of the renewed working relationship with ANAC and the possible 
establishment of a new TSA attache in Brasilia.  He met with 
officials at the Ministry of External Relations (MRE), the Civil 
Aviation Authority (ANAC) and the airport authority (INFRAERO).  As 
reported ref B, MRE expressed interest in working with TSA to 
establish Brazilian regional leadership in the area of civil 
aviation security and was pleased to hear that TSA bilateral 
engagement already included many developed nations.  Both ANAC and 
INFRAERO expressed satisfaction with the TSA airport visits, 
welcomed the proposal to establish a TSA attach???? in Brasilia, and 
were eager to explore enhanced technical exchanges and 
collaboration.  However, on December 18, MRE claimed that it had 
convened a meeting with civil aviation officials including ANAC, 
INFRAERO and Ministry of Defense (MOD) where the parties concluded 
there was no compelling reason for TSA to establish an office in 
Brazil and that any future cooperation could be accomplished 
through an exchange of letters.  We informed MRE this input 
conflicted greatly with the feedback that we received from the 
presidents of both INFRAERO and ANAC during TSA visits to Brazil. 
We also mentioned that in subsequent meetings regarding this issue, 
the MOD Director of Civil Aviation Policy also agreed with this 
proposal.  MRE promised to reengage with these agencies when all 
officials return from vacation on Jan 11.   COMMENT:  Mission 
believes this feedback represents a MRE viewpoint rather than views 
of the relevant operational agencies and believes the importance of 
a TSA attach???? at post will be an essential point to raise at your 
MRE meeting.  END COMMENT. 
 
 
 
Â¶10. (SBU) In responding to the current threat to aviation security, 
as reported refs C and D, the issue of pat-downs has created a 
challenge for GOB.   The Brazilian Constitution restricts personal 
searches to cases of "suspicion" and authority in the present case 
does not appear to be as clear as in a case of a specific person's 
clearly identified criminal intent.  It appears that under current 
rules, only the Federal Police has pat-down authority.  A draft new 
 
 
Security Policy, not yet signed or implemented, may expand 
authority to INFRAERO and air carriers, but will not explicitly 
expand conditions under which pat-downs may be performed.  ANAC has 
been charged with coordinating GOB response to the TDA Security 
Directive/Emergency Amendment on this issue, but it will be 
important to raise in all your meetings in Brazil and to discuss 
how other countries have addressed this issue.  GOB approaches the 
issue of pat-down authority extremely cautiously.  The Brazilian 
Constitution (literally the size of a phonebook and extremely 
detailed) is a direct result of Brazil's recent history as a 
military dictatorship (1964-1985), where there was substantial 
government disrespect and abuse of civil liberties.  The current 
government (many members of which fought against the military 
dictatorship), while recognizing that responding to global threats 
require a coordinated and effective response, is inclined to tread 
carefully in this area.  While manpower to perform pat-downs is 
obviously a concern, the Constitutional issue remains the 
fundamental circle the GOB is seeking internally to square. 
Approaching the issue with sensitivity to this context and 
brainstorming workarounds within Brazilian law will be important to 
finding a solution. 
 
 
 
STATE/NAS: 
 
 
 
Â¶11. (U) The Memorandum of Understanding on Narcotics Control and 
Law Enforcement (MOU) between the USG and GOB was signed in August 
Â¶2008.  This bilateral agreement is designed to improve cooperation 
between Brazilian and US law enforcement agencies and improve the 
capacity of our Brazilian colleagues in confronting the threat of 
drug trafficking and related crimes.  The main partner for the GOB 
is the Brazilian Federal Police (DPF).  There are seven programs 
under the MOU, four of which directly involve the DPF.  They are 
Law Enforcement Training, Special Investigation Units (SIU), 
Airport Interdiction, and the Canine Program.  The Narcotics 
Affairs Section (NAS) (State Department) at the embassy is charged 
with implementing and managing these programs. Programs relevant to 
air security are described below. 
 
 
 
Â¶12. (U) The DPF's Airport Interdiction Program: Under the MOU, NAS 
has expanded an existing program to assist the DPF in the detection 
of narcotics, narcotics-related products, and other types of 
contraband, including explosives, moving through passenger 
terminals as checked baggage, hand luggage, or concealed on 
passengers. The DPF conducts traditional law enforcement 
investigative methods to conduct their interdiction operations. 
These include analyzing and profiling passenger lists, interviewing 
select passengers, conducting baggage searches after check-in using 
x-ray machines, researching DPF data bases containing foreign 
passenger entry and scheduled departures, informant utilization 
(such as taxi drivers, baggage handlers and others), and airline 
employees cooperating with the DPF. 
 
 
 
Â¶13. (U) The project encompasses the acquisition, with State 
Department INL funds, of specialized equipment for drug and 
explosive detection.  The program was initially at the 
international airports of Sao Paulo and Rio de Janeiro and has 
expanded in 2009 to other Brazilian international airports, 
including Manaus, Fortaleza and later to Natal, Recife, and 
Salvador.  The DPF has requested assistance in the acquisition of 
additional resources, including specialized equipment.  NAS has 
ordered the following detection equipment: 
 
 
 
Body-Scan - manufactured by Smiths Detection.  A suspect steps onto 
it and an image is taken of the person's body.  The unit is 
designed to detect drugs, explosives, knives, guns, diamonds, 
precious metals, and electronic devices hidden under clothes or 
inside the body.  It emits a high resolution image within 5 to 7 
seconds.  Four units were purchased with State INL funds under the 
MOU for a total cost of US$755,000.  The DPF plans to install these 
at the international airports in Sao Paulo, Rio de Janeiro, Manaus, 
and Recife.  This product requires a license from Brazil's nuclear 
energy agency (CNEN) before it can be imported.  The company 
applied for the license in mid-December. 
 
 
Mobile Trace Instrument - manufactured by General Electric.   This 
is a seven pound portable simultaneous dual-mode handheld explosive 
and narcotic detector.  It detects trace samples or vapors for a 
broad range of narcotics and explosives. Eight units were purchased 
with State INL funds under the MOU for a total cost of US$228,000. 
The DPF plans to place these items at the airports of Sao Paulo, 
Rio de Janeiro, Manaus, Recife, Natal, Fortaleza, Salvador, and one 
for their Mobile Interdiction Team.  This equipment is in shipment 
transit now. 
 
 
 
Â¶14. (U) The Canine Program: The DPF's dog training facility is 
located in Brasilia and is responsible for training and deploying 
dog and handler teams for interdiction operations all over Brazil, 
specifically to airports, seaports, river ports, and other border 
locations.  DPF currently has 55 dogs for detection work.  The 
majority of the dogs are used for drug detection, but the DPF 
recently began training dogs for explosive detection as well.  As 
part of the MOU, dog purchases have been made with INL funds to 
augment the dog population.  In 2009, 12 Belgium Mallinois dogs 
were purchased in Holland and brought to Brazil.  Of these, two (2) 
were trained for explosive detection.  Counting one 
explosives-trained dog DPF already had, DPF now has three (3) dogs 
trained for explosives.  One dog is deployed in Brasilia, including 
at the airport.  The two new dogs have not yet been deployed, but 
will initially also be used in Brasilia.  In 2010, an additional 20 
dogs will be purchased with State INL funds under the MOU, with a 
larger amount destined for explosive detection training. 
 
 
 
DHS/CBP: 
 
 
 
Â¶15. (U) CBP posted a CBP Attach???? at the U.S. Embassy in Brasilia 
in 
February 2008.  Cooperation with the government of Brazil (GOB) is 
considered good, although some problems have arisen such as the 
recent denials of visas for CBP personnel to conduct in-country 
validations under the Customs Trade Partnership Against Terrorism 
(C-TPAT). After a series of meetings, the GOB advised that CBP 
visit to Brazil will be approved as long as there is no mention of 
"visits to Brazil for anti-terrorism purposes."   In 2008, the GOB 
decided against the establishment of an Immigration Advisory 
Program (IAP) that would have permanently stationed CBP Officers at 
the airport in Sao Paulo to assist airlines and host nation 
authorities on document fraud and passenger admissibility. 
Despite numerous overtures and engagement with the GOB by the 
Secretary of Homeland Security and CBP since 2007, the GOB decided 
not to implement the IAP due to concerns over sovereignty. The GOB 
had specific concerns about direct interactions between CBP 
officials and air passengers at Sao Paulo Airport.  Even thought 
they were reassured of the advisory nature of CBP's role, with no 
legal authority, they refused IAP in Brazil. Federal Police 
staffing shortages led to the hiring of third-party subcontractors 
to perform immigration/emigration checks at the country's principal 
airport, Guarulhos Airport in Sao Paulo.  Subcontractors have also 
been hired to process passport applications.  Training of these 
subcontractors is minimal and salaries are very low. This causes a 
significant weakness in the first line of defense at passport 
primary, inbound and outbound as this position is not federalized. 
 
 
 
 
Â¶16. (U)  U.S. Embassy Law Enforcement agencies cooperates closely 
with Brazilian Federal and Civil Police on individuals suspected of 
human smuggling as well as visa, passport, or other document fraud. 
ICE-CBP continues to work with appropriate police, prosecutors and 
judges in furtherance of prosecution where possible under local 
law. During 2008-09, Embassy and Consulate staff and CBP trained 
over 1,200 Federal Police and airline employees at airports in Sao 
Paulo, Rio de Janeiro, Manaus, and Recife on air passenger 
admissibility and document fraud.  The airlines trained were 
American Airlines, United, Delta, Continental, TAM, Varig, GOL, 
Copa, South African, and JAL.  In 2009, CBP hosted a delegation of 
Federal Police Officers to an orientation to observe CBP's airport 
passenger and air cargo operations at Miami International Airport. 
In 2009, CBP hosted a delegation of Brazilian government officials 
from Brasilia to briefings at CBP HQs, an orientation of CBP's 
 
 
operation in Baltimore, and the National Targeting Center (NTC). 
CBP Airport Interdiction Training was conducted in June 2009 at 
Guarulhos International Airport in Sao Paulo on identifying and 
interdicting suspicious air cargo and passengers utilizing 
commercial air conveyances. The training was conducted over the 
course of 5 days and was attended by members of the Federal Police, 
Customs and INFRAERO.  CBP enhanced the technical competencies of 
Federal Police Immigration and Receita Federal at Brasilia Airport 
through document fraud and passenger screening training in 
preparation for the first U.S. - Brasilia air passenger route that 
commenced in December 2009.  CBP Carrier Liaison Program (CLP) is 
scheduled to provide training on document fraud and admissibility 
to carriers, host nation law enforcement and embassy staff during 
the March-April 2010 timeframe in Brazil. CLP training was last 
presented in 2006. 
 
 
 
Â¶17. (U) The CBP Attach???? is discussing a series of additional 
activities with the Federal Police Airport Security Working Group 
involving visits to several U.S. airports to observe the inter 
agency operability amongst the various U.S. law enforcement and 
airport authorities. These visits are proposed for 2010 and will 
most likely entail a visit to NY JFK and Miami International 
Airport.  CBP also proposes to support Brazil law enforcement 
contingency planning for the World Cup Soccer Games in 2014 by 
providing technical assistance and training in non-traditional 
areas of Detection of Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD), Incident 
Response, Cargo and Passenger Risk Management, Advance Passenger 
Targeting/APHIS, and Business Continuity. 
 
 
 
DHS/ICE: 
 
 
 
Â¶18. (U) From an investigative perspective, ICE uses its unified 
immigration and customs authorities to collaborate with Brazilian 
authorities on joint investigations to identify, disrupt and 
dismantle criminal organizations and other threats, and deprive 
transnational criminal groups from employing traditional smuggling 
networks and methods to further their crimes. To this end, as part 
of our objective, ICE has established and continues to maintain 
enduring partnerships with customs, immigration and law enforcement 
agencies in Brazil to conduct and enhance investigations in area of 
human smuggling and trafficking connected with Brazilian 
international airports. 
 
 
 
Â¶19. (U) Most recently, the ICE Attach???? coordinated with Brazil 
Authorities on investigative activities related to the Annita Devi 
Gerald alien smuggling investigation.  In December Gerald was 
indicted on charges of conspiracy and alien smuggling in connection 
with her role in the smuggling or attempted smuggling of 
individuals to the United States. The joint ICE and Brazilian 
Federal Police investigation discovered substantial evidence 
associated to Gerald and her activities at Sao Paulo's 
International airport. 
 
 
 
Â¶20. (U) In March 2009, the ICE Attach???? reported the arrest of an 
Extraterritorial Criminal Travel Strike Force Subject by local 
authorities at S????o Paulo International Airport.  ICE Attach???? 
worked 
extremely closely with Brazilian Federal Police on this human 
smuggling investigation associated with the activities of an 
Ethiopian citizen residing in Sao Paulo, Brazil. The organization 
operated by this individual facilitated transportation services and 
the issuance of fraudulent documents used by various East African 
nationals transiting Brazil en route to the United States. 
 
 
 
Â¶21. (U) U.S. Embassy reporting on Trafficking in Persons (TIP) 
identifies Brazil as a country of origin, transit, and destination 
for internationally trafficked men, women, and children.  The ICE 
Attach???? continuously strives to strengthen relationships with 
Brazilian authorities and continues to provide outreach to local 
authorities and NGOs in our efforts to investigate allegations of 
sexual tourism, specifically by US citizens and/or Legal Permanent 
Residents. TIP in Brazil primarily involves Brazilians trafficked 
 
 
internally and to foreign locations for the purposes of commercial 
sexual exploitation. In July 2009, John Heep, a U.S. citizen, was 
arrested along with ten (10) Brazilian nationals by the Brazilian 
Federal Police in Sao Paulo, Brazil for Conspiracy to Traffic in 
Persons.  The arrests were the result of a joint investigation 
conducted by the Brazilian Federal Police, ICE Attach????, RAC/Las 
Vegas and the officials of the U.S. Department of State.  Heep was 
charged by the Brazilian Federal Police under Brazilian law with 
Trafficking in Persons and Conspiracy.  The Brazilian Nationals 
arrested are being charged with various Brazilian charges to 
include Internal (Domestic) Trafficking in Persons, International 
Trafficking of Persons (to participate in prostitution), 
Exploitation of Prostitution, Conspiracy, and Facilitation of 
Prostitution (for financial gain). Many of the victims trafficked 
in this investigation were routed through Sao Paulo's International 
airport. 
 
 
 
Â¶22. (U) In May 2008, the ICE Attach???? co-hosted a week long 
Fraudulent Document Analysis training course funded by the 
Inter-American Committee against Terrorism (CICTE), Organization of 
American States (OAS).  Approximately thirty representatives to 
include, but not limited to, members from the Brazilian Federal 
Police, Brazilian Intelligence community officials and Document 
Analysts from various cities throughout Brazil participated in this 
training course.  The purpose of the exercise was to help 
strengthen the capacity of customs, immigrations, and law 
enforcement personnel to improve their controls on travel and 
identity documents, as well as their capability to detect 
fraudulent documents in order to prevent their counterfeiting, 
forgery, or fraudulent use. The workshop was aimed at midlevel to 
senior personnel in the areas of customs, immigrations, police, and 
passport issuance. In addition to hands-on technical training on 
the latest techniques, there was ample opportunity for discussion 
of best practices and a sharing of techniques among the 
participants. 
 
 
 
KUBISKE 
KUBISKE