04ROME2872
World Food Program/Libya Memorandum of
Fri Jul 23 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Rome
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS  ROME 002872 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
FROM US MISSION TO THE UN AGENCIES IN ROME 
 
STATE FOR A/S PRM DEWEY, MCKELVEY AND BROTHERS-JACKSON, 
NEA/ENA, A/S IO HOLMES AND IO/EDA BEHREND AND KOTOK 
USAID/W FOR ADMINISTRATOR NATSIOS, D/A SCHIECK, AA/DCHA 
WINTER, DAA/AFR ALMQUIST, DCHA/D/FFP LANDIS, DCHA/OFDA OWENS 
USMISSION GENEVA FOR AMBASSADOR MOLEY AND USAID/KYLOH 
BRUSSELS FOR AFRICA WATCHERS AND USAID/LERNER 
USUN FOR AMBASSADOR DANFORTH, TAMLYN AND MLUTZ 
NSC FOR JMELINE AND AFRICA DIRECTORATE 
 
E.O. 12958:   N/A 
TAGS: PREF EAID ELTN LY CD SU WFP
SUBJECT:  World Food Program/Libya Memorandum of 
Understanding 
 
REF: (A) KHARTOUM 00864, (B) ROME 002746, (C) ROME 002371 
 
Sensitive but unclassified.  Please protect accordingly. 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) US Mission has received copy of the World Food 
Program/Libya Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) related to 
the transit of humanitarian assistance through Libya into 
Chad, Sudan and other African countries, signed in Tripoli 
on July 15, 2004. The MOU permits all forms of humanitarian 
assistance, food and non-food, to transit through Libya, as 
long as the assistance is consigned to, and remains under 
the auspices of WFP. The new arrangement is crucial for 
opening additional routes to supply Darfur refugees who are 
now more stranded than ever as the seasonal rains close down 
traditional roads. As now envisioned, WFP would open food 
shipments via Libya to Chad, from where distribution to 
camps on both the Chadian and Darfurian (assuming GOS 
concurrence) sides of the border would take place. 
 
¶2. (SBU) With respect to all official activities, WFP and 
its property shall be exempt from all forms of taxation, 
customs duties and all other levies. Libya will afford WFP 
the right to import all necessary telecommunications 
equipments. The MOU is valid for ten years. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Specifically, Libya will extend clearances for the 
use of airports by aircrafts owned or contracted by WFP and 
authorized by Libya, including expeditious granting of 
landing and overflight rights, where such aircrafts are used 
in support of humanitarian assistance. This could become 
exceedingly crucial as WFP is now encountering major 
difficulties in obtaining adequate quotas of jet fuel within 
Sudan for its humanitarian airdrops. End summary. 
 
---------- 
Background 
---------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) In a meeting with senior officials at WFP on July 
21, WFP passed along a signed copy of World Food 
Program/Libya Memorandum of Understanding related to the 
transit of humanitarian assistance through Libya into Chad, 
Sudan and other African countries, signed in Tripoli on July 
15, 2004, by the Libyan Government's Assistant Secretary for 
Cooperation Mohammed Taher H. Siala and WFP's Deputy 
Executive Director (Resources) John Powell. The MOU entered 
into force from the date of its signing and is vaid for ten 
years. 
 
------------------------ 
Salient Parts of the MOU 
------------------------ 
 
¶5. (SBU) The MOU permits all forms of humanitarian 
assistance, food and non-food, to transit through Libya, as 
long as the assistance is consigned to, and remains under 
the auspices of WFP. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Libya will permit WFP to allow for the safe passage 
of humanitarian cargoes transiting through Libyan territory 
by air, water and land transport. Note. It is not restricted 
to one point of entry. End note. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Libya will facilitate for WFP, and for all 
organizations and personnel working with WFP and on behalf 
of WFP, the use of all transport means, including clearances 
for the use of border crossing points to expedite delivery 
of humanitarian aid, including the safe passage of 
humanitarian cargo on board foreign transport carriers as 
 
 
authorized by Libya through its territory. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Libya will extend clearances for the use of 
airports by aircrafts owned or contracted by WFP and 
authorized by Libya, including expeditious granting of 
landing and overflight rights, where such aircrafts are used 
in support of humanitarian assistance. This could become 
exceedingly crucial as WFP is now encountering major 
difficulties in obtaining adequate quotas of jet fuel within 
Sudan for its humanitarian airdrops. Note. Separately, WFP 
has explained that its jet fuel requirements have expanded 
from 60,000 to 130,000 imperial gallons per day. Despite 
repeated requests, the GOS is still supplying 60,000 
imperial gallons or less per day. Refinery capacity or other 
priorities may hamper the honoring of WFP's request. End 
note. 
 
¶9. (SBU) With respect to all official activities, WFP and 
its property shall be exempt from all forms of taxation, 
customs duties and all other levies. Libya will afford WFP 
the right to import all necessary telecommunications 
equipments. 
 
¶10. (SBU) WFP is permitted to import both 4x4 vehicles and 
trucks when deemed necessary for humanitarian purposes 
within Libya 
 
¶11. (SBU) Finally, Libya will facilitate provision of exit 
and re-entry permits to personnel of collaborating 
organizations working with WFP involved in humanitarian 
activities, including personnel accompanying humanitarian 
cargo on board aircraft and vehicles. 
 
12 (U) Note. Copy of the signed MOU will be faxed directly 
to USAID/DCHA/AA Roger Winter. End note. 
 
---------- 
Next steps 
---------- 
 
¶13. (SBU) WFP will send a technical logistics team to Libya 
headed by Pierre Carasse o/a July 27 to negotiate 
contract(s) with the Libyan transportation union and pursue 
other logistical issues described ref B. 
 
---------------------------- 
Comment from Ambassador Hall 
---------------------------- 
 
¶14. (SBU) This MOU is an outstanding example of negotiation 
by WFP, with a bit of behind the dais support from the US 
Mission. In my view, the MOU demonstrates that Libya is keen 
to be recognized as a responsible member of the 
international community, a step in the rehabilitation of a 
decades-long "pariah-state" image. Assuming that all goes 
well with the first shipment of Swiss donated wheat in early 
August (ref B), I would strongly urge that we accelerate the 
arrival to U.S.-supplied humanitarian goods for movement 
through the Libya corridor. 
 
¶15. (U) Khartoum minimize considered.  Hall 
 
 
NNNN 
 2004ROME02872 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED