04CARACAS3156
ARDENT PRO-CHAVEZ DAILY GIVES GUARDED WELCOME AND
Wed Oct 13 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Caracas
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS  CARACAS 003156 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PDA CONNERS/ADAMS/BANKS/PROCTOR, WHA/PPC 
GALLEGOS/ZIMMERMAN, WHA/AND CUE/COLLINS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO PGOV OPRC PREL VE
SUBJECT: ARDENT PRO-CHAVEZ DAILY GIVES GUARDED WELCOME AND 
WARNING TO AMBASSADOR BROWNFIELD 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. The regular "Stumbling Block" column published under the 
pseudonym "Marciano" in the very pro-Chavez daily DIARIO 
VEA, offered both a guarded welcome and a warning to 
Ambassador Brownfield.  "Martian" noted that Ambassador 
Brownfield seemed to be bringing a new approach based on 
mutual respect.  He warned the Ambassador not to try to 
interfere in Venezuela's internal affairs.  It is widely 
believed that "Marciano" is actually Venezuela's Vice- 
President, Jose Vincente Rangel.  END SUMMARY. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
HEADLINE AND FULL TEXT 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. DIARIO VEA (pro-government, circ. 25,000) 
10/08 Stumbling Block column headline: "Shapiro's Successor" 
 
Full text: "The new U.S. Ambassador to Venezuela is William 
Brownfield.  He's a Foreign Service official; that is, a 
professional.  He's coming from Chile, where he was 
carefully watched: too friendly say some, but restless. 
He's loquacious and forward.  His wife is also the U.S. 
Ambassador to Ecuador.  It is a family of diplomats. 
Brownfield was in Central America and also, some years ago, 
in Venezuela as a consul in Maracaibo.  In other words, he 
knows the country. 
 
"What is, for now, the main thing about Brownfield?  The 
instructions he brings from his government and the fact that 
he is Shapiro's successor.  Let's see: a) As for the 
instructions, he gave a signal when he submitted copies of 
the letters of credence to Foreign Affairs Minister Prez: 
"We are ready, willing, prepared and eager to explore the 
possibility of improving the bilateral relations between our 
two countries and also to collaborate on regional affairs," 
(our cannibalistic opposition cannot be happy with this 
statement).  Starting off with this statement is not bad and 
we have to bet on his good faith.  Venezuela-United States 
relations got complicated as a result of Washington's 
interfering in Venezuela's domestic affairs and because of 
the way the U.S. Embassy worked together with the Venezuelan 
opposition in sinister events such as the coup d'tat on 
April 11 and the oil strike and sabotage in 2002.  The 
government of the United States provoked the conflict, not 
the government of Venezuela.  Therefore, if the new 
ambassador brings another approach, that of respect for 
national sovereignty, there won't be any trouble because 
everything can be dealt with based on that recognition.  b) 
Succeeding Shapiro is a challenge: he was a most imprudent 
and undiplomatic human being.  If Brownfield doesn't want 
problems he must behave differently than his predecessor - 
more discretion and less meddling; relations with all the 
sectors of society and not with one in particular; Chavista 
and anti-Chavista; government and opposition; not to succumb 
to the lure of the East of Caracas and to keep in mind that 
Caracas also has other places where human beings live and a 
number of people that believe in the Venezuelan government 
and support President Chvez. 
 
"Welcome or Unwelcome: 
"This columnist, who has many reservations about the Bush 
administration's foreign policy towards the region - and 
particularly towards Venezuela - and about the performance 
of ambassadors from that nation, leaves the door open to 
judging Brownfield's management, which will not be working 
within the parameters of other previous ambassador, and with 
the hope that the U.S. administration will look at the case 
of Venezuela with a different criteria from the one it has 
used up until now.  Welcome, Mr. Brownfield!  And I hope I 
won't have to say in the future, Unwelcome, Mr. Brownfield!" 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶5. `Marciano' is considered to be the pen name of 
Venezuela's Vice-President Rangel; the fact that he chose to 
address this issue probably reflects the Vice President's 
desire to comment on recent statements by Secretary Powell, 
A/S Noriega and the Ambassador.  The general line in VEA is 
stridently anti-USG.  Marciano's message shows some 
restrain, but remains firm in the GoV's stated principles 
End Comment. 
 
 
Brownfield 
 
 
NNNN 
      2004CARACA03156 - UNCLASSIFIED