04CARACAS884
INCREASED OIL SALES TO CUBA?
Mon Mar 15 00:00:00 +0100 2004
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Caracas
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L CARACAS 000884 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
NSC FOR TSHANNON AND CBARTON 
ENERGY FOR DPHUMPHREY AND ALOCKWOOD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/09/2014 
TAGS: EPET ECON VE CU
SUBJECT: INCREASED OIL SALES TO CUBA? 
 
REF: 2003 CARACAS 4192 
 
Classified By: AMB. CHARLES S. SHAPIRO, FOR REASONS 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
------ 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (C) Venezuela's crude and refined product exports to Cuba 
have been increased by an additional 25,000 b/d for an 
official total of 78,000 b/d, according to a maritime 
industry contact.  Another Embassy source asserts that Cuba 
is now paying a larger portion of its debt to Venezuela with 
bonds emitted by the National Bank of Cuba.  End Summary. 

------------------- 
OIL SALES INCREASED 
------------------- 
 
¶2. (C) On March 8, a maritime industry contact passed to 
econoff a copy of an internal PDVSA memo dated February 25, 
2005 and signed by PDVSA President Ali Rodriguez, which 
authorizes delivery of an additional 25,000 barrels per day 
of crude and refined products to Cuba for the month of March 
¶2004.  Despite the fact that the one sentence memo authorizes 
"the delivery of an additional 25,000 b/d, between crude and 
products, for the month of March 2004 to Cupet (the Cuban 
state petroleum enterprise)," our contact believes this will 
be a permanent increase to 78,000 b/d instead of the 53,000 
b/d stipulated in the Caracas Energy Accord of October 2002. 
Given that Venezuela's deliveries to Cuba averaged some 
30,000 b/d over the 53,000 b/d ceiling in August-October 2003 
(see reftel), econoff asked if future sales to Cuba would now 
likely exceed 100,000 b/d to which our contact responded 
"yes."  He also confirmed that Cuba's debt with Venezuela is 
nearing US$1 billion. 
 
-------------------------------- 
CUBA CONTINUES TO PAY WITH BONDS 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (C) Another source, formerly a highly-placed PDVSA 
executive, passed the text of another Cuba-related PDVSA 
document bearing Ali Rodriguez's signature to econoff.  This 
document, translated informally in Para. 4 below, marks the 
formal transfer of approximately US$251 million in National 
Bank of Cuba bonds from PDVSA to the Venezuelan treasury and 
states that this represents part of PDVSA's dividend payments 
to the GOV.  Then PDVSA President General Guaicapuro Lameda 
informed econoff in early 2002 that he had instituted this 
practice of assigning the Cuban bonds to the treasury so that 
the central government could bear the risk of non-payment 
rather than PDVSA.  The source who passed the document to us, 
however, added that Cuba had previously been expected to pay 
at least some portion of the short term portion of its debt 
in cash not bonds.  He asserted, although we cannot confirm 
this, that Cuba is now paying the entire debt with bonds. 
 
¶4. (C) An informal translation follows below: 
 
In the city of Caracas, on the 27th of January 2004, citizen 
Ali Rodriguez Araque in his position as President of 
Petroleos de Venezuela S.A, and under the powers conferred by 
the Statutory Document of the corporation, in this Act 
delivers six payments emitted by the National Bank of Cuba, 
on the basis of the sales contract signed by PDVSA Petroleo 
S.A, affiliate of (Petroleos de Venezuela S.A.) with the 
Cuban Petroleum Union (CUPET) under the framework of the 
Integral Cooperation Convention, celebrated by the Bolivarian 
Republic of Venezuela with the Republic of Cuba on 30 October 
2000, identified with the numbers 1/12, 4/12, 5/12, 6/12, 
8/12 and 12/12 for an amount of US$251,248,523.11 equivalent 
to Bs. 401,997,636,976 calculated at an exchange rate fixed 
for the sale of these reserves by the Central Bank of 
Venezuela at (1,600 bs) for each dollar, to citizen Carmen 
Teresa Melendez, National Treasurer, representing the 
Ministry of Finance, to receive the above mentioned quantity 
as part of the payment to the Bolivarian Republic of 
Venezuela of dividends by PDVSA, according to that agreed in 
the first annual Ordinary Assembly of the Board of Petroleos 
de Venezuela, on 16 December 2003. 
 
------- 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶5. (C) Maintaining subsidized oil sales to Cuba is likely to 
remain a high priority for Chavez, despite his own pressing 
need for cash.  Word of additional sales to Cuba (assuming 
the 25,000 barrels are indeed new oil) has not yet hit the 
public but, with the Cuban debt climbing, it would 
undoubtedly be a hot button issue for the opposition. 
SHAPIRO