04CARACAS2518
BOSTON GROUP AT VENEZUELA'S NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
Fri Aug 06 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Caracas
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS CARACAS 002518 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
NSC FOR C. BARTON 
USCINCSO ALSO FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KDEM VE
SUBJECT: BOSTON GROUP AT VENEZUELA'S NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 
 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  (U) The U.S.-Venezuela Interparliamentary Forum 
(informally known as the "Boston Group") met at the 
Venezuelan National Assembly August 4.  At the meeting, which 
was open to the press, U.S. Representatives Cass Ballenger, 
Bill Delahunt and  Gregory Meeks noted the Boston Group's 
role in strengthening democracy and respect for democratic 
institutions in Venezuela.   During their brief speeches, the 
Venezuelan legislators spoke highly of the Boston Group and 
the positive contributions the group has made in 
strengthening democracy in Venezuela.  End Summary. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Importance of Institution Building 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) U.S. Representatives Cass Ballenger (R-NC), Gregory 
Meeks (D-NY) and Bill Delahunt (D-MA), speaking at the 
U.S.-Venezuela Interparliamentary Forum (informally known as 
the Boston Group) August 4, reiterated that the primary 
mission of the group is to focus on institution building as a 
requisite for a strong and vibrant democracy.   Additionally, 
the U.S. Representatives emphasized the need to strengthen 
legislative bodies not only in Venezuela, but throughout the 
countries of the Western Hemisphere.   Delahunt noted that 
the Boston Group could serve as an example for other Latin 
American countries about the importance of working together 
to strengthen and build democratic processes and 
institutions.  The U.S. Representatives also noted that the 
August 15 recall referendum is historic not only for 
Venezuela but for the rest of the Hemisphere and that this 
process itself is evidence that democracy is alive and 
vibrant in Venezuela.  They advocated that the presidential 
recall referendum be transparent and fair and that all 
sectors of Venezuelan society respect the  referendum results. 
 
--------------------------- 
THE BOSTON GROUP OF FRIENDS 
--------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (U)  Fifth Republic Movement (MVR) Deputy Calixto Ortega 
highlighted the importance of the Boston Group in providing a 
neutral forum where pro-GOV and pro-opposition members could 
meet to debate their political differences.   He called the 
Boston Group a true friend of Venezuela and suggested that 
the group consider expanding to deal with other issues and 
actors in Venezuelan society.   Fellow MVR Deputy Saul 
Ortega, echoed Ortega's statements and also called for the 
Boston Group to act as a facilitator with other actors within 
the political sphere.   Ortega proposed, and his colleagues 
approved by acclamation, that Rep. Cass Ballenger become the 
Honorary President of the Boston Group upon his retirement 
from the United States Congress and recommended that the 
group's next meeting be held in the Gran Sabana in Venezuela. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶4.  (U)  This Boston Group meeting reinforced the belief that 
Venezuelans can and should work together to strengthen 
democracy through the respect for the rule of law and 
institution building.  The comments of pro-GOV and 
pro-opposition deputies regarding the Boston Group were quite 
similar despite their different political perspectives.  All 
deputies were pretty much in agreement on the need to 
continue the Boston Group's mission of  strengthening 
democracy in Venezuela.  All 12 deputies appeared grateful 
for the work and assistance Reps. Ballenger and Meeks, and 
Senator Delahunt, have provided through the Boston Group thus 
far. 
 
¶5.  (U) Codel Ballenger did not have the opportunity to clear 
this message before its departure. 
Shapiro 
 
 
NNNN 
      2004CARACA02518 - UNCLASSIFIED