07CARACAS330
VENEZUELA NOMINATIONS FOR THE SECRETARY OF STATE'S
Thu Feb 15 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Caracas
VZCZCXRO9002
PP RUEHAO RUEHCD RUEHGA RUEHGD RUEHGR RUEHHA RUEHHO RUEHMC RUEHNG
RUEHNL RUEHQU RUEHRD RUEHRG RUEHRS RUEHTM RUEHVC
DE RUEHCV #0330/01 0461508
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 151508Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY CARACAS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7840
INFO RUEHWH/WESTERN HEMISPHERIC AFFAIRS DIPL POSTSUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CARACAS 000330 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PASS TO G/IWI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KWMN PHUM KPAO VE
SUBJECT: VENEZUELA NOMINATIONS FOR THE SECRETARY OF STATE'S 
AWARD FOR INTERNATIONAL WOMEN OF COURAGE 
 
REF: STATE 12871 
 
¶1.  (U) Post identified a number of potential nominees for 
the Secretary of State's Award for International Women of 
Courage.  Because of the abundance of deserving candidates, 
post has decided to nominate two Venezuelan Women of Courage 
for Washington's consideration.  Both are working for the 
social advancement of women and trying to preserve democratic 
freedoms in the increasingly authoritarian Bolivarian 
Republic of Venezuela. 
 
¶2.  (U)  Nominee:  Daniela Bergami 
 
¶3.  (U)  Title, Institution:  General Manager of RCTV 
 
¶4.  (U)  Date of Birth:  July 12, 1955 
 
¶5.  (U)  Contact Information: Ph: 58-212-401-2346; Mobile: 
0416-622-3241; email Dbergami@hotmail.com 
 
¶6. (SBU)  Justification: Daniela Bergami, General Manager of 
embattled RCTV, is leading the defense of free press in 
Venezuela as President Chavez seeks to close down the 
television station which she manages.  Bergami has long been 
a role model for successful professional women in an industry 
dominated by men, but the government's assault on RCTV has 
given her role and gender added prominence.  Bergami has not 
been intimidated by the Chavez government's vocal attacks on 
her station.  To the contrary, she has rallied the station's 
management and its employees to continue their work and to 
maintain their focus on objective and unflinching news 
coverage, while leading a counter-campaign to generate 
hemispheric support for the station and against the 
government's crass and politicized assault against freedom of 
the press in Venezuela. 
 
In addition to her high-profile work at RCTV, Bergami has 
participated in numerous conferences and seminars on women's 
leadership and has worked tirelessly to provide opportunities 
for women to reach their professional goals, including 
promoting them from within.  Bergami is a member of several 
leadership organizations, including the American Institute of 
Management Resources, the International Women's Forum and the 
American Society for Quality Control. 
 
Daniela Bergami graduated from the Central University of 
Venezuela with a degree in industrial psychology.  She has 
been the General Manager of Venezuela's leading television 
stations, Radio Caracas Television (RCTV) since 2000, and has 
worked for the station for nearly 20 years. 
 
¶7.  (U)  Nominee:  Monica Fernandez 
 
¶8.  (U)  Title, Institution: Founder and Executive Director 
of Justice NGO Foro Penal 
 
¶9.  (U)  Date of Birth:  July 2, 1972 
 
¶10. (U)  Contact Information:  Phone: 0414-027-6582; email 
monifersan@hotmail.com 
 
¶11. (SBU)  Justification:  Monica Fernandez is the founder 
and executive director of justice NGO Foro Penal.  Foro Penal 
is committed to providing proof of the deterioration of the 
rule of law in Venezuela. 
 
Foro Penal, with Fernandez serving as one of its most vocal 
and visible spokespersons, has released reports scathingly 
critical of the Venezuelan justice system's increasing 
politicization.  Fernandez has publicly alleged that the 
judicial and prosecutorial authorities in Venezuela have 
progressively undermined the law since the events of April 
¶2002. 
 
Fernandez is an outspoken critic of the government during a 
time when the current regime is increasingly hostile to even 
its more muted critics, much less critics as virulent as 
Fernandez.  What magnifies Fernandez's courage in this 
environment is that she maintains her principled position 
even in the face of legal charges against her very person. 
 
On April 11, 2002, then a Caracas criminal court judge, 
Fernandez ordered then-Interior Minister Ramon Rodriguez 
Chacin confined to his home on charges based on the 
allegation that he was no longer a minister following 
President Chavez's alleged resignation.  She ordered 
Rodriguez freed the next day, when it appeared that Chavez 
had not resigned.  Over two years later, the government 
opened a criminal case against Fernandez.  Although Fernandez 
 
CARACAS 00000330  002 OF 002 
 
 
had eventually ordered the then-minister's release, the 
Fourth Appeals Court of Caracas ruled that Fernandez had 
committed an "inexcusable error."  Fernandez contends that 
the ruling was made as a pretext for her firing.  Fernandez 
resigned rather than face termination.  Monica Fernandez 
continues to face criminal charges stemming from this 
incident. 
 
Chavez's usurpation of the judicial powers and the increasing 
repression of freedom of expression under his rule create an 
environment in which public criticism of the government often 
results in anything from harassment to incarceration. 
Moreover, Chavez often uses the judicial system to "legally" 
prolong the agony of his critics and/or political opponents. 
Monica Fernandez, sitting underneath the hanging sword of 
Damocles otherwise known as the Venezuelan judicial system, 
chooses not to sit at all.  Rather, she stands up in the face 
of adversity, she stands up in the face of baseless charges 
pending against her, she stands up for what she believes, and 
continues to courageously stand for an honorable, efficient, 
and fair system of justice in Venezuela. 
 
¶12.  (U)  Embassy Caracas's officer responsible for women's 
issues is Poloff Ms. Veronica Torres; phone: 58-212-907-8052; 
e-mail: TorresV@state.gov. 
 
BROWNFIELD