07BERLIN940
BERLIN: COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED TO
Wed May 09 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Berlin
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHRL #0940/01 1291657
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 091657Z MAY 07
FM AMEMBASSY BERLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8222
INFO RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS BERLIN 000940 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AMGT ASEC OTRA PARM PREL GM
SUBJECT: BERLIN: COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED TO 
NONPROLIFERATION DIRECTORS' GROUP 
 
REF: STATE 61706 
 
¶1. (SBU) Embassy welcomes and grants country clearance to 
Deputy Assistant Secretary Andrew K. Semmel, ISN/DOS 
Alexander T. Liebowitz, and Senior Policy Advisor Gerald 
Stacy to participate in the G-8 NPDG meeting from May 12-15, 
¶2007. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Point of contact for this visit will be Global 
Affairs Officer Richard Crandell, who can be reached at 
office telephone 49(30)8305-2309, fax 49-30-8305-2339, home 
phone 49(30)2300-4475, mobile phone 49 (0) 173-945-4720 and 
email CrandellRD@state.gov.  Per reftel, Post will assist 
with transportation to and from the meeting location. 
 
¶3. (U) Post and German authorities continuously review 
information that could impact on the safety and security of 
your visit to Germany.  At this time, we are not aware of any 
specific, credible threats to your traveling party. 
 
¶4. (U) The Department of State assesses German cities with a 
U.S. diplomatic presence as high for transnational terrorism 
and medium for criminal activity.  On 20 April 2007, The U.S. 
Embassy released a public announcement stating that security 
at U.S. diplomatic and consular facilities throughout Germany 
had increased their security posture in response to a 
heightened security environment.  This heightened threat of a 
terrorist attack continues and visitors are encouraged to 
consult with the Regional Security Office or Control Officer 
prior to travel.  The full text of this public announcement 
is available on the internet at www.usembassy.de. 
 
¶5. (U) While there have been no recent significant domestic 
terrorist attacks in Germany, the country remains a potential 
venue for transnational terrorism.  German troops are 
currently deployed in Afghanistan and are assisting with the 
NATO training mission in Iraq.  In addition, the country 
continues to host a sizeable number of U.S. military 
installations, almost all of which are involved in our 
current military efforts in Iraq.  A March 2007 video, 
apparently produced by Islamic extremists, specifically 
threatened Germany with terrorist attacks as a result of the 
country's military deployment in Afghanistan.  In June 2006, 
two improvised explosive devices were placed aboard regional 
commuter trains in Western Germany; the devices failed to 
function and the perpetrators were apprehended.  Nonetheless, 
the incident is a reminder that Germany is not immune from 
the threat of terrorism. 
 
¶6. (U) The most common threat to official USG travelers in 
Germany is petty crime.  Pick-pocketing, bag-snatching, and 
confidence schemes are often perpetrated against obvious 
tourists and foreigners in large German cities.  Hotel room 
break-ins and thefts from automobiles, while infrequent, have 
occurred in the past.  Armed robbery, home invasion, and 
car-jacking are all but non-existent in Germany.  Taxis, as 
well as Germany's extensive public transportation network, 
are safe and may be used by USG personnel. 
 
¶7. (U) Large-scale protests are a common feature of daily 
life in major German cities.  Only rarely are such protests 
held without police sanction, and German authorities are 
skilled in crowd control techniques.  The overwhelming 
majority of protests occur without violence, although marches 
and demonstrations by right-wing and Neo-Nazi extremists have 
recently drawn violent counter-protests from the left-wing 
community. 
 
¶8. (U) Visitors to Germany should practice the same good 
common-sense personal security practices that are an every 
day part of life in U.S. cities.  A heightened sense of 
situational awareness should be exercised when in popular 
tourist areas, train stations, and other soft-target venues. 
Large gatherings and demonstrations, regardless of the theme 
or topic, should be avoided.  USG visitors are encouraged to 
report unusual, suspicious, threatening, or harassing 
behavior to the nearest Mission Germany Regional Security 
Office at the numbers listed below. 
 
¶9. (U) German law enforcement agencies are professional and 
extremely supportive to the U.S. government and all of our 
concerns.  The countrywide police emergency telephone number 
is 110.  The fire department and ambulance service may be 
reached at telephone 112.  The U.S. Embassy in Berlin reports 
current threat information for American citizens at 
030-832-9233. 
 
¶10. (U) Further questions regarding this assessment may be 
directed to the Regional Security Office in Berlin at 
49-30-8305-1400, in Frankfurt at 49-69-7535-2444, or in 
 
Munich at 49-89-2888-625. 
TIMKEN JR