07BERLIN222
SECRETARY CHERTOFF ENGAGES MUSLIMS IN GERMANY ON
Mon Feb 05 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Berlin
VZCZCXRO7782
PP RUEHAG RUEHAST RUEHDA RUEHDBU RUEHDF RUEHFL RUEHIK RUEHKW RUEHLA
RUEHLN RUEHLZ RUEHROV RUEHSR RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHRL #0222/01 0361120
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 051120Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY BERLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6906
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUCNFRG/FRG COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEAHLC/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEFHLC/HOMELAND SECURITY CENTER WASHINGTON DC PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BERLIN 000222 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/AGS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: GM KISL PTER SOCI
SUBJECT: SECRETARY CHERTOFF ENGAGES MUSLIMS IN GERMANY ON 
COUNTERTERRORISM 
 
REF: 06 BERLIN 3529 
 
¶1.  Summary:  On January 26, 2007, Secretary of Homeland 
Security Michael Chertoff exchanged views on counterterrorism 
efforts with twelve leaders of Germany's Muslim communities 
over dinner at the residence of Ambassador Timken.  This 
event was the highest level of engagement with Muslims in 
Germany to date for Mission Germany's Policy Roundtable 
(reftel), which seeks to strengthen and expand contacts with 
Muslim leaders, counter misinformation and misperceptions 
about U.S. policies, develop a sense of shared interests, and 
help undermine the bases for extremism and anti-Americanism. 
Secretary Chertoff, Ambassador Timken, and the Muslim guests 
 
SIPDIS 
shared ideas on the causes of and solutions for extremism 
among Muslims in Germany.  End Summary. 
 
Addressing the Roots of Extremism 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  The Muslim representatives included leaders of religious 
and secular organizations, as well as a member of the German 
national parliament, a scholar, and a prominent businessman. 
Among the views expressed by the guests was the claim that 
many extremists do not understand the Koran, which some 
guests said requires obedience to the laws of the host 
country and repudiation of violence.  Other participants 
claimed that Germany has not yet fully embraced being a 
country of immigrants, thereby contributing to Islamophobia 
and alienation of Muslim youth.  As one participant noted, 
many Muslim Germans, although born or at least educated in 
Germany, do not feel that they are accepted as "real" 
Germans.  He observed that this sense of exclusion 
contributes to the appeal of extremist groups, which can 
provide a sense of recognition and identity to isolated 
youth.  Most participants seemed to agree that Muslim 
community leaders need to continue both mosque-based and 
secular educational programs aimed at moderating radicalized 
youth.  A highlight of the evening was a participant's 
passionate expression of gratitude to the Secretary and 
Ambassador for the American intervention in Bosnia.  This 
speaker, who had lost family members in the Balkan conflict, 
pointed out the importance of educating Muslim youth about 
the many occasions in which Americans have assisted Muslims 
throughout the world. 
 
¶3.  Secretary Chertoff expressed concern about the path that 
some young Muslims take from disagreement with policies to 
radicalization and, sometimes, terrorism.  The central 
question, said Secretary Chertoff, is how societies should 
steer youth away from extremism.  A major way to convince 
youth of the senselessness of extremism, he continued, is 
greater discussion of Muslim extremist violence directed 
against other Muslims, which does nothing to advance Islam or 
solve political problems. 
 
Lessons from the American Experience 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶4.  When asked about the alleged loss of civil liberties in 
the U.S. as a consequence of counterterrorism measures, 
Secretary Chertoff responded that a balance must be struck 
 
SIPDIS 
between absolute security (which would be too costly in terms 
of limits on freedom) and returning to the status quo before 
9/11 (which would be too great a security risk).  When asked 
what specific measures Muslims in Germany should take to curb 
radicalization, Secretary Chertoff noted that lessons from 
the U.S. might not always be applicable to other societies, 
but added that the U.S. has successfully implemented Incident 
Management Teams.  These teams of U.S. officials contact 
influential Muslim leaders to explain the reasons for U.S. 
counterterrorism actions and the dangers of specific 
terrorist plots.  Ambassador and Mrs. Timken noted the 
importance of the International Visitor (IV) and Windows on 
America programs in our efforts to demonstrate true American 
values.  The latter sends German youth with immigrant 
backgrounds to the U.S. for a first-hand view of American 
society, and thereby helps to dispel misperceptions. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶5.  Muslim leaders welcomed the opportunity to meet with 
Secretary Chertoff and Ambassador Timken.  Muslim guests at 
 
SIPDIS 
this event were eager to have their pictures taken with 
Secretary Chertoff and one of them (with the agreement of the 
 
SIPDIS 
others) plans to publicize the event in his organization's 
newsletter.  As was the case with Mission Germany's three 
 
BERLIN 00000222  002 OF 002 
 
 
previous Policy Roundtables, Post did not announce the event 
publicly or invite the press.  However, Mission Germany will 
explore whether the growing comfort level with the Policy 
Roundtable concept can be used, perhaps by involving the 
media, to spread our message more broadly. 
TIMKEN JR