08LUSAKA546
MWANAWASA ON ZIMBABWE AND VIEWS OF SADC'S ROLE
Tue May 20 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Lusaka
VZCZCXRO8711
PP RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHJO RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHLS #0546/01 1411410
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 201410Z MAY 08
FM AMEMBASSY LUSAKA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5822
INFO RUCNSAD/SOUTHERN AF DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 LUSAKA 000546 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM SADC ZA ZI
SUBJECT: MWANAWASA ON ZIMBABWE AND VIEWS OF SADC'S ROLE 
 
REF: LUSAKA 463 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary.  Following the visit to Zambia of Assistant 
Secretary of State for African Affairs Jendayi Frazer and 
National Security Council Senior Director Bobby Pittman (Ref 
A), the Ambassador and President Mwanawasa exchanged views on 
Zimbabwe through a series of letters.  In his May 5 letter 
(para 2), President Mwanawasa acknowledged President Bush's 
letter that A/S Frazer delivered on April 26 and expressed 
his appreciation for A/S Frazer's visit.  On May 6, the 
Ambassador underscored the need for continued SADC engagement 
to ensure free elections and to address reports of gross 
human rights violations (para 3).  On May 12, President 
Mwanawasa responded, noting the need for a strong SADC 
electoral observer mission as well as a possible delegation 
to meet with President Mugabe, comprised of President Dos 
Santos, President Jakaya Kikwete, and King Mswati (para 4). 
President Mwanawasa also conveyed reports that Zimbabwe's 
Electoral Commission is ill-prepared to organize the runoffs, 
primarily due to inadequate resources, and expressed his 
intention to seek financial support from the United Nations. 
End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) On May 5, President Mwanawasa sent the following 
letter to President Bush, expressing his appreciation for A/S 
Frazer's visit and acknowledging President Bush's letter that 
A/S Frazer hand-delivered on April 26 (Ref A): 
 
(begin text) 
 
Dear Mr. President, 
 
I thank you for your letter dated 21st April, 2008, and I was 
pleased to receive your Special Envoy, the Assistant 
Secretary of State for African Affairs and we had a very good 
discussion concerning the crisis in Zimbabwe.  I am pleased 
to note that you will continue working with us in the region 
to resolve the crisis in Zimbabwe. 
 
Please accept, Mr. President, assurances of my highest 
consideration. 
 
Dr. Levy P. Mwanawasa, SC 
President of the Republic of Zambia 
 
(end text) 
 
¶3. (SBU) On May 6, the Ambassador sent the following message 
to President Mwanawasa, emphasizing reports of gross human 
rights violations in Zimbabwe, the need for free and fair 
elections, and the importance of continued SADC leadership: 
 
(begin text) 
 
Your Excellency, 
 
I wish to express my government's gratitude for the 
hospitality that you extended to Assistant Secretary of State 
for African Affairs Jendayi Frazer and National Security 
Council Senior Director Bobby Pittman during their recent 
visit to Zambia.  I especially appreciate your readiness to 
accommodate our request for a meeting on such short notice 
and your willingness to meet with us on a Saturday night. 
 
As SADC Chair, you have made essential contributions to 
regional stability by acknowledging the crisis in Zimbabwe 
and bringing it, once again, to the forefront of the SADC 
agenda.  Your leadership on this issue is a credit to both 
you and the Republic of Zambia.  Indeed, it is consistent 
with Zambia's historical role as a facilitator for peace 
within southern Africa. 
 
The need for strong leadership is critical to the challenging 
period ahead, in the wake of the Zimbabwe Electoral 
Commission's (ZEC's) announcement of the presidential 
election results.  We understand that the ZEC did not comply 
with SADC's request for an inclusive verification process. 
According to the Movement for Democratic Change, the ZEC has 
refused to provide documentation to substantiate its 
preliminary results, which differ significantly from those 
posted publicly at polling stations. 
 
The massive irregularities in the electoral process, both 
before and after the March 29 election, undermine the 
credibility of the election results and the independence of 
the ZEC.  We hope there will be an opportunity for SADC to 
engage with the ZEC and the Government of Zimbabwe to ensure 
that both comply with the process for counting and 
verification as stipulated by the April 13 SADC communique. 
 
 
LUSAKA 00000546  002 OF 003 
 
 
As discussed in your meeting with Assistant Secretary Frazer, 
the violence carried out by the government of Zimbabwe 
against its own people increases every day.  The 
international community is receiving credible, documented 
accounts of torture bases and terror campaigns being used to 
punish those who are members of, or even sympathetic to, the 
political opposition.  Zimbabweans who are thought to have 
voted for the opposition have had their houses burned, have 
been denied food, and have seen their family members raped 
and murdered.  That Zimbabwean security forces are 
participating in these crimes makes it even more shocking. 
It is an unacceptable role for an institution charged with 
protecting its own citizens. 
 
The great hardships that the Zimbabwean people are enduring 
need to end.  The number of displaced persons, the shortage 
of food and medical care, and the escalating, 
government-sanctioned campaign of intimidation and violence 
must be of great concern to the entire southern African 
region.  As Assistant Secretary Frazer expressed in your 
meeting, it is also of great concern to the United States. 
Our government is prepared to support you, and other SADC 
Heads of State, as you endeavor to find a solution to the 
crisis in Zimbabwe that reflects the will of its people. 
 
Once again, I thank you for meeting with us on April 26, and 
for a fruitful and encouraging discussion.  I look forward to 
an opportunity to share your insights on this situation. 
 
Sincerely, 
Carmen Martinez 
Ambassador 
 
(end text) 
 
¶4. (SBU) In a May 12 letter, President Mwanawasa recognized 
the need for a strong SADC electoral observer mission, 
announced the possibility of a senior SADC delegation to meet 
with President Mugabe, comprised of President Dos Santos, 
President Jakaya Kikwete, and King Mswati, and conveyed his 
concern that the Zimbabwe Electoral Commission lacks the 
resources to conduct the runoff elections: 
 
(begin text) 
 
Your Excellency, 
 
I thank you for your letter dated 6th May, 2008, and indeed I 
was also delighted for an opportunity to discuss Zimbabwe 
with the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs 
Jendayi Frazer and National Security Council Senior Director 
Bobby Pittman and yourself recently. 
 
I have received similar reports of violence in Zimbabwe as 
you heard.  The results have been announced although we very 
much doubt their veracity.  It is nevertheless felt in SADC 
that there is nothing which can be done at the moment but for 
SADC and other interested organizations to insist that the 
run-offs should be free, fair and possess integrity.  On our 
part we have insisted to send a strong observer mission and 
we have agreed that President Dos Santos who is Chairman of 
the Organ of SADC together with other Heads of State who are 
members of the Organ, namely his Excellency Jakaya Kikwete, 
President of Tanzania and King Mswati of Swaziland should, as 
soon as possible, travel to Zimbabwe to meet the Zimbabwean 
government and the opposition to discuss issues of security 
and fairness in this run-off. 
 
We have received reports that the ZEC are not prepared for 
this run-off apparently because they lack financial 
resources.  We want to assist and so does the African Union 
but our resources are limited so we have asked the United 
Nations to receive contributions from member countries who 
are able to contribute some funding and such funding could be 
availed to the ZEC and also to SADC to enable us to 
participate in the observer Mission.  After a long period of 
hesitation, I am glad to note that recently Mr. Morgan 
Tsvangirai announced that he will participate in the run-off. 
 We will now continue to work for the creation of a security 
environment for free and fair elections to take place in 
Zimbabwe. 
 
Once again I thank you for having called on me. 
 
Yours sincerely, 
Dr. Levy P. Mwanawasa, SC 
President of the Republic of Zambia 
 
(end text) 
 
 
LUSAKA 00000546  003 OF 003 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) Comment.  Post will continue to build upon A/S 
Frazer's visit, emphasizing to President Mwanawasa and senior 
GRZ officials that SADC can and should play an important role 
in condemning human rights violations, calling for free and 
fair elections, and supporting a democratic and stable 
electoral process.  Post also will continue to draw attention 
to ZANU-PF's record of violence and human rights abuse with 
media outlets and non-governmental organizations.  On May 19, 
Deputy Chief of Mission hosted an event for civil society 
leaders, during which he and the guest of honor referred to 
the situation in Zimbabwe and underlined the critical role 
that civil society can play in bringing about democratic 
change. 
MARTINEZ