08STATE49237
PSI FIFTH ANNIVERSARY: OFFICIAL INVITATION FROM
Thu May 08 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0020
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #9237 1292103
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 082056Z MAY 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 0000UNCLAS STATE 049237 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MNUC PARM PHSA PREL KNNP MO
SUBJECT: PSI FIFTH ANNIVERSARY: OFFICIAL INVITATION FROM 
U/S ROOD TO MOROCCO 
 
REF: A. STATE 028996 
     ¶B. RABAT 000314 
 
OBJECTIVES AND ACTION REQUESTS 
------------------------------ 
 
¶1.  Following the April 17 phone call from Acting U/S Rood to 
MFA Secretary General Omar Hilale to discuss Morocco's 
endorsement of the PSI Statement of Interdiction Principles, 
below is an official U.S. invitation to the events we are 
hosting in Washington on the fifth anniversary of the 
President's announcement of the Proliferation Security 
Initiative (PSI).  We would like Morocco to endorse the PSI 
Statement of Interdiction Principles prior to the meeting so 
that it can be represented at all of these events.  Our goal 
is for Morocco to provide a dip note endorsing the PSI, and 
then to participate in the May 28 Senior-Level Meeting for 
PSI participating states, as well as the May 29 PSI Outreach 
Workshop.  The Moroccan delegation to the May 28 Senior-Level 
Meeting should be headed by an official equivalent to a 
Deputy Foreign Minister, who is involved in decision-making 
on nonproliferation policies. 
 
¶2.  Post is requested to deliver the invitation letter from 
Acting Under Secretary for Arms Control and International 
Security John Rood to MFA Secretary General Omar Hilale and 
urge Moroccan participation in the PSI Fifth Anniversary 
events following endorsement of the PSI Statement of 
Interdiction Principles. PDF copy of signed letter will be 
sent via email. 
 
¶3.  A PSI outreach demarche was transmitted to your Post on 
20 March (Reftel A) to urge Morocco to make a definite 
endorsement of the PSI.  The ref A sample diplomatic note 
should be provided in conjunction with the invitation letter, 
while noting that various options are available to express 
Morocco's official endorsement to include: announce 
endorsement in DC on May 28 at the PSI meeting; announce 
endorsement just prior to the meeting or during opening 
remarks; a joint announcement through press corps; or a 
combination of above options.  Washington remains flexible on 
venue and format of any public endorsement. In the absence of 
endorsement, Morocco is invited to attend the second day of 
the event (PSI Outreach Workshop) only, as described in 
reftel A. 
 
¶4.  Post is also requested to be prepared to assist 
participant(s) from Rabat in obtaining any required U.S. 
visas on an expedited basis. If Moroccan officials indicate 
they cannot complete registrations by e-mail, please contact 
the POCs below and we will arrange for the registration forms 
to be e-mailed or FAXed to post to pass to MFA contacts. 
 
REPORTING DEADLINE AND POC 
-------------------------- 
 
¶5.  Post is requested to deliver the documents below to MFA 
as soon as possible and report delivery by April 30.  E-mail 
reply is acceptable.  Points of contact for the PSI 5th 
Anniversary events are Jane Purcell (202-647-6186, 
purcelja@state.gov) and Carlos Guzman (202-647-6320, 
guzmancs@state.gov).  The Department greatly appreciates 
Embassy Rabat,s assistance. 
 
INVITATION LETTER 
----------------- 
 
¶6.  Begin text of PSI invitation letter from U/S Rood: 
 
Dear Secretary General Hilale: 
 
It is clear from our phone conversation on April 17 that our 
two countries share a strong commitment to nonproliferation 
and our continued cooperation in areas such as the Global 
Initiative has an important role in shaping security policy 
in the region.  I believe this cooperation would be further 
enhanced through Morocco's endorsement of the Proliferation 
Security Initiative (PSI). 
 
May 2008 marks the fifth anniversary of President Bush's 
announcement of the PSI in Krakow, Poland.  Since that time, 
the PSI has achieved tremendous success and has become a key 
tool in our efforts to interdict shipments of weapons of mass 
destruction, their delivery systems, and related materials 
worldwide.  To that end, I want to invite you and other 
Moroccan government officials to attend the Proliferation 
Security Initiative Fifth Anniversary events of May 27-29, 
2008, in Washington, DC.  The focus of these meetings will be 
to review the Initiative's results and successes over the 
last five years and look at ways to continue strengthening 
the PSI for the future.  Following a reception on the evening 
of Tuesday, May 27, I will chair a Senior-Level Meeting on 
Wednesday, May 28, open only to PSI endorsing states. 
 
As we discussed, some of these events are open only to PSI 
endorsing states.  Your government's endorsement of the PSI 
by that date will enable you to participate in those 
meetings.  We are flexible about the means for Morocco's 
endorsement, including a diplomatic note and/or public 
announcement. 
 
His Excellency 
Omar Hilale, Secretary General, Minister for Foreign Affairs 
and Cooperation of Morocco, Rabat. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
John C. Rood 
Acting Under Secretary of State for 
Arms Control and International Security 
 
LOGISTICAL INFORMATION 
---------------------- 
 
¶7.  Begin text of logistical information sheet for PSI 5th 
Anniversary Invitations: 
 
Logistical Information Sheet for PSI 5th Anniversary Events 
 
Registration:  To register for any or all of the PSI 5th 
Anniversary events, begin by sending an e-mail to: 
PSIConf@qualitysupport.com .  Use the subject line "(Name of 
Country) - Registration for PSI Fifth Anniversary" on your 
e-mail.  Include in the e-mail the name of your country, your 
name, the name of the ministry or other government 
organization where you work, your e-mail address, and the 
names of each person you want to register to attend any 
portion of the events.  The meeting organizer will then 
e-mail to you a link to the meeting registration form for 
each attendee. At the end of the registration form, there is 
a link to on-line hotel registration. If you do not have 
access to email, contact your local U.S. Embassy and provide 
a FAX number, and the registration forms can be faxed to you. 
There is no fee for these events. 
 
Visas:  For countries where a U.S. visa is required, please 
submit the U.S. visa application form to your local U.S. 
Embassy as early as possible.  You may contact your local 
U.S. Embassy for guidance or assistance with visa processing. 
 
Agenda and Structure:  The PSI 5th Anniversary events will 
commence with a reception in the garden of the Hilton 
Washington Hotel (or indoors in case of inclement weather) 
from 6-8 pm on Tuesday, May 27.  On Wednesday, May 28, the 
PSI Senior-Level Meeting will begin at 8:30 am (check-in and 
breakfast begins at 7:30 am) and will continue until 4:30 pm 
(tentative agenda attached).  On Thursday, May 29, the PSI 
Outreach Workshop will begin at 9:00 am (check-in and 
breakfast begins at 8:00 am) and will continue until 5:30 pm 
(tentative agenda attached). 
 
Delegation size and composition:  There are no specific 
limitations on the size of a country's delegation.  We 
suggest countries be prudent in sizing their delegations 
sufficiently to support their head of delegation.  We 
encourage broad participation by senior policy makers, 
ministry officials, and diplomats stationed in the United 
States.  We ask that all participants be either involved in 
nonproliferation/export controls/interdictions or report the 
meeting results to those who do. 
 
Location:  All PSI 5th Anniversary events will be held at the 
Hilton Washington Hotel, 1919 Connecticut Avenue, NW, 
Washington, DC, 20009.  The Hilton Washington is located four 
blocks north of the Dupont Circle Metrorail station. 
 
Accommodations:  The Hilton Washington was offering PSI 5th 
Anniversary participants the government rate of U.S. $201 per 
night per room plus 14.5% tax from May 24 - June 1, but these 
rooms were only being held open until April 28 and remain 
available only on a space available basis.  On-line hotel 
registration can be completed either on-line at the website: 
http://www.hilton.com/en/hi/groups/personaliz ed/DCAWHHH- 
PSI-20080527/index.jhtml, 
or by telephoning the U.S. number: (888)-324-4586 and 
requesting the rate for the PSI-State Meeting. 
The hotel's website includes information on directions, local 
transportation, and local attractions.  Participants are 
responsible for their own accommodations costs. 
 
Meals:  Appetizers, wine, and non-alcoholic beverages will be 
served at the reception on the evening of Tuesday, May 27. 
The PSI meetings on May 28 and 29 will include continental 
breakfast, luncheon, snacks and beverages. 
 
Working language:  The official working language during the 
events will be English.  There will be no translation 
services.  Personal interpreters for attendees must be 
registered as participants. 
 
Additional meeting room:  One small meeting room at the hotel 
will be available for side meetings if requested. 
 
Weather:  Late May in Washington offers a good probability of 
ideal temperature.  Temperatures are likely to be between 
60-85 degrees F (15-29 degrees C).  Rain is possible at any 
time, including thunderstorms. 
 
Electricity:  Electricity sockets in the United States are 
set at 110 Volts and 60 cycles, and fit electric plugs with 
two flat blades, with or without a third cylindrical 
grounding pin.  Electrical appliances from outside the United 
States generally need a power converter and an adaptor for 
use in U.S. sockets. 
 
Point of Contact:  The points of contact for the PSI 5th 
Anniversary events are:  Jane Purcell, phone: 202-647-6186, 
e-mail: PurcelJa@state.gov, and Carlos Guzman, phone: 
202-647-6320, e-mail: GuzmanCS@state.gov. 
 
End logistical information sheet. 
 
Tentative Agendas 
----------------- 
 
¶8.  Begin tentative agendas for PSI 5th Anniversary events: 
 
May 28 PSI 5th Anniversary Senior-Level Meeting:  Draft Agenda 
 
07:30 - 08:30 - Check-in, continental breakfast 
 
08:30 - 08:45 - Welcome from Chairman 
 
08:45 - 09:45 - Taking stock: the first five years of PSI 
 
09:45 - 10:00 - Break 
 
10:00 - 10:30 - Keynote address by senior USG official 
 
10:30 - 12:00 - Looking ahead: continuing to strengthen PSI 
 
12:00 - 12:15 - Break 
 
12:15 - 1:15 - Luncheon address 
 
1:15 - 3:00 - Efforts to strengthen international frameworks 
 
3:00 - 3:15 - Break 
 
3:15 - 3:45 - Expanding distribution of PSI information 
 
3:45 - 4:15 - Discussion 
 
4:15 - 4:30 - Closing summary by Chairman 
 
 
May 29 PSI Outreach Workshop:  Draft Agenda 
 
08:00 - 09:00 - Check-in, continental breakfast 
 
09:00 - 09:30 - Overview of PSI 
 
09:30 - 10:15 - Current proliferation threats and challenges 
 
10:15 - 10:30 - Break 
 
10:30 - 11:00 - The Operational Experts Group: working on 
behalf of all PSI partners 
 
11:00 - 11:30 - The PSI exercise program 
 
11:30 - 12:00 - PSI legal lessons learned 
 
12:00 - 1:15 - Lunch 
 
1:15 - 2:15 - Organizing for PSI 
 
2:15 - 3:15 - Walk-through of an interdiction scenario 
 
3:15 - 3:30 - Break 
 
3:30 - 4:00 - How export controls support PSI 
 
4:00 - 4:30 - Capacity-building for PSI partners (including 
UNSCR 1540 and available training assistance) 
 
4:30 - 4:45 - Upcoming calendar of PSI events 
 
4:45 - 5:30 - Q&A session 
 
End cable. 
RICE