05DAMASCUS6226
Damascus Media Reaction: Euro-Med Summit, Al-Hariri
Tue Nov 29 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 DAMASCUS 006226 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT 
VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND AFERNANDEZ, 
IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O.12958:  N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: Euro-Med Summit, Al-Hariri 
Investigation, Iraq (11/29) 
 
 
¶1. Summary: Syrian papers today reported in banner headlines 
FM Shara's address at the Euro-Med Summit in Barcelona and 
carried the full text of the final communique of the 
conference. Papers also reported FM Shara's meeting with 
Lebanese FM Al-Saniora in which Shara said that Syria has 
opened a new page in its relations with Lebanon and that the 
Shebaa Farms are Lebanese territory. 
 
Syrian papers also continued to focus on the story of the 
masked witness Husam in the Al-Hariri assassination, citing 
the press conference held in Damascus in which he disclosed 
more details about his arrest by Lebanese intelligence and 
his false testimony. Headlines also featured statements by 
some Lebanese figures demanding dismissal of Lebanese 
Minister of Interior Al-Saba' and the arrest of Lebanese 
journalist Fares Al-Khashan. Headlines also cited an 
acknowledgement by the International Investigation 
Commission that it had listened to Husam's testimony. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2. Selected Headlines: 
 
"Husam reports in a press conference details on forcing him 
to give false testimony: I was exposed to temptation, 
bargaining and torture. I met twice with Saed al-Hariri, who 
directed me to cooperate with Khashan. Confused reactions by 
the forged testimony crew. Speculation about the position of 
Lebanese judiciary towards detainees. The International 
Investigation Commission acknowledges hearing the masked 
witness. Other masks are expected to fall. The witness shows 
readiness to appear before an international court. Wahab 
[former Lebanese Minister] calls for dismissal of Al-Saba' 
and arrest of Khashan, and warns against a gang that is 
exploiting Lebanese establishments and apparatus to serve 
its interests" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 11/29) 
 
"The masked witness exposes more details about the 
conspiracy to implicate Syria in the Al-Hariri 
assassination. A group of politicians dictated information 
to him and arranged for him to go to Vienna. The car of the 
masked witness is found near Lebanese customs. Lebanese 
calls to dismiss the Lebanese Minister of Interior Al-Saba' 
and to arrest Khashan" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 11/29) 
"On behalf of President Asad, FM Shara delivers a speech to 
the Euro-Mediterranean Summit held in Barcelona. The Summit 
voices commitment to achieve a just, comprehensive peace in 
the Middle East in accordance with the principles of the 
Madrid conference. Mr. Shara discusses latest regional 
developments with King Juan Carlos of Spain, and meets 
Lebanese Premier Al-Saniora and other senior officials in 
Barcelona" (Government-owned Tishreen, 11/29) 
"Protests and sit-ins continue in the Syrian provinces in 
rejection of pressure and threats against Syria and in 
assertion of national unity" (Government-owned Tishreen, 
11/29) 
"The UN demands that Al-Jafaari cabinet halt operations in 
Western Iraq. The Saddam trial is postponed until mid- 
December" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 11/29) 
 
¶3. Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
"Will our People Be Relieved?" 
 
Dr. Khalaf al-Jarrad, Chief Editor of government-owned 
Tishreen, commented (11/29): "Syria, through its agreement 
with the international investigation commission into the Al- 
Hariri assassination, once again proves, in words and deeds, 
that it respects international legitimacy and complies with 
international resolutions and requirements even if it has 
reservations and substantive observations about some of 
them, such as Security Council Resolution 1636.... 
 
"When Syria insisted on changing the proposed place for 
questioning the Syrian officials, it proceeded from a deep 
desire to preserve the dignity of its citizens on the one 
hand and to safeguard Lebanon's stability and avoid tension 
and negative repercussions on the other." 
 
"The agreement will not prompt Syria to relax, but to 
demonstrate further vigilance and caution against the plans 
targeting it...." 
 
"Not to Be Charged with Bias" 
 
Umar Jaftali, a commentator in government-owned Tishreen, 
commented (11/29): "The EU took no action against Israel 
despite a reported British Foreign Office memorandum saying 
that Israel is working to Judaize Jerusalem through 
activities that conflict with international law. 
 
"We believe that the EU has lost enthusiasm for the 
memorandum after an Israeli threat to boycott Europe and 
exclude it from the peace process if any measures were taken 
against Israel.... 
 
"Is it conceivable that the advocates of democracy and human 
rights retreat after a simple Israeli reprimand and turn 
into false witnesses with respect of violations of 
Palestinian human rights...?" 
 
"The Barcelona Conference and the Demanded Cooperation" 
 
Muhammad Khair al-Jammali, an editorialist in government- 
owned Al-Thawra, said (11/29): "The success of the Euro- 
Mediterranean summit is contingent upon a solution to the 
real problems the Middle East is facing, notably the Israeli 
occupation of Arab territories and the American occupation 
of Iraq.... 
 
"Some countries want to make terrorism the central issue on 
the summit's agenda.... The issue of terrorism is very 
important and must be confronted, but the fact is that 
terrorism is an effect, not a cause, and its definition is 
controversial. 
 
"Arabs reject terrorism, but the double-standard policy 
toward issues of the region does not help solve the 
problem.... 
 
"If controversial issues are solved, Euro-Mediterranean 
cooperation will be a model of civilized interaction and an 
element of regional and international stability." 
 
Seche