04TAIPEI3251
SUSPECT HIGH SEAS DRIFTNET VESSELS NOT TAIWAN
Tue Oct 19 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TAIPEI 003251 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO AIT/W 
 
STATE FOR EAP/RSP/TC 
 
STATE ALSO FOR OES/OMC - TOM KING 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIS PREL PHSA SENV TW ESTH
SUBJECT: SUSPECT HIGH SEAS DRIFTNET VESSELS NOT TAIWAN 
FLAGGED: INFO ON INDONESIAN VESSEL REQUESTED 
 
REF: A) TAIPEI 03152     B) STATE 216948 
 
¶1.  Fisheries Agency Deputy Director-General James Sha has 
provided AIT with a written response to the questions posed 
in Ref B regarding suspected high seas driftnet fishing 
vessels in the North Pacific.  Mr. Sha indicates that none 
of the vessels listed in Reftels are Taiwan-flagged, but did 
provide information on one of the vessels, which did visit 
one of Taiwan's ports.  The VICTORIA JAYA 2 is registered in 
Indonesia and has a Taiwanese-national master.  Mr. Sha 
requests that AIT provide any additional information it may 
have with respect to the VICTORIA JAYA 2 to assist Taiwan in 
its investigation of the alleged violation of the master of 
vessel.  Para. 2 contains the verbatim text of Deputy 
Director-General Sha's October 18 facsimile.  Additional 
documentation on the VICTORIA JAYA 2 will be transmitted to 
OES/OMC Tom King via facsimile. 
 
¶2. Begin verbatim text. 
 
Thank you for your fax dated on 8 October 2004, regarding 
the reported high seas driftnet fishing activity in the 
North Pacific Ocean.  After checking the fishing management 
system maintained by this Agency, we have not found any 
information on the vessels as listed on your fax message. 
In other words, none of them is flagged ROC's flag. 
 
However, there are some informations I can share with you 
that we have found VICTORIA JAYA 2 entered Kaohsiung harbor, 
Taiwan on 20 March 2004 and departed on 6 April 2004.  The 
related authority had checked the vessel before she left the 
port, and no driftnet gear or equipment were found. 
According to the documents provided by the agent, as 
attached, the nationality, fishing gear, and registered port 
of the vessel are Indonesia, bottom longoine, and Sorong, 
respectively.  Please find the relevant information of the 
vessel as attached for your reference. [to be faxed to 
OES/OMC] 
 
When the vessel departed Kaohsiung harbor, the master was 
identified as a national of Taiwan.  It would be appreciated 
if you could provide any specific evidence that indicated 
the vessel was engaged in high seas driftnet fishing 
activities.  The investigation will be conducted in 
consistent with our domestic law to pursue the alleged 
violation of the master. 
 
As you mentioned in your letter that AIT need further 
information on any vessel operating in the same area during 
April - October, so far Fisheries Agency has not permitted 
any driftnet vessel to operate in the said area, only eight 
squid-jigging vessels were permitted to fish in the North 
Pacific Ocean.  The operating location is between N42-43 and 
E170-175.  Please find the attached information of these 
vessels as well. 
 
It would be very helpful for deterring the illegal 
activities of driftnet fishing by keeping exchange 
information regionally as before.  Looking forward to your 
upcoming information. 
 
End verbatim text. 
 
PAAL