04TAIPEI3322
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Fri Oct 22 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TAIPEI 003322 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/RSP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - 
ROBERT PALLADINO 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
 
"The Need for Trust and Better Communication" 
 
Former chairman of the American Institute in Taiwan Nat 
Bellocchi wrote in the pro-independence "Taipei Times" 
(10/22): 
 
"The Double Ten National Day speech by President Chen 
Shui-bian lifted some of the tension that still exists 
in the U.S.-Taiwan relationship, but events connected 
with the recent full-page advertisement by Koo Kwang- 
ming in two leading American newspapers, and a 
symposium on Taiwan's Constitution and U.S.-Taiwan 
relations, show that some bilateral tension and 
mistrust remains -- based more on evasion of reality 
than any misunderstanding. It is not good at a time 
when the United States must work closer than ever with 
Taiwan through understanding and dialogue. . 
 
"There is much to ponder in the broader tripartite 
relationship. One immediate task will be to determine 
what can or should be done once elections are completed 
and policy review begins. The United States will need 
policies that take into account the mainstream opinion 
while maintaining good relations with China. 
 
"If one looks at what lies ahead for Taiwan -- a new 
constitution, a referendum and perhaps dialogue with 
China -- the United States may find it necessary to 
become quite intrusive in Taiwan's domestic affairs. 
That's dicey in any event, and in any country. Foreign 
intrusion in domestic matters is never welcome. 
 
"The United States will have to work with that reality. 
The core need is close, effective and broader 
communication with one another. In Taiwan, there are 
frequent symposiums that invite American and other 
scholars to take part. The Unite States does this as 
well, but when it comes to Taiwan, it seldom if ever 
includes people who do not agree with U.S. policy. This 
is unfortunate, as understanding is the base for better 
communication between governments. 
 
"One possibility in pursuing better government 
communication is for the United States to establish a 
cross-strait task force made up of deputy assistant 
secretaries -- or people of equivalent rank -- from the 
 
SIPDIS 
State Department, the Defense Department, the National 
Security Council and perhaps others. This group would 
be tasked with producing a regular report to the 
president. The report could be drawn from a regular 
quarterly meeting of the group and their Taiwanese 
counterparts, and would include recommendations on any 
matter that should be addressed. 
 
"The Taiwanese side would be expected to start a 
similar process to ensure the president is well 
informed. There is a need for presidential aides on 
both sides to be kept well informed about this 
relationship. 
 
"Unfortunately, raising the frequency and level of 
communication tends to be seen in Taipei first and 
foremost in terms of high-profile visits or publicly 
announced bilateral meetings which strain the United 
States' relationship with China. The biggest obstacle 
to more regular, higher-level liaisons between the 
United States and Taiwan in national security matters, 
of course, is objections from China. Yet there have 
been similar, if less structured, liaisons in the past 
that were manageable. It does require trust, however, 
and broadening the number of people involved in this 
liaison strengthens government support on both sides. 
 
"There are doubtless many other possibilities for 
enhancing communication. The United States has endorsed 
Chen's Oct. 10 speech, and one hopes that it could 
eventually result in a dialogue between Taiwan and 
China. Even so, it is unlikely to remove the U.S.' need 
for a continuing and perhaps even closer relationship 
with Taiwan." 
 
PAAL