04TAIPEI3129
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Thu Oct 07 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TAIPEI 003129 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/RSP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - 
ROBERT PALLADINO 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
 
A) "Disputes between Political Parties Should Not 
Surpass National Security" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" noted in an 
editorial (10/7): 
 
". Democratic countries normally protect freedom of 
speech, and disputes between political parties are 
normal situations often seen [in democratic countries]. 
But national defense should be an issue of common 
language shared by all the people of the country. . 
Deputy Undersecretary of Defense Richard Lawless' 
speech underscored [our] American friends' thorough 
observations and concerns about Taiwan's political 
situation.  To protect the lives and property of 23 
million people and to safeguard Taiwan's independent 
sovereignty, we urge opposition party leaders to go 
beyond their position [that this is just] a dispute 
between parties and support the special arms budget. 
In this way we can demonstrate to the international 
community the Taiwan people's determination to defend 
the island and to show them that Taiwan is an asset 
rather than a liability in the democratic world." 
 
B) "Deputy Undersecretary of Defense Richard Lawless' 
Remarks Made at an Inappropriate Occasion" 
 
Journalist Lu Chao-lung commented in the "My Views" 
column of the centrist, pro-status quo "China Times" 
(10/7): 
 
". Lawless is a Pentagon official in charge of Asia- 
Pacific defense affairs; he also has the authority to 
decide on issues concerning the Pacific Command.  As 
Lawless is well versed in the United States' military 
deployment in the area, he is trying to remind Taiwan 
of the importance of these arms deals.  He does not 
want to see Taiwan bungle and ruin the Pentagon's chess 
game. 
 
". Lawless' strongly worded statements of course 
sounded very pleasant to the ears of American defense 
industry businessmen.  What he said was also very true 
based on his duties and responsibilities. 
 
"Some Taiwan military leaders know Lawless well and 
believe he has a chance for promotion, but some others 
do not think so.  No matter what, there will be a 
personnel reshuffle in the Pentagon after the U.S. 
presidential elections.  Lawless' severe remarks on 
Taiwan's arms purchases have made him a big winner who 
is standing in an advantageous position." 
 
C)  "An Imbalanced U.S. Policy and the Misled Taiwan 
People" 
 
Journalist Sun Yang-ming said in the conservative, pro- 
unification "United Daily News" (10/7): 
 
".  American sources that know the inside story said a 
balanced U.S. cross-Strait policy would be to `assist 
with Taiwan's self-defense capabilities militarily on 
one hand, and on the other hand, urge Taipei to engage 
in a dialogue with Beijing to reduce tensions across 
the Taiwan Strait.' 
 
". Under such a concept, the arms procurements 
mentioned by Lawless . merely assumes the types and 
amount of weapons that Taiwan needs under a certain 
circumstance to maintain a balance [across the Taiwan 
Strait].  But it does not represent a political issue, 
such as whether both sides of the Taiwan Strait should 
resume dialogue.  If people only see it from a single 
perspective, they will misinterpret the U.S. policy. . 
 
"If people inside Taiwan only take one side of the 
story, believing firmly that it represents an overall 
U.S. policy, and start to promote it, it might be false 
and seriously misleading to the Taiwan people." 
 
D) "Taiwan Has Strong Reasons to Hold Its Ground and 
Should Work Together to Speak out in Challenge of the 
International Community; the United States Which Honors 
Freedom of Speech Should Not Question Whether K.M. 
Koo's Advertisement Is `Political Means'" 
 
The pro-independence "Taiwan Daily" editorialized 
(10/7): 
 
". Senior Presidential Advisor K.M. Koo paid for the 
advertisement out of his own pocket . doesn't such a 
move of idealism and enthusiasm deserve support from 
both the ruling and opposition parties in Taiwan?  Just 
as Government Information Office Director-General Lin 
Chia-lung said, the United States is a country that 
honors freedom of speech, [so] it should not `make any 
associations' regarding Koo's advertisement. 
 
". We believe that the relevant government agencies 
should consider condensing the contents of Koo's 
advertisement, printing it out as a position paper, and 
promoting it widely to the international community, [in 
order to] convey the Taiwan people's rejection of the 
ignorant and outdated `one-China policy.'" 
 
PAAL