06AITTAIPEI2375
MEDIA REACTION: KMT CHAIRMAN MA YING-JEOU'S TRIP TO JAPAN
Thu Jul 13 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0030
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #2375/01 1940815
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 130815Z JUL 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1087
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5403
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 6612UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 002375 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - ERIC BARBORIAK 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: KMT CHAIRMAN MA YING-JEOU'S TRIP TO JAPAN 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  The investigation into First Lady Wu Shu-chen's alleged 
role in the ownership fight for the Sogo Department Store and the 
release on bail of President Chen Shui-bian's son-in-law remained in 
the Taiwan media spotlight July 13.  News coverage also focused on a 
plan by some pro-Green scholars to urge President Chen to step down; 
KMT Chairman Ma Ying-jeou's trip to Japan; Tropical Storm Bilis, 
which is expected to hit Taiwan later today; and a suspected 
corruption scandal involving the Labor Insurance Bureau chief.  Both 
the pro-status quo "China Times" and pro-unification "United Daily 
News" front-paged plans by a group of pro-Green scholars to make a 
declaration at the DPP party congress later this month, calling for 
President Chen's resignation. 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, a "China Times" opinion 
piece discussed Japan's role in regional security.  An editorial in 
the limited-circulation, pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan 
News" said Ma received a cold shoulder in Tokyo, as he is widely 
seen in Japan as being "pro-China."  End summary. 
 
A) "When Everyone Vies for a Chance to Visit Japan" 
 
Tsai Tseng-chia, associate research fellow at National Chengchi 
 
SIPDIS 
University's Institute of International Relations, opined in the 
pro-status quo "China Times" [circulation: 400,000] (7/13): 
 
"...  The major reason behind Japan's proactive attitude toward 
regional security is because Japan is ready to use the North Korea 
[missile] issue to stride toward the plan of turning itself into a 
normal country.  The factor behind Japan's proactive attitude toward 
cross-Strait relations, however, is that Japan is ready to use the 
Taiwan issue as a balancing lever for its relations with China.  As 
a result of Japan's proactive concern toward the Taiwan issue, 
members of Taiwan's ruling and opposition parties are vying for a 
chance to visit Tokyo.  ...  Based on such a development, relations 
between Taiwan and Japan have manifested the following special 
changes. 
 
"First, Taipei must go through Tokyo in order to get to Beijing. 
Over the past six years, since the DPP came into power, Taiwan and 
Japan have developed unprecedentedly close post-World War II 
relations. ...  Judged from the fact that Japan was extremely 
anxious when China enacted the Anti-Secession Law, and the fact that 
Japan showed that it understands Taiwan best with regard to the 
DPP's plan to push for a popular vote on Taiwan's new constitution, 
Taiwan might just have to go through Tokyo if it wants to get to 
Beijing. 
 
"Second, Washington also has to go through Tokyo in order to get to 
Taipei.  Since Japanese Prime Minister Koizumi assumed office in 
2001, he has gradually deepened and carried out the U.S.-Japan 
security alliance, a move that has made the Koizumi Administration 
the most pro-U.S. regime since World War II.  In addition, Koizumi 
followed the United States' East Asian policy and anti-terrorism 
policy closely.  He also tried to use the changes in the U.S.-Japan 
security alliance to achieve the goal of turning Japan into a normal 
country. 
 
"As a result, when the arms procurement bill was boycotted by the 
pan-Blue camp and failed passage in the Legislative Yuan, the United 
States tried to use Japan to exert pressure on the Taiwan 
government.  Judged from Tokyo's public statements made during the 
visits to Japan by Legislative Yuan President Wang Jin-pyng and KMT 
Chairman Ma Ying-jeou that it does not welcome people who oppose the 
U.S. arms procurement bill to visit Japan, Washington will likely 
have to go through Tokyo if it wants to get to Taipei. ..." 
 
B) "Cool Reception for Ma in Japan" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" [circulation: 
20,000] editorialized (7/13): 
 
"The timing of this week's visit by Kuomintang Chairman Ma Ying-jeou 
to Japan took on greater significance after North Korea test-fired 
seven tactical missiles into the Sea of Japan on July 5.  The open 
preparations by the People's Republic of China to veto any possible 
motion in the United Nations Security Council to impose sanctions on 
Pyongyang is a distinct embarrassment to Ma, who is widely seen in 
Japan, especially by the Liberal Democratic Party, as being 
'pro-China.' ...  As a result, Ma received a cold shoulder in Tokyo. 
 ... 
 
"Evidently to avoid offending China, the KMT has also adopted an 
evasive attitude on the possible role of the U.S.-Japan alliance to 
promote regional democracy and has continued to oppose the upgrading 
of Taiwan's defensive capabilities and has reasserted its strategic 
choice toward unification with China, effectively narrowing the 
KMT's vision of Taiwan's 'choice' to only 'immediate' or 'ultimate' 
unification. ...  On one hand, Ma highlights the importance of 
maintaining 'peace and prosperity' in the Taiwan Strait without 
mentioning 'democracy.'  On the other hand, KMT legislators 
boycotted legislative review of the defensive weapons procurement 
program nearly 60 times over the last two years, thus allowing 
China's rising military clout to pose an increasingly greater threat 
to 'peace and prosperity' in the Taiwan Strait.  Given the 
convoluted logic of these 'positions,' it is hardly surprising that 
Japanese policy-makers do not trust Ma Ying-jeou.  Should we?" 
 
YOUNG