06AITTAIPEI3041
MEDIA REACTION: PRESIDENT CHEN'S OVERSEAS TRIP, CAMPAIGN TO
Tue Sep 05 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #3041/01 2482159
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 052159Z SEP 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1937
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5614
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 6819UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 003041 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - DAVID FIRESTEIN 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: PRESIDENT CHEN'S OVERSEAS TRIP, CAMPAIGN TO 
OUST PRESIDENT CHEN, ARREST OF STRAITS TIMES REPORTER FOR SPYING 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused their 
coverage September 2-5 on moves to oust President Chen Shui-bian; 
Chen's trip to the South Pacific aboard Air Force One; and the 
renaming of Chiang Kai-shek International Airport.  The 
pro-independence "Liberty Times," Taiwan's biggest daily, ran a 
Central News Agency story on page four September 3 with a banner 
headline that read "Arms Procurements Must Be Passed, Political 
Situation Must Be Stable; For Taiwan-U.S. Relations, September and 
October Are Key."  Several papers also carried a news story 
September 4 regarding a publication of the American Chamber of 
Commerce in Taipei, whose editorial criticized the Taiwan government 
for succumbing to the Taiwan Solidarity Union and sidelining 
important cross-Strait issues, which would only "weaken Taiwan's 
competitiveness." 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, an editorial in the 
pro-unification "United Daily News" slashed at President Chen's 
overseas trip aboard Air Force One, saying that the indifference 
shown by the United States towards Chen's transit "is in exact 
proportion to Chen's declining legitimacy."  An editorial in the 
pro-status quo "China Times" commented on the campaign to oust 
President Chen, saying Taiwan faces the tough subject of how to 
deepen its democracy and rule of law and how to ensure people's 
freedom and equal rights.  An editorial in the limited-circulation, 
pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" said in the face 
of the movements to unseat President Chen, Chen is not the only one 
under pressure; instead, it is the DPP that has more to lose.  In 
terms of China's verdict on a Straits Times journalist accused of 
spying for Taiwan, editorials in the limited-circulation, 
pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" and the 
limited-circulation, conservative, pro-unification, English-language 
"China Post" both said the verdict shows that the Chinese government 
under President Hu Jintao has no intention of opening the door to 
political reform, despite China's torrid pace of economic expansion. 
 End summary. 
 
¶3. President Chen's Overseas Trip 
 
"Air Force One:  Showing Off to Palau, But Asking for Insults in 
Guam!" 
 
The pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 400,000] 
editorialized (9/2): 
 
"... But no matter how hard President Chen has tried to create an 
ambiance for his overseas visit, one can hardly sense any joy in 
current developments; all people could discern was the feeling of 
depression and decay.  The United States' refusal to allow 
[Taiwan's] Air Force One to transit Guam was actually not 
unexpected.  What is noteworthy, however, is the United States' 
persistently cold and indifferent attitude when commenting on this 
issue. 
 
"Chen traveled westbound in a rage in May to protest to Washington 
for not allowing him to transit the continental U.S., giving people 
the impression that he is uninhibited and mercurial.  Such an 
attitude would only make the U.S. government treat him with more 
guarded prudence.  Besides, after Chen returned from his odyssey, a 
series of scandals, including his son-in-law's being taken into 
custody, and his and his wife's involvement in the special state 
affairs expense account scandal and the false report of jewelry 
assets case, respectively, have done severe harm to his image as 
well as that of the ruling party.  The indifference shown by the 
United States is in exact proportion to Chen's declining legitimacy. 
 Did the United States need to speak courteously to a state leader 
who is being protested with contempt by a million of his people? 
 
"Given Chen's personality, he would have announced that he would not 
transit Guam after having been turned down [by the U.S.], because a 
few hours' transit is tasteless for him.  But the situation today is 
different from that in the past; Chen's personal reputation and 
position are all in a critical situation.  How much is left to his 
own advantage that he can use to turn hostile to the United States 
except for simply gulping down Washington's indifference? ..." 
 
 
¶4. Campaign to Oust President Chen 
 
A) "Deepening Democracy Is Ultimate Concern of Anti-Graft 
Movements" 
 
The pro-status quo "China Times" [circulation: 400,000] 
editorialized (9/3): 
 
"...  This round of movements to oust Bian and oppose corruption is 
directly aimed at President Chen Shui-bian.  In other countries 
where democratic elections are held, even if the accused [leader] 
does not step down on his accord out of guilt or shame, he would at 
 
least solidly reflect on himself and review his practices.  But when 
we look at President Chen and how he confronted the public 
accusations and doubts, we saw that he not only failed to clarify 
the doubts but also adopted various approaches, such as dividing, 
attacking or making fun of [the accusers] - all the moves that would 
only help to highlight the legitimacy and necessity of the 
anti-graft appeals.  ... 
 
"... The main reason why such an embarrassing and displeasing scene 
happened in Taiwan was because over the past few decades, Taiwan has 
transformed from an authoritarian system to a democracy... without 
going through any revolution or blood-shed.  But the corruption and 
degeneracy that appeared following the transfer of power have all 
the more underscored the fact that Taiwan's democratic 
transformation has yet to be completed. ...  All these signs 
truthfully showed that Taiwan remains in an unfinished stage of its 
democratic transformation.  As a result, how to deepen democracy and 
the rule of law as well as how to ensure freedom and equal rights is 
a tough subject and the ultimate concern of the one million 
anti-graft people.  ..." 
 
B) "The DPP Flounders over Shih" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] editorialized (9/5): 
 
"As the countdown begins for the month-long, round-the-clock sit-in 
rally led by former Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) chairman Shih 
Ming-teh, it would seem that President Chen Shui-bian is not the 
only one under pressure.  The DPP itself is struggling to defend 
itself against Shih's attacks and is hamstrung by internal divisions 
and bickering.  The worst moment of the crisis for Chen ended when 
the opposition failed to recall him.  No one was surprised by the 
failure of that attempt, since the pan-blue camp did not have enough 
legislative votes for the measure to succeed.  The moment that Chen 
retained the support of the DPP, he was home free.  Without that 
support, he would have faced a serious threat from the recall.  ... 
 
"It is the DPP that has more to lose.  Ever since Chen declared that 
he would hand over a degree of responsibility to the premier, the 
party has acted like a child in serious need of guidance.  There 
seems to be no leadership - individually or collectively - in the 
party.  At a time like this, the last thing that the party needs is 
an extension of the crisis to show how helpless it has become. 
..." 
 
¶5. Arrest of Straits Times Reporter for Spying 
 
A) "PRC Ruling Shows View on Freedoms" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" [circulation: 
20,000] wrote in an editorial (9/5): 
 
"The decision by a state court in the People's Republic of China to 
sentence Ching Cheong, the Hong Kong-based correspondent for 
Singapore's Straits Times to five years in prison on charges of 
spying for Taiwan's quite naturally sparked fierce criticism and 
grave concern in Hong Kong's media circles.  Taiwan's Mainland 
Affairs council also strongly rebuked China for the engineered 
verdict by its state-controlled 'justice system' as yet another 
example of the PRC's oppression of news freedom and freedom of 
expression. ...  The case of Ching Cheong and other instances of 
suppression of news freedom and human rights have shown that the 
Chinese government under PRC State Chairman Hu Jintao has no 
intention whatsoever of opening the door for political reform 
despite China's torrid pace of economic expansion and the 
continuation - if in fits and starts - of reform of the economic 
system. ...  Indeed, actions by the PRC authorities aimed at 
intensifying their control over civil society, such as Ching's 
arrest or the forceful passage of 'anti-subversion' legislation in 
Hong Kong, displays publicly their fear of the vibrant civil society 
being fostered by China's overheating economy. ..." 
 
B) "Controversial Verdicts Damaging to China's Image" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] commented in an editorial (9/2): 
 
"In barely a week, mainland China has handed down two verdicts of 
two Chinese-born journalists working for foreign newspapers - Zhao 
Yan of the New York Times and Ching Cheong of the Straits Times in 
Singapore. ...  Whatever the facts, it doesn't help Beijing's image 
to arrest journalists on such dubious charges of espionage or 
leaking state secrets.  Only dictators are afraid of journalists who 
report truths.  Mainland China, which has made stunning progress in 
the economic field, has failed to do the same in the political area. 
 The jailing of the two journalists serves no interests of the 
mainland.  It hurts the country's image as a modern, civilized 
 
member of the international community." 
 
YOUNG