06AITTAIPEI1346
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA SUMMIT, KMT-CCP ECONOMIC FORUM
Tue Apr 18 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0021
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1346/01 1080755
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 180755Z APR 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9760
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5086
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 6285UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001346 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - ERIC BARBORIAK 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA SUMMIT, KMT-CCP ECONOMIC FORUM 
 
 
¶1. Summary: Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies continued to 
focus their coverage April 18 on the controversial battle over the 
ownership of the Sogo Department Store, in which First Lady Wu 
Shu-chen was allegedly involved; the aftermath of last weekend's 
KMT-Chinese Communist Party (CCP) Economic Forum; and the year-end 
Taipei and Kaohsiung mayoral race. 
 
With regard to the upcoming U.S.-China summit, the pro-status quo 
"China Times" and the pro-unification "United Daily News" each spent 
half of their "cross-Strait news" page (page 13) on wire service 
coverage of Chinese President Hu Jintao's U.S. trip.  The "China 
Times" ran a banner headline on its page 13 that read: "Each Side 
Has Something to Insist upon at the Bush-Hu Meeting: Beijing Is 
Particular About [Protocol] Details While the United States Is 
Focused on Trade and Economic Issues."  A separate "China Times" 
news article carried the headline: "Bill Gates Will Host a Dinner 
Reception [for Hu], in Which [Former U.S. National Security Council 
Senior Director for Asian Affairs] Kenneth Lieberthal Will Talk 
about the Interim Agreement [for Both Sides Across the Taiwan 
Strait]."  The "United Daily News" ran a news story on its page 13 
with the headline: "Hu Jintao to Depart for His U.S. Trip Today, 
Which Will Be a Focus of Attention for Both Sides of the Taiwan 
Strait."  The sub-headline added: "'A Visit That Will Promote 
China-U.S. Relations;' the Bush-Hu Meeting Will Take Place April 20, 
in Which Security, Economic, and Taiwan Issues Will Be the Focus." 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times," Taiwan's biggest daily, merely 
carried a wire service news story on its page four with the 
headline: "Hu Jintao Has Expressed to Bush That [Beijing] Has No 
Strength to Challenge U.S. Hegemony." 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, Professor Edward Chen of 
Tamkang University's Graduate Institute of American Studies wrote in 
the "United Daily News" that Hu is fully prepared to explain to Bush 
that Beijing is sincere in improving the China-U.S. relations; 
China's rise is not aimed at the United States; and that the current 
impasse across the Taiwan Strait is not Beijing's fault.  An 
editorial in the limited-circulation, pro-independence, 
English-language "Taiwan News" called on the DPP government to urge 
Washington to beware of possible efforts by Hu to further erode 
international backing for Taiwan's democracy.  Editorials in the 
"Liberty Times" and the limited-circulation, pro-independence, 
English-language "Taipei Times" continued to criticize the KMT-CCP 
economic forum as China's "united-front tactics" aiming at eroding 
Chen's DPP government.  End summary. 
 
¶3. U.S.-China Summit 
 
A) "For the Bush-Hu Meeting, [Chen Shui-]Bian's and [Annette] Lu's 
Criticisms against Lien [Chan] Are Like Offering Hu [Jintao] a 
Hand" 
 
Professor Edward Chen of Tamkang University's Graduate Institute of 
American Studies opined in the pro-unification "United Daily News" 
[circulation: 400,000] (4/18): 
 
"The meeting between [KMT Honorary Chairman] Lien Chan and [Chinese 
President] Hu Jintao has just concluded, which will soon be followed 
by the meeting between [U.S. President George W.] Bush and Hu.  Hu 
is fully prepared for his upcoming trip to the United States, and 
his purpose is to make Bush understand that: first, Beijing is 
sincere with regard to improving China-U.S. relations; second, 
China's rise is not aimed at the United States; and third, it is not 
Beijing's fault that both sides of the Taiwan Strait still remain in 
tense standoff.  ... 
 
"American officials currently stationed in Taiwan believed earlier 
that Washington had successfully used its high-profile treatment of 
[KMT Chairman] Ma Ying-jeou to convey a message to Chen Shui-bian, 
which 'cannot be explained in words' - namely, if the DPP fails 
again to improve cross-Strait relations, Washington may likely 
further tilt toward Ma.  During his recent meeting with Ma, Chen 
said he would respect the idea if Beijing publicly announces that 
the '1992 Consensus' means 'one China with different 
interpretations.'  In response, the American officials also believe 
that Chen's statement indicated that he is a quick learner.  The 
American officials' view [of Chen] may seem like a good beginning 
[for both sides], but judging from Chen's criticism against the 
Lien-Hu meeting, it seems evident that this may just be the United 
States' wishful thinking." 
 
B) "U.S. Must Beware of Hu's Trickery" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" [circulation: 
20,000] editorialized (4/18): 
 
"The Democratic Progressive Party government  must urge 
policy-makers in Washington to beware of possible efforts by 
People's Republic of China President and ruling Chinese Communist 
Party General Secretary Hu Jintao to further erode international 
backing for Taiwan's democracy during his upcoming meeting with 
United States President George W. Bush in Washington D.C. on April 
¶20. ...  In light of President Chen's pledges to promote 
constitutional re-engineering during the last two years of his term, 
Hu may also urge Bush to openly declare that Washington 'opposes,' 
rather than 'does not support,' any form of 'Taiwan independence' or 
even to push Bush to sign a fourth communiqu containing this 
principle.  We do not believe the Bush administration will easily 
fall into Beijing's trap, but we nevertheless strongly urge the DPP 
government to carry out full preparations to cope with the worst 
possible scenarios. ... 
 
"President Chen must also clarify to U.S. channels that Washington's 
concern over a possible 'dangerous, objectionable, and foolish 
response' by Beijing to the consolidation of Taiwan's substantive 
independence does not legitimize the PRC's opposition to moves by 
the Taiwan people to improve or deepen their own democratic system, 
especially as such upgrading is taking place through incremental and 
democratic constitutional procedures.  In sum, the DPP government 
can best allow Taiwan's voices to be heard worldwide by 
distinguishing our desire for democracy and peace based on the 
exercise of the free will of our citizens from the PRC's 
authoritarian rule and rising imperial ambitions." 
 
¶4. KMT-CCP Economic Forum 
 
A) "Only [When Taiwan] Develops Its Domestic Economy Can the Island 
Safeguard Its Sovereignty" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 600,000] 
editorialized (4/18): 
 
"... The KMT-CCP forum set up a stage for China's united-front 
tactics by using economic baits to wrap up its ill-intentioned one 
China principle.  The [Taiwan] government's responsibility is to 
safeguard Taiwan's sovereignty and it can never yield to the 
pressure jointly posed by the KMT and the CCP.  In addition, the 
government must come up with countermeasures that can prevent the 
KMT and CCP from gaining what they conspired to get.  This newspaper 
believes that the government must not dance to the devil's tune but 
should do what is opposite of the KMT-CCP schemes; that is, the 
government should renounce the myth that Taiwan's economy must rely 
on China, and it should do its utmost to develop Taiwan's domestic 
economy and let those who believe in Taiwan enjoy a better life. 
..." 
 
B) "The Man Who Sold Taiwan, Twice" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation; 
30,000] wrote in an editorial (4/18): 
 
"So former Chinese Nationalist Party (KMT) chairman Lien Chan has 
wrapped up his second trip to China.  Apart from helping this sad 
and aloof figure secure some kind of political legacy, it is hard to 
see what this latest trip has actually achieved. ...  Besides that, 
the communists tossed a few more crumbs onto the table in the guise 
of help for Taiwanese fishermen, farmers and other groups, in a 
blatant attempt to erode the DPP's support base.  It's certain that 
there will be no positive achievements from Lien's trip.  After all, 
what government would honor an agreement that their traitorous 
opposition had signed with a country that has 800 missiles trained 
on it? ... 
 
"In his bid to satisfy his vanity, Lien and the KMT have merely 
become tools of the Chinese Communist Party's 'united front' 
campaign.  Lien is like the Pied Piper of Hamelin, and the 
pro-unification media his pipe, as he leads Taiwan's democracy into 
the dark reaches of Beijing's cavern.  The question is: Do the 
Taiwanese people want to follow him?" 
 
YOUNG