07AITTAIPEI1116
MEDIA REACTION: TAIWAN'S WHO BID
Thu May 17 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0005
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1116/01 1370810
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 170810Z MAY 07
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5292
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 6787
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 8036UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001116 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - LLOYD NEIGHBORS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: TAIWAN'S WHO BID 
 
Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused news 
coverage May 17 on the mishaps during the 23rd Hankuang Military 
Exercise Wednesday, on the cabinet personnel reshuffle, and on other 
local issues.  In terms of editorials and commentaries, an editorial 
in the centrist with pro-Blue proclivities "China Times" criticized 
the DPP government's foreign policy, saying it is aimed at using 
Taiwan's setbacks in the international community as a political ploy 
for domestic consumption.  An editorial in the limited-circulation, 
pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times," however, 
criticized China's attempts to thwart Taiwan's bid to join the World 
Health Organization (WHO).  A separate "Taipei Times" op-ed also 
chimed in, urging the WHO member states to put politics aside and 
allow Taiwan to become a full participant.  End summary. 
 
A) "Is It Appropriate for [Taiwan's] Foreign Policy to Be Aimed at 
'Seeking Failure' Only?" 
 
The centrist with pro-Blue proclivities "China Times" [circulation: 
400,000] editorialized (5/17): 
 
"... In short, the DPP authorities have been seeking radical 
independence in terms of their policies, making [Taiwan] isolated 
among its allies and seeking spectacular setbacks when it comes to 
[the island's] bid to join international organizations, in an 
attempt to create capital for [the party to win] domestic elections 
-- this is the meaning conveyed by the phrase 'seeking failure.' 
[Note: the Mandarin phrase "du gu qiu bai" refers to a fictitious 
character in a well-known martial arts novel who was cut off from 
the outside world and who aimed to seek failure.] 
 
"But the question is:  Such a 'failure seeking' foreign policy has 
not only infuriated [Taiwan's] allies but has also done harm to 
Taiwan's economic development.  For organizations such as the United 
Nations and the World Bank, Taiwan's participation in them may carry 
both symbolic and substantive significance.  Even for the World 
Health Organization, its member states will hardly sense any 
different treatment until the moment when a pandemic strikes.  But 
the regional trade organizations such as ASEAN, or the potential 
free trade agreements that Taiwan may likely sign with South Korea, 
Japan, the United States or European Union are the organizations or 
agreements that Taiwan should strive to sign or participate in 
because the substantive significance of Taiwan's bids far outweighs 
the symbolic significance.  This paper has pointed out more than 
once in its editorials that when the ASEAN plus three takes shape in 
2010 and when all ASEAN nations have each signed free trade 
agreements with the United States and EU nations, Taiwan, which is 
excluded from all these, will quickly lose the relative edge it has 
enjoyed in bilateral and multi-lateral trade, and a major crisis of 
economic marginalization will thus be formed.  It is a widely known 
fact that the United States plays a very influential role in 
determining whether Taiwan is able to join or sign these regional 
trade agreements.  If our policy that seeks failure continues to 
infuriate the United States, it will surely be inauspicious for 
Taiwan's economic planning.  This is not a move to show our love for 
Taiwan, rather it will do harm to the island." 
 
B) "China's 'Concern' Makes Us Sick" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] editorialized (5/17): 
 
"... However, those who voted against Taiwan's bid for full 
membership in the WHO cannot simply wash their hands and walk away. 
They are equally guilty of turning a blind eye to the rights of 23 
million people and for leaving a missing link in the global health 
framework by yielding to political pressure and excluding Taiwan. 
The organization as a whole and its individual member states seem 
unbothered by the contradiction between a body's mandate to 
prioritize global health issues -- above political agendas -- and 
blocking an entire nation from that body. ...  How long will the WHO 
and its member states allow Taiwan to remain in this untenable 
position?  One way or another, Taiwan is better off without China's 
magnanimity." 
 
C) "PRC Shares 'Expertise' with WHO" 
 
Â¶J. Michael Cole, a Taipei-based writer, opined in the 
pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] (5/17): 
 
"... A global health organization worthy of its name and budgets, 
which after all come from its constituents, would have the wisdom to 
look beyond the narcissism of nationalist politics and act as per 
its mandate, which is to protect all, regardless of religion and 
nationality.  It is high time the supposed wise men and women in the 
pristine white lab coats at the WHO in Geneva lifted the veil of the 
leaders in Beijing and gazed into the festering disregard for human 
rights that animates their policies. ...  Whether it is in the 
spirit of global citizenship, or for selfish national security 
interests, the 193 member states at the WHO, NGOs and rights groups 
worldwide must put politics aside and pressure Beijing and the WHO 
-- including its Hong-Kong-born secretary-general, Margaret Chan, 
whose views on the issue are a reflection of Beijing's relentless 
efforts to isolate Taiwan -- into allowing Taiwan, next time around, 
to become a full participant." 
 
YOUNG