07AITTAIPEI212
MEDIA REACTION: CHINA'S ANTI-SATELLITE MISSILE TEST,
Mon Jan 29 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0010
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0212/01 0290900
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 290900Z JAN 07
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3890
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 6281
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 7511UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000212 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - LLOYD NEIGHBORS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: CHINA'S ANTI-SATELLITE MISSILE TEST, 
TAIWAN'S UN BID 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused their 
coverage January 27-29 on the debt-ridden Rebar Asia Pacific Group; 
on possible Blue and Green candidates for the 2008 presidential 
elections; on President Chen Shui-bian's remarks at the 
"Transformation in New Democracies" forum last Friday regarding 
Taiwan's UN bid; and on the death of a young TV actress Sunday 
following a severe car crash.  The pro-unification "United Daily 
News" ran a banner headline January 27 on page four that said "Bian: 
Joining the United Nations under the Name of Taiwan Does Not Violate 
the Four Nos Pledge.  The pro-independence "Liberty Times," Taiwan's 
largest-circulation daily, on the other hand, ran a news story on 
page four January 29 with the headline "Taiwan Will Communicate with 
the United States over Its UN Bid under the Name of Taiwan." 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, a "Liberty Times" 
editorial commented on China's recent anti-satellite missile test, 
saying the move is akin to telling Washington that China already has 
the ability to counterattack spy satellites and thereby restrain the 
U.S. military system.  An editorial in the limited-circulation, 
conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post," on the 
other hand, discussed President Chen's proposal of the island 
joining the UN under the name of "Taiwan."  The article directly 
pointed out that "the real reason why President Chen is determined 
to use the name 'Taiwan' in our U.N. bid has to do with domestic 
pandering to his solid base of support, rather than any realistic 
hope of making progress with the bid."  End summary. 
 
¶3. China's Anti-Satellite Missile Test 
 
"Killing Satellites, Killing Taiwan" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 550,000] 
editorialized (1/29): 
 
"... In fact, China's missile test was to provoke the United States 
in its face.  It is a well-known fact that the United States' over 
two hundred spy satellites equipped with advanced technology are an 
indispensable tool for its military superiority in the world, 
including in the Asia-Pacific region.  These satellites are also the 
reason why China has not dared to engage in a conflict with the 
United States until now.  China's move to launch a missile to 
destroy its satellite is akin to telling the United States that it 
already has the ability to counterattack spy satellites and thereby 
restrain the United States' military system. ... 
 
"Of course, it was not the United States and Japan alone that were 
affected by China's anti-satellite missile test.  For Taiwan, 
already the target of over 900 of China's short and medium-range 
missiles, the only countries that will come to its aid if it is 
under China's attack are the United States and Japan.  If China 
takes a pre-emptive move to destroy U.S. and Japanese spy satellites 
at the same time when it launches a surprise attack against Taiwan, 
both the United States and Japan will miss the initial opportunity 
to come to Taiwan's rescue.  Such a development will offer China an 
opportunity to control Taiwan and then force both the United States 
and Japan to accept the fact that Taiwan is annexed by China. ... 
 
"For Taiwan, China's military threats are imminent, and the top 
priority for the island is to fix its defense inadequacy as early as 
possible.  The fundamental resolution, however, lies in fostering 
Taiwan to be a normal country.  Only when Taiwan becomes a normal 
country, has its name rectified and a new constitution written, and 
consequently joins the United Nations, can China's scheme of 
annexing Taiwan using the excuse of dealing with its internal 
affairs be totally eliminated.  In addition, when Taiwan becomes a 
normal country, it can work to build a consensus over its national 
identity and stop the pro-unification force [in Taiwan] from joining 
hands with China. ..." 
 
¶4. Taiwan's UN Bid 
 
"Name Not the Problem for U.N." 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (1/28): 
 
"Just when we thought relations with the United States had settled 
down, President Chen Shui-bian is once again risking Washington's 
ire by seeking to change the status quo.  According to President 
Chen, who recently spoke at an international conference on 
burgeoning democracies, using the name 'Taiwan' on our bid to 
re-join the United Nations, in contrast to the past when we sought 
re-entry as the Republic of China, has not broken his solemn promise 
to Washington not to change the national title during his term in 
office. ... 
 
"Obviously, the real reason why President Chen is determined to use 
the name 'Taiwan' in our U.N. bid has to do with domestic pandering 
 
to his solid base of support, rather than any realistic hope of 
making progress with the bid. ...  By dumping the ROC name in favor 
of 'Taiwan,' President Chen is essentially now applying for 
admission as a new state, rather than seeking re-entry as an 
existing state. ...  We believe it is highly likely that President 
Chen's name game has already irritated our friends in Washington, 
who as a result will surely be loath to offering any more support 
for U.N. aspirations." 
 
YOUNG