07AITTAIPEI252
MEDIA REACTION: TAIWAN POLITICS, WAR IN IRAQ,
Thu Feb 01 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0012
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0252/01 0320850
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 010850Z FEB 07
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3957
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 6314
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 7544UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000252 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - LLOYD NEIGHBORS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: TAIWAN POLITICS, WAR IN IRAQ, 
 
 
¶1. Summary: Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused their 
coverage February 1 on former President Lee Teng-hui, who made an 
about-face move by saying Wednesday that he has never advocated 
Taiwan independence; and on the rezoning of electoral districts for 
the year-end Legislative Yuan elections.  The pro-status quo "China 
Times" ran a banner headline on page two that read "Lee: Pursuit of 
Taiwan Independence Is Both Regressive and Dangerous."  The 
front-page headline of the pro-unification "United Daily News" also 
said "A Big Change of Direction; Lee Teng-hui Criticizes Taiwan 
Independence." 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, editorials in the 
pro-independence "Liberty Times," Taiwan's largest-circulation 
daily, and the pro-unification "United Daily News" both discussed 
the recent revisions to the history textbooks for Taiwan's high 
school students - namely, changing and taking out the portion on 
Chinese history.  The "Liberty Times" editorial said the move was an 
educational reform to recover historical truth and to intensify the 
Taiwan-centered values and the Taiwan peoples' nativist 
identification, while the "United Daily News" called it a forcible 
means of using political power to interfere with education.  An 
editorial in the limited-circulation, conservative, pro-unification, 
English-language "China Post," on the other hand, discussed the war 
in Iraq and said it is a war the Americans must win.  End summary. 
 
 
¶3. Taiwan Politics 
 
A) "New Edition of History Textbooks Are Meant to Reveal the 
Original Look of Taiwan History" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 550,000] 
editorialized (2/1): 
 
"... Frankly speaking, the new edition of history textbooks for high 
school students emphasizes nativist values and historical documents; 
it discards the phony grand Chinese consciousness and reduces the 
portion on Chinese history.  The move was indeed a kind of cultural 
revolution, but not the one launched by Mao Zedong in 1960s and 70s. 
 China's Cultural Revolution was a power struggle ... and a means 
used by Mao to purge the dissidents in the party via mass movements. 
 But as for Taiwan's revisions to its history textbooks, this is an 
educational reform to recover historical truth, to interpret 
Taiwan's history from the perspective of the Taiwan people, to 
intensify Taiwan-centered awareness and the Taiwan people's nativist 
identification, and to eliminate the poisonous ideas of alien 
regimes. ..." 
 
B) "Whether Sun Yat-sen Should Be Named as [Our] National Father 
Depends on Whether or Not Chen Shui-bian is the President of the 
Republic of China!" 
 
The pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 400,000] 
editorialized (2/1): 
 
"... Those in charge of the revision of the history textbooks this 
time used two nominal reasons to explain their move: 'cultural 
diversity' and 'Taiwan-centered awareness.'  But in fact their real 
purpose was 'de-ROC-ification' -- using the force of political power 
to 'interfere with education.'  Such a move has violated not only 
substantive justice but also procedural justice. ..." 
 
¶4. War in Iraq 
 
"U.S. Must Win Iraq War" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (2/1): 
 
"... The war in Iraq, however, has been far harder and longer than 
the Americans could have imagined.  They go off on the wrong foot by 
letting the rabble loot the country.  While optimism was in the air 
when the constitution was approved and after the elections, it has 
not translated into success on the ground. ...  Tell Americans it 
could take decades to win this war, and they are incredulous. 
Americans like a war to be like a basketball game - fast and 
furious, with a clear winner in a short time.  The United States is 
unchallenged in high intensity warfare, but dropping a lot of bombs 
on Iraq won't change much - what is needed are boots on the ground. 
 
 
"This type of war is a hard grind - stressful for the troops and the 
politicians at home.  In the U.S., the anti-war movement is growing. 
...  It must be said that the U.S. pulling out of Iraq would be a 
disaster for the Americans, the Middle East and the world.  The 
shameful exit of the Americans from Vietnam was shameful not because 
they lost, but because of the way the Congress cut off funds to its 
South Vietnamese allies.  The U.S. now has an all-volunteer army. 
Recruiting figures have held, but the strain on the armed forces has 
 
been considerable - the steady grind of anti-insurgent warfare is 
taking its toll on the troops.  This is a war the Americans must 
win.  The Bush administration will not pull out - in the short term, 
it may even boost troop numbers in Iraq - but in 2008 a new 
administration will be elected.  Who can tell then?" 
 
WANG