08AITTAIPEI1189
MEDIA REACTION: THE BEIJING OLYMPIC GAMES; PRESIDENT BUSH'S
Mon Aug 11 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0004
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1189/01 2240946
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 110946Z AUG 08
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9723
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 8524
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 9732UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001189 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: THE BEIJING OLYMPIC GAMES; PRESIDENT BUSH'S 
VISIT IN ASIA; U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused August 
9-11 news coverage on the opening ceremony of the Beijing Olympic 
Games; on weightlifter Chen Wei-ling winning Taiwan's first medal in 
the Olympics; and on the conflict in South Ossetia.  In terms of 
editorials and commentaries, a column in the pro-independence 
"Liberty Times" criticized the grand opening ceremony of the Beijing 
Olympic Games, saying calling it a failure that sacrificed 
individualism and did not touch people's souls at all.  An op-ed in 
the centrist, KMT-leaning "China Times" offered several reflections 
from the opening ceremony of the Beijing Olympics, including linking 
the implications between the Olympics and the conflict in South 
Ossetia.  The op-ed also implied that DPP Chairperson Tsai Ing-wen's 
analogy of the Beijing Olympic Games to the 1936 Games hosted by 
Nazi Germany does not make sense.  Both the conservative, 
pro-unification, English-language "China Post" and pro-independence, 
English-language "Taiwan News" criticized United States President 
George W. Bush's attendance at the Beijing Olympic Games for 
ignoring China's poor records in human rights.  An op-ed in the 
pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" warned both 
Washington and Taipei to be aware of the threat of China's 
developing missile capability with respect to its 'areal denial' 
strategy in the Taiwan Strait.  End summary. 
 
¶2. The Beijing Olympic Games 
 
A) "A Reflection from the Chinese Netizens' Scolding: A 'Failed' 
Olympics Opening" 
 
Cao Changqing, an independent commentator, wrote in his column in 
the pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 720,000] (8/11): 
 
"The Chinese government used up all its resources to present the 
Olympic Games opening ceremony to the whole world in a style of 
'grandiosity, spectacular fireworks, big colors, big groups, and 
extravagancy.'  The opening nevertheless was a 'big failure' and was 
criticized by Chinese netizens.  [The opening] was regarded by 
[Chinese netizens] as an 'upgraded version of North Korean big 
group-dancing: a big scene with empty content; human waves tactics 
without humanity!'...   [The opening]...squandered money to create 
the most garish Olympics in history. ... 
 
"It was really because [Beijing Olympics opening ceremony director] 
Zhang Yimou's main thought was to propagandize [China's] state and 
national pride rather than the Olympic spirit.  Therefore, no matter 
how many people Zhang mobilized and the lighting, color and digital 
techniques he used to present orderly squares and shouts just like 
operating robots, [Zhang] was not able to fill the opening ceremony 
with the soul, which is the spirit of human beings' freedom. ..." 
 
B) "The Post-Colonial Beijing Olympic Games" 
 
Chang Teng-chi, an assistant professor at the Institute of Strategy 
and International Affairs at National Chung Cheng University, opined 
in the centrist, KMT-leaning "China Times" [circulation: 400,000] 
(8/11) 
 
"The opening ceremony of the Beijing Olympics was held smoothly.  At 
the juncture that Chinese netizens commented on [Beijing Olympics 
opening ceremony director] Zhang Yimou's success and failures, and 
Taiwan opposition leader [DPP Chairperson Tsai Ing-wen]'s 
condemnation that the Beijing Olympics are tantamount to the Nazis' 
[Games in 1936], a war with serious impact on the international 
order, despite receiving little media attention is developing: a 
conflict between Georgia and South Ossetia.  Although Pro-Russia 
Ossetia's insistence to split from Georgia and wish to declare 
independence is the fuse, the United States' clandestine support to 
pro-U.S. Georgia and Russia's firm resistance to the United States' 
influence in the Caucasian region is the most dangerous factor. 
Nevertheless, the Untied States' global tasks are so complicated and 
the Caucasian region is so far away.  It is unlikely that [the 
United States] would help Georgia to resist [South Ossetia's wish 
to] independence and promote unification. 
 
"The apocalypse of the South Ossetia War can not be clearer: the 
Olympic Games are only a stage for countries (maybe including South 
Korea) to confirm their international status and to promote 
multinational capitalism.  At the most, several dramatic stories are 
heard occasionally, in which medium-sized or small countries' 
sportsmen have outstanding performances.  'Modern' Olympics are no 
more advanced than the 'ancient' [Olympics].  Slavery, famine, 
competition among big countries, wars and the Olympics happen at the 
same time.  From the perspective of international politics, [the 
Olympic Games] are not worth too much expectation. ... 
 
"The reson for [DPP Chairperson Tsai Ing-wen] to make an analogy 
that the Beijing Olympic Games are tantamount to the Nazis' Olympics 
[in 1936] is simply based on her worry that the Taiwan people will 
become Jews in China's eyes and suffer from China's oppression, or 
VISIT IN ASIA; U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
become the Czechoslovakia that was betrayed at Munich.  And, 
[Chinese President] Hu Jintao would be the Nazi leader who wanted to 
pretend that everything was going well.....China is not like the 
Germany of that time which was strong enough to be the leader of 
Euroasia.  [United States President George W.] Bush not only does 
not pursue isolationism, but also went to Beijing to attend a 
religious service.  [Chinese President] Hu [Jintao] and [Chinese 
Premier] Wen [Jiabao] do not enjoy the uniquely-revered status that 
the Nazi leader did at that time. ..." 
 
¶3. President Bush's Visit in Asia 
 
A) "Bush's Pat on the Back" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (8/9): 
 
"Bush's lecture, in fact, is not new.  It's like harping on the old 
tune.  It's interesting to note that Bush chose to make the speech 
public in Thailand instead of China.  Obviously, he did not want to 
offend his host and spoil the fun he and his family are going to 
have in Beijing.  He said earlier in Seoul that he did not believe 
the Olympics should be used as an occasion to criticize the host 
country. ... 
 
"The speech was a slap on the wrist, not in the face.  Ever since 
President Bush decided to attend the Beijing Games last year, he has 
been under mounting pressure from critics at home and human rights 
activists abroad who urged him to boycott the games.  He has to 
respond to his critics. 
 
"The fact is, Bush's attendance lends much prestige and 
respectability to Beijing.  All the protests that have plagued the 
organizers of the games will be made irrelevant by Bush's appearance 
- a pat on the back of Beijing from the world's most powerful 
democracy. 
 
"In politics, what's important is what you do, not what you say. 
Bush's rhetoric doesn't mean very much compared to what he is doing. 
 No wonder that Beijing's foreign ministry did not take President 
Bush's speech seriously, saying perfunctorily that human rights are 
China's internal affairs. ... 
 
"President Hu Jintao should be extremely gratified by Bush's 
presence, and pretend he didn't hear anything.  Now is party time, 
to smile and to have fun, not to let nasty politics ruin the 
auspicious occasion.  It is certainly inappropriate for Bush to boo 
the debutante at her coming out party. ..." 
 
B) "End of Olympics Test for 'Responsible PRC" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" [circulation: 
20,000] editorialized (8/11): 
 
"... Nevertheless, the efforts by PRC leaders to downplay both the 
impact of controversy over the 'Genocide Olympics' and natural 
disasters brought in a rich political harvest as heads-of-state or 
national leaders from over 100 countries, including United States 
President George W. Bush, gathered in Beijing for the historical 
occasion. ... 
 
"Bush's statement reflected the US strategy of 'con-gaging' China 
(containment and engagement in tandem) to bring the Beijing regime 
into the international framework and incrementally transform China 
into a politically democratic and economically liberal country while 
simultaneously allowing PRC leaders shoulder the responsibility of 
being a great power. 
 
"However, questions abound over this approach, including doubts 
whether PRC leaders will transform their authoritarian part - state 
into a more democratic and peaceful power in line with such 
expectations and whether Beijing will act as a responsible emerging 
power in international society, especially after the Olympics. 
 
"Indeed, if a successful Beijing Olympics only makes a rising PRC 
more arrogant and expansionist and even less likely to respect 
universal values of democracy and human rights, then all major power 
will have to shoulder the consequence that they created. 
 
"Unfortunately, unwillingness of Bush or other world 'democratic' 
leaders to miss out on Friday's authoritarian extravaganza and the 
blanket endorsement shown to Hu and the CCP leadership by their 
attendance sent contradictory message, namely that the expressed 
concern for 'human rights' and 'peace' are merely words in the face 
of the dictum that 'might is right.' ... 
 
"Bush appears to be joining President Ma Ying-jeou in a tacit gamble 
that 'peace' in the Taiwan Strait can be maintained if Taiwan stops 
VISIT IN ASIA; U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
striving for self-determination, but the next U.S. president as well 
as the Taiwan people will pay the price if their bet loses. 
 
"Instead, we believe the United States and the rest of the world 
democratic community will ultimately be faced with their 
responsibility to make more substantial efforts to promote the 
opening of China's political system so promote room for the Chinese 
people to strive for democratization and to cease sacrificing 
Taiwan's democracy and autonomy to the false god of appeasement." 
 
¶4. U.S.-China-Taiwan Relations 
 
"Beijing's New Missiles Go Too Far" 
 
Stan Chiueh, an assistant coordinator for programs at the Institute 
of National Policy Research in Taipei, opined in the 
pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] (8.11): 
 
"... A successful 'area denial' strategy based on these new missiles 
would play a key role of denying the US the ability to prevent 
attacks on Taiwan. ... 
 
"The US, for its part, has imposed an unofficial arms sale freeze on 
Taiwan, at least until after the Olympics. 
 
"While US President George W. Bush and the State Department have 
been largely silent on the issue, their silence speaks volumes about 
the changing US relationship with China compared with Bush's 
previous statements that he would do 'whatever it takes' to protect 
Taiwan from aggression by China. 
 
"Beijing, on the other hand, has treated the US and Taiwan's efforts 
toward a diplomatic thaw not as gestures of goodwill deserving of 
reciprocation, but as their responsibilities to 'honor' commitments 
made to China. ... 
 
"Taking these various factors into consideration, it is evident that 
the latest round of missile deployment is yet another disturbing 
development in China's efforts to ever more successfully challenge 
the US over Taiwan.  It is important for policymakers in Washington 
and Taipei to recognize the potential threats arising from China's 
advancing area-denial capabilities and preempt it by demanding that 
measures be taken to reduce the military build-up as a condition for 
future cooperation." 
 
YOUNG