09BRUSSELS1350
EU DISCUSSES AFGHANISTAN-PAKISTAN WITH PARTNERS
Tue Oct 06 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USEU Brussels
VZCZCXRO3940
OO RUEHIK
DE RUEHBS #1350/01 2791600
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 061600Z OCT 09 ZDK
FM USEU BRUSSELS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 001350 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL EAID EUN AF PK
SUBJECT: EU DISCUSSES AFGHANISTAN-PAKISTAN WITH PARTNERS 
 
REF: STOCKHOLM 577 
 
BRUSSELS 00001350  001.6 OF 002 
 
 
Sensitive But Unclassified -- please handle accordingly. 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Summary and Introduction:  Swedish Special 
Representative for Afghanistan and Pakistan Anna-Karin 
Enestrom and Swedish EU Presidency Political and Security 
Committee Ambassador Olof Skoog hosted informal consultations 
on October 5 to discuss Afghanistan and Pakistan.  In 
addition to the United States, the UN, NATO, the World Bank, 
Canada, Australia, Norway, Turkey, and Japan were invited to 
share their thinking.  The Swedes presented a broad outline 
of their ongoing strategic review (as discussed at the 
informal foreign ministers, Gymnich, meeting in September; 
see reftel).  Key themes, developed in more detail since the 
September meeting, include the importance of regional actors, 
a more concrete and action-oriented approach, and Afghan 
ownership of the process.  The EU emphasized that it is in 
Afghanistan for the long-term and the review should be seen 
as a modus operandi for the way forward. The European 
Commission also noted they are looking to put more resources 
into Afghanistan.  All representatives were broadly in 
agreement on improved donor coordination and transitioning to 
an Afghan-led process.  The EU member states will begin 
meeting October 6 to determine the final format of the review 
paper, to be released at the foreign minister's GAERC meeting 
at the end of October.  End Summary and Itrst major tn.  Specialshare fromle thereith the Parliament and 
civil society.  Canada ha raised concerns about security and 
technicalcapacities to hold such a high-level conference in 
Kabul.  The Council Secretariat Head of Unit for Asia also 
noted that the election results are still in flux, and that 
any international conference or compact could be limited by 
the perceived legitimacy of the future Afghan government, 
which could require a "dramatic" re-evaluation of the 
strategic review process, "if things go awry."  (All nodded 
approvingly when Canada underscored the importance of unified 
messaging on the elections.) 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  On Afghanistan, UNAMA Representative Mark Ward 
spoke about the Afghan National Development Strategy and the 
move to strategically focus on three main clusters of 
economic development (agriculture and rural development, 
education and vocational training, and infrastructure and 
economic development, mainly in the Center and North.)  The 
European Union noted they are interested in focusing 
particularly on sub-national governance as a critical field 
for new development (as work within national sectors is 
on-going).  Additionally, the EU brought up rule of law, 
policing and the judiciary as areas for continued attention. 
Reintegration is also a sector the EU intends to invest in, 
particularly on the technical aspects of administering such a 
program.  USEU Charge d'Affaires conveyed talking points 
provided by Washington.  The NATO representative spoke of the 
importance of civil-military interaction, particularly noting 
that the military can conduct clearing operations, but that 
holding and building is the critical element for civilian and 
military interaction.  Several noted that holding and 
building programs should ideally be Afghan-owned and 
 
BRUSSELS 00001350  002.6 OF 002 
 
 
implemented, albeit supported by the international community. 
 Canada said Afghan administrative officials must move 
quickly into cleared villages.  For Pakistan, the European 
Union, broadly supported by the partner countries present, 
supports the Malakand Development Strategy.  The EU also said 
they are working with Pakistan to enhance governance, and to 
strengthen the EU-Pakistan political and economic 
relationship.  All, including the U.S., noted the importance 
of building the capacity of Afghan government ministries. 
UNAMA noted that the next Afghan president will need to 
delegate extra authority to "super ministries" to govern. 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  Comment:  One day after these informal 
consultations with non-EU partners, the EU Political and 
Security Committee will begin discussing the text of the EU's 
strategy review.  The EU hopes to produce an updated paper 
for the foreign ministers meeting at the end of October.  The 
Swedish Presidency said the purpose of the exercise is to 
make the EU Af/Pak strategy paper discussed at the early 
September Gymnich meeting more concrete and action-oriented. 
Additionally, the Swedes announced that they will be hosting 
a meeting on October 6 to find creative solutions for the EU 
to fulfill its EUPOL mandate. (EUPOL has filled 265 of 400 
training slots.)  Commission and Council Secretariat contacts 
note the Swedish Presidency is heavily invested in ensuring 
that a concrete way-ahead comes out of this process. End 
comment. 
 
 
MURRAY 
.