09DUBLIN417
YOUR OCTOBER 11 VISIT TO IRELAND
Sun Oct 04 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Dublin
VZCZCXRO1085
OO RUEHDBU RUEHFL RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHNP RUEHROV RUEHSL RUEHSR
DE RUEHDL #0417/01 2770908
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 040908Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY DUBLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0234
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHBL/AMCONSUL BELFAST IMMEDIATE 1082C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 DUBLIN 000417 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/04/2019 
TAGS: PGOV PREL ECON EFIN PINR EI
SUBJECT: YOUR OCTOBER 11 VISIT TO IRELAND 
 
DUBLIN 00000417  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Daniel M. Rooney.  Reasons 1.4(b/d). 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: Your visit comes just after the Irish 
approval of the Lisbon Treaty and before a series of 
difficult tests for the Irish government.  Before the end of 
the year, Irish Prime Minister Brian Cowen must come to 
agreement with his coalition partner, the Green Party, on a 
new program for government, push through hotly-contested 
legislation designed to further shore up the Irish banking 
sector, and deliver a harsh budget.  Failure on any of these 
issues would likely bring down the government early next 
year.  That said, a change in government would not alter the 
good relationship we enjoy with the Irish people or our close 
cooperation with the Irish government on the issues that are 
most important to us.  End Summary. 
 
The Celtic Tiger -- R.I.P. 
-------------------------- 
 
¶2. (C) After over a decade of heady growth the Irish economy 
tumbled farther and faster than most other economies during 
this global recession.  This has led to a bit of 
soul-searching among the policy elites about what went wrong 
and how it can be fixed.  The "man-on-the-street" isn't 
searching the soul but, rather, is simply angry.  This anger 
has manifested itself in tumbling poll numbers for the 
government and an increase in industrial actions.  That said, 
Ireland today is economically much better off than it was 
before its Celtic Tiger period. And, while the Cowen 
government took some time to get its bearings, it is moving 
forward with initiatives to get the Irish economy back on 
track.  Recently, the economy has shown signs of bottoming 
out and some forecasters are predicting a return to growth as 
early as mid-2010.  This would be good news for Cowen because 
he still faces many short-term political challenges. 
 
Government Woes: Lisbon Referendum and Beyond 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (C) The government successfully navigated the first of 
these challenges -- a successful Lisbon Treaty referendum 
vote (reftel).  With Irish approval of the Treaty secured, 
Cowen's government (comprised of his own party, the centrist 
Fianna Fail (FF), and the Green Party) must now come to an 
agreement on the government's new platform.  Some Greens feel 
that FF has taken them for granted and may seek a "better 
deal" than the one they negotiated when they entered 
government in May 2007.  The Greens have some bargaining 
power because they have enough votes in parliament to bring 
down the government if it left the coalition.  However, there 
is a strong possibility that the Green Party would not win 
any seats if a general election were held in the near future. 
 Given that, most observers do not expect the Greens to 
precipitate an election.  The Greens' opening position in the 
talks include securing promises from FF that cuts to 
secondary education be rolled back, that social welfare 
payments not be reduced, that the number of members of 
parliament be reduced, and that a universal health care plan 
be introduced.  These will all be difficult for FF to agree 
to. 
 
¶4. (C) Later in October, the government must pass legislation 
to set up the National Asset Management Agency (NAMA) which 
would be the repository of all property loans currently on 
the Irish banks' books.  Because the purpose of NAMA is to 
free up the banks to start lending again, the agency has 
become a lightning rod for those who blame bankers and 
property developers for Ireland's financial mess.  In 
particular, many of the Green Party's rank-and-file are angry 
at their party's leadership for signing on to the legislation 
and have pushed for the legislation to be changed. 
 
 
¶5. (C) The biggest challenge will be the introduction of the 
government's budget in December.  Against the backdrop of 
double-digit unemployment, a contraction in GDP of eight 
percent in 2009, and a lack of credit in the economy, the 
government has promised its EU partners that it will bring 
its 11 percent budget deficit (as a percentage of GDP) down 
to three percent by 2013.  To do this, the government must 
"find" USD 6 billion through spending cuts and tax increases 
next year in order to cut into the approximately USD 30 
billion budget deficit.  The spending measures will be most 
difficult politically for the government and will give the 
opposition an opportunity to pick off backbenchers in an 
effort to force an early general election. 
 
¶6. (C) We expect the NAMA legislation to pass and the Greens 
and FF to reach a satisfactory accommodation on the new 
platform for government.  The budget is the most likely of 
the three to lead to a change in government.  Even if this 
doesn't happen, we expect a shake-up in the ministerial ranks 
 
DUBLIN 00000417  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
that may reach to Cowen himself. 
 
Excellent Bilateral Cooperation 
------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (C) Whether there is a change in government or not, we 
expect Ireland to continue to cooperate closely on the issues 
of most importance to us.  This cooperation includes, among 
other things, the September 26 arrival in Ireland of two 
Guantanamo detainees, the continued use of Shannon airport as 
a transit point for U.S. military flights, and the beginning 
of full pre-clearance operations at Shannon and Dublin 
airports for both commercial and general aviation flights to 
the U.S. 
 
Issues the Irish May Raise 
-------------------------- 
 
¶8. (C) Because the Irish economy is a front-burner issue and 
it depends heavily on U.S. economic fortunes, the Irish will 
be interested in President Obama's efforts to revive the U.S. 
economy and may ask about the Administration's views on the 
taxation of U.S. multinationals, a group that is 
well-represented in Ireland.  They will thank you for the 
role that the U.S. government continues to play in the 
Northern Ireland peace process and for naming Declan Kelly as 
the new Economic Envoy to Northern Ireland.  They will be 
interested to hear what steps Kelly will take and will seek 
your views on completing the devolution of policing and 
justice to the Northern Ireland authorities.  The Irish will 
reiterate their pitch to regularize the status of the Irish 
residing illegally in the U.S.  We have told the government 
that this issue can only be addressed within comprehensive 
U.S. immigration reform. 
 
¶9. (C) Since the issue of alleged renditions broke in 2004, 
the Irish have publicly stated that they have accepted USG 
assurances that no rendition detainees have transited 
Ireland.  Top Irish officials, including the Prime Minister, 
have declared that they would take the USG at its word and 
not pursue inspections of U.S. aircraft suspected of 
transiting Ireland with rendition detainees without 
sufficient probable cause.  However, with a new 
Administration, the Irish may seek reassurances that 
renditions will not occur.  In a September 28 meeting, Green 
Party leader John Gormley pressed the Ambassador on this 
issue without success. 
 
Possible Issues to Raise with the Irish 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶10. (C) Irish FM Martin discussed with you in March his 
government's fight against hunger.  The Irish have committed 
to spend 20 percent of their assistance budget on food 
security and recently sent their Aid Minister to the 
Partnering for Food Security meeting in late September. 
While the government's belt-tightening will preclude 
increases in the overall aid budget, the Irish would welcome 
the opportunity to be included in international efforts on 
this issue. 
 
¶11. (C) The Irish have been very receptive to President 
Obama's public remarks on climate change and renewable 
energy.  We believe that we can partner with the Irish on the 
nexus of environmental/energy issues including climate 
change, ocean/wave energy, methane capture, and clean coal 
technologies, which would be useful in our broader engagement 
with Europe going forward, especially post-Copenhagen. 
 
¶12. (C) On the push side of the ledger, we are awaiting a 
response from the Irish on two draft data-sharing agreements 
that must be in place for Ireland to remain in the visa 
waiver program.  The first is a State Department-led effort 
to reach agreement on sharing information on known or 
suspected terrorists.  The second deals with data-sharing on 
criminals and is led by the Department of Homeland Security. 
Our Irish contacts told us that both agreements are under 
review by the Irish Attorney General's office. 
 
¶13. (C) Embassy Dublin assesses that specific individuals 
resident in Ireland have facilitated terrorist acts outside 
of Ireland against American and allied interests.  The U.S. 
Government appreciates the assistance it has received from 
the Irish Government in countering terrorist activity. 
However, we hope cooperation in the future can lead to the 
elimination of terrorist activity facilitated from Ireland 
which affects American and allied interests. 
 
President Mary McAleese 
----------------------- 
 
¶14. (C) President McAleese: McAleese is the first Irish 
 
DUBLIN 00000417  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
President born in Northern Ireland and has been in the 
position since 1997.  She was elected unopposed in 2004 to 
another seven-year term.  The President * a largely 
ceremonial position * acts as the guardian of the Irish 
Constitution.  Known as a bright, intelligent force, McAleese 
engages in many of the all-island issues, as well as the 
Irish economy, and is very well-respected on both sides of 
the border.  McAleese will be keen to discuss the Northern 
Ireland peace process and North-South economic issues.  The 
President's husband, Dr. Martin McAleese, also plays a key 
behind-the-scenes role on Northern Ireland. 
 
Prime Minister Brian Cowen 
-------------------------- 
 
¶15. (C) Prime Minister (Taoiseach) Brian Cowen:  Since taking 
office on May 7, 2008 following the scandal-forced 
resignation of Bertie Ahern, the fortunes of Cowen and his 
party (Fianna Fail) have been on a downward trajectory, with 
approval ratings falling from 42 percent in May 2008 to 20 
percent in September 2009.  Cowen's personal approval rating 
is just 23 percent, an improvement from a recent low of 15 
percent.  While the approval of the second Lisbon Treaty 
referendum is a huge political victory for Cowen, he is still 
struggling to overcome his perceived mismanagement of the 
ongoing sharp economic downturn and mounting labor unrest. 
 
Foreign Minister Michel Martin 
------------------------------- 
 
¶16. (C) Formin Martin: Michel (pronounced &Mee-haul8) 
Martin assumed office in May 2008, when Brian Cowen became 
Prime Minister.  He was previously Minister for Enterprise, 
Trade and Employment.  As FM, Martin was out front in the 
push to secure a Lisbon Treaty victory.  Martin is seen as 
one of the front-runners to replace Cowen as PM should there 
be a ministerial shuffle within the government.  While he may 
raise economic issues, Martin,s focus will be on following 
up with you on food security and global hunger, as well as 
the security situation in Northern Ireland and the 
announcement of Declan Kelly as Economic Envoy. 
ROONEY