09OTTAWA794
CANADA: SECURITY CERTIFICATES TAKE MAJOR HIT
Thu Oct 15 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ottawa
VZCZCXRO1205
OO RUEHGA RUEHHA RUEHMT RUEHQU RUEHVC
DE RUEHOT #0794/01 2882016
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 152016Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY OTTAWA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9947
INFO RUCNCAN/ALL CANADIAN POSTS COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 OTTAWA 000794 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PGOV CA
SUBJECT: CANADA: SECURITY CERTIFICATES TAKE MAJOR HIT 
 
REF: OTTAWA 747 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: Canada's Federal Court has formally quashed the 
immigration security certificate against alleged terror suspect Adil 
Charkaoui.  The Court also blocked a potential federal appeal to the 
Federal Court of Appeal to clarify the limits of legal disclosure in 
national security cases.  The collapse of one of Canada's most 
high-profile security certificate cases is a major setback to the 
battered process and to the government's ability successfully to 
uphold the four certificate cases still before the courts.  End 
summary. 
 
¶2. (U) On October 14, Presiding Federal Court Justice Danielle 
Tremblay-Lamer issued a 68-page ruling voiding the immigration 
security certificate against alleged terror suspect Adil Charkaoui. 
On September 24, Justice Tremblay-Lamer had lifted all remaining 
bail restrictions on Charkaoui and signaled her intent to quash the 
certificate after the federal government withdrew the greater part 
of its sensitive wiretap evidence from the case rather than comply 
with her previous order to disclose the information (reftel).  She 
continued to hear submissions and the certificate remained valid 
until the Court made this final ruling. 
 
"A SERIOUS QUESTION OF GENERAL IMPORTANCE" 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶3. (U) In its submission, the federal government acknowledged that 
its remaining data against Charkaoui did not meet the burden of 
proof required by the certificate.  However, it asked the Court to 
find that the Charkaoui case raised a "serious question of general 
importance" -- the balance between national security concerns and a 
defendant's right to the fullest defense possible -- as grounds for 
an appeal to the Federal Court of Appeal.  Pending clarification by 
the Appeal Court, the federal government further asked the Federal 
Court to uphold the security certificate against Charkaoui. 
 
NO BASIS FOR APPEAL 
------------------- 
 
¶4. (U) Justice Tremblay-Lamer rejected both requests.  She defended 
her demand for greater transparency, arguing that the belief that 
the court put individual rights ahead of national security was 
"unfounded."  She refused the appeal, finding that the issues raised 
were particular to the Charkaoui case and of no broader importance, 
as well as that no legal basis existed for further appeal.  Justice 
Tremblay-Lamer noted that "the notion of national security is a 
question of perspective," adding that "grey areas can exist where a 
misunderstanding is possible."  She added that the federal 
government's clear purpose in seeking the appeal was to rewrite her 
previous disclosure order. 
 
¶5. (U) Justice Tremblay-Lamer formally ruled that the government's 
failure to present sufficient evidence rendered the security 
certificate against Charkaoui null and void.  She wrote that to 
maintain the certificate without supporting evidence would violate 
Charkaoui's constitutional right to life, liberty, and security of 
the person under section 7 of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, as 
well as contravene fundamental principles of justice and of logic. 
 
¶6. (U) In a brief response to the ruling, a spokesperson for the 
Canadian Security Intelligence Service (CSIS) commented that "it is 
unfortunate that, given the unique nature of this decision and the 
implications for national security, the judge did not agree that the 
case presented aspects that warranted an appeal." 
 
EVIDENCE AGAINST CHARKAOUI 
-------------------------- 
 
¶7. (U) The most recent summary of the case against Charkaoui 
indicated how much confidential evidence the federal government had 
withdrawn.  The government reportedly disclosed that it still 
Qwithdrawn.  The government reportedly disclosed that it still 
suspected that he was a member of al-Qaeda and had trained in 
terrorist camps in Afghanistan and Pakistan, as well as that he 
consorted with known Islamic extremists.  It corroborated 
Charkaoui's presence at al-Qaeda terrorist training camps in 1998 
with evidence from so-called Millennium Bomber Ahmed Ressam, and 
Noureddine Nafia, the former head of the GICM, a Moroccan Islamist 
terror group.  However, material gleaned directly from Charkaoui, 
including his account of activities at mujahedeen training camps, 
his alleged declarations in support of jihad, and references to a 
June 2000 conversation in which he allegedly discussed seizing 
control of a commercial airliner, had been blacked out. 
 
SEEKING COMPENSATION 
-------------------- 
 
¶8. (U) Justice Tremblay-Lamer nonetheless rejected Charkaoui's 
request to reserve his right to sue the federal government for 
alleged violations of his constitutional rights.  She formally 
closed the certificate case, advising that Charkaoui would have to 
launch a separate case if he wanted to seek further remedy.  At a 
 
OTTAWA 00000794  002 OF 002 
 
 
post-ruling press conference, Charkaoui told the media that he felt 
"elated" and "totally vindicated" by the ruling.  He stated that he 
would seek a formal apology from the federal government.  His lawyer 
confirmed that Charkaoui would also seek substantial financial 
compensation for his "arbitrary and abusive loss of freedom." 
 
¶9. (SBU) Comment:  The collapse of the federal government's 
high-profile case against Charkaoui is a major setback to the 
credibility of the battered security certificate system, to Canada's 
ability to uphold the remaining four certificates, and to efforts by 
security agencies to set limits to legal disclosure of sensitive 
data in court.  The Charkaoui case lasted six years and set 
significant legal precedents, including two Supreme Court rulings in 
favor of greater transparency of evidence in security cases. 
JACOBSON