09PARIS1451
FRANCE: RETHINKING INDUSTRIAL POLICY
Wed Oct 28 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Paris
VZCZCXRO2664
RR RUEHIK
DE RUEHFR #1451/01 3011652
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 281652Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7435
RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 001451 
 
SENSITIVE 
NOT FOR INTERNET DISTRIBUTION 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 19528: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EIND EFIN ETRD FR
SUBJECT: FRANCE: RETHINKING INDUSTRIAL POLICY 
 
Ref:  A. Paris 1216 
 ¶B. Paris 0493 
 
PARIS 00001451  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary.  President Sarkozy has initiated a national debate 
on the country's long-term industrial policy.  After a three and half 
month consultative process starting this month with small/medium 
sized enterprises and industries (SME/SMIs), unions, local 
governments, experts, and the general public, the government of 
France (GOF) will consider recommendations on designating innovative 
strategic sectors, as well as industries in need of reform or 
workforce renewal.  The debate's findings should fold into other 
state-led, long-term planning initiatives that aim to keep jobs, 
industries, and know-how at home.  End summary. 
 
The "State is Back" 
------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Sylvain Roques, industrial policy advisor to the Minister 
of Industry Christian Estrosi, told us that Sarkozy is fully backing 
the "Estates-General for Industry" (EGI) initiative, which Roques 
said marks the "return of the state" in industrial policy.  When 
Sarkozy announced the EGI on October 5, he said that the "market is 
important" but the "state's duty is also to have an industrial 
policy".  Over the course of 3-5 years, Estrosi's office and his 
superior, Minister of Economy Christian Lagarde, will introduce 
incentives to promote the development side of R and D in key 
industries (bio and nanotechnologies, eco-industries, fiber optics, 
electric vehicles), Roques stated.  Estrosi cited two examples: an 
"innovation tax credit," that would complement the existing research 
tax credit and help companies through the period between patent 
filing and production launching, and subsidized loans for investments 
in eco-friendly industrial processes.  Moreover, Estrosi wants to 
promote interaction between France's most competitive industrial 
sectors, for example, between renewable energy and water treatment, 
or between the medical device and health care service industries. 
 
From out- to in-sourcing 
------------------------ 
 
¶3.  (SBU) GOF efforts will also focus on sectors in need of "reform, 
restructuring, and workforce retraining", Roques added.  In 
particular, the GOF is pushing for "re-localization" (in-sourcing), 
in the automobile and luxury goods sectors (Chanel, Hermes) because 
the GOF wants to bring jobs back to France, he stressed.  Opening the 
EGI, Estrosi said he would focus his efforts on financial and tax 
assistance for the relocation of production facilities to France, and 
for R and D (1.5 billion euros to bolster R and D in competitive 
industrial sectors for 2009-2011).  Companies will also be offered 
incentives worth up to 15,000 euros per job repatriated to France, 
Estrosi continued, but details are scarce and will depend on several 
factors, including company location.  Roques told us the number of 
jobs eligible for such incentives is still under review. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) In an October 5 speech, President Sarkozy said he was 
adamant about reducing outsourcing.  He noted that in 2007, France's 
principal automobile maker (Renault), in which the GOF has a 17 
percent stake, had 75 percent of its labor force outside France: "I 
want that reality to change...it is not normal to produce cars abroad 
when we sell them in France.  Outsourcing is not something we can 
accept or want.  That is not industrial development", Sarkozy stated. 
 (Note: outsourcing has increased in France since 2006.  Official 
figures put the loss of industrial jobs from 2002 to 2006 at 500,000, 
of which 3-10 percent were due to outsourcing.  End note.) 
 
The Estates-General for Industry process (EGI) 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (U) Akin to the "Grenelle process" for environmental policy, the 
EGI is a nation-wide consultation aimed at generating ideas and 
support for revamping industrial policy.  For the next several 
months, the GOF will consult SME/SMIs, unions, associations, 
independent experts, and local and regional governments to designate 
the country's most strategic industrial sectors for development.  A 
National Committee for the EGI (NCEGI), plus ten working groups, will 
lead different sectoral and cross-sectoral discussions.  Regional 
workshops should start operating by mid-November and will release 
their findings mid-December.  A special website will amass views from 
the general public.  This consultative process ends in February 2010 
at which time the NCEGI will present its recommendations to the GOF 
and a "National Convention" will be held.  President Sarkozy then 
plans to announce the country's "new industrial policy". 
 
Break-down of EGI themes 
----------------------- 
 
¶6.  (U) Minister Estrosi outlined the major EGI themes in an October 
15 speech. 
 
-- Innovation and entrepreneurship to boost small enterprise growth; 
-- Partnerships and networking (among distributors, sub-contractors, 
 
PARIS 00001451  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
international associates); 
-- Employment and training; 
-- Competition and green growth; 
-- Access to financing. 
 
SME/SMI- the weak link 
---------------------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Embassy contacts underscore that it is difficult for 
SME/SMIs in France to grow into large companies.  Our contacts 
stressed the need for French SME/SMIs need to reach a "critical mass 
of 500 employees."  Sandrine Bourgogne, Deputy Secretary General of 
the French small and medium business confederation told us that 
French SME/SMIs stagnate and fail to grow for a number of reasons: 1. 
high fiscal and administrative costs for companies with more than 
nine employees, 2. management with limited international training and 
experience, and disinclined to bring in foreign investors, 3. limited 
export activity, and 4. dependency of supplier companies on large 
domestic distributors/buyers. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Marcel de la Haye, Estrosi's advisor on international 
affairs, stressed the problem of capital.  He said French SME/SMIs 
traditionally have low capital/cash reserves that limits their 
ability to cover operating costs, social charges, and taxes, not to 
mention investment and R and D. The GOF hopes EGI initiatives will 
help boost SME/SMI's innovation and competitiveness, a point Sarkozy 
has made in every speech on industrial policy in the last year. 
However, the GOF can't do everything, Roques stressed, implying it 
will have to make choices about what industries to promote or 
re-orient.  For now, the most pressing goal is to break the "500 
employee glass ceiling" and keep SME/SMI know-how in France, Roques 
concluded. 
 
Special Debt Issue 
------------------ 
 
¶9.  (SBU) The EGI will fold into the priorities of the upcoming 
special debt issue, or "Grand emprunt", Roques noted.  Planned for 
the beginning of 2010, the special debt issue will provide financing 
for long-term projects.  The special debt issue, along with the EGI, 
and the GOF's recovery plan should be consistent and mutually 
reinforcing, Roques explained.  These state-led initiatives will 
promote growth and R and D in key sectors and innovative 
technologies, while reorienting and reforming others, all of which 
must also comply with the GOF sustainable development mandate, Roques 
concluded. 
 
Rocky Start to the EGI 
---------------------- 
 
¶10.  (SBU) The EGI was originally proposed by Bernard Thibault, chief 
of the leftist labor union Confederation generale du travail (CGT), 
and subsequently adopted by President Sarkozy.  Other labor and 
employer unions have agreed to participate in the EGI, but have 
called for vigilance on how the GOF proceeds with the process.  On 
October 22, an estimated 13,000 workers (according to police, 30,000 
according to the CGT) demonstrated in Paris against job cuts and over 
fears of future changes to industrial policy that the EGI might bring 
about.  Thibault called on employees from industries hit by the 
economic downturn (metal, textile, chemical, paper) to speak out for 
an EGI that leads to greater job stability and reduced outsourcing. 
The CGT leader has been a long-time advocate of an EGI but recalled 
the government's poor performance this summer regarding the Molex 
labor dispute (Ref A).  The Force ouvriere (FO) union also expressed 
doubts the EGI would be a meaningful exercise, or that Thibault and 
the CGT could effectively represent labor's interests. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶11.  (SBU) For the EGI to get off the ground, the GOF must not only 
be willing to step forward and make strategic choices, but it must 
also get business, labor and, to some extent, finance to engage and 
buy in to its approach.  Although the idea of an EGI originated with 
a left-wing labor union, Sarkozy is lending his political weight to 
the initiative, as well as his own spin.  Although the French are 
used to the intervention of a strong state (Ref B), Sarkozy will 
still have difficulty achieving consensus on industrial policy. 
However, by consulting a broad range of stakeholders, Sarkozy will 
have made a visible effort at inclusiveness, while maintaining the 
ability to put his imprint on industrial policy. 
 
RIVKIN