05ADANA102
SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY FOR MAY 10, 2005
Thu May 12 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ADANA 000102 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU ADANA
SUBJECT: SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY FOR MAY 10, 2005 
 
This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary for May 10, 2005. 
Please note that Turkish press reports often contain errors or 
exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch for the accuracy 
of the reports summarized here. 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
EVRENSEL / OZGUR GUNDEM:        During a visit to Siirt on 
Saturday, PM Erdogan met with Siirt's AKP Mayor Mervan Gul. 
Erdogan also met with six Municipality Assembly members from SHP 
(Social Democratic People's Party). The assembly members 
reportedly called for an end to military operations in the 
southeastern region and a general amnesty, in order to foster 
the establishment of a peaceful society. Erdogan's responded 
that military operations were carried out for the sake of 
people's security, adding that without economic stability, peace 
would be a difficult end to achieve. 
 
CUMHURIYET:     The paper quotes Mersin's CHP Mayor Macit Ozcan as 
saying that the AKP has been exercising influence in all 
Chambers of Commerce and Industry in Turkey. Complaining that 
such behavior has caused a lack of cooperation in Mersin, Ozcan 
added that due to their political aspirations, representatives 
of NGOs are firing criticism at every service rendered by the 
municipality and opposing all opportunities for people to come 
together. 
 
YENI SAFAK:     A dinner organized to resolve a feud between two 
Kiziltepe families in Mardin province was reportedly attended by 
members of both families, Mardin Governor Temel Kocaklar, 
Mardin's AKP deputies and 70th Mechanized Brigade Commander 
Selahattin Kisacik. 
 
YENI SAFAK / OZGUR GUNDEM:      Bad weather is affecting life 
adversely in Erzurum, Mus and Kars provinces. Heavy wind in Kars 
destroyed roofs of houses, demolished a minaret of a mosque and 
caused blackouts. Lightening struck and killed two people in 
Mus. 
 
 
 
REID