05ANKARA2811
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue May 17 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

171322Z May 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 002811 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
TUESDAY, MAY 17, 2005 
 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Rice Warns Barzani to Protect Iraq's Unity - Milliyet 
Erdogan: Turkey Worried About Anti-Islamist Sentiment - 
Milliyet 
Erdogan Calls for Cooperation Against Terror - Turkiye 
2 PKK Suicide Bombers Killed in Siirt - Hurriyet 
Uzbek Troops Kill 200 in Pahtaabad - Milliyet 
5,000 Uzbeks Flee Country for Kyrgyzstan - Sabah 
Iranian Dissidents Call for Boycott of June Presidential 
Polls - Aksam 
Bill Gates to Donate $450 Million to Medical Researches - 
Hurriyet 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Iraqi Defense Ministry Bans Operations Against Places of 
Prayer - Yeni Safak 
Baghdad Bans Raids Against Universities, Shrines - Zaman 
White House Wants Newsweek to Retract Koran Abuse Report - 
Zaman 
Newsweek Steps Back on Koran Report - Cumhuriyet 
Uzbeks on the Run - Radikal 
Washington Post: Websites Recruiting Fighters for Iraq - 
Cumhuriyet 
Tehran-Baku Friendship Pact - Radikal 
Serbian Orthodox Monastery Reopens in Mostar - Radikal 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
US Congressional Delegation to `TRNC':  "Hurriyet" columnist 
Fatih Altayli writes that a US Congressional delegation led 
by a `friend of Turkey,' Ed Whitfield, is to visit Turkey in 
coming days for meetings with politicians and businessmen. 
Altayli expects the US delegation to move on to north Cyprus 
directly from Turkey.  Altayli notes that this would be the 
first visit of its kind, and claims that the decision to fly 
directly from Turkey to north Cyprus has `driven the Greek 
Cypriots crazy.'  He notes that Nicosia's efforts to block 
the visit have not achieved a positive result.  Altayli 
emphasizes that Washington, despite its problems with 
Turkey, seems determined to take the Greek Cypriots back to 
the negotiating table within the framework of the Annan 
Plan, and believes the upcoming US visit to north Cyprus 
will be a way for the Americans to show the Greek Cypriots 
`the iron hand beneath the velvet glove.' 
 
Erdogan-Kocharian at Odds at COE Summit:  Turkish papers 
slam Armenian President Robert Kocharian for making 
reference to `genocide' claims in his address to the Council 
of Europe (COE) summit meeting in Warsaw.  Papers claim that 
Kocharian's statements damaged efforts for dialogue between 
Ankara and Yerevan.  Kocharian also suggested the annexation 
of Nagorno-Karabakh to Europe, a proposal regarded by Turks 
as another blow against efforts to keep open a channel of 
communication.  Ties between Armenia and Turkey have now 
become more tense, according to the reports.  Addressing a 
press conference at the COE summit yesterday, Prime Minister 
Erdogan said that Armenia is responsible for the lack of 
progress in establishing diplomatic relations between the 
two neighbors.  Erdogan blamed Kocharian for pursuing 
populist policies, and urged Armenia to pull out of Nagorno- 
Karabakh `before accusing others.'  Erdogan also criticized 
countries that adopted Armenian genocide resolutions. 
Erdogan noted that Turkey has opened its archives, and he 
called on Armenia and third countries to do the same. 
 
Secretary Rice's Messages in Iraq:  "Milliyet" claims that 
 
SIPDIS 
Secretary Rice delivered three important messages during her 
 
SIPDIS 
surprise visit to Iraq last weekend.  The paper reports that 
the Secretary called on Iraqi officials to increase the 
participation of Sunni elements, including former Baathists, 
in the Iraqi political process.  She also encouraged Kurdish 
leaders to keep their parties engaged in constructive 
efforts to build the new Iraq.  Finally, Secretary Rice 
delivered a harsh assessment of Syria's failure to prevent 
the infiltration of foreign fighters into Iraq, and said 
that the Syrians had also failed to withdraw all 
intelligence forces from Lebanon as required under UNSC 
resolutions. 
 
AKP Government Intervenes in Turkey's Defense in ECHR 
`Headscarf' Case:  Turkey's ruling AK Party will argue on 
Wednesday at a hearing of the European Court of Human Rights 
(ECHR) that the ban on Islamic headgear in Turkey does not 
constitute a violation of human rights, "Radikal" reports. 
A Turkish university student, Leyla Sahin, had appealed an 
ECHR ruling last year in which the court had decided that 
the ban on wearing headscarves in Turkish universities was 
not a violation of the European Convention on Human Rights. 
A Turkish government statement drafted under the guidance of 
Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul will inform the ECHR that the 
ban on headscarves in Turkish universities has not been an 
infringement of religious freedom, "Radikal" claims. 
Meanwhile, "Cumhuriyet" reports that Gul has omitted from 
the defense statement the argument used by Turkey at 
previous hearings that the headscarf has been used as a 
`political symbol' in Turkey and an `element of oppression' 
against Turkish women.  Fearing that the ECHR final judgment 
tomorrow may confirm the previous ruling, the AK Party 
government has deliberately weakened Turkey's defense in the 
case, "Cumhuriyet" argues. 
 
AKP Wants Ocalan Case Discussed at NSC:  The AK Party 
government, reluctant to take political responsibility for 
implementing the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) 
decision stipulating a retrial for imprisoned PKK leader 
Abdullah Ocalan, says the case is a matter that concerns the 
state, not the government, "Cumhuriyet" reports.  The AKP is 
hesitant to change legislation that would allow for a 
retrial of Ocalan, even though President Sezer has warned 
the government to do so.  "Cumhuriyet" claims that the AKP 
government, in an effort to evade political responsibility 
and ease public pressure, will take the issue to the 
National Security Council (NSC) meeting in June. 
 
Greenpeace Opens `Peace Office' in Incirlik:  Greenpeace has 
set up a `Mission Office for Peace' in the town of Incirlik 
in Turkey's southern province Adana, declaring that its 
objective is to inform people about the nuclear bombs 
allegedly stored at the airbase, Turkish media report.  A 
Greenpeace member, Aslihan Tumer, recalled claims that 90 
nuclear bombs are stored in Incirlik within the NATO 
framework.  He called for the immediate transfer of the 
weapons to the United States.  `Nuclear arms stored at US 
bases in Europe will be reviewed in a proposal that has been 
submitted to the US Senate.  It is possible that other 
nuclear bombs stored in Europe will be transferred to 
Turkey,' Tumer said, adding that the proposal will be 
submitted for the approval of President Bush on September 
Â¶23.  Greenpeace Chairman Gerd Leipold added that the Turkish 
people had the right to be informed about nuclear weapons in 
their country.  The Greenpeace office at Incirlik will 
remain open for three weeks. 
 
US Court Confirms Verdict on Uzans:  A US Appeals Court  has 
confirmed a New York South District Court ruling in which 
Judge Jed Rakoff had ordered Turkey's Uzan family to pay a 
2.13 billion USD settelement in the Motorola case, 
"Milliyet" reports.  The Court's judgment ends the appeals 
process for the Uzans.  Motorola's deputy executive chairman 
Peter Lawson voiced his satisfaction with the verdict. 
2 PKK Suicide Bombers Killed in Siirt:  Two suicide bombers 
from the PKK were killed in Turkey's southeastern province 
of Siirt on Monday as they were preparing to attack the 
governor's residence, papers report.  One bomber killed 
himself after detonating his explosives, while the other 
escaped but was later killed by security forces. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: Uzbekistan; Armenia-Turkey 
 
"Uzbekistan is the Toughest Nut" 
Nuh Gonultas commented in the conservative-sensational 
"Dunden Bugune Tercuman" (5/17): "Uzbekistan has a cruel 
leader who seems unwilling to transfer his authority through 
peaceful means.  Kerimov's brutal methods to break the riot 
in Andijan, which has claimed between 50 and 500 lives, show 
his true character.  Washington will find it very difficult 
to lay the groundwork for a `civilian coup' in Uzbekistan. 
Kerimov has already closed down the office of George Soros 
and deported some American citizens.  The recent incidents 
also prove that Kerimov is determined to retaliate brutally 
in the face of any attempt to bring about a `civilian coup.' 
. Kerimov's political record in Uzbekistan is anything but 
clean.  He even extended his term in January 2002 by 
arranging a fake referendum.  Kerimov has used every method 
available to him to remain in power, including becoming a 
close partner of the United States in the fight against 
terrorism.  Given the current circumstances, Uzbekistan 
seems to be the toughest nut to crack for those who want to 
provoke a `civilian coup.'  Nevertheless, history tells us 
that there is an end even for the most brutal of dictators." 
 
"Kerimov Has Solid Support" 
Haluk Ulman wrote in the economic-political "Dunya" (5/17): 
"Secretary Rumsfeld praised Uzbekistan's role highly when 
the US launched its global campaign against terrorism with 
the operation in Afghanistan.   The former Soviet Republics, 
particularly Uzbekistan and Krygyzstan, are very important 
for Washington, because they constitute a basis for American 
policy in Asia. . Kyrgyzstan has given over its Manas base 
for the use of the US, and President Akayev maintained 
excellent ties with Washington.  Washington, for the sake of 
the military base, turned a blind eye to the blatant human 
rights violations in Kyrgyzstan.  A similar thing can be 
seen in Washington's apparent disinterest in the Andijan 
riots and Kerimov's mistakes.  . The military bases in 
Uzbekistan continue to make a great deal of impact on 
Kerimov's ability to continue his rule.  The Europeans 
complain about the country's poor human rights record and 
take some measures, but the US administration keeps silent. 
The State Department characterizes Uzbekistan government as 
`stable and moderate.'  This is due to the fact that the US 
military needs the bases in Uzbekistan." 
 
"Kocaryan Openly Expresses Yerevan's Hopes" 
Semih Idiz commented in the mainstream opposition "Milliyet" 
(5/17):  "International media attention had been focused on 
a possible meeting between Turkish PM Erdogan and Armenian 
President Kocaryan at the European Council meeting in Warsaw 
yesterday.   Despite the expectations, the meeting never 
materialized.  While diplomats at the summit are not 
talking, those covering the event for the media believe that 
the meeting failed to take place because no resolution was 
reached on the Nagorno-Karabakh issue during the Aliyev- 
Kocaryan meeting on Sunday.  According to Azerbaijani 
sources, the atmosphere of the meeting was very positive. 
Some positive developments had already been achieved at the 
periodic meetings between the Armenian and Azerbaijani 
Foreign Ministers, and Armenia had agreed to withdraw from 
the seven areas it had occupied in Azerbaijan.  Before 
taking any further steps on the Armenia issue, however, the 
Turkish wanted to listen to Kocaryan's speech at the summit. 
As if trying to confirm Turkey's negative expectations, 
Kocaryan made sure to mention the Armenian `genocide' issue 
in his speech.  Kocaryan added that Europe should have open 
borders without any embargoes.  It wasn't lost on anyone at 
the summit missed that these remarks were directed toward 
Turkey.  Despite all of these negative developments, Turkish 
and Armenian diplomats did not close all doors to positive 
developments.  Diplomats from both countries emphasize the 
continuity of the negotiations on the Nagorno-Karabakh 
issue.  The Turkish side has made known that Turkey's stance 
will be `dynamic and constructive' at the negotiations, even 
though the Turks are not prepared to make `one-sided' 
gestures.  The Turkish side expects different approaches 
from Armenia on certain issues.  Unfortunately, there were 
no signs in Warsaw that these expectations will be met.  It 
is not yet clear yet whether a meeting between Erdogan and 
Kocaryan will eventually come to pass.  Given that certain 
powers want this to happen, it probably will at some point. 
But the success of future talks between the Azeri and 
Armenian leaders will likely play a determining role in 
Erdogan's willingness to meet with Kocaryan." 
 
EDELMAN