05JERUSALEM2009
WB/G SITREP: IDF MISSILE STRIKE INJURES ONE HAMAS
Wed May 18 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Jerusalem
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 JERUSALEM 002009 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FRONT OFFICE; NEA/SA/EX FOR AUSTIN-FERGUSON; DEPT 
FOR DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PBTS PHUM KWBG CASC IS
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: IDF MISSILE STRIKE INJURES ONE HAMAS 
MILITANT NEAR KHAN YUNIS, FOLLOWING MISSILE BARRAGE ON GUSH 
KATIF: MAY 18, 2005 (1600 HOURS LOCAL) 
 
 
This is a joint Embassy/ConGen cable. 
 
¶1.   (SBU) Summary: In the Gaza Strip, the IDF fired missiles 
at two Hamas militants May 18, injuring one critically, as 
the two were reportedly preparing to fire mortars into the 
Gush Katif settlement bloc.  The IDF action followed a 
barrage of five mortars into the settlement earlier in the 
day.  IDF soldiers shot and killed one Palestinian overnight 
May 17-18 in Rafah.  Reports vary, but the man was either 
killed during an exchange of gunfire with the IDF that 
erupted after Palestinian militants launched an anti-tank 
rocket at an IDF position along the border, or while he was 
in the process of planting an IED along the border fence. 
UNRWA and Israeli press identified the dead Palestinian as a 
Hamas militant.  There were reports of rocket, mortar, and 
shooting incidents elsewhere in the Gaza Strip, but no 
reported injuries.  In the West Bank, a total of six 
Palestinians were arrested May 17-18 during clashes and IDF 
arrest operations.  According to press reports, the PA 
Elections Court of Appeals on May 17 decided to annul 
election results from a number of polling stations in Rafah, 
citing voting irregularities.  End summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2.   (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Death: Nil. 
 
-- Injuries: According to UN information, at least ten 
Palestinians on May 17 sustained injuries when clashes took 
place between Palestinians and the IDF in Dura village, 
southwest of Hebron (see "Arrests"). 
 
¶3.   (SBU) ARRESTS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Arrests: The IDF on May 17 arrested a total of three 
Palestinians in the northern West Bank towns of Jenin, 
Qalqilya, and Huwwara. 
 
-- Arrests: The IDF on May 17 arrested two Palestinians 
during clashes with the IDF in Dura village, southwest of 
Hebron. 
 
-- Arrest: According to UN information, a special undercover 
IDF unit on May 18 entered Bethlehem and arrested one 
Palestinian. 
 
-- Demonstration in Hebron: During a May 17 demonstration in 
Hebron, approximately 50 al-Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades activists 
called for the removal of the local PA police commander. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶4.   (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Death: UNRWA and the IDF reported that one Palestinian was 
killed overnight May 17-18 in Rafah, along the Egyptian-Gaza 
border.  The IDF reported that IDF soldiers shot and killed 
the man during an exchange of fire that broke out after 
Palestinian militants launched an anti-tank rocket at an IDF 
position along the border.  UNRWA, however, reported that IDF 
soldiers opened fire at the man as he was planting an IED 
near the security fence there, adding that the dead man was a 
Hamas militant. 
 
-- Injury: the IDF fired missiles at two Hamas militants May 
18, injuring one critically, as the two were reportedly 
preparing to fire mortars into the Gush Katif settlement bloc 
(see "Mortars/Rockets"). 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: The IDF and Israeli media reported that 
Palestinian militants fired a barrage of five mortar shells 
into the Gush Katif settlement bloc May 18, one of which 
narrowly missed hitting a school in Neve Dekalim.  No Israeli 
injuries were reported from the attack, but one Palestinian 
was critically injured when the IDF successfully targeted the 
militants with a missile (see "Injury"). 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: The IDF reported that Palestinian 
militants fired five mortar shells towards Morag settlement 
and a sixth at an IDF outpost west of Khan Yunis overnight 
May 17-18.  Militants also fired two anti-tank rockets 
towards IDF outposts in Rafah in the same period. 
-- Shootings: The IDF reported that IDF soldiers and 
Palestinian militants engaged in five separate exchanges of 
fire overnight May 17-18. 
 
¶5.   (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS: 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was open May 18, with a major detour at Netzarim 
Junction. 
 
-- Erez Crossing was open for Palestinians May 17, and a 
total of 3,987 laborers and 179 merchants crossed into Israel. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone was open May 17, and 580 laborers 
entered the zone. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers May 18, 
but was open for the import of aggregates used in 
construction. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was open May 18. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open for arrivals and departures May 
¶18. 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan checkpoint was closed May 18.  Toufah 
checkpoint was open for residents of al-Mowassi, except males 
aged 16-30. 
 
¶6.   (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- Palestinian and media sources reported that, in response 
to a complaint lodged by Fatah, the PA Elections Court of 
Appeals decided May 17 to annul election results from a 
number of polling stations in Rafah.  In its decision, the 
court cited irregularities in the conduct of the voting due 
to inaccurate voter registration lists. 
Pearce