05PARIS3210
USUNESCO - MIDDLE EAST ISSUES AT UNESCO EXECUTIVE
Wed May 11 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PARIS 003210 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FROM USMISSION UNESCO PARIS 
STATE FOR IO, IO/T, L/UNA, NEA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: XE XF XG XD FR UNESCO
SUBJECT: USUNESCO - MIDDLE EAST ISSUES AT UNESCO EXECUTIVE 
BOARD 
 
RE:  PARIS 08393 (2004) 
 
¶1. Summary:  UNESCO continues to be the sole UN organization 
where Israeli-Palestinian issues are handled with a minimum 
of polemics and polarization.  Following concrete 
improvements in cooperation on UNESCO activities in the 
region, the UNESCO Secretariat submitted unbiased draft 
decisions on two Middle East issues for adoption by the 
recent Executive Board.  These items concerned Jerusalem and 
educational and cultural institutions in the occupied Arab 
territories.  A push by leaders of UNESCO's Arab Group to 
include objectionable language in the draft resolutions was 
ultimately unsuccessful.  Ambassador Oliver worked closely 
with all involved to reach acceptable language.  She also 
made clear that progress must be recognized and that the 
continued politicization of the issues could hinder further 
progress. End Summary. 
 
¶2. The 171st Session of UNESCO's Executive Board (April 18- 
28 2005) was presented with two recurring agenda items 
dealing with the Middle East:  Item 18: Jerusalem and the 
implementation of 32 C/Resolution 39 and 170 EX/Decision 
3.6.1, and Item 53:  Implementation of 32 C/Resolution 54 
and 170 EX/Decision 9.3 concerning educational and cultural 
institutions in the occupied Arab territories.  Both reports 
pointed to increased cooperation and achievements on the 
ground, facilitated by greater Israeli government 
flexibility. 
 
¶3. While few comments were made on Middle-Eastern issues in 
the plenary and commission meetings, Arab delegations sought 
on the margins of the meetings to return to language adopted 
at the preceding Board sessions (Reftel).  This was resisted 
by the Israeli Ambassador to UNESCO who felt that Israeli 
efforts, including facilitating and easing visa procedures 
for the Ramallah book fair and the facilitation of UNESCO 
expert missions to the region, should be recognized.  He 
further emphasized that returning to earlier language that 
did not recognize the improved situation, would discourage 
further cooperation.  He asserted that the regional 
stakeholders should point to these successes as examples to 
follow and refused to consider accepting any language other 
than that proposed by the Secretariat.  Indeed, he felt that 
no decision was needed at all. 
 
¶4. Following intense consultations, an agreed text was 
adopted by consensus without debate on April 28th.  The 
agreed text, while not that of the Secretariat, is 
significantly better than that of previous decisions. 
Ambassador Revah was still frustrated, however, as the 
Secretariat was not given the opportunity to make statements 
 
SIPDIS 
highlighting the positive results of their activities on the 
ground. The Decisions adopted are copied below: 
 
¶1.   Begin Text of resolution regarding Jerusalem 
 
¶18. Jerusalem and the implementation of 32 C/Resolution 39 
and 170 EX/Decision 3.6.1 (171 EX/15 and 171 EX/PX/DR.2) 
 
The Executive Board, 
 
Recalling 32 C/Resolution 39 and 170 EX/Decision 3.6.1, as 
well as the provisions of the four Geneva Conventions (1949) 
of the Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural 
Property in the Event of Armed Conflict (1954) and the 
related Protocols, and of the Convention for the Protection 
of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage (1972), the 
inclusion of the Old City of Jerusalem in the World Heritage 
List and in the List of World Heritage in Danger, and the 
recommendations, resolutions and decisions of UNESCO on the 
protection of the cultural heritage, 
 
Affirming that nothing in the present decision, which aims 
at the safeguarding of the cultural heritage of the Old City 
of Jerusalem, shall in any way affect the relevant United 
Nations resolutions and decisions, in particular the 
relevant Security Council resolutions on the legal status of 
Jerusalem, 
 
Taking note of document 171 EX/15 concerning Jerusalem, 
 
Expresses its sincere thanks to the Director-General for his 
sustained efforts for the safeguarding of the cultural and 
natural heritage of the Old City of Jerusalem, in compliance 
with 32 C/Resolution 39 of the General Conference as well as 
170 EX/Decision 3.6.1 of the Executive Board, and reiterates 
its concern as to the obstacles to the safeguarding of the 
cultural and natural heritage of the Old City of Jerusalem; 
 
Congratulates the Director-General on the holding of the 
first meeting of the International Committee of Experts on 
the safeguarding of the cultural and natural heritage of the 
Old City of Jerusalem at UNESCO Headquarters on 26 and 27 
January 2005 and invites him to pursue his efforts with a 
view to establish an action plan in conformity with the main 
lines established by this Committee and requests the 
Director-General to present to it a progress report on the 
implementation of the plan of action for the safeguarding of 
the cultural and natural heritage of the Old City of 
Jerusalem; 
 
Further invites the concerned parties to cooperate with 
UNESCO for the implementation of the action plan and 
reiterates its appeal to the Member States with a view to 
their financial contribution to the full implementation of 
this action plan; 
Further encourages the Director-General to intensify his 
efforts towards the establishment of a centre for the 
conservation of Islamic manuscripts in Al-Ashrafiya Madrasa 
within the Esplanade of the Mosques (al-Haram Ash-Sharif); 
 
Decides to include this item in the agenda of its 172nd 
session. 
 
¶5. Begin text of resolution regarding the Occupied 
Territories 
 
 
¶53.  Implementation of 32 C/Resolution 54 and 170 
  EX/Decision 9.3 concerning educational and cultural 
  institutions in the occupied Arab territories (171 EX/41 
  Rev. and 171 EX/PX/DR.3) 
 
The Executive Board, 
 
Recalling 32 C/Resolution 54 and 170 EX/Decision 9.3; as 
well a Article 26 of the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights with regard to the right to education; Articles 4 and 
94 of the Geneva Convention with regard t the denial of the 
right of children to education; as well as the UNESCO 
Convention for the Protection of the World Cultural and 
Natural Heritage (1972) and the Hague Convention (1954) and 
its Additional Protocols, 
 
Having examined document 171 EX/41 Rev., 
 
Further recalling the role that UNESCO is called upon to 
play in order to satisfy the right to education for all and 
to meet the need for safe access of Palestinians to the 
educational system, 
 
Recalling paragraph 32 of the Medium-Term Strategy (31 C/4 
Approved), defining a "road map" for a revitalized UNESCO: 
principles of action and programming", and paragraph 12 of 
31 C/Resolution 43, 
 
Deeply committed to the safeguarding of monuments, works of 
art, manuscripts, books and other historical and cultural 
properties to be protected in the event of conflicts, 
 
Supports the efforts made by the Director-General with a 
view to the implementation of 32/C/Resolution 54 and 170 
EX/Decision 9.3 and requests him to do everything possible 
to ensure that they are fully implemented and its 
implementation be reinforced in the framework of the 
Programme and Budget for 2006-2007 (33 C/5); 
 
Expresses its appreciation for the substantial contributions 
of all concerned Member States, IGOs and NGOs to UNESCO's 
action in the Palestinian Territories and appeals to them to 
continue assisting UNESCO in this endeavour; 
 
Thanks the Director-General for the results which have been 
obtained, in relation to the implementation of a number of 
current educational and cultural activities, 
 
Reiterates its concern as to the obstacles to the 
safeguarding of the cultural and natural heritage, to the 
functioning of the cultural and educational institutions, 
and calls for the observance of the provisions of 32 
C/Resolution 54 and of 170 EX/Decision 9.3; 
 
Encourages the Director-General to continue to reinforce his 
action in favour of the reconstruction, rehabilitation and 
restoration of the Palestinian archaeological sites and 
cultural heritage; 
 
Invites the Director-General to address the needs for 
capacity-building in all UNESCO's fields of competence by 
expanding the financial assistance programme for Palestinian 
students from both regular budget and extrabudgetary 
resources; 
 
Requests the Director-General to continue close monitoring 
of the implementation of the recommendations of the sixth 
meeting of the Joint UNESCO-Palestinian Authority Committee, 
in particular the flagship projects identified during this 
meeting, and to reinforce cooperation with the Palestinian 
authorities with a view to organizing a donor event in 
compliance with 32 C/Resolution 54; 
 
Encouraged by the resumption of the Israeli-Palestinian 
dialogue, expresses the hope that the Arab-Israeli peace 
negotiations will be resumed, and that a just and 
comprehensive peace will speedily be brought about in 
accordance with UNESCO's Constitution and the United Nations 
resolutions, particularly the relevant Security Council 
resolutions, on this matter; 
 
Also invites the Director-General: 
 
(a) to continue the efforts he is making with a view to 
preserving the human, social and cultural fabric of the 
occupied Syrian Golan, in accordance with the relevant 
provisions of this decision; 
 
(b) to undertake efforts with a view to offering appropriate 
curricula, and to provide more grants and special assistance 
to the educational institutions of the occupied Syrian 
Golan; 
 
Decides to inscribe this item at its 172nd session and 
invites the Director-General to present to it a progress 
report thereon. 
 
OLIVER