05TAIPEI2271
MEDIA REACTION: CROSS-STRAIT RELATIONS,
Tue May 24 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TAIPEI 002271 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/RSP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - 
ROBERT PALLADINO 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: CROSS-STRAIT RELATIONS, 
CONSTITUTIONAL REFORM 
 
¶1. Summary: The Taipei dailies concentrated their 
coverage this past weekend on cross-Strait relations, 
while their focus shifted Monday to report on their 
front pages that President Chen Shui-bian ordered the 
DPP caucus in the Legislative Yuan to overturn the "Law 
on the National Assembly's Exercise of Power" that was 
passed last Friday.  Members of Taiwan's National 
Assembly are responsible for voting on constitutional 
amendments. 
 
¶2. Both the centrist "China Times" and the pro- 
unification "United Daily News" reported on their front 
pages Saturday (May 21) that the Taiwan government 
welcomes China's decision to lift its ban on mainland 
Chinese making sightseeing trips to Taiwan, but each 
newspaper emphasized that both sides should negotiate 
to ensure the policy is acceptable to both governments. 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times," Taiwan's biggest 
daily, however, ran a banner headline on its second 
page that day that said: "Bian: Taiwan's China fever is 
declining."  The sub-headline added: "[Bian] accepted 
an interview from The Economist, saying that [China's] 
suppression of [Taiwan's] WHO bid has waken up those 
who have illusions about China.  [Bian also] criticized 
that the `both sides on the Strait, one China' 
[statement] is a step backward." 
 
¶3.  The "Liberty Times," in the meantime, carried a 
news story on cross-Strait relations on page two with 
the headline: "President Chen: Bian-Hu meeting must be 
held at a third country."  The sub-headline read: 
"[Chen] said in private that there should not be any 
preconditions for the meeting between him and Hu, 
including the One China and 1992 Consensus.  But based 
on the results of [KMT Chairman] Lien Chan's and [PFP 
Chairman] James Soong's China trips, chances are slim 
for Bian and Hu to meet now." 
 
¶4.  In terms of editorials and commentaries, a "Liberty 
Times" editorial urged Chen to stick to the Taiwan- 
centered route and not to sacrifice Taiwan's 
sovereignty just because he wants to take certain 
measures to seek reconciliation and co-existence.  A 
commentary in the limited-circulation, pro- 
independence, English-language "Taipei Times" said Chen 
is now standing at a crossroads with regard to cross- 
Strait policy.  In the centrist "China Times," 
Professor Chu Yun-han wrote a commentary that described 
the constitutional reform process in Taiwan as 
"bizarre." End summary. 
 
¶1.  Cross-Strait Relations 
 
A) "[The Government] Must Not Sacrifice Its Objectives 
Simply Because It Wants to Adopt Certain Measures to 
Seek Reconciliation and Co-existence - the Taiwan- 
Centered Route Must Not Be Changed Again" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 
800,000] editorialized (5/23): 
 
". Even though President A-bian did not deliver any 
speech May 20, the anniversary of his inauguration day, 
he emphasized Sunday when participating in the annual 
meeting of the Lion's Club that [he will] uphold 
Taiwan's national sovereignty, [and] stick to the 
ideals of democratic reforms and the Taiwan-centered 
route to seek reconciliation and dialogue.  In the next 
three years, A-bian must thoroughly put all these words 
into practice, both in the aspect of the interaction 
between the ruling and opposition parties and with 
regard to cross-Strait relations.  Only by that can he 
realize the promises he made during his campaigns and 
walk out a new route that upholds Taiwan-centered 
consciousness, and only by doing so can Taiwan's 
security and the well-being of Taiwan people be 
safeguarded." 
 
B) "Chen at a Crossroads over Cross-Strait Policy" 
 
Assistant Professor of Political Science at Soochow 
University Emile Sheng noted in the pro-independence, 
English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 30,000] 
(5/23): 
 
". In setting up his cross-strait policy, Chen has to 
consider the reactions of Washington, Beijing, 
opposition parties, independence forces in Taiwan, the 
DPP's factions and public opinion.  It is not easy to 
find a balance between these various forces, but Chen's 
vacillating and shortsighted tactics have increased the 
hostility of opponents and raised doubts among 
supporters.  If he really wants to achieve something in 
the time remaining, he must pursue a consistent 
political agenda and prepare himself to deal with the 
criticism that this may engender. . 
 
"Chen is at crossroads, and none of the options before 
him - whether to risk war, seek peace or to 
procrastinate - are easy.  But if political infighting 
deprives him of the ability to choose one of these 
roads, then many opportunities will simply pass us by. 
Whether When will succeed in the end will be determined 
not only by his sincerity, but also by his vision. 
 
"Vision refers not only to a skillful political 
strategy but also to broad political horizons.  Chen 
must rise above personal or partisan motives and think 
about setting an example for the rest of the world. 
For the future of cross-strait relations, Chen should 
work with opposition parties rather than engaging in 
political infighting and divisive strategies." 
 
¶2.  Constitutional Reform 
 
A) "Fantastic Story of Taiwan's Constitutional Reforms" 
 
Professor Chu Yun-han of the National Taiwan 
University's Department of Political Science commented 
in the centrist, pro-status quo "China Time" 
[circulation: 600,000] (5/23): 
 
". Two things are very bizarre with regard to the 
constitutional reform process this time: First, over 
the past ten years, the Legislative Yuan has been tying 
its hands and has never exercised its authority to 
amend [Taiwan's] Constitution.  But look at the 
masterpiece of its first effort in leading 
constitutional revision: it has passed a constitutional 
proposal with regard to congressional reforms, which 
will definitely seriously undermine the Legislative 
Yuan's role in representing the diversity of our 
society and undercut its legislative and supervisory 
functions.  Second, many political figures used to 
regard public participation in constitutional reform as 
the highest objective for democratic reforms, and as a 
result, they tried their best to promote the proposal 
of `abolishing ad hoc National Assembly 
representatives' and replaced it with a `public 
referendum on constitutional reform.'  They also tried 
to package the referendum as the main course of the set 
meal of constitutional reform this time and define the 
ad hoc National Assembly election as a `substantive' 
referendum.  But in the end, the less than one fourth 
of the voter turnout rate showed that this 
constitutional reform lacks justification in a 
democratic sense and has formed a constitutional wound 
that is hard to mend. ." 
 
PAAL