05TELAVIV3256
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Tue May 31 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 TEL AVIV 003256 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
Mideast 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
On Sunday, Ha'aretz reported that President Bush 
promised PA Chairman [President] Mahmoud Abbas during 
their meeting on Thursday that if the PA meets its 
security commitments under the road map, including its 
undertaking to disarm wanted men, the U.S. will demand 
that PM Sharon dismantle all the illegal outposts in 
the West Bank immediately after the disengagement. 
Today, Ha'aretz reported that at a meeting on Monday 
with visiting members of the U.S. House Appropriations 
Committee, Sharon voiced disappointment with the result 
of last Thursday's meeting between Bush and Abbas in 
Washington.  Sharon was quoted as saying: "The 
Palestinians came out feeling no pressure to fight 
terror, and that they don't have to take immediate 
action."  He also reportedly said: "Questions are being 
asked -- what happened to Bush's promises? -- and 
people say the whole disengagement is a bluff.  I need 
calm to carry out the disengagement, and this is 
causing me difficulties."  The newspaper says that 
Sharon told the congressmen that he had no complaints 
for Bush, who made his objection to terror clear to 
Abbas, and that "democratic reforms [in the PA] cannot 
be a substitute for war on terror."  On Sunday, Maariv 
quoted Israeli officials as saying that Bush told Abbas 
what he wanted to hear, and that the statement was 
geared to allay the Palestinians' concerns about Bush's 
letter of commitment from 2004.  On Sunday, Yediot 
reported that during his visit to the U.S., Abbas asked 
Bush to pressure Israel to allow the entry of 1,500 
soldiers from the Palestinian Bader Brigade from 
Jordan.  The newspaper wrote that over the weekend, 
Israel made it clear to the American administration 
that its response was negative, and that the subject is 
not open to negotiations. 
 
Echoing reports that have appeared in the media in the 
past few weeks, Ha'aretz writes that dozens of right- 
wing extremists have moved into the abandoned Hof 
Dekalim during the past two weeks, and that the IDF 
fears that they will turn the hotel into the focus of 
hardcore resistance to the evacuation of the Katif Bloc 
(Gush Katif).  Leading media reported that children 
aged 7 to 10 were among those arrested following a road 
blockage by disengagement opponents northeast of Tel 
Aviv on Sunday. 
 
Yediot cited a secret document recently prepared by the 
Foreign Ministry, which details a Palestinian plan on 
the use to be made of Gaza Strip property: the northern 
Strip will become an industrial zone; the settlement of 
Netzarim will turn into the Gaza harbor; the settlement 
of Kfar Darom will be converted into an agricultural 
area; and the Katif Bloc will turn into a Club Med 
resort.  The Foreign Ministry document allegedly says 
that the PA intends to launch a media campaign soon, 
calling on the Palestinians to refrain from plundering 
or violating order in evacuated areas. 
 
On Monday, leading media quoted Abbas as saying in an 
interview aired on Sunday that the era of suicide 
bombings may be over. 
 
Egyptian Ambassador to Israel Assef Ibrahim was quoted 
as saying Monday in an interview with Jerusalem Post 
that Israel should not expect Egypt to prevent attacks 
that may emanate from the Gaza Strip after Israel's 
withdrawal.  However, Ibrahim was quoted as saying that 
Israel could expect better control of smuggling across 
the border were Egypt allowed to station more troops. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that Pentagon official Larry Franklin 
has admitted that he may have disclosed classified 
information to a foreign official who was not 
authorized to receive it.  A Virginia grand jury is 
expected to indict Franklin for giving classified 
materials to representatives of AIPAC in the coming 
days.  On Monday, Ha'aretz reported that the U.S. 
Justice Department is expected to file indictments 
against two former AIPAC staffers -- Steve Rosen and 
Keith Weissman. 
 
On Monday, Jerusalem Post reported that PA officials 
told the newspaper on Sunday that Iraqi security forces 
have recently arrested dozens of Palestinians in 
Baghdad and other cities on charges of helping 
terrorists launch suicide attacks against Iraqi 
policemen and U.S. troops. 
 
Yediot cited reports that have recently reached the 
highest echelon of the GOI, according to which Deputy 
National Security Advisor Elliott Abrams, who holds the 
"Israeli-Palestinian portfolio" in the White House, is 
the leading candidate to replace Daniel Kurtzer as U.S. 
ambassador to Israel.  Yediot cited the U.S. Embassy to 
Israel as saying that until further notice, Kurtzer is 
the U.S. Ambassador to Israel and that there is no 
intention of replacing him before the end of his term. 
The newspaper quoted embassy sources as characterizing 
the reports that have reached Jerusalem as "rumors" 
only. 
 
On Monday, the media reported that the cabinet on 
Sunday approved the release of 400 prisoners, in 
accordance with previous agreements with the PA. 
 
On Sunday, Maariv and other media reported that the 
U.S. administration has decided to expand General 
William Ward's authority and to give him the task of 
mediating security issues between Israel and the 
Palestinians. 
 
On Monday, Ha'aretz quoted Maj. Gen. Yair Naveh, the 
head of the Central Command, as saying before the 
Knesset's Foreign Affairs and Defense Committee on 
Sunday that the IDF will remain in the northern West 
Bank for several months after the evacuation of the 
four Jewish settlements in the area.  On Monday, 
Jerusalem Post quoted Israel's National Security 
Adviser Giora Eiland as saying Monday that it is "very 
likely" that the IDF will reoccupy Khan Yunis and other 
Palestinian villages prior to disengagement. 
 
Leading media reported that on Monday, Palestinian 
security forces uncovered and later sealed an 
explosives tunnel in Khan Yunis, north of the Katif 
Bloc.  On Monday, Ha'aretz reported that four 
Palestinians were killed in separate incidents in the 
West Bank and Gaza Strip on Sunday, three in apparent 
"work accidents" in the Gaza Strip, and one while 
trying to stab IDF soldiers.  On Sunday, Jerusalem 
reported that security forces thwarted a suicide 
bombing on Friday afternoon, when soldiers manning a 
checkpoint at the western exit to Nablus captured a 
Palestinian from Qalqilya carrying an explosives belt 
hidden in a bag. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that the Jerusalem Municipality has 
begun proceedings to raze 88 buildings housing some 
1,000 residents in the Silwan neighborhood, to "restore 
the area to its landscape of yore," according to the 
city engineer, Uri Shetrit.  The newspaper notes that 
the demolition, if it goes ahead, will be among the 
largest to take place in East Jerusalem since 1967. 
 
Israel Radio reported that in a first interview with 
the London-based Asharq Al-Awsat, outgoing IDF Chief of 
Staff Moshe Ya'alon expressed his belief that peace 
will not be achieved in the short term.  Ya'alon 
reportedly said that Israel can defend itself without 
the Golan. 
 
Israel Radio cited an Iranian announcement that Iran 
has conducted a test of a 2,000-km-range surface-to- 
surface missile. 
 
Jerusalem Post reported that PA Minister for Civilian 
Affairs Muhammad Dahlan called on Monday for firm 
action against Palestinians suspected of 
"collaboration" with Israel.  He also denied that Abbas 
had promised Israel he would not authorize the 
executions of convicted "collaborators."  Jerusalem 
Post also reported that Samir Rantisi, a local 
journalist and spokesman for former PA Information 
minister Yasser Abed Rabbo, was murdered in Ramallah on 
Monday.  He had for years urged Palestinians to endorse 
nonviolent methods in their confrontation with Israel 
and was strongly opposed to suicide bombings. 
Maariv quoted Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf as 
saying in an interview with the German weekly Der 
Spiegel that Sharon is a courageous leader.  Maariv 
cited the Indian newspaper Indian Express, which on 
Monday quoted senior officials in Islamabad as saying 
that Musharraf is committed to diplomatic relations 
with Israel. 
 
On Sunday, Jerusalem Post reported that USAID has 
launched a new ad campaign -- through posters and TV 
commercials -- aimed at improving America's image among 
the Palestinians.  The newspaper says: "Chances of 
success appear slim." 
 
On Sunday, Jerusalem Post reported that the mufti of 
Jerusalem, Ikrema Sabri, demanded that the U.S. 
apologize for alleged mishandling of the Koran in 
Guantanamo Bay.  The mufti also called on Muslims 
around the world to boycott American products. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that the Labor Party's Central 
Committee approved the merger between One Nation and 
Labor on Monday, paving the way for One Nation chairman 
MK Amir Peretz to compete for chairmanship of the 
party. 
 
On Sunday, Maariv reported that Moshe Bachar and Edmond 
Ben-Ami, two Israelis who were under house arrest in 
the U.S. awaiting trial, succeeded in deceiving the 
American authorities, boarding a flight, and fleeing 
back to Israel.  The newspaper says that the two were 
assisted by none other than the Israeli Foreign 
Ministry, as Consul-General in Miami Shmuel Micha 
personally issued them laissez-passer documents.  The 
newspaper cited a denial by the Consulate-General that 
requests for such documents were on their records. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that Israel and South Africa are 
resuming security cooperation after a hiatus of almost 
15 years, with a senior delegation from South Africa 
due in the country next week for the first time since 
the fall of the apartheid regime. 
 
Maariv reported that dozens of young people who have 
recently emigrated from the CIS have founded in Israel 
a neo-Nazi organization that holds secret meetings. 
 
Over the weekend, the media headlines were dominated by 
a case that involved several arrests last week of top 
executives at some of Israel's biggest companies, 
including the Yes satellite TV company, Mayer Cars & 
Trucks and the Pelephone Communications and Cellcom 
cellular networks, on suspicion of involvement in 
industrial espionage.  A total of 18 people have been 
detained, including nine private investigators. 
Leading media quoted police as saying Monday that 
classified defense-related material belonging to an 
Israeli arms manufacturer was found on as server 
allegedly used to store information stolen from 
targeted companies.  Maariv reported that the FBI has 
asked for information on the matter. 
 
All media highlighted various cases of violent crime 
carried out or cracked over the past few days. 
 
-------- 
Mideast: 
-------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Senior op-ed writer Akiva Eldar opined in left-leaning, 
independent Ha'aretz: "If anyone has cause for 
complaint in this regard, it is Abu Mazen.  Once again 
... Bush did not say anything about what Israel will 
have to give to the Palestinians in return for the 
population centers it annexes." 
 
Extreme right-wing columnist Caroline B. Glick wrote in 
conservative, independent Jerusalem Post: "From the 
Bush administration's actions on the ground from 
Teheran to Riyadh to Ramallah, it seems that rather 
than placing these terror regimes in the crosshairs, 
the President and his advisers are strengthening them. 
If this is the case, then Israel is in for one of the 
toughest periods in its history." 
 
David J. Forman, founder of the group Rabbis for Human 
Rights, wrote in Jerusalem Post: "What of America's 
carpet bombing of Fallujah, where half the city was 
destroyed and untold civilian life lost?  Is this not a 
'war crime?'" 
 
 
 
 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
¶I.  "Comprehension Difficulties" 
 
Senior op-ed writer Akiva Eldar opined in left-leaning, 
independent Ha'aretz (May 29): "The declaration 
received by Sharon [from President Bush] and that made 
to Abu Mazen do not contradict one another.... Bush's 
statements do not stray in the slightest from the road 
map adopted by Israel.... The U.S. position is that the 
reality in the field must be taken into account; but 
America most certainly doesn't have the ability or 
intention of forcing this position on the parties to 
the conflict.... First, the starting point for the 
talks must be the cease-fire line.  Second, the United 
States believes the large population centers in the 
West Bank must be taken into consideration.  And third, 
the border must be determined in agreement between the 
sides.  One can safely assume that when the day of the 
final-status talks comes, the U.S. will serve as 
principal mediator.  Therefore, one cannot undermine 
the importance of its position vis-a-vis the nature of 
the peace settlement.  But if anyone has cause for 
complaint in this regard, it is Abu Mazen.  Once again, 
as in the case of his letter from April last year, Bush 
did not say anything about what Israel will have to 
give to the Palestinians in return for the population 
centers it annexes." 
 
II.  "Is America Abandoning the Fight?" 
 
Extreme right-wing columnist Caroline B. Glick wrote in 
conservative, independent Jerusalem Post (May 31): "The 
top story in Sunday's Washington Post reported that the 
Bush administration is revising its counter-terrorism 
strategy.  Whereas since the September 11 attacks the 
U.S. has concentrated its efforts on physically 
destroying al-Qaida to prevent it from carrying out 
another major attack by arresting and killing its 
operatives and leaders, now, according to the report, 
the U.S. will be widening the focus to include 
contending with the threat of militant Islam generally 
by trying to counteract it as a social and political 
force among Muslims worldwide.  This of course would be 
a welcome change.... And yet, from the Bush 
administration's actions on the ground from Teheran to 
Riyadh to Ramallah, it seems that rather than placing 
these terror regimes in the crosshairs, the President 
and his advisers are strengthening them.  If this is 
the case, then Israel is in for one of the toughest 
periods in its history." 
 
III.  "We Are Not Paranoid" 
 
David J. Forman, founder of the group Rabbis for Human 
Rights, wrote in Jerusalem Post (May 30): "We Israelis 
are not paranoid. Much of the world is truly out to 
'get us.'  Witness the Amnesty International report 
accusing Israel of 'crimes against humanity' and 'war 
crimes.'  What of America's carpet bombing of Fallujah, 
where half the city was destroyed and untold civilian 
life lost?  Is this not a 'war crime?'.... If our 
critics are truly intent on having Israel address some 
of its admittedly grievous behavior, they do themselves 
and ultimately Israel a dreadful disservice by their 
blatant abuse of language.  After all, no one has 
suffered greater 'crimes against humanity' than we 
Jews.  Before judging us, the world would do well to 
understand our narrative, and to acknowledge not just 
our historic nightmare, but its many manifestations 
that continue to this day." 
 
KURTZER