07SURABAYA60
US CONSULATE GENERAL SURABAYA:  2007 ANNUAL CERTIFICATION OF
Tue Oct 23 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Surabaya
VZCZCXRO6641
RR RUEHJS
DE RUEHJS #0060/01 2960754
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 230754Z OCT 07
FM AMCONSUL SURABAYA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0084
INFO RUEHJA/AMEMBASSY JAKARTA 0076
RUEHJS/AMCONSUL SURABAYA 0086UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SURABAYA 000060 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CMGT CVIS ID
SUBJECT: US CONSULATE GENERAL SURABAYA:  2007 ANNUAL CERTIFICATION OF 
CONSULAR MANAGEMENT CONTROLS 
 
REF: STATE 139705 
 
¶1.  Post completed the 2007 annual review of consular management 
controls on 22 October 2007.  Caryn R. McClelland, Consul 
General, FS-01 certified the completion of the management 
review. 
 
¶2.  Background on Surabaya Personnel:  There are currently two 
consular officers assigned to post and one Pol/Econ officer who 
covers during personnel shortages.  All three officers are 
recent graduates of the Consular General Course offered at FSI. 
 
 
¶3.  Narrative describing steps completed during this review: 
 
a)  Standard Operating Procedures:  All consular officers are 
familiar with and have access to all consular guides, cables, 
instructions, references and regulations.  Post specific SOPs 
are stored on the consular shared-drive at post and all consular 
section employees have access to this location. 
 
b)  Consular Shared Tables (CST) Management:  Personally 
verified the following: 
 
(1) Consular employees only have access to necessary systems 
befitting their position and that only FSOs have adjudicatory 
and management roles. 
(2) Only active employees are maintained in the system.  No 
anonymous accounts exist. 
(3)  All users are given access as their position requires. 
(4)  User passwords are changed every 6 months or as necessity 
dictates. 
 
c)  Access:  Due to physical constraints/size of the existing 
Consulate building post has not been able to completely limit 
access to the Consular Section.  We have recently installed 
cypher-locks on all the doors and after the shared fax machine 
has been relocated, these doors will be locked at all times.  In 
the meantime, we have posted limited access area signs, which 
list the authorized personnel to enter without escort and an 
American consular officer is present in the section at all times 
while the doors are open.  The Consular Section is locked each 
evening upon departure of the consular officers and LE staff are 
not left alone in the section without an American Officer 
present.  A new consulate building is presently being 
constructed and is anticipated to open summer 2009.  The new 
building will meet all consular and state security requirements. 
 
d)  Inventory Count and Reconciliation of Accountable Consular 
Items:  Complete inventory was conducted on 19 October 2007. 
All passports, passport foils, CRBAs, visa foils and 
non-expendable seals and stamps were accounted for without 
discrepancy.  A memo was created and has been placed in the 
appropriate file. 
 
e)  Control and Reconciliation of Accountable Items:  Verified 
that all accountable consular items are being handled, 
controlled destroyed and accounted for per guidance from State. 
Prior to close of business each day, all accountable items are 
reconciled and accounted for in the system.  Reconciliation 
sheets are printed, initialed, dated, placed in the safe and 
kept on file for 3 years. 
 
f)  Destruction Log:  All spoiled, unusable and obsolete 
controlled consular items are destroyed according to regulation. 
 A non-Consular Officer witnesses each destruction and signs the 
destruction log as required. 
 
g)  Cash Accountability: 
 
(1)  Primary and alternate ACOs and cashiers have been formally 
designated in writing by the new Principal Officer and 
Management Officer.  Original documents are on file in the 
consular safe. 
(2)  The personnel mentioned above are familiar with the duties 
and responsibilities of their positions. 
(3)  Prior to close of business each day, the ACO reconciles the 
consular fees received for that day and completes the ACRS End 
of Day Report and Daily Accounting Sheet.  At the end of each 
month the ACO forwards the Daily Accounting Sheet to the 
Management Officer for his review and verification. 
 
h)  Periodic Comparison of MRV Fees and NIV Applications: 
Verified that MRV fees and NIV applications are compared 
quarterly.  No discrepancies noted. 
 
i)  Referral System:  Upon arrival of the new Principal Officer, 
a revised referral policy was written, approved and signed.  The 
new referral policy was provided to each FSO/section.  All FSOs 
have been briefed on the new policy however, no referrals have 
been requested since the new policy was established. 
 
j)  Training:  FSOs and LE staff are being cross-trained so that 
 
SURABAYA 00000060  002 OF 002 
 
 
they can fill vacancies during personnel shortages.  Quarterly 
training is conducted in Jakarta and all personnel are included 
in the training development program.  Training for newly 
assigned consular personnel was not in place but has since been 
established for the next generation. 
 
k)  Standards of Employee Conduct:  FSOs and LE staff are 
required to review the Standards of Ethical Conduct annually. 
All adjudicating officers recently underwent this training at 
FSI prior to their arrival at post. 
 
l)  Namecheck and Clearance Reviews:  NIV Section Chief is 
responsible for reviewing all NIV applications on a daily basis. 
 Post forwards SAOs whenever appropriate. 
 
m)  Visa Lookout Accountability:  VLA procedures are in place 
and certification is up to date.  Adjudicating officers at post 
were recently trained at FSI. 
 
n)  Intake, Interview and Screening:  Intake and screening 
performed by LE staff is monitored on a daily basis due to close 
proximity to FSOs interviewing.  LE staff have not overstepped 
their roles and do not try to influence the adjudication 
process. 
 
o)  Oversight of Processing:  Due to physical constraints of the 
existing Consulate building, post has not been able to 
accomplish line-of-sight supervision on a continuous basis. 
However, consular officers do periodically observe LE staff 
process visas, passports, CRBAs, etc., on a regular basis.  A 
new consulate building is presently being constructed and is 
anticipated to open summer 2009.  The layout of this building 
will allow for line-of-sight monitoring. 
 
p)  Fingerprinting for Biometric Purposes:  EFM Consular 
Assistants normally conduct all fingerprinting at post. 
Whenever the EFM is not available, Consular Officers fingerprint 
the applicants. 
 
q)  Interview and Adjudication:  All visa applicants have 
appeared in person for an interview in 2007. 
 
r)  Photo Standards:  Photographs over 6 months old are not 
accepted from applicants.  When an applicant appears with a 
photograph that does not meet this standard they are required to 
provide a new photograph.  This is all done during intake and 
processing. 
 
s)  Review of Visa Refusals and Issuances:  Adjudicating 
officers at post enter notes for both refusals and issuances. 
The Principal Officer reviews the required cases on a weekly 
basis. 
 
t)  Visa Shopping:  Applicants with prior refusals and 
third-country nationals are thoroughly scrutinized.  All visa 
issuances are reviewed by the NIV Chief and no trends have been 
detected. 
 
u)  Consular File Management:  Consular files are being 
maintained chronologically and in accordance with Department 
Policy.  Older records are shipped to KCC when required or 
destroyed when appropriate.  All files are kept in locked 
cabinets and are never left open for public perusal. 
 
v)  Passports and CRBAs:  ACS Officer consistently checks CCD, 
PIERS and conducts name checks prior to issuing passports, extra 
pages and CRBAs.  Citizenship is confirmed and proper 
identification is required prior to issuance. 
 
w)  Fraud Prevention Programs:  Post recently conducted 
interviews to fill new FSN-I position.  Selection has been made 
but still awaiting background and medical checks prior to formal 
offer of employment.  In the meantime, the RSO  FSN-I has been 
doing an exemplary job investigating all possible cases of fraud 
that adjudicating officers bring to his attention. 
 
x)  Classified Access:  All Consular Officers have access to the 
classified system.  Do to the small size of the post there isn't 
a designated Consular Chief.  The consular officers check the 
classified system each day on a rotating basis. 
 
y)  Posts Exercising Supervision of Consular Agents:  US 
Consulate Surabaya supervises the Consular Agency in Bali. 
Direct supervision of that consular agent is maintained through 
the ACS Officer at post.  Periodic visits to Bali ensure that 
the management controls are in place.  Last visit to the Bali 
Consular Agency was 26 - 28 September 2007, by Rebecca Couture, 
ACS Officer. 
MCCLELLAND