07LIMA689
Peru: 2007 Anti-Trafficking in Persons Report
Thu Mar 08 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Lima
VZCZCXYZ0005
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHPE #0689/01 0671915
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 081915Z MAR 07
FM AMEMBASSY LIMA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4278
INFO RUEAWJA/DOJ WASHDC
RUEAHLC/HOMELAND SECURITY CENTER WASHDC
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA 4417
RUEHQT/AMEMBASSY QUITO 1055
RUEHLP/AMEMBASSY LA PAZ MAR TOKYO 2625
RUEHSG/AMEMBASSY SANTIAGO 1146
RUEHMD/AMEMBASSY MADRID 2812
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME 0534UNCLAS LIMA 000689 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE, SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, PRM, WHA/PPC 
STATE PASS TO USAID 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD ASEC PREF ELAB PE
SUBJECT: Peru: 2007 Anti-Trafficking in Persons Report 
 
REF: A) 06 STATE 202745 B) 06 LIMA 4554 C) LIMA 0313 
 
     D) 06 LIMA 0826 
 
¶1. (SBU)  SUMMARY:  The Peruvian Government demonstrated a 
strong commitment to comply with basic TIP standards by 
making significant efforts in the areas of prevention, 
prosecution, and protection.  Its achievements include: 
 
  -- One person was sentenced to 10 years in prison for 
trafficking in persons for commercial sexual exploitations. 
Thirteen more cases remain before the Peruvian courts. 
 
  -- The new Garcia administration passed a comprehensive 
TIP law on January 17, 2007--within six months of taking 
office.  The law clearly defines TIP in accordance with 
what Post believes fulfills the U.S. and UN definitions of 
TIP as stated in Ref A. 
 
  -- The Public Ministry, with the assistance of an NGO, 
trained 1389 law enforcement and social service 
professionals in 13 cities on TIP laws and enforcement 
procedures. 
 
  -- The Women's Ministry conducted all-day, TIP-awareness 
workshops for 1055 municipal officials and 1000 community 
leaders in 7 regions. 
 
  -- The new TIP law significantly strengthens victim and 
witness protection and calls for victim treatment and 
rehabilitation services by requiring ministries to budget 
for the provision of these services. 
 
  -- The GOP's Multisectoral Committee (MSC), assisted by 
the IOM, wrote a draft national law enforcement strategy 
that is now being revised to reflect the new law. 
 
  -- The Ministry of Foreign Affairs shows anti-TIP videos 
to passport applicants and disseminates videos and related 
information to embassies/consulates worldwide. 
 
  -- The Interior Ministry is operating a toll-free TIP 
hotline and referring cases to police since March 2006. 
 
  -- Peru signed a bilateral agreement with Chile to halt 
TIP across their borders. 
 
  -- The Peruvian National Police (PNP) implemented a 
computerized case-tracking system for TIP crimes.  The 
Minister of Interior took the somewhat unusual step of 
issuing a ministerial resolution that requires that all law 
enforcement personnel enter TIP cases into the system. 
 
  -- The Ministry of Tourism is running a campaign to have 
hotels sign a "code of conduct" against child-sex tourism, 
focusing initially in seven major tourist regions. 
 
END SUMMARY 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Following is a checklist of answers to Ref A, 
Para 27, (Overview): 
 
¶A.  Peru is not a country of origin for "significant" 
international trafficking in persons.  A few cases of 
international trafficking of women have been reported in 
the past, but the scope of the problem is not yet known. 
In past years, the destinations of foreign trafficking from 
Peru have been the U.S., Spain, Japan, and Italy. 
According to the limited information gathered so far by the 
GOP and local NGOs, Peru is not a country of transit or 
destination for trafficking in persons.  Internal 
trafficking is, by far, the greater problem. 
 
     The magnitude of the TIP problem remains difficult to 
quantify.  The illegal, semi-clandestine nature of the 
trafficking--especially the commercial sexual exploitation 
of minors (CSEM)--as well as the lack of a standardized 
system for tracking the crimes and the mobility of the 
population make gathering data problematic.  Studies done 
by NGOs and international organizations (IOM, ILO, and 
UNODC) from 2004 through 2006 have been more qualitative in 
character and focused on urban areas where TIP is more 
visible, e.g., in the streets, bars, and discotheques.  The 
reliability of the data should be considered good within 
the limited parameters of the studies themselves, i.e., 
personal interviews of prostitutes, social workers, and key 
informants in urban areas. 
 
     In regions with little or no government presence 
(primarily in the coca-growing regions of the Upper 
Huallaga and the Apurimac-Ene River Valleys), post has 
received reports from NGOs that children are used to 
process coca leaf into cocaine, but there is no official 
data on the extent of the child labor or trafficking. 
Narcotraffickers and the narco-terrorist group Sendero 
Luminoso (SL) use the labor of children to grow food crops 
and coca for them.  Narcotraffickers routinely violate the 
rights of children in their efforts to produce cocaine.  In 
August 2004, the National Commission for Development and 
Life without Drugs estimated that 5,000 children were 
employed in the illegal narcotics industry.  NGOs have 
photos showing children stomping on coca leaves in shallow 
pits filled with kerosene and other chemicals, the first 
step in making cocaine. 
 
     Using information gleaned from NGO studies and key 
informant interviews, the Ministry for Women and Social 
Development (MIMDES) estimates that 9,600 children and 
adolescents are victims of CSEM nationwide (8 percent of an 
estimated 120,000 sexual workers).  In metropolitan Lima, 
the NGO Via Libre estimates that 5,000 minors are victims 
of CSEM; 80 percent of the victims are female and 60 
percent are between the ages of 15 and 17.  The Via Libre 
figures do not include victims living in the extremely poor 
urban areas that encircle Lima, which would likely raise 
the figures substantially. 
 
     NGOs and international organizations maintain that 
significant domestic trafficking occurs, particularly 
underage women from the poorest and least developed regions 
east of the Andes--the Amazonian jungle and the mountains-- 
into the major cities or into mining areas to work as 
prostitutes or domestic servants.  Data gathered by NGOs 
indicate that trafficking takes place through informal 
networks that could involve acquaintances, extended family 
members, and even the parents of the underage victims. 
 
     There are as yet no comprehensive official GOP figures 
on the extent or magnitude of the TIP problem.  One 
important step toward rectifying this lack of data was the 
inauguration in December 2006 of a computerized case- 
tracking system for identifying and prosecuting TIP crimes 
(in Spanish it is called "Registro de Estadistica de 
Delitos de Trata de Personas y Afines"--RETA).  Minister of 
the Interior Pilar Mazzetti presided over the ceremony, and 
took advantage of the media coverage to express her strong 
support for anti-TIP efforts. 
 
     On February 28, 2007, the Minister Mazzetti took the 
somewhat unusual step of issuing Ministerial Resolution (RM 
129-2007-IN/0105) setting forth the procedures that will be 
followed in reporting TIP crimes with RETA.  This 
resolution makes RETA an official and required part of 
police procedures.  It requires that all law enforcement 
personnel must consider whether a case involves TIP and, if 
so, must use the system to register the case.  The PNP and 
other law enforcement officials are also required to train 
personnel in its operation, maintain the system, and report 
the data to the MSC. 
 
     RETA was developed by the NGO Capital Humano y Social 
- Alternativo (CHS-A) with a FY 2004 G/TIP grant.  CHS-A, 
with the full cooperation of the Peruvian National Police 
(PNP), has trained 505 policemen in the cities of Lima, 
Chiclayo, Ayacucho, Ica, Pucallpa, Cusco, Puno, and 
Juliaca.  By the end of the USAID grant in June 2007, CHS-A 
will train another 101 policemen to use RETA in the cities 
of Huanuco and Huancayo.  The police who are receiving the 
training are responsible for investigating crimes either at 
the local level in police stations or at the national level 
in specialized units, notably in the TIP Investigations 
Unit.  The NGO is also training 90 teachers in the PNP 
Academies in Lima, Puno, Cusco, and Huancayo. 
 
¶B.  The GOP has demonstrated the political will to deal 
with TIP crimes.  The Peruvian Congress passed a law on 
January 12, 2007 that more clearly defines TIP, strengthens 
sentencing guidelines, and provides protection for TIP 
victims and witnesses (see Ref C and Para 4, Section A 
below).  The Multisectoral Committee (MSC) for TIP, a 
permanent, ministerial-level group created in March 2004, 
continues to function.  In December 2006, it issued its 
second year-end review of the activities of Peru's MSC. 
The 100-page report provides an overview of Peru's efforts 
to combat TIP. 
 
     NGO and international organization studies currently 
provide the bulk of the information available on 
trafficking patterns and method.  In a February 2005 report 
by the ILO and subsequent 2006 surveys by the IOM and local 
NGOs, a profile of trafficking victims in Peru (the data is 
most focused on CSEM) has emerged:  1) the populations most 
vulnerable to TIP are children ages 8-17 and young women 
from rural areas or the poor urban areas on the periphery 
of major cities; 2) persons living in poverty (48 percent); 
3) handicapped persons, especially children and the 
elderly, as victims of forced labor and street begging; 4) 
victims of parental or spousal abuse; 5) illiterate or 
semi-illiterate persons; 5) undocumented persons--no birth 
certificates or other identification documents.  Infants 
and children up to age 10 are sold to traffickers who use 
the infants to garner sympathy for women beggars and the 
older children are forced to beg on the streets.  Children, 
mostly girls, ages 8-17 are trafficked as domestic 
servants.  A 2005 ILO report on forced labor in the illegal 
logging industry estimates that 33,000 people are being 
victimized.  The majority of the victims come from ethnic 
groups in the Amazonia region of Peru (primarily the 
departments of Ucayali, Madre de Dios, and Loreto). 
 
     The methods used by traffickers to approach victims 
are often a combination of emotional manipulation and 
coercion.  Victims are recruited through newspaper ads 
offering work.  Notices posted on the street and in the 
markets are also used, especially in the poor areas.  In a 
February 2007 study by the ILO, 69 percent of the victims 
of CSEM were recruited by friends or by people who 
befriended them on the street.  Local employment agencies 
also play a role in recruiting trafficking victims, mostly 
poor young women from rural areas.  The agencies offer the 
girls relatively well paid "restaurant work" in cities like 
Lima and Cusco, and, in some cases, in foreign countries. 
Boys are also trafficked to work in artisanal gold mining 
and illegal logging operations. 
 
     Traffickers usually transport their victims by road. 
A smaller percentage are moved by air or river transport. 
Again, NGOs studies have identified patterns of CSEM 
trafficking that move victims from east of the Andes to the 
major cities on the coasts.  False documents are sometimes 
used, but it is common for the young to have no type of 
identification, and controls on internal migration are 
almost non-existent or easily circumvented.  All varieties 
of forged documents are easily available in Peru. 
 
¶C.  The limitations on the GOP to address this problem are 
a lack of resources, weak institutions, and corruption. 
Funding for the police is inadequate.  As reported in 2006, 
the PNP is seriously understaffed based on historical 
trends.  In 1990, there were 129,000 police for a 
population of 22 million.  In 2005, the police force stood 
at 92,000 officers serving 27 million people--a deficit of 
almost 60,000 officers when the increase in population is 
taken into account.  Corruption is a pervasive problem in 
Peru, and there is no evidence that it affects TIP more 
than other types of Peruvian crime. 
 
     The funding for TIP prevention and training comes from 
existing GOP programs to protect women and children and 
NGOs and international organizations.  GOP support 
typically involves in-kind contributions, i.e., salaries 
(allowing employees to train during work hours), per diem, 
facilities for training, and using existing shelter 
programs for abused women and children for TIP victims as 
well. 
 
     The GOP lacks adequate resources to aid TIP victims. 
Lack of witness protection is a severe weakness in the 
Peruvian justice system for witnesses in all categories of 
crimes.  The new TIP law passed in January 2007 mandates 
aid to TIP victims and witnesses (see Para 3, section A). 
 
¶D.  The government began systematically monitoring its 
anti-trafficking efforts when it established a permanent, 
ministerial-level Multisectoral Committee (MSC) for TIP in 
March 2004.  In December 2006, Peru issued its second year- 
end review of the activities of the MSC against trafficking 
in persons.  The MSC's report, which covers 100 pages, is a 
fully indexed, Spanish-language document that reviews the 
GOP's efforts to fight TIP.  The report points out the need 
for greater budgetary resources to fight TP, lists its 
achievements, describes what still needs to be done and, 
most important, it both documents and promotes coordination 
between different GOP ministries, local governments, and 
NGOs in the fight against TIP.  All TIP initiatives and 
assessments are undertaken in a fully transparent manner 
and are reported to the ILO, IOM, UNICEF, and UNODC. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Following is a checklist of answers to Ref A, 
Para 28, (Prevention): 
 
¶A.  Yes, the GOP recognizes that trafficking is a problem 
in Peru. 
 
¶B.  The permanent, ministerial-level Multi-Sectoral 
Committee (MSC), established in March 2004, has the lead in 
tracking and coordinating government anti-TIP efforts. The 
MSC is chaired by the Director of the Office of Human 
Rights in the Ministry of the Interior and includes 
representatives from 11 government ministries and agencies, 
4 national NGOs, and 3 international organizations (ILO, 
IOM, and UNICEF). 
 
¶C.  With funding from the IOM, the GOP started an anti-TIP 
toll-free hotline located in the Ministry of Interior in 
March 2006.  The MSC and the IOM organized an awareness 
campaign drawing attention to TIP, promoting the hotline, 
and encouraging people to report TIP crimes.  The Ricky 
Martin Foundation provided materials and publicity for the 
awareness campaign and the Interamerican Development Bank 
provided the financing.  As Post reported in Ref B, the TIP 
hotline has received up to one thousand calls per month. 
Since the hotline started in March 2006, the hotline has 
received an average of 700 nuisance calls per month.  Of 
the remaining 300 TIP-related calls, 80 percent were 
seeking more information on TIP.  On average, two calls per 
month have been classified as TIP cases requiring action. 
These calls were passed to the police for investigation 
(post has no information whether any resulted in arrests on 
TIP charges).  The hotline staff is located in the Office 
of Human Rights in the Ministry of Interior.  The Ministry 
created a ground-breaking protocol for the hotline where 
the PNP and the Office of Human Rights have agreed to 
truncate significantly the usual bureaucratic procedures to 
allow hotline tips to be passed quickly to a police station 
nearest the complainant. 
 
     As part of the "The Government and Society against 
Violence" project funded by Belgium, MIMDES is working to 
combat TIP in 4 regions: Cuzco, Lima, Loreto, and Madre de 
Dios.  Activities include training teachers to provide 
students and parents with the information on TIP.  The NGO 
Action for the Children used its G/TIP grant to train 
police officers and other officials to identify and prevent 
TIP crimes as well as to understand the applicable laws. 
The scope of the awareness campaign was such that in Lima, 
Callao, Ica, Ancash, Cerro de Pasco, Huanuco, and Ayacucho: 
 
  -- 1055 Heads of municipal Offices for the Protection of 
Children and Adolescents received TIP awareness training. 
 
  -- 126 teenage victims of TIP from 7 municipalities in 
greater Lima received health assistance and psychological 
counseling through the municipal Offices for the Protection 
of Children and Adolescents. 
 
  -- 1000 community leaders attended all-day workshops on 
how to incorporate TIP information into their daily 
interactions with the community. 
 
  -- 732 school directors, education specialists, and 
teachers learned how to prevent TIP, report it, and handle 
the victims. 
 
     Since 2005, the Ministry of Exterior Commerce and 
Tourism (MINCETUR) is implementing a communications 
campaign directed at national and international tourists 
who engage in the sexual exploitation of minors.  The 
campaign, "Prevention of Sexual Exploitation of Children 
and Adolescents by Tourists," is funded by UNICEF and Save 
the Children.  Already 4,000 tourist agency personnel have 
received awareness training on TIP laws and prevention 
nationwide.  The training will continue with a focus on the 
Departments of Cusco, Iquitos, Lima, Tacna, Ayacucho, 
Moquegua, and Madre de Dios with the goal of creating a 
network of tourist professionals working against child-sex 
tourism.  MINCETUR is also distributing printed material 
and information on CDs.  Videos are shown on domestic 
flights--and will soon be shown on inter-city and tourist 
buses within Peru--to educate people about the laws against 
CSEM and sexual tourism.  MINCETUR developed a code of 
conduct regarding CSEM for the tourist industry and will 
promote its adoption in hotels nationwide, starting in 
March 2007. 
 
     The Women's Ministry (MIMDES) developed a project with 
UNICEF to 1) strengthen the PNP's TIP Unit, 2) determine 
the routes used by traffickers, and 3) train local police 
and immigration officials in recognizing TIP.  The project, 
which is being financed by Belgium, has started in the 
departments of Loreto, Madre de Dios, Cusco, and Lima where 
CSEM is the worst. 
 
     The GOP Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) produced two 
videos to educate travelers to the danger of TIP.  The 
videos were distributed to Peruvian Embassies and 
Consulates with instructions to disseminate the information 
to local authorities and the local Peruvian community. 
Copies were also sent to MFA regional offices in Peru to 
distribute to the regional and local governments.  A 
brochure on TIP was distributed to its offices in Cusco, 
Iquitos, Puno, Tacna, and Tumbes.  The brochure is also 
available in the office that issues passports.  The MFA now 
offers an annual training session for consular officials on 
the issues of TIP and illegal migration. 
 
¶D.  The Ministry of Education (MED) is incorporating 
information about TIP into its human rights campaign 
entitled "I Have the Right to Good Treatment," and into its 
tutoring program.  The MED is also working with the NGO 
"Instituto de Estudio de la Familia y la Infancia (IDEIF) 
to train hundreds of teachers and parents (mostly mothers) 
about TIP and the threat of CSEM in high TIP-risk areas in 
Peru. 
 
¶E.  Government officials, NGOs, and other relevant 
organizations have consistently demonstrated a cooperative, 
collegial, working relationship.  The MSC includes 
representatives from four NGOs, but other NGOs have been 
invited as observers.  The NGOs are generally pleased with 
the cooperation and inclusiveness that the MSC has 
exhibited. 
 
¶F.  The GOP claims that TIP is part of its immigration and 
emigration monitoring (as noted above, MIMDES has a 
training project aimed at immigration officers).  All cases 
handled by prosecutors and the courts are reviewed for 
indications of TIP.  With the passage of the new TIP law in 
January 2007, this scrutiny should increase.  The GOP 
signed a bilateral cooperation agreement with Chile on 
March 15, 2005, to halt the trafficking of children and 
adolescents across their common border (many Peruvians work 
as domestics in Chile). No cases have been reported so far. 
 
¶G.  The GOP established a permanent, ministerial-level 
Multisectoral Committee (MSC) for TIP in March 2004 with 
the responsibility for coordination and communication 
between various internal, international, and multilateral 
entities on TIP matters.  The MSC consists of 11 
ministries, 4 national NGOs, and 3 international 
organizations.  Other government agencies, international 
organizations, and NGOs can attend as 
observers/participants.  In June 2006, the Ministry of 
Justice prepared a National Development Plan against 
Corruption to cover the period 2006-2011 in the final 
months of the Toledo Administration.  The Garcia 
Administration, which assumed office on July 28, 2006, is 
reviewing the 240-page plan prior to implementing it. 
 
¶H.  Peru does not yet have an approved national plan of 
action on TIP.  The MSC, in close coordination with the 
IOM, has produced a draft plan.  A subcommittee was formed 
to finalize the draft and obtain approval for a "National 
Plan of Action against Trafficking in Persons, 2007-2011. 
The subcommittee consists of the representatives from the 
Ministry of Interior, the Public Ministry, two NGOs, and 
the IOM. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Following is a checklist of answers to Ref A, 
Para 29, (Investigation and Prosecution of Traffickers): 
 
¶A.  The new Garcia administration demonstrated its strong 
commitment to combating Trafficking in Persons (TIP) by 
passing a comprehensive law on TIP within six months of 
taking office.  The GOP's Multisectoral Committee (MSC) for 
TIP marshaled the active support of five ministers to lobby 
Congress.  The Peruvian Congress passed Law 28950 on 
January 12, 2007 that adequately defines TIP, strengthens 
sentencing guidelines, and provides protection for TIP 
victims and witnesses (Ref C).  In this law, the GOP brings 
the Peruvian Penal Code into compliance with its 
obligations under the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and 
Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and 
Children, supplementing the UN Convention Against 
Transnational Organized Crime, which Peru ratified on 
December 25, 2003 (Palermo Protocol).  Post also believes 
that the law fulfills the U.S. and UN definitions of TIP as 
stated in Ref A.  This legislation will also enable the 
development of a functioning system for victim and witness 
protection.  The Congress mandated that the law's 
regulations be written within 30 days, without which 
enforcement is not possible.  The MSC recognizes that this 
timeframe is not realistic; nonetheless, it has met several 
times already and is planning a series of all-day 
interagency workshops to start drafting the regulations. 
Among other things, the new law raises the minimum sentence 
to 25 years for some crimes; it mandates the creation of 
bilateral and multilateral agreements on prosecuting and 
extraditing traffickers; it allows evidence obtained by 
undercover police, electronic surveillance, or other 
surreptitious means; and it requires treatment of victims 
and the payment of reparations. 
 
     In June 2004, the Penal Code was modified by Law 28251 
to define trafficking in persons as it relates to sexual 
exploitation (Article 182 of Penal Code).  The law 
penalizes a person who promotes, advertises, or facilitates 
sexual tourism using child pornography in pamphlets, 
publications, audio and videotape recordings, or through 
the Internet. The one TIP conviction for 2006 was the 
result of Law 28251. 
 
     Taken as a whole, the TIP laws in Peru now adequately 
cover the full scope of TIP.  A series of laws in the 
criminal code address various aspects of TIP.  The Peruvian 
Constitution (Article 2, Clause 24) establishes that "all 
people have rights" and specifically prohibits slavery, 
servitude, and trafficking in human beings in all its 
forms. 
 
     The TIP-related laws in the Peruvian Penal Code are 
listed below (translations of legal terms are unofficial): 
 
Sexual Exploitation 
     Article 170: Rape 
     Article 173: Rape of a minor under 14 years of age 
     Articles 176, and 176-A: Acts of Public Indecency 
                  with Minors 
     Article 179: Promoting Prostitution of Minors 
     Article 179-A: Clients of Underage Prostitutes 
     Article 180: Sexually Exploiting a Minor between 14 
                  and 18 years of Age for Profit 
     Article 181: Pimping of Minors 
     Article 181-A: Child-Sex Tourism 
     Article 182: Trafficking in Persons for the Purposes 
                  of Sexual Exploitation--Domestic and 
                  International. 
     Article 183 and 183-A: Child Pornography 
 
Labor Exploitation 
     Articles 50, 51, 53: Prohibitions against Child Labor 
     Article 128: Forced Labor in Dangerous Working 
Conditions 
     Article 129: Forced Labor Resulting in Serious Injury 
                  or Death 
     Article 153: Trafficking of Minors 
     Article 153-A: Aggravated Trafficking of Minors 
     Article 168: Forced Labor 
 
     TIP Law 28950 allows for civil penalties against TIP 
crimes that include forfeiture laws and seizure of 
property. 
 
¶B.  The trafficking statutes in Article 153 provide 
penalties from 8 to 15 years imprisonment.  In Article 
153A, the penalty is 12 to 20 years for an aggravated form 
of trafficking that is defined as involving one of the 
following five factors: 
 
     -- If the victim is between 14 and 18 years of age. 
     -- If the trafficker uses violence, threats or other 
forms of coercion. 
     -- If the trafficker has a position of authority, 
either directly or indirectly, over the victim; or if the 
trafficker has a family relationship with the victim, 
biologically or by adoption. 
     -- If the trafficker is acting as a member of criminal 
organization or gang. 
     -- If the victim is delivered to a pimp. 
 
     The penalty is no less than 25 years in prison if one 
of the following three factors is involved: 
 
     -- If the victim dies, is seriously wounded, or that 
puts the victim in a life-threatening situation. 
     -- If the victim is under age 14 or has a temporary or 
permanent physical or mental handicap. 
     -- If the trafficker is part of a criminal 
organization. 
 
     The traffickers or promoters of sexual tourism 
exploiting victims between 14 and 18 years will be 
sentenced to 2 to 6 years in prison.  If the victim is 
under 14, the penalty is 6 to 8 years.  In the case of 
government officials or a person who has been given 
responsibility for a victim, e.g., teacher, relative, or 
guardian, the penalty will be 8 to 10 years in prison. 
 
¶C.  Labor trafficking crimes are also covered under Law 
28950 and the penalties are the same.  The same holds true 
for labor recruiters, employers, labor agents, those who 
confiscate workers' documents and all manner of labor 
trafficking described in this section. 
     The Peruvian Constitution prohibits forced or 
compulsory labor, including labor by children.  The legal 
working age is 14 years.  Labor inspectors attempt to 
control this problem, but have difficulties doing so in a 
large, informal economy.  For additional information on 
labor trafficking, see Para 3, Section F. 
 
¶D.  The penalties for rape or forcible sexual assault of 
adults range from 6 to 8 years in prison (Law 28704).  In 
the case of minors (less than 18 years), the penalties are: 
 
     -- If the victim is less than 10 years of age, the 
penalty is life in prison. 
     -- If the victim is 10 to 14 years, the penalty is 30- 
35 years in prison. 
     -- If the victim is 14 to 18 years, the penalty in 20- 
25 years in prison 
 
               Penalties for            Penalties for 
         Trafficking for Commercial    Rape or Forcible 
             Sexual Exploitation        Sexual Assault 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
Adults            8-15 yrs                 6-8 yrs 
Children - Ages 
  Less than 10    8-15 yrs                 Life 
  10 to 14        8-15 yrs                 30-35 yrs 
  14 to 18        8-15 yrs                 20-25 yrs 
Aggravated 
  Adults          12-25 yrs                 N/A 
  Children - Ages 
     0 to 10      12-25 yrs                 N/A 
    10 to 14      12-25 yrs                 N/A 
    14 to 18      12-25 yrs                 N/A 
 
¶E.  Prostitution is legal for women over 18 years of age if 
they register with municipal authorities and carry a 
sanitary certification.  Brothels are also licensed.  In 
practice, the vast majority of prostitutes work in the 
informal sector where they lack health protection. 
Unlicensed prostitutes and brothels are common.  The 
activities of pimps, owner/operators of brothels, 
enforcers, clients of underage prostitutes, and child 
sexual tourism are criminalized.  The pervasiveness of 
these activities and the paucity of police data suggest 
that law enforcement is weak. 
 
¶F.  The PNP Investigative Directorate and its unit on TIP 
crimes reported three cases in 2005, nine cases in 2006, 
and two cases so far in 2007.  All but one of the 2006 
cases remain before Peruvian courts, i.e., 13 cases. 
 
     On December 27, 2006, a Peruvian court sentenced Edwin 
Alberto SANCHEZ Aguilar (27), alias "Cafu" or "Cueto," for 
the crime of "trafficking in persons with the intent of 
sexual exploitation" according to Article 182 of the Penal 
Code.  Sanchez was sentenced to 10 years in prison and will 
be required to pay each of his three female victims USD 
1,565 (5,000 Nuevos Soles) (Ref C). 
 
     Sanchez was detained in February 2006 by the PNP's TIP 
Investigation Unit.  He is charged with befriending young 
women in malls and using physical force, verbal threats, 
and possession of a firearm to coerce the women to work in 
brothels in Lima and four other cities.  He imprisoned the 
women and transported them between the cities.  It is 
important to note that this case moved more quickly than 
normal through the judicial system--less than a year when 
the norm is 3 years.  MIMDES and the MSC expended 
significant effort to expedite this case while the three 
victims stayed a MIMDES shelter for abused women.  The 
rapid conviction in this case illustrates GOP commitment to 
combating TIP. 
 
     No one has yet been tried under the new TIP Law 28950. 
Despite recent advances in the Public Ministry and the PNP, 
it will be several years before the Peruvian justice system 
has the capability to provide reliable, comprehensive data 
from arrest to release from prison.

     Although only one person was brought to trial, 
convicted, or sentenced in 2006, this should not be seen as 
a lack of GOP will.  The average time for criminal cases to 
move through the judicial system from beginning to end is 
30 months.  (Comment:  Getting accurate and complete 
information from the Peruvian judicial system is difficult, 
because the system is fragmented and inefficient. 
Furthermore, communication and data-sharing within and 
between ministries is problematic, which is reflected in 
the somewhat inconsistent yearly information Post receives. 
Post does not believe that GOP is withholding information. 
End Comment.) 
 
     The PNP continues to raid brothels, bars, hostels, and 
discotheques, etc. in search of sexually exploited minors. 
In 2004, the police conducted 2636 raids, 2822 in 2005, and 
2776 in the first three quarters of 2006.  So far in 2006, 
about 380 minors were found during the raids (273 possible 
victims of sexual exploitation), 135 pimps, and 490 clients 
with minors.  These figures are difficult to interpret 
because it is not clear how policemen in the field classify 
the people involved or who is finally charged with a crime. 
If the people were arrested and charged, it was not for 
CSEM under the law (28251) current at the time.  These 
issues are discussed in more detail in Post's 2006 report 
(Ref D).  The recently installed RETA system should solve 
many of the problems with incomplete data (for more on 
RETA, see Para 2, Section A). 
 
     The GOP has been moving against child labor, a 
phenomenon that overlaps with TIP.  It established the 
Multisectoral Committee on Preventing and Eradicating Child 
Labor (CPETI) on August 22, 2003 to eradicate child labor 
within 10 years.  The committee includes 13 ministries and 
representatives from the regional governors and 
municipalities.  International organizations like the ILO, 
PAHO, and UNICEF are also members.  The Labor Ministry 
chairs CPETI. 
 
     Although the law restricts child labor based upon the 
age of the child, hours worked, and occupation, child labor 
remains a serious problem in Peru. The law's provisions are 
violated routinely in the informal sector.  The legal 
minimum age for employment is 14; however, children between 
the ages of 12 and 14 may work in certain jobs for up to 4 
hours per day, and adolescents between ages 15 to 17 may 
work up to 6 hours per day if they obtain special 
permission from the Ministry of Labor and certify that they 
also were attending school. 
 
     In certain sectors of the economy, higher minimum ages 
are in force: age 15 in industrial, commercial, or mining 
work and age 16 in the fishing industry.  The law prohibits 
children from engaging in certain types of employment, such 
as work underground, work that involves the lifting and 
carrying of heavy weights, work where the child is 
responsible for the safety of others, work at night, or any 
work that jeopardizes the health of children and 
adolescents, puts at risk their physical, mental, and 
emotional development, or prevents their regular attendance 
at school. 
 
     Forms of child labor vary. In rural areas, many 
children work on small farms with their parents, in 
artisanal mining, or are sent to cities to work as 
domestics.  In urban settings, children often work on the 
streets, performing, selling candy, begging, or shining 
shoes; or as scavengers in municipal dumps. 
 
     On May 12, 2006, the International Labor Organization 
(ILO) reported that nearly 33,000 persons are involved in 
forced labor in the Amazonia provinces of Ucayali and Madre 
de Dios, primarily in the logging industry.  In 2004, the 
GOP reported on child labor conditions in Puno, where 
approximately 240,000 children were engaged in the mining 
and artisanal industries. 
 
     The Ministry of Labor's (MOL) Office of Labor 
Protection for Minors (PMT) issues permits authorizing 
children to work.  Parents or legal guardians must apply 
for the permit, and employers cannot hire a minor without 
one.  Each permit requires an on-site inspection to ensure 
compliance with Peruvian labor law.  The PMT is still 
completing visits to the over 1,300 sites issued permits in 
¶2005. 
 
     On November 1, 2006 the U.S. Department of Labor (DOL) 
began, with the cooperation of the GOP, a five-year, $5 
million project to reduce child labor in Lima, Callao, 
Trujillo, and Iquitos.  The program helps at-risk children 
ages 11 to 15 to stay in school and assists children who 
are already working to return to school.  More than 5,000 
children are expected to benefit from the program.  The 
Department of Labor is also working with the GOP to 
implement a national child labor survey to document the 
incidence and nature of child labor nationally.  The 
project is expected to begin in the first quarter of 2007. 
 
     The GOP has defined brick-making as a sector relying 
on child labor.  In 2006, MIMDES and CESIP, a Peruvian NGO, 
promoted joint development programs in Guachipa, a 
municipality near Lima, where thousands of children were 
engaged in brick-making.  MIMDES and CESIP helped community 
leaders organize worker associations and pressure local 
governments to extend basic services.  CESIP also has 
secured private sector money from companies to fund the 
construction and improvement of four Guachipa elementary 
schools.  As a result, several hundred children attend 
school instead of working. 
 
     In mid-2005, the MOL completed the National Action 
Plan for Child Labor.  In June 2006, a third revision of 
the plan was released to the public.  The plan contains 
reports on progress achieved in combating child labor and 
details objectives in meeting the overall goal of 
eradicating child labor.  According to the MOL, the rate of 
children entering the workforce has slowed: from 1996 to 
2001, the percentage of children holding jobs increased by 
13 percent.  From 2001 to 2006, the increase was 3 percent. 
 
     The Ministry of Labor has the authority to investigate 
reports of illegal child labor practices.  Focusing on the 
formal sector, inspectors conducted routine visits without 
notice.  Firms found guilty of violating child labor laws 
may be fined and have their operations suspended.  The 
Ministry of Labor has 236 labor inspectors. 
 
¶G.  Investigations by GOP authorities and NGOs indicate 
that domestic TIP activities are, for the most part, 
carried out on a local and informal basis, without the 
involvement of major trafficking organizations.  The GOP 
has established that employment and tourist agencies and 
other apparently legitimate businesses are involved in 
trafficking.  International trafficking to Japan has been 
linked to the Yakuza or Japanese mafia.  The Embassy has no 
evidence of government officials being involved in TIP 
crimes.  There is no information that points to trafficking 
money being laundered or used to finance other crimes. 
 
¶H.  The PNP created a "Trafficking in Persons Investigation 
Section" in January 2004 as part of the Kidnapping 
Investigations Division.  The officers have been trained to 
investigate TIP crimes.  The section is responsible for 
investigations in all of Peru.   As of February 2007, 
sources both inside and outside the PNP agree that there is 
almost no sharing of information among the divisions. 
There are another 5 investigation divisions in the Lima- 
Callao metropolitan area that do not talk to each other or 
to the national divisions of DIRINCRI.  The disarray 
continues because the investigation divisions in the 11 
districts outside of Lima do not communicate with each 
other.  The expansion of RETA (computerized case-tracking 
system) will allow the TIP Investigations Unit to handle 
more cases (for more info on RETA, see Para 2, section A). 
Part of the communications problem is a lack of technology, 
but it is also structural--something not easily or quickly 
solved. 

     Law 28950, when implemented, gives the PNP the 
authority to use undercover agents, surveillance, paid 
informers, wiretapping, money laundering investigations, 
and access to protected information such as financial 
records.  Covert operations are authorized.  Previously, 
there were laws that allowed surveillance and undercover 
investigations, but the circumstances in which the police 
would use these methods were unknown. 
 
¶I.  The GOP is working closely with NGOs and international 
organizations to train government officials to recognize, 
investigate, and prosecute TIP crimes.  In all cases, the 
ministries are providing in-kind contributions, e.g., use 
of meeting facilities, transport, paid training time for 
employees, and office supplies.  In 2006, the Ministry of 
Interior, which includes the police, worked with two NGOs 
to 1) establish the RETA case-tracking system and train 
police officers in its use and 2) educate and raise the 
awareness of police, local government officials, and other 
relevant officials.  The Public Ministry (loosely analogous 
to the U.S. Justice Department) worked with an NGO to train 
1389 people in 13 cities on how to recognize TIP and to 
apply the law in prosecuting cases.  The Ministry for Women 
is incorporating TIP education in its ongoing programs for 
women and children.  The Ministry of Education is 
cooperating with an NGO to educate thousands of teachers 
and parents on TIP along with its other mandated trainings 
(NGO: IDIEF). 
 
¶J.  The MFA has established a communications protocol with 
the PNP and Interpol to respond to complaints filed by TIP 
victims outside Peru or to investigate reports in the 
foreign media.  The PNP will keep the MFA informed about 
TIP victims who were repatriated to Peru and about the 
progress of their cases in the judicial system.  There was 
one case of a cooperative international investigation on 
TIP.  In November 2005, two Peruvian sisters (Dorothy 
Tamara, age 13, and Maria Pia MELLIZ Olivos, no age given) 
were kidnapped by two Ecuadorian citizens (Jose Luis 
ZAMBRANO Velez and another man going by the nickname 
"Maico") for sexual exploitation.  Peruvian officials 
coordinated with Ecuadorian authorities to repatriate the 
two victims.  Prosecution of the Ecuadorian traffickers is 
in the hands of Ecuadorian authorities. 
 
¶K.  A separate part of the Penal Code (Article 2) addresses 
extraterritoriality.  The law applies to any criminal act, 
as defined by Peruvian Law, committed by a Peruvian in a 
foreign country.  The person would be tried in Peruvian 
courts as if the crime had been committed in Peru.  The law 
also states that Peru is obligated to conform to the 
international treaties and norms that it has signed and 
ratified.  To date, no one has been extradited for TIP 
crimes, and no Peruvian has been charged with TIP crimes 
committed in another country.  The GOP has not reported 
receiving any extradition requests related to TIP. 
 
     The GOP signed a bilateral cooperation agreement with 
Chile on March 15, 2005 to prevent the trafficking of 
children and adolescents across their common border. 
 
     The PNP created a special anti-fraud group to combat 
document and other types of fraud related to TIP and 
illegal immigration.  This group is authorized to work with 
U.S. authorities to dismantle trafficking networks 
targeting the U.S. 
 
¶L.  There is no evidence of government involvement in or 
tolerance of trafficking at any level of government.  It is 
widely accepted in Peruvian society that individual police 
officers tolerate the presence of underage prostitutes and 
the operation of unregistered and unlicensed brothels.  No 
police have been charged or prosecuted for complicity in 
TIP. 
 
¶M.  During this reporting period, there have been no cases 
of government officials being involved in trafficking.  On 
December 29, 2005, Congressman Torres Ccalla received a 
sentence of eight years in prison on charges of aggravated 
rape of a minor (aggravated because of his official 
position).  He was also fined 20,000 Nuevos Soles (about 
USD 6,250).  Torres Ccalla had brought the young girl to 
Lima from his home district of Puno, allegedly to work in 
his office.  He was convicted under Law 28251 (passed in 
2004) that stipulates a sentence of 4 to 8 years for 
someone who sexually exploits a minor. 
 
¶N.  Peru is a destination for child sex tourism.  All 
studies of the issue point to the cities of Iquitos and 
Cusco as the principal destinations for child sex tourism. 
On the question of the extraterritoriality enforcement of 
child sexual abuse laws, please see Para 4, Section K.  The 
GOP has no data on the arrest, prosecution, or extradition 
of foreign sex tourists in Peru. 
 
¶O.  The government has signed and ratified the following 
instruments: 
 
     -- ILO Convention 182 concerning the prohibition and 
immediate action for the elimination of the worst forms of 
child labor: Peru signed in 1999; it was ratified in 2001 
and entered into effect in Peru on January 10, 2003. 
 
     -- ILO Convention 29 and 105 on forced or compulsory 
labor:  Peru signed in 1959 and 1960, respectively. Both 
entered into effect in Peru in 1961. 
 
     -- The Optional Protocol to the Convention on the 
Rights of the Child (CRC) on the sale of children, child 
prostitution, and child pornography: Peru signed in 2000 
and it was ratified in 2001. 
 
     -- The Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish 
Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children, 
supplementing the UN Convention Against Transnational 
Organized Crime: Peru signed in 2000, it was ratified in 
2001 and then it entered into effect on December 25, 2003. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Following is a checklist of answers to Ref A, 
Para 30, (Protection and Assistance to Victims): 
 
¶A.  Law 28950, the new TIP law that was passed in January 
2007 (see Para 4, Section A), requires that victims of TIP 
be assisted and protected by providing them with temporary 
lodging and legal, medical, and psychological assistance. 
There are no shelters designated specifically for TIP 
victims; however, MIMDES has shelters for victims of family 
violence and sexual abuse where TIP victims will be 
assisted until the relevant sections of Law 28950 are 
implemented.  Under the new law, the Ministry of Health 
also has the responsibility to provide medical assistance 
to TIP victims, and the Justice Ministry must provide legal 
and witness protection assistance.  Until the new law is 
implemented, no reliable data will be available on the TIP 
victims placed in any of the shelters mentioned above. 
 
¶B.  The GOP does not provide any funds to NGOs for any 
activities.  NGOs are funded by international or private 
donors.  However, various ministries have provided 
facilities and other services to NGOs to conduct TIP 
training of government workers.  In one case, the Public 
Ministry provided conference facilities and paid per diem 
and travel expenses for 1389 government officials to 
participate in TIP-awareness training funded by a G/TIP 
grant in 13 cities. 
 
¶C.  The only referral process for victims occurs when they 
end up in a MIMDES shelter.  Law enforcement officials must 
refer victims to the shelter in order for them to make use 
of the services.  MIMDES produced a Procedures Guide to 
assist police in handling TIP victims.  An additional 
problem that victims encounter in this stage is that 
without a national ID card the PNP cannot legally refer the 
victim to a shelter.  The lack of proper identification 
also makes it difficult to establish a database of victims 
of trafficking in persons. When police raid brothels and 
nightclubs, they are unable to determine which girls are 
underage and which are not. 
 
     The GOP will have a formal system for identifying TIP 
victims when Law 28950 is implemented.  The implementing 
legislation is now being drafted by the MSC (see Para 4, 
Section A for more details).  The newly implemented RETA 
computerized case-tracking system will also assist in 
identifying TIP victims as well as the traffickers (Ref C). 
 
¶D.  Normally, victims are not advised of their rights and 
are not provided medical treatment.  With the vast majority 
of the victims, the police try to identify the victims, but 
since most have no identity papers, they are released. 
Some make their way to the MIMDES Emergency Centers where 
they receive assistance, but many underage prostitutes 
return to the brothels where they will receive shelter and 
food.  Law 28950 mandates that systems and protocols be 
created to protect and care for victims.  TIP victims are 
not detained, treated as criminals, jailed, or deported. 
Victims are not fined. 
 
¶E.  Currently, legal assistance to a victim of trafficking 
is almost nonexistent.  The GOP does not support any 
programs that encourage victim participation in the 
investigation or prosecution of the trafficker.  Many times 
victims cannot afford the legal representation necessary to 
confront the traffickers.  There is no legal impediment to 
victims' seeking legal redress.  Filing a civil lawsuit in 
the Peruvian legal system is an expensive and lengthy 
undertaking.  A victim can obtain other employment pending 
trial proceedings, but may not leave the country without 
permission from the court.  Law 28950 and 28251 require 
victim restitution. 
 
     While Law 28950 addresses these TIP issues, the Garcia 
Administration recognizes that the entire Peruvian legal 
system is in serious need of reform.  Judicial reform is a 
highly political and contentious issue that may take years 
to resolve. 
 
¶F.  Law 28950 and Law 27378 mandate protection of victims, 
informers, witnesses, expert witnesses, and their families. 
At a minimum, the laws provide for the payment of 
repatriation, lodging, medical, psychological, and legal 
assistance as well as assistance in re-adapting to family 
and society.  There are also provisions for witness 
protection, e.g., new identities, safe houses, police 
protection, and new jobs.  In practice, these measures have 
not yet been implemented or enforced.  As a general rule, 
the GOP does not provide protection to victims or 
witnesses.  The PNP has a program by which co-conspirators 
or co-defendants can receive protection.  Informants 
receive limited protection.  Child victims would be placed 
in shelters run by the GOP, charities, or NGOs. 
 
     MIMDES's National Project against Sexual and Domestic 
Violence supports a number of programs, some of which are 
TIP-related.  MIMDES runs 42 Women's Emergency Centers, 
which focus on the legal, psychological, and medical 
problems facing women and children who are victims of 
domestic violence.  These resources are now also being used 
to protect TIP victims.  The National Institute for Infant 
and Child Welfare (INABIF) also has a live-in center for 
underage TIP victims in Callao, administered by the Sisters 
of Adoration.  This center has a capacity of 60 adolescent 
females and 15 infants of the adolescents. 
 
¶G.  MIMDES and the Public Ministry have both worked closely 
with NGOs to conduct awareness-raising sessions and held 
workshops for law enforcement officials on the new TIP law 
and the 2004 law on sexual exploitation (Law 28251).  The 
NGO, Action for the Children, provides training to police 
officers and to teachers to help them recognize TIP and to 
provide resources on where to refer victims.  As part of a 
G/TIP grant, the NGO OPCION coordinated with the Public 
Ministry to train 1389 professionals in 13 cities. 
 
     The Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) has a program to 
provide assistance to Peruvians who are indigent or require 
special care abroad.  All Peruvian embassies and consulates 
provide a 24/7 emergency phone line.  The embassies and 
consulates are also required to maintain referral 
relationships with care centers in their jurisdictions. 
The MFA has established a toll-free help line for their 
citizens in the United States that connects to the MFA 
Office of Peruvian Rights in Lima (1-800-535-3953, Monday- 
Friday from 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Lima time). 
 
¶H.  The MFA will provide assistance to victims who wish to 
be repatriated.  The repatriated victims would be given the 
same protections as domestic victims, according to Law 
¶28950. 
 
¶I.  Post has identified 14 NGOs and international 
organizations in Peru that work in some way on TIP-related 
issues.  The NGOs and international organizations below 
work closely with the GOP on TIP and often attend MSC 
meetings.  The GOP does not have a specific budget for TIP 
issues and does not give financial support to any NGOs. The 
lack of TIP funding by the GOP should not be construed as 
lack of commitment to combating TIP.  The GOP has 
demonstrated its commitment to TIP by providing significant 
resources for training officials and making use of its 
existing programs to support anti-TIP efforts (see Para 2, 
Section C). 
 
     Below are the 8 NGOs that work with TIP victims. 
 
     -- Action for the Children (Accion por los Ninos): 
provides training for all types of GOP officials, community 
anti-TIP mobilization campaigns, and temporary shelter for 
victims. 
 
     -- Save the Children - Sweden: provides training for 
all types of GOP officials, focuses on the sexual and labor 
exploitation of children and adolescents. 
 
     -- The El Pozo Movement (Movimiento El Pozo): searches 
out and identifies sexually exploited or abused women and 
children; provides guidance counseling and temporary 
shelter for victims. 
 
     -- Flora Tristan Center (Centro de la Mujer Peruana 
Flora Tristan): searches out and identifies sexually 
exploited or abused women and children; provides guidance 
counseling and temporary shelter for victims. 
 
     -- Sisters of Adoration (Hermanas Adoratrices - AKA 
the Order of the Sisters of Adoration, Slaves of the 
Blessed Sacrament and of Charity): provides long-term 
shelter and rehabilitation services for female victims of 
commercial sexual exploitation of minors. 
 
     -- Institute for the Study of Children and the Family 
(Instituto de Estudios por la Infancia y la Familia): 
provides training for all types of GOP officials, focuses 
on the trafficking of children and adolescents for sexual 
exploitation, also child sex tourism and border trafficking 
of children. 
 
     -- Human and Social Capital Alternative (Capital 
Humano y Social - Alternativo): provides training for law 
enforcement officials, designed the computerized case- 
tracking system for TIP and trained police in its use; 
implementation and training continue with close cooperation 
from the Ministry of Interior and the PNP. 
 
     -- OPCION (Corporacion Peruana para la Prevencion de 
la Problematica de las Drogas y la Ninez en Alto Riesgo 
Social): works with Public Ministry to educate prosecutors 
and other government officials about TIP and how to 
implement the TIP laws. 
 
     Post has identified 6 international NGOs and 
organizations in Peru that work in some way on TIP-related 
issues.  Post has heard no reports from these organizations 
about lack of cooperation of the local authorities. 
 
     -- International Office of Migration (IOM): Supports 
and/or participates in TIP workshops/training sessions; is 
assisting the GOP's MSC to produce the National Plan of 
Action for TIP; funds the toll-free hotline run by the 
Ministry of the Interior. 
 
     -- United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF): Provides 
technical assistance and support for training on combating 
the sexual exploitation of children and adolescents-- 
prevention, public education, and rehabilitation of the 
victims. 
 
     -- International Labor Organization (ILO): Provides 
technical assistance and support for training regarding 
labor exploitation. 
 
     -- United Nations Office of Drugs and Crime (UNODC): 
Provides technical assistance and financial support for 
training on TIP issues. 
 
     -- Belgian aid agency: Supports the Ministry of 
Interior initiative to train the PNP and Immigration 
officials to identify TIP and to map the routes taken by 
traffickers in 4 regions of Peru (Loreto, Madre de Dios, 
Cusco, and Lima). 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Nomination of Heroes and Best Practices 
---------------------------------------- 

¶6. (U)  The Embassy is not making any nominations for 
Heroes. 
 
¶7. (U)  The Embassy is not making any nominations for Best 
Practices. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Point of Contact and Hours of Preparation 
-------------------------------------------- 

¶8. (U)  Point of Contact is: 
     -- Michael Trulson, NAS Program Officer; telephone: 
(511) 618-2689, Fax (511) 618-2162; email: 
trulsonmc@state.gov 
 
¶9. (U)  Hours spent in preparation of this report: 
    -- NAS Director (FE-OC): 1 hour 
    -- NAS Deputy Director (FS-1): 1 hour 
    -- NAS Program Officer (FS-2): 60 hours 
    -- Political Officer (FS-2): 2 hours 
    -- USAID Officer (FS-3): 2 hours 
    -- USAID Program Assistant (LES-9): 12 hours 
    -- NAS Program Assistant (LES-10): 15 hours 
 
STRUBLE