09KABUL4120
ANTI-CORRUPTION CONFERENCE CALLS FOR QUALIFIED PUBLIC
Tue Dec 22 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBUL #4120/01 3560435
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 220435Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 4283UNCLAS KABUL 004120 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SRAP STAFF AND SCA/A 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KCOR KJUS EAID AF
SUBJECT: ANTI-CORRUPTION CONFERENCE CALLS FOR QUALIFIED PUBLIC 
SERVANTS AND STREAMLINED PROCEDURES 
 
¶1. (U) Summary:  President Karzai opened the National 
Anti-Corruption Conference December 15-17, 2009, before 250 
attendees that included parliamentarians, academicians, media and 
diplomatic representatives.  He invoked national pride to fight 
against the image of being one of the most corrupt countries in the 
world. Referring to daily accusations of corruption against 
government officials, he said whether the propaganda is right or 
wrong, it is the Afghan people's responsibility to stamp out 
corruption in Afghanistan.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) President Karzai spoke at the opening session of the National 
Anti-Corruption Conference December 15, 2009.  To the more than 250 
attendees, including parliamentarians, academicians, media and 
diplomatic representatives in attendance, Karzai invoked national 
pride to fight against the image of being one of the most corrupt 
countries in the world.  He called for realistic expectations of 
what can be accomplished, warning that corruption won't be 
eliminated in one day or one year.  He said actions rather than 
slogans are needed for the fight.  Karzai tasked the conference 
participants to discuss ideas, to exchange views with each other to 
develop realistic, practical measures to produce results in 
eliminating corruption. 
 
Simplify bureaucracy to fight corruption 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (U) Pointing to unnecessary bureaucracy as one of the sources of 
corruption, Karzai said simplifying government procedures and 
regulations would reduce bureaucracy which is a primary source of 
corruption.  He used the example of the driver's license application 
process which requires 25 steps, each its own opportunity for 
corruption.  Karzai suggested that streamlining procedures to 
require driver's license applicants visit only one office rather 
than many will not only simplify the process and improve efficiency 
but also reduce opportunities for corruption.  Karzai cited the 
United Kingdom, India, and Singapore as examples of countries where 
unnecessary bureaucratic steps and the need for political 
connections for licensing or taxes have been eliminated. 
 
Service for the public not personal gain 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Addressing public salaries, Karzai suggested that many 
Afghan government employees are getting rich in one or two years. 
With salaries on average of 100 USD per month, he said there should 
be no way they should have the means to travel abroad, buy property, 
a house, car or even a bicycle, and yet they do.  Observing that 
even the President of Afghanistan could not afford to travel abroad 
without special government allowances, he disclosed that he had 
completed his asset declaration which indicated he had $10,000 - 
$15,000 USD in a German bank account.  Karzai challenged ministers 
and deputies, even parliamentarians to disclose their assets and 
financing of their property.  Anyone expecting to work in the Afghan 
government, he said, should do so to serve the people not to get 
rich.  He indicated that money can be earned through business, but 
government employment should not be the source of personal gain. 
 
Foreign Money Brings Foreign Influence 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (U) Turning to foreign influence as another source of corruption, 
Karzai called for an end of foreigners "secretly" paying government 
employees and providing them with vehicles without informing the 
government.  Without citing any actual examples, he did suggest that 
these payments weaken the government, leads to corruption and 
establishes a parallel government within the government.  Declaring 
that there is only one source of power and administration, he called 
upon Afghanistan's foreign friends to end this problem.  (Note:  The 
United States and the international community fund salaries and 
supplements for Afghan government employees through a transparent, 
basket fund, but the President's statement do not appear to be 
asking that this support end.)   Karzai called for a meritocracy to 
de-politicize the process of hiring and promoting employees in the 
Afghan government.  He said that political affiliations should not 
matter, and the government's administration and civil service should 
be immune from political intervention.  Afghan government hiring and 
promotion practices need to follow international norms and 
standards, because Afghan employees, including the president should 
be in the "service of all." 
 
Avoid corrupting the anti-corruption fight 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶6. (U) As he turned to local politics, Karzai cautioned that the 
fight against corruption should not turn into corruption itself. 
Referring to Kabul Mayor Abdul Ahad Sahebi who was recently 
convicted of corruption and sentenced to four years in jail, then 
subsequently released pending his appeal, Karzai called him "clean," 
an honest person who may have been unjustly accused.  He challenged 
the Attorney General's office to investigate whether the Mayor was 
 
 
convicted upon false charges, but Karzai added, if the mayor was 
rightfully convicted, then he "should spend four years in jail." 
Karzai admitted that everyone in government has shortcomings, from 
the president to low-profile government employees, but the fight 
against corruption should not defame respectable individuals. 
 
¶7. (U) Referring to government agencies charged with oversight and 
reform, he said they should be apolitical.  He said the people 
should have the truth about the alleged fraud in the recent 
elections from a thorough investigation, regardless of how long it 
will take.  The President concluded with the suggestion that the 
conference be an annual event to work out problems and "our future" 
together. 
 
Rule of Law and Public Outreach 
------------------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) The Attorney General and the Acting Supreme Court Chief 
Justice Bahuddin Baha reiterated Karzai's remarks.  Baha reminded 
the audience that the rule of law governs Afghanistan and that the 
conference participants had an important role in developing ways to 
combat corruption.  He advised law enforcement to abide by and 
implement court decisions.  The Attorney General compared the fight 
against corruption to removing a wall between the people and the 
government, and that government offices, even his, need to 
communicate more with the public.  To accomplish this, he 
established the AG's media unit to provide the public with 
information, helping them understand the legal process and reassure 
them of their safety and security. 
 
Audience Reaction and Dissent 
----------------------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) The audience showed little enthusiasm for the President's 
address; lightly applauding the speech only three times during, 
including when he switched from Pashto to Dari.  Some laughed when 
he said he was worth only $10,000 - 15,000. 
Following Karzai, one of the Directors from the High Office of 
Oversight received resounding applause when he all but directly 
contradicted the President regarding Mayor of Kabul. (Comment: If 
freely expressing different opinions advances an exchange of ideas 
among conference participants, then the opening session moved 
anti-corruption efforts one step in the right direction.  End 
Comment.) 
 
RICCIARDONE