09USUNNEWYORK239
SPANISH PERMREP PAYS INTRODUCTORY CALL ON
Wed Mar 11 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO5821
OO RUEHAG RUEHAST RUEHDA RUEHDBU RUEHDF RUEHFL RUEHIK RUEHKW RUEHLA
RUEHLN RUEHLZ RUEHNP RUEHPOD RUEHROV RUEHSK RUEHSR RUEHTRO RUEHVK
RUEHYG
DE RUCNDT #0239/01 0700015
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 110015Z MAR 09
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6047
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 USUN NEW YORK 000239 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV MINURSO SP
SUBJECT: SPANISH PERMREP PAYS INTRODUCTORY CALL ON 
AMBASSADOR RICE 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY. Spanish Permrep Juan Antonio 
Yanez-Barnuevo reviewed Spain's UN priorities in a March 9 
introductory meeting with Ambassador Rice.  He observed that 
the Second Forum of the Alliance of Civilizations set to take 
place in Istanbul on April 6-7 would coincide with President 
Obama's trip to Europe, and he hoped that President Obama 
would be able to attend the Forum.  Ambassador Yanez-Barnuevo 
welcomed the prospect of United States participation in the 
Human Rights Council, and said also that Spain would be a 
candidate for the HRC in 2010.  He pledged Spanish support 
for the SYG's Personal Envoy for the Western Sahara, 
Christopher Ross, and hoped that Ross would be able to make 
progress in relations not only between Morocco and Polisario, 
but also between Morocco and Algeria.  He expressed 
satisfaction with the High-Level Meeting on Food Security for 
All that had taken place in Madrid in late January, but he 
said the disparate organizations working the issue would need 
to present an attractive package in order to attract leaders 
to a Food Summit in Autumn 2009, as had been proposed by FAO 
Director-General Diouf at the Madrid meeting.  The Spanish 
Permrep also described Spain's efforts, as a co-chair of the 
General Assembly's system-wide coherence effort, to build 
consensus around a new UN gender architecture.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Spanish Permrep Juan Antonia Yanez-Barnuevo paid an 
introductory call on Ambassador Rice on March 9, 2009 and 
outlined his UN priorities.  At the outset, Yanez-Barnuevo, 
delivered a letter from the Foreign Minister of Spain, Miguel 
Angel Moratinos, seeking the participation of the United 
States in the Second Forum of the Alliance of Civilizations 
to be held in Istanbul on April 6-7.  Yanez-Barnuevo told 
Rice he was happy to hear that President Obama would be 
visiting Turkey as part of his early April European trip, and 
said he hoped that the President would consider attending the 
Forum. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Yanez-Barnuevo also offered his support for the new 
UN Personal Envoy of the SYG for Western Sahara, Christopher 
Ross, who had returned to New York after a trip to the 
region.  Yanez Barnuevo hoped that Ross' good-offices could 
"break the log-jam" in the negotiations over the Western 
Sahara. He thought Ross could usefully help to build 
confidence between Morocco and the Polisario, but also should 
try to further the bilateral relationship between Morocco and 
Algeria outside the context of Western Sahara's status. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Turning to the High-Level Meeting on Food Security 
for All held in Madrid on January 26-27, 2009, Yanez-Barnuevo 
expressed satisfaction that it had succeeded in creating a 
task force that included the whole UN system together with 
NGOs and private entities, and that the U.S. had decided to 
join the effort as well.  Commenting on the proposal by the 
Director-General of the Food and Agriculture Organization for 
a food summit in Fall, 2009, Yanez-Barnuevo acknowledged that 
the task force needed to be ready with a package of proposals 
that would attract leaders.  He did not know if the EU had 
taken a position on the proposed summit. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Yanez-Barnuevo acknowledged the United States' 
review of its engagement in the Human Rights Council, and 
said Spain would like to see the U.S. in the council.  He 
noted that Spain, which lost a 2008 bid for one of two seats 
by one vote to the United Kingdom and France, was running 
again for a seat in 2010, but that so far there were only two 
announced candidates for the two seats. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Ambassador Yanez-Barnuevo also outlined Spain's 
efforts, as a co-chair of the General Assembly's system-wide 
coherence initiative, to create a new "gender architecture" 
in the UN from the many disparate offices and agencies that 
currently address gender issues.  Ambassador Rice expressed 
support for this effort and said reforming the UN's gender 
office would be an early priority of hers.  Referring to an 
ongoing discussion among member states about whether to 
create the new gender office within the Secretariat or 
whether to make it an autonomous fund or program (for 
example, like UNICEF or UNDP), Rice asked Yanez-Barnuevo for 
his views on a "composite entity", that would contain 
elements of both options.  Yanez-Barnuevo said a composite 
entity would need have both operational and normative 
pillars.  He thought the operational pillar could be in the 
mold of UNIFEM, which is working well in the field.  It would 
need to retain sufficient autonomy, flexibility and 
accountability to do what needs to be done in the field. 
Yanez-Barnuevo expressed some frustration by efforts of some 
GA members from the G-77 to "put the brakes on" reform of the 
gender architecture, by tying it with other issues (e.g., 
Security Council Reform).  He thought that tying issues 
together was "a recipe for paralysis" in the system-wide 
coherence effort. 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000239  002 OF 002 
 
 
Rice