09SANJOSE54
COSTA RICA: MINOR DEMONSTRATIONS PROTEST
Thu Jan 29 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy San Jose
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHSJ #0054/01 0291436
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 291436Z JAN 09
FM AMEMBASSY SAN JOSE
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0447
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SAN JOSE 000054 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN, DS/IP/WHA, and DS/TIA/ITA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC CS KPAL PGOV PREL XF
SUBJECT: COSTA RICA: MINOR DEMONSTRATIONS PROTEST 
LATEST GAZA VIOLENCE 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: The Costa Rican reaction to the 
recent violence in Gaza was limited to small 
demonstrations in front of the Israeli embassy (on 
January 9) and the U.S. Chancery (on January 20). 
Although the fighting drew heavy (and mostly anti- 
Israeli) coverage in the local media, the NGO and MFA 
reactions were more muted (and more even-handed).  The 
small, but well-amplified protest on Inauguration Day 
struck us as an attempt to find new relevance by a 
nearly-defunct splinter party and the local 
Palestinian community.  The two demonstrations were in 
keeping with the Tico tendency to protest domestic 
developments (e.g., CAFTA) more vigorously than 
international events, but they highlight the extent of 
the concern about the IDF incursion into Gaza, even in 
out-of-the-way Costa Rica.  END SUMMARY. 
 
LITTLE, LATE AND LOUD 
--------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) On January 20, a group of approximately 50 
people peacefully parked themselves in front of 
Embassy San Jose to protest the (by then ended) 
violence in Gaza.  The RSO had been notified by host 
country security services and all appropriate measures 
were in place, albeit unnecessary for the small and 
peaceful event.  The organizers, the Solidarity 
Committee with the People of Palestine, appeared to 
have had obtained permission to demonstrate. 
 
¶3. (U) The group remained in front of the Embassy for 
nearly two hours in the late afternoon, at times 
giving speeches over a loud speaker system and 
chanting in support of Palestine and against Israel. 
The protestors seemed a little confused; they 
criticized both the (by then out of office) Bush and 
incoming Obama administrations.  The mellow 
participants waved flags of the PLO and the virtually- 
defunct Workers' Revolutionary Party (PRT) of Costa 
Rica; a few faded anti-CAFTA stickers were in evidence 
as well. 
 
¶4. (U) The protest followed a larger (and more timely) 
gathering in front of the Israeli embassy in downtown 
San Jose on January 9.  On that date, over 200 people 
gathered to burn the Israeli flag, paint graffiti on 
nearby buildings, wave placards and call for a "free 
Palestine."  The protestors also called on President 
Arias to break diplomatic relations with Israel. 
Unlike the small event in front of the U.S. Embassy, 
the event on January 9 drew some media coverage. 
 
HR COMMISSION, MFA ISSUE STATEMENTS 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (U) Although the latest round of Gaza fighting drew 
heavy (and mostly anti-Israeli) coverage in the local 
media, the NGO and MFA reactions were more muted (and 
more even-handed).  The Costa Rican International 
Human Rights Commission, for example, issued a 
statement on January 8 expressing "profound concern" 
about the violence, and in particular about the "grave 
humanitarian impact" on the people of Gaza.  The 
Commission called for both sides to end hostilities, 
for humanitarian assistance to flow again immediately, 
and for a return to dialogue and the search for a 
peaceful solution. 
 
¶6. (U) The Commission's statement followed (and 
echoed) the MFA's release of January 5, which 
similarly called for an immediate end to the 
hostilities, blamed both sides for the violence, 
insisted on the immediate resumption of international 
humanitarian assistance, insisted also on a return to 
dialogue, and called for "quick and decisive" action 
by the UNSC (as a Council member).  The MFA's 
statement (the only official GOCR reaction to the 
violence) concluded that Israeli-Palestinian peace 
would only come from a political, two-state solution. 
(Full text emailed to WHA/CEN.) 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) The well-amplified protest on Inauguration 
Day struck us as an attempt to find new relevance by a 
nearly-defunct splinter party and a few members of the 
very small Palestinian community here.  This second 
event seemed almost an afterthought to the "main" 
 
protest, which targeted the Israeli embassy earlier, 
but even that was not significant.  Both 
demonstrations were in keeping with the Tico tendency 
to protest domestic developments (e.g., CAFTA) more 
vigorously than international events, but they 
highlight the extent of the concern about the IDF 
incursion into Gaza, even here in out-of-the-way Costa 
Rica.  We were pleased the MFA statement struck a 
balanced tone.  Given Costa Rica's recognition of 
Palestine in 2008 (and the regional Palestinian 
ambassador - the Permrep in New York - visiting to 
present his credentials on January 19), we half- 
expected more criticism of Israel. 
 
CIANCHETTE