05ANKARA6426
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue Oct 25 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 ANKARA 006426 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, OCTOBER 24, 2005 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Papadopoulos Expects New UN Initiative on Cyprus - Vatan 
NATO to Help Earthquake Victims in Kashmir - Hurriyet 
Turkey to Send 150 Million USD to Pakistan - Hurriyet 10/22 
UN Hariri Report Corners Assad - Milliyet 10/22 
Sanctions against Damascus at Doorstep - Milliyet 10/23 
Saddam's Lawyer Killed in Iraq - Sabah 10/22 
Police Disperse Opposition Rally in Baku - Milliyet 
US to Set Up Three Bases in Romania - Star 
Tough Week for President Bush - Milliyet 
DeLay Briefly Detained in Houston - Sabah 1022 
Avian Flu Spreads to Britain - Vatan 10/23 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Papadopoulos Expects New UN Cyprus  Initiative - Radikal 
Barzani Visits US - Yeni Safak 
US, UK Step Up Pressure against Syria - Zaman 
45 Percent of Iraqis Support Insurgent Attacks - Zaman 
No Support for Occupation Forces in Iraq - Cumhuriyet 
Iraqis Approve Insurgent Attacks against Coalition - Radikal 
Greek Support to Turkey's EU Bid Increases - Radikal 10/23 
Turkish Investors Worried about Sanctions on Syria - Zaman 
10/23 
Wilma Strikes Mexico: 6 Killed - Yeni Safak 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
NSC Convenes Today:  Turkey's National Security Council 
(NSC) will convene today to discuss the draft National 
Security Policy Document, which outlines Turkey's internal 
and foreign security strategies, Monday papers report.  The 
draft document claims that some parties and NGOs in Turkey 
give logistical support to the outlawed PKK as part of a 
campaign aimed at legitimization of the terrorist 
organization.  The NSC will also discuss domestic security 
threats such as fundamentalism, leftist extremism, and 
missionary activities. 
 
TGS Terror Briefing for Military Attaches:  The Turkish 
General Staff (TGS) gave a `terror briefing' to foreign 
military attaches in Ankara in which the activities of the 
PKK were explained in detail, "Milliyet" reported on 
Saturday.  PKK attacks have claimed 1,007 lives since June 
Â¶2004.  The PKK earns 600 million USD annually from narcotics 
trafficking, and has established affiliate organizations in 
30 countries, mainly in Europe, TGS told the military 
attaches.  The TGS also criticized the US for taking no 
measures against the PKK in northern Iraq, and called on the 
Iraqi government to prevent terrorist infiltration into 
Turkey. 
 
Turkey Steps up Pressure for Closure of Mahmur Camp:  Turkey 
is putting pressure on the US to close the Mahmur Camp in 
northern Iraq, the all-news channel NTV reported on Friday. 
The two countries are busy discussing formulas for the 
removal of PKK elements from Mahmur, where civilians are 
also settled.  The question of where the thousands of 
refugees would be relocated if Mahmur were closed worries 
both Turkish and American officials.  The UN High Commission 
for Refugees is opposed to a military operation at the camp: 
`If there are elements that would disturb the civilian 
character of the camp, then these should be eliminated in 
cooperation with the UN, without violating international 
law.'  Turkey did not sign the agreement reached in 2004 for 
the return of  refugees from Mahmur Camp, where over 10,000 
Turkish Kurds have been living, because Ankara was unable to 
get the guarantees it wanted from the United States. 
Americans Allegedly Meet with the PKK:  An American 
delegation advised the PKK to lay down its arms at an 
October 4 meeting in the Kandil Mountains, Saturday's 
"Zaman" claims.  Cemil Bayik, a leading figure in the PKK, 
reportedly told the unnamed Americans that the PKK was 
willing to give up its weapons if their group is recognized 
as a political party and their members in prisons are 
released.  American officials promised to support the PKK 
activities in the political arena if PKK militants agree to 
lay down their arms, "Zaman" claims. 
 
Talabani Interview with The New Anatolian:  The following 
are excerpts from responses by Iraqi President Jalal 
Talabani in an interview with the English-language daily 
"The New Anatolian" that appeared on Monday: 
 
`Iraq's constitution guarantees federation rights for Iraqi 
Kurdistan, and also guarantees the rights of the other 
governorates in Iraq.  The referendum was like a battle 
against terrorism.  The conservatives called for a boycott 
and tried to prevent people from voting, but a great 
majority participated in the referendum.  Compared to other 
countries like Lebanon and Egypt, the participation was much 
higher.' 
 
 `This is the first time in history that the President of 
the United States is inviting the President of the Kurdistan 
region.  This is a kind of recognition of the identity of 
Iraqi Kurdistan by the US within the Iraq framework.  I 
think the US will advise the Kurds to be more mindful of the 
unity of Iraq.  They will encourage the Kurds to remain 
faithful to democracy and oppose all kinds of extremism, 
including fundamentalism and extreme nationalism.' 
 
 `It is possible to bring down the PKK from the mountains if 
there is a general amnesty in Turkey.  It will also be 
helpful if there is some kind of a cooperation between 
Turkey, the Iraqi government, the PUK and the KDP on this 
issue.  It will be impossible to solve the issue through 
force.  The Iraqi army is not yet capable of doing that.  If 
we push the PKK too far, they may cooperate with terrorists 
in Iraq like al-Qaida, Ansar al-Islam and Zarqawi.  We think 
a political solution is the best way to end their so-called 
armed struggle.' 
 
`I think the Americans will raise the PKK issue during the 
Barzani visit to Washington.  The Americans are very much 
concerned about the PKK presence in Iraq and want to solve 
this problem.  They are taking Turkish demands very 
seriously and are raising the issue with us at every 
occasion.' 
 
 `We can turn Kirkuk into a city of brotherhood among Kurds, 
Turkmen, and Arabs, who have always lived there.  The future 
of Kirkuk will be decided according to article 58 of the 
constitution.  This means that after two years we will ask 
the people of Kirkuk what they want.  If they want to become 
part of the Kurdish federation, they are welcome.' 
 
Talat to Visit US:  Turkish Cypriot leader Mehmet Ali Talat, 
due to meet with Secretary Rice and UNSG Annan in the US on 
October 28, will demand political equality for both sides in 
Cyprus, Monday papers report.  `Turkish Cypriot FM' Serdar 
Denktas said it would not be rational to expect sanctions 
against Turkish Cyprus be lifted immediately after the visit 
of `President' Talat to the United States next week. 
Denktas voiced hope for a settlement in Cyprus before Turkey 
joins the EU.  Meanwhile, Monday's "Vatan" reports that 
Talat lashed out at former `president' Rauf Denktas for 
turning Turkish Cyprus into a `banana republic' by actions 
such as arbitrarily issuing Turkish Cypriot passports to 
Turkish nationals. 
YOK-AKP Standoff:  Tensions between the Higher Education 
Board (YOK) and the ruling AK Party government are rising. 
University presidents went to the eastern province of Van 
over the weekend to display support to the rector of Yuzunci 
Yil University, Yucel Askin, who was jailed last week on 
claims of corruption.  YOK President Erdogan Tezic 
complained about the lack of a peaceful environment in 
universities across Turkey.  AKP lawmaker Ramazan Toprak 
accused Tezic of trying to block government attempts to 
change the law that regulates the YOK, and claimed that the 
Van rector was `an Armenian.'  Oppositon politicians and 
journalists promptly denounced Toprak's comment as racist. 
Dailies expect more tensions this week, when the AKP 
government submits to parliament a bill granting amnesty to 
academics who had been dismissed from universities for 
fundamentalist activities.  Mainstream papers see the bill 
as the government's retaliation to YOK for protesting the 
Askin case.  Meanwhile, Monday papers say that President 
Sezer has invited all 77 university rectors to the Turkish 
National Day reception at the presidential palace October 29 
in a show of support for Turkey's educational establishment 
against the AKP government. 
 
MFA on Nikiforos Military Exercise:  Turkey will `closely 
monitor' the Nikiforos military exercise to be held in the 
Mediterranean by the Greek Cypriots, Turkish Foreign 
Ministry (MFA) Spokesman Namik Tan said on Friday, adding 
that `assessments will be made accordingly.'  Tan said that 
Ankara considered the exercise as an action that will hinder 
efforts for stability and cooperation in the region. 
 
Turkish Businessmen Concerned About Possible Sanctions 
against Syria:  Turkish businessmen investing in Syria are 
worried about possible international sanctions against 
Damascus, Sunday's "Zaman" reports.  The Gaziantep Chamber 
of Commerce drew attention to improving political and 
economic ties between Turkey and Syria, saying that Syria is 
important for Turkey's attempts to improve ties with Arab 
countries.  The Southeast Anatolian Federation of 
Businessmen said that industrialists from Gaziantep had been 
preparing for new investments in Syria, but added that they 
will follow the policies of the Turkish Foreign Ministry. 
 
Erdogan Returns from Earthquake-Ravaged Pakistan:  On 
Sunday, Prime Minister Erdogan said after returning form 
earthquake-stricken Pakistan that Turkey will help in the 
construction of 5,000 homes in the disaster zone.  `The 
earthquake claimed over 50,000 lives in Pakistan.  Turkey 
has sent 15 cargo planes of humanitarian aid and will  send 
50,000 tons of flour and sugar to the region,' Erdogan said. 
The Prime Minister pledged 150 million USD in disaster 
assistance during his visit to Pakistan last week. 
 
Poll: Majority of Greeks Believe Turkey Will Join EU: 
Turkish papers cite the Saturday edition of the 
"Kathimerini" daily reporting a public opinion survey, which 
showed that 46 percent of Greeks believe that Turkey's 
accession to the EU is in the interests of Greece, while 38 
percent disagree.  65 percent believe that Greek-Turkish 
relations will continue to improve.  60 percent of Greeks 
think that Turkey will succeed in joining the European bloc 
at the end of the negotiating process.  Greeks remainare 
pessimistic, however, that Turkey's membership in the EU 
will contribute to resolving the Cyprus problem. 
 
Poll: Iraqis Oppose Presence of Foreign Troops:  Monday 
dailies cite the British daily "Sunday Telegraph" as 
reporting an opinion poll indicating that 45 percent of 
Iraqis consider insurgent attacks against coalition forces 
as right, and that 65 percent oppose the presence of foreign 
troops in the country.  Less than one percent of those 
surveyed think that coalition forces came to Iraq to help 
provide security.  67 percent said they feel `less secure' 
after the occupation.  The nationwide survey reveals that 
American and British leaders have lost the battle for heart 
and minds in Iraq, according to the "Telegraph." 
 
Blasts Halt Iraqi Oil Flow to Turkey:  Four bomb blasts 
halted oil exports from northern Iraq to Turkey's 
Mediterranean port of Ceyhan and repairs could take up to a 
month, international wire services reported on Sunday.  The 
pipeline, which has the capacity to carry more than 1.5 
million barrels per day, has been closed for most of the 
post-invasion period.  The flows to a storage facility on 
the border had increased from 200,000 to 500,000 to 700,000 
barrels per day during the past week. 
 
Erdogan Due in Yemen:  Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan will 
travel to Sanaa, Yemen together with a large delegation of 
officials and businessmen on October 25 for a three-day 
official visit. 
 
`Best Western' to Increase Presence in Turkey:  A 
representative for the US-based Best Western hotel chain 
said over the weekend that the company plans to open several 
new hotels along Turkey's Mediterranean Coast.  Best Western 
also plans to move its headquarters for the Eastern 
Mediterranean region to Turkey from its present location in 
Israel. 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  Iraq; Syria 
 
"Black Clouds Over the White House" 
Ali Aslan observed from Washington in the Islamist- 
intellectual "Zaman" (10/24): "George Bush is certainly not 
the only US president who mixed foreign policy issues with 
domestic politics.  But the White House has experienced its 
most significant damage in domestic politics as a result of 
the Iraq occupation and the masterminds of this action 
within the administration.  Sources close to the 
administration continues to draw an optimistic picture of 
Iraq, saying that Iraq is going through an historic 
transition after democratic elections to end the tradition 
of dictatorship.  But objective observers do not see such a 
bright situation in Iraq, and view the current democratic 
structure as an artificial one.   . The Bush administration 
is having serious problems domestically.  Iraq seems to be 
the one and only `prestige project' for the Bush 
administration.  Therefore, reports of even minor setbacks 
in Iraq are becoming a colossal headache for the Bush 
administration.  This is one of reasons for the Bush 
administration's `no action' stance against the PKK, despite 
Ankara's warnings about the PKK presence in northern Iraq. 
The Americans are aware that winning Turkish hearts requires 
steps against the PKK.  But they are now very much 
preoccupied with winning the hearts of their own people." 
 
"The Syrian Regime Goes toward An End" 
Erdal Safak commented in the mass appeal "Sabah" (10/22): 
"The Hariri investigation report, along with the 
international consequences for the Damascus regime, will 
have a potential impact on Turkish-Syrian relations.  First, 
the report clearly documents that the assassination was 
carried out by high-level Syrian officials.  The US and 
France are prepared to take this issue to the Security 
Council, and will ask the UNSC to give Syria two options: 
either full cooperation on the Hariri issue, or total 
isolation. . If Assad elects to cooperate, the 40-year-old 
Baath regime in Damascus will come to an end, because Assad 
will not be able to cooperate with the UN if he is opposed 
by the Syrian intelligence service, the army, and high-rank 
Baath Party officials.  But if he declines to accept the 
international ultimatum, he will face severe challenges, 
both domestic and foreign. . The US seems to have taken a 
lesson from Iraq, and does not want to carry out a military 
operation against Syria.  The US will focus instead on 
moving the Damascus regime toward collapse by implementing 
full isolation, both diplomatic and economic." 
 
"A Blow from the UN to Damascus" 
Sami Kohen wrote in the mainstream daily "Milliyet" (10/22): 
"As expected, the UN report linked Syrian officials with the 
Hariri murder.  Of course, Syrian officials reject these 
allegations and accuse the UN inspectors of politicizing the 
issue.  This report will form the basis for UN action and 
shape the future stance of the US administration toward 
Syria.  The question is whether the US will be satisfied 
with the UN decision to blame those who are responsible for 
the assassination.  Or will the US take a step forward and 
pressure the UN to apply sanctions against Syria?  If some 
kind of sanctions come to the UN agenda, will Russia and 
China go along?  It is obvious that the US will use the 
report as an excuse to pressure Syria.  One of the possible 
means of pressure is a US military operation against Syria. 
Although Secretary Rice has said that `every option is on 
the table,' many observers believe that this is little more 
than a psychological pressure tactic, and that the US has no 
desire at the moment for another military operation.  We 
hope this is true.  If the more recent "Washington Post" 
analysis is correct, the US strategy on Syria is not to 
topple Assad, but to change his policy.  If the goal is to 
change Assad's policies through diplomatic channels, Turkey 
can play an active role that would be to everyone's 
benefit." 
 
MCELDOWNEY