05BAGHDAD4434
WORKING DINNER WITH BAGHDAD MAYOR AND
Thu Oct 27 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 004434 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 
NOT FOR INTERNET DISTRIBUTION 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN ELAB IZ
SUBJECT: WORKING DINNER WITH BAGHDAD MAYOR AND 
ACCOMPANYING DELEGATION 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: On October 26, 2005, IRMO Director 
Ambassador Daniel Speckhard, MG Robert Heine, BG 
O'Neill, Ferris Nesheiwat, LTC William Duddleston met 
with the Mayor of Baghdad, Saber Al-Esawi, and 
accompanying delegation, Amer Al-Saadi, Deputy Mayor 
for Managerial Affairs; Mohammad Amanuel, Deputy Mayor 
for Municipalities; and Naeem Ab'oub the Director 
General of Sadr City baladia/district, to discuss the 
reconstruction efforts and future plans for Baghdad. 
The Mayor outlined his immediate priorities and his 
long term vision for the city.  His immediate concerns 
are: 1) fighting corruption, 2) increasing the 
efficiency of the Mayoralty of Baghdad ("Amanat"), and 
3) solving the solid waste/trash problem in Baghdad. 
The Mayor emphasized the importance of close and 
continued cooperation between the US Embassy and the 
Amanat, and described a mechanism for such 
cooperation.  He described the financial situation of 
the Amanat and its need for support as there is little 
coming from independent revenue or from the Interim 
Iraqi Government (ITG).  He also outlined the Amanat's 
efforts to establish contacts and bilateral contacts 
with international donors.   He considers the next 
three months critical for his success as Mayor and 
would direct all the Amanat's energies and resources 
to accomplishing the three goals outlined above. End 
Summary. 
 
Close And Continued Cooperation Between US Embassy And 
The Amanat 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶2. (SBU) The Mayor suggested theestablshmen of 
join US-Aanat ommitte to e tasked with overseeing 
all the reconstruction efforts for the city of 
Baghdad, and the planning of any future projects. 
Such a committee, he argues, would prevent the current 
duplication of efforts by some reconstruction 
agencies, streamline the reconstruction process, and 
would allow for better supervision and quality control 
of the finalized project.  The local district and 
neighborhood councils, the Mayor emphasized, can be 
very effective in selecting projects and monitoring 
the progress of the contractors.  Alternatively, he 
submits, the USG risks not realizing the full 
potential of the enormous effort and funds, which he 
admits are being expended in the city. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Director Speckhard asked what the Mayor would 
recommend to assure that future reconstruction efforts 
be properly credited to the US people and the Mayor 
advised that better media coverage and handling is 
needed, but equally important is the need to tackle 
the immediate issue of trash accumulation and sewer 
collapses throughout the city so that the citizens can 
fell immediate tangible results. 
 
The Current Financial Situation Of The Amanat 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) The Mayor stated that the Amanat has but $12 
million for the remainder of the year, which allows 
for nothing but payment of salaries and other basic 
functions.  The current financial situation is not 
contusive to any developmental efforts by the Amanat. 
He requested the USG help in facilitating the 
requisition of funds from the ITG, which he said is 
not doing its part to support the city. 
 
¶5. (SBU) The Mayor described the unique position 
Baghdad has as a local government of its own and 
responsible for most of the essential services (water, 
sewer, solid waste, and roads) for its citizens, 
without any assistance from other ministries like the 
Ministry of Municipalities and Public Work.  Aid 
provided to those ministries, therefore, does not 
filter down to Baghdad. 
 
¶6. (SBU) The Mayor urged the USG to consider having a 
separate agenda and a dedicated office within the 
embassy to exclusively handle the city's 
reconstruction and infrastructure planning efforts, as 
they are unique to the city and independent from any 
such efforts done for the rest of the country.  The 
Mayor expressed his frustration that even though 25% 
of Iraq's population lives in Baghdad, some cities 
receive more funds from the ITG than it does. 
 
¶7. (SBU) He stated that $100 million were allocated to 
the city by the Cabinet but were cut in half by the 
Ministry of Finance, and the remaining half was 
forwarded to the Ministry of Planning, which in turn 
used it instead to finance unfinished projects for 
other ministries. 
 
¶8. (SBU) The Amanat is pursuing funding from 
international donors to augment the funding it 
receives from the USG and the ITG.  To that end the 
Mayor will be visiting Amman this week to hold 
discussions with the World Bank, the Japanese 
Government, and the United Nations.  He will be 
accompanied by Mr. Ferris Nesheiwat, IRMO Amanat 
Liaison Officer. 
 
The Road Ahead 
-------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) The Mayor indicated his intent to expend all 
the resources of the Amanat in the next two months 
month to resolve the problems of trash accumulation 
and sewer collapses across the city.  These two 
problems are considered by him to be the most obvious 
indication of the failure of the Amanat to deliver 
meaningful services to the city's population; 
therefore, he is determined to tackle them.  He plans 
to put the ITG in a situation where it is forced to 
recognize the need for additional financing to support 
the essential services of the city.  The current 
situation of maintaining the status quo is not 
acceptable by him. 
 
¶10. (SBU) the City is already taking the initiative in 
tackling the issue described in point 8 by taking over 
the trash collection and transfer process in the three 
of the eleven baladias/districts that comprise 
Baghdad.  The other eight baladias will continue to be 
served by the private contractor hired by the 3ID. 
The Mayor requested that the 3ID request the 
contractor to move all the resources it will save from 
the three baladias to the other eight it still runs so 
that better service is provided.  The City is to take 
over the collection process for the entire city by 
March 1, 2006. 
 
¶11. (SBU) Brigadier General O'Neill, who represented 
the 3ID in the meeting, supported the Amanat's move 
and expressed belief that the Amanat is the most 
qualified entity to handle this issue as it knows the 
city best. 
 
¶12. (SBU) All parties from the US side agreed that the 
Amanat should be more involved with the supervision 
and monitoring of the reconstruction efforts as it 
provides invaluable input through fist hand knowledge 
of the city's issues and needs, especially through the 
net work of the local district and neighborhood 
councils. 
 
¶13. (SBU) The Mayor emphasized that the USG is doing 
excellent work and he expressed appreciation for the 
efforts of all involved whether as civilians or 
uniformed. He requested our continued support and 
cooperation, because without it, he will not be 
successful in achieving his plans and ideas for the 
city of Baghdad.