05LIMA4487
PROGRAM REPORTING: SPEAKER "YOUTH PARTICIPATION IN
Mon Oct 17 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Lima
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS LIMA 004487 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR IIP/G/WHA (CBARONE), IIP/T/ES (GCHRISTISON), WHA/PDA 
(MDCONNERS/GADAMS/SLEBENS), WHA/PD (GGALLEGOS), WHA/AND 
(JMONSERRAT) 
 
E.O.12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP PE
SUBJECT: PROGRAM REPORTING: SPEAKER "YOUTH PARTICIPATION IN 
ELECTORAL PROCESSES"-- TRACKER 24820 
 
 
¶1.  Veronica de la Garza, former Executive Director of the Youth 
Vote Coalition, visited Lima under PAS auspices from October 3-6, 
2005 to conduct a workshop on the importance of youth 
participation to strengthen democratic processes.  The program, 
organized with the National Committee of Youth and a local NGO, 
sought to promote a culture of democracy by mobilizing and 
empowering youth to become active citizens, engage in political 
campaigns, and think critically about issues affecting their 
country. 
 
¶2.  During her stay in Lima, Ms. De la Garza participated in a 
two-day intensive workshop at a rural hotel, conversed with young 
professionals at a lunch hosted by ACAO, and was interviewed on 
youth and political participation in the United States by Radio 
Programas del Peru, RPP, Peru's leading radio national station 
(253,300 listeners per half hour.) 
 
PAS and the National Committee of Youth selected 53 Peruvian 
participants from all regions of the country based on their 
proven track records as community leaders and as representatives 
of local youth groups.  During the course of the conference, they 
formulated regional plans to involve youth in Peruvian political 
life, discussed national issues, and shared goals, ideas, 
strategies and tactics to encourage other young people to vote 
consciously during the upcoming presidential and municipal 
elections in Peru. 
 
¶3.  As a result of the event, the participants committed to 
collaborate on their regional plans to involve youth in Peruvian 
political life, to establish youth coalitions and to work 
together to make a difference in their communities.  Post's goal 
is to support worthwhile projects that have grown out of the 
conference and that seek to increase youth participation in the 
upcoming national elections in April 2006. 
 
¶4. U.S. support: Program was funded with FY05 I bucks. Our 
appreciation to IIP/T/DHR, Estelle Baird for her close 
coordination with post. 
 
STRUBLE