05MADRID3629
COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR ADOLFO A. FRANCO AND DAVID
Mon Oct 17 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Madrid
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

171520Z Oct 05UNCLAS MADRID 003629 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR USAID 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID OTRA SP
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR ADOLFO A. FRANCO AND DAVID 
MUTCHLER 
 
REF: A) STATE 188739 B) TELCON PRO-MUTCHLER 10-14-2005 
 
¶1.   Embassy welcomes and grants country clearance to Aldolfo 
¶A. Franco, Assistant Administrator, and David Mutchler, 
Senior Advisor for Cuba, to travel to Madrid, October 24-29, 
to attend the Cuba Conference sponsored by The University of 
Miami. 
 
¶2.    Embassy Points of contact are Jennifer Pro and Ken 
Forder in the Economic Section.  Jennifer can be reached at 
 34 91 587 2388, cell:  34 669 273 669 email:projk@state.gov. 
 Ken can be reached at  34 91 587 2385, cell:  34 650-622-420 
email: ForderK@state.gov. 
 
¶3.  Per telcon, Embassy Madrid (Ken Forder and Administration 
Section Expeditor Aurelio Sevillano) will pick up Mr. Franco 
and Mr. Mutchler from Barajas International Airport in Madrid 
on Tuesday, October 25th at 8:55 am. 
 
¶4.  Visitors are reminded that bearers of diplomatic and 
official passports coming to Spain an official business need 
to obtain a Spanish visa prior to arrival to Spain. 
 
¶5.  THREAT ASSESSMENT: 
 
In general, Spain is safe.  However, Madrid, Barcelona and 
other large cities in Spain --including resort/convention 
areas such as Benidorm-- attract a large number of criminals 
and pickpockets and frequent incidents of crime of 
opportunity against the unwary do occur.  Carry only 
essential items including a photocopy of your passport's 
photo page.  Visitors can protect themselves against crime by 
being street-smart, alert and aware of their surroundings. 
In the event you are victimized by crime, or experience any 
security-related incident, please contact the Embassy's 
Regional Security Office at 91-587-2550 or after hours at 
91-587-2355.  Official visitors to the Embassy in Madrid or 
the Consulate General in Barcelona are encouraged to receive 
a security briefing from the RSO office at their earliest 
convenience.  Additional information regarding safety and 
security in Spain is available on the U.S. Department of 
State's website (www.embusa.es). 
 
Travelers are encouraged to review the most recent Worldwide 
Caution issued by the Department of State. As the Department 
of State continues to develop information on any potential 
security threats to Americans overseas, it shares credible 
threat information through its Consular Information Program 
documents, available on the Internet at 
http://travel/state.gov.  In addition to information on the 
Internet, U.S. travelers can hear recorded information by 
calling the Department of State in Washington, D.C. at 
202-647-5225 from their touch-tone telephone, or receive 
information by automated telefax by dialing 202-647-3000 from 
their fax machine. 
AGUIRRE