05MANAMA1433
BAHRAIN SPECIAL IV PROPOSAL: "BRIDGES ACROSS FAITH
Mon Oct 03 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Manama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MANAMA 001433 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE for R (KHUGHES and DPOWELL), NEA/PPD (CWHITTLESEY), 
NEA/ARPI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO PREL PGOV PTER OEXC BA
SUBJECT: BAHRAIN SPECIAL IV PROPOSAL: "BRIDGES ACROSS FAITH 
AND CULTURE" 
 
Ref A: Manama 01292; Ref B: Smith/Hornbuckle email 9/30 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Embassy Manama proposes a special 
International Visitor program to send a delegation of five 
to six Bahraini religious leaders to the U.S. under the 
theme of "Building Bridges Across Faith and Culture." 
Efforts to engage regional Muslim leaders and encourage 
messages of tolerance, moderation and solidarity against 
extremist violence have found fertile ground in Bahrain.  In 
recent discussions, the Bahraini Ministry of Islamic Affairs 
requested USG support to help send a delegation of Bahraini 
clerics to the United States to discuss with American Muslim 
leaders how to encourage greater tolerance, moderation, and 
interfaith dialogue (Ref A).  This program will build on the 
foundation laid by a special Speaker program planned for 
Ramadan (October 18-19), when American Imam Yahya Hendi, of 
Georgetown University, visits Bahrain as a guest speaker of 
the Ministry.  We believe a special SCP International 
Visitor program would be an excellent follow-on project 
where greater and more focused dialogue can take place, 
offering Bahraini clerics a view of religious life in the 
United States, and help fulfill MPP goals in building mutual 
understanding, and forming linkages across cultures and 
faiths.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. In Ref B, posts were requested to provide proposals for 
supplemental funding from R in FY 06, and to include the 
following information. 
 
¶3. Funding Amount: $50,000 
 
¶4. Performance Goals:  Exchanges increase mutual 
understanding and build trust between Americans and 
Bahrainis. 
 
¶5. Intended audience:  Initial audience is Bahraini clerical 
community.  These leaders are among the most influential 
opinion-leaders in Bahrain, and have the potential to reach 
tens of thousands of people with a positive message about 
the United States, particularly as a country with shared 
respect for Islam, cultural and religious identity in 
general. 
 
¶6. What will the program accomplish?  The program will 
facilitate understanding and build lasting linkages between 
the Islamic and other religious communities in Bahrain and 
the U.S.  Dialogue between religious communities in Bahrain 
and the U.S. reinforces messages of tolerance, moderation, 
and shared values, and strengthens solidarity against 
violent extremism. 
 
¶7. Measure of effectiveness:  Amplification of statements by 
religious, political and civil society leaders against 
extremist violence and in favor of tolerance, moderation, 
and mutual understanding, measurable by monitoring of 
commentary, including Friday sermons, newspaper columns, and 
follow-on contact among participants and their U.S. 
contacts. 
 
¶8. Post thanks NEA/PPD and R for considering this proposal. 
 
MONROE