05MADRID3683
SPAIN COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR CALEB MCCARY
Fri Oct 21 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Madrid
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MADRID 003683 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OTRA SP
SUBJECT: SPAIN COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR CALEB MCCARY 
 
REF: SECSTATE 188816 
 
¶1.  Embassy welcomes and grants country clearance to Caleb 
Charles McCarry, Cuba Transition Coordinator, to travel to 
Madrid, Spain from October 23-27, 2005.  The purpose of this 
visit is to give a speech at a seminar regarding Cuba 
Transition Issues and meet with appropriate government 
officials. 
 
¶2.  Embassy point of contact for this visit will be Political 
Officer Rob Allison (TEL:  34-91-587-2393; FAX: 
34-91-587-2391; Email:  AllisonRS@state.gov). 
 
¶3.  Reservations have been made within per diem at Hotel 
Hesperia, Paseo de la Castellana, 57, Madrid (TEL: 
34-91-210-8800; FAX:  34-91-210-8899) confirmation number: 
¶2027662. 
 
¶4.  The Public Affairs Office has coordinated press and been 
in contact with Mr. McCarry's office. 
 
¶5.  Visitors are reminded that bearers of diplomatic and 
official passports coming to Spain on official business need 
to obtain a Spanish visa prior to arrival to Spain. 
 
¶6.  THREAT ASSESSMENT: 
 
In general, Spain is safe.  However, Madrid, Barcelona and 
other large cities in Spain--including resort/convention 
areas such as Benidorm--attract a large number of criminals 
and pickpockets and frequent incidents of crime of 
opportunity against the unwary do occur.  Carry only 
essential items including a photocopy of your passport's 
photo page.  Visitors can protect themselves against crime by 
being street-smart, alert and aware of their surroundings. 
In the event you are victimized by crime, or experience any 
security-related incident, please contact the Embassy's 
Regional Security Office at 91-587-2550 or after hours at 
91-587-2355.  Official visitors to the Embassy in Madrid or 
the Consulate General in Barcelona are encouraged to receive 
a security briefing from the RSO office at their earliest 
convenience.  Additional information regarding safety and 
security in Spain is available on the U.S. Department of 
State's website (www.embusa.es). 
 
Travelers are encouraged to review the most recent Worldwide 
Caution issued by the Department of State. As the Department 
of State continues to develop information on any potential 
security threats to Americans overseas, it shares credible 
threat information through its Consular Information Program 
documents, available on the Internet at 
http://travel/state.gov.  In addition to information on the 
Internet, U.S. travelers can hear recorded information by 
calling the Department of State in Washington, D.C. at 
202-647-5225 from their touch-tone telephone, or receive 
information by automated telefax by dialing 202-647-3000 from 
their fax machine. 
AGUIRRE