05WELLINGTON811
MEDIA PLAY:  NEW NZ FOREIGN MINISTER PLACES HIGH
Tue Oct 18 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS WELLINGTON 000811 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/PD-AGrimes, EAP/ANP-DRicci, EAP/P - 
KBailes 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO NZ
SUBJECT:  MEDIA PLAY:  NEW NZ FOREIGN MINISTER PLACES HIGH 
PRORITY ON REBUILDING US-NZ BILATERAL RELATIONSHIP 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: For the second day in a row newly-appointed 
Foreign Minister Winston Peters has publicly indicated that 
he places high priority on "rebuilding New Zealand's 
relationships with the United States."  END SUMMARY 
 
¶2. On the second day of the new Foreign Minister's term, the 
front-page of the country's highest circulation daily ("New 
Zealand Herald") carried an article entitled "Peters ready 
to Build US Bridges." The article was written by the 
newspaper's Assistant Editor, Fran O'Sullivan. Extracts 
follow. 
 
BEGIN TEXT: 
"Foreign Minister Winston Peters says he is prepared to 
tackle head-on the `big challenge' of rebuilding New 
Zealand's relationships with the United States. 
 
"His diplomatic skills will be put to the test early in the 
New Year when he is expected to lead moves to open 
discussions with the US about burying the 20-year-old 
dispute over nuclear ships. Departing US Ambassador Charles 
Swindells signaled in July that Washington wanted to move on 
and establish a new security, economic and trade framework 
to strengthen the relationship. 
 
"Mr. Peters said he could not make any detailed comments 
until he had been briefed by officials and consulted Prime 
Minister Helen Clark. 
 
"He may call on political colleagues such as former Trade 
Ministers Mike Moore (Labour) and Philip Burdon (National) 
to help push through his initiatives.. 
 
"The Foreign Minister also signaled he wanted to play a more 
active role in the South Pacific, where New Zealand's 
influence had been reduced since the region became a 
`battleground' for Chinese and Taiwanese influence.. 
 
"He also indicated he had his views on filling the plum US 
ambassadorship, which is up for grabs early next year. A 
raft of high-profile names -- including Governor-General 
Silvia Cartwright -- has been privately floated. 
 
"But Mr. Peters emphasized the job should be filled by 
someone with `diplomatic and trade skills,' saying that he 
could be prepared to support the appointment of a high- 
profile former politician who had the right credentials.. 
END TEXT 
 
¶3. On day one of in his new position Winston Peters was 
interviewed on Radio New Zealand's highly-influential 
flagship program, "Morning Report."  A partial transcript 
follows. 
 
BEGIN TRANSCRIPT: 
INTERVIEWER: In terms of foreign policy do we need closer 
relations with the United States? Do we need to go ahead 
with the free trade agreement with China, which this 
government appears committed to trying to get? 
 
FOREIGN MINISTER PETERS: Well, I think with respect to every 
country the closer your relationships with them, the better. 
And obviously if we have differences with other countries, 
we should try and sort them out and particularly when you 
are talking about old friends. It is important that you keep 
them, because in the case of the United States it is the 
world's biggest economy, but in the case of China we are a 
long way away from a free trade agreement. Right now I would 
think dealing with the protocols by way of agreement are 
important.  But I come back to the point that that is in the 
province, and it has been for a long time, of the Minister 
of Trade, not the Minister of Foreign Affairs. TRANSCRIPT 
ENDS. 
 
Regards, Burnett