07JAKARTA701
INDONESIA ANTI-TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS (TIP)
Mon Mar 12 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Jakarta
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHJA #0701/01 0710206
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 120206Z MAR 07
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3778
INFO RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI 0312
RUEHKL/AMEMBASSY KUALA LUMPUR 2290
RUEHKU/AMEMBASSY KUWAIT 0402
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 0537
RUEHUL/AMEMBASSY SEOUL 3992
RUEHGP/AMEMBASSY SINGAPORE 5857
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO 0380
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 3964
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 0507
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 2327
RUEHIN/AIT TAIPEI 1963
RUEAWJB/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDC
RUEAUSA/DEPT OF HHS WASHDC
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDCUNCLAS JAKARTA 000701 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, PRM, EAP/RSP 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD ASEC PREF ELAB
SUBJECT:  INDONESIA ANTI-TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS (TIP) 
REPORT, March 2005 to March 2006 (PART 4 OF 4) 
 
POLICE APPROACH TO INVESTIGATIONS 
--------------------------------- 
 
Update 
------ 
 
Beginning as early as 2001, the police established women's 
help desks (RPK) to protect women and child victims of 
violence, including trafficking, and also to aid in 
investigations of these crimes.  The police have steadily 
expanded the number of RPK, totaling 280 such desks as of 
February 2007. End update. 
 
Anti-trafficking NGOs report increasing levels of 
cooperation with police and prosecutors in some parts of 
eastern Indonesia.  East Java NGOs report a greater police 
awareness of human trafficking as a crime and increased 
sensitivity to victims and their needs during interviews. 
A good example of greater cooperation is the East Java 
ATTF, formed during 2006.  Its 26 members from around the 
province meet monthly to discuss human trafficking trends 
and best practices in victim assistance.  They also form 
anti-trafficking policy and are developing an anti- 
trafficking legislative agenda for submission to the 
provincial legislature.  The provincial government offices 
participating in the East Java ATTF are the Community 
Empowerment Board, the Regional Planning Development Board, 
the Health Office, the Manpower and Transmigration Office, 
East Java police, several government hospitals, the 
Immigration Office and the East Java Attorney GeneralQs 
Office. (Surabaya input) 
 
West Lombok anti-trafficking NGOs, on the other hand, 
report little change in local government and policeQs 
apathetic attitude toward the thousands of trafficking 
victims sourced from the province.  They implicate local 
government officials in actually running overseas 
employment agencies engaged in dubious employment practices 
while serving as local Manpower or Immigration officers. 
 
The Central Sulawesi Child Protection Agency (CSLPA) 
reports a rapidly growing trafficking problem in Palu that 
was only recently identified.  Central Sulawesi Police 
intercepted a boat carrying twenty-two 14 to 16 year old 
girls from East Java.  The police investigation uncovered a 
ring based in Surabaya moving several boatloads of girls 
per month to be indoctrinated at a brothel in Palu then 
trafficked to Kalimantan and eventually to Malaysia for 
employment as commercial sex workers.  The boat captain 
escaped and police eventually released the Palu brothel 
owner due to a lack of local laws defining the activity as 
a crime. 
 
As noted above, police continued actions to investigate 
traffickers, break up trafficking rings, arrest traffickers 
and free victims during this period.  Police trained under 
the DOJ/ICITAP program carried out qualitatively improved 
investigations of trafficking during 2005, according to 
U.S. Mission observations.  In most incidents, however, 
police were largely reactive in their investigations, 
taking actions in response to complaints by family members, 
escaped trafficking victims, civil society groups, NGOs, 
the pess and other government officials.  Police morereadily took action in the case of children trappe in 
prostituution, rathe  than adults forced into,o*r trapped 
in, the sexiindustry. 
 
In 2005, certain police districts, inl(uding Jakarta and 
North Sumatra, formed specialized investigative units 
focused on crimes againstwwomen and children, with the 
units referred to b  the abbreviation RENATA.  In 2006 the 
RENATA untt in Medan, North Sumatra, consisted of 18 full-t ime female police investigators, led by a senior female 
 
police official, and focused most of its work on cases of 
domestic violence and trafficking in persons.  As noted 
above, in 2005 North Sumatra carried out more anti- 
trafficking law enforcement actions than any other 
province, per available data. Jakarta's RENATA unit 
achieved some high-profile success in 2005 with the arrests 
of two traffickers sending young women into prostitution in 
Japan. 
 
GOI officials and NGOs often criticized police officers as 
too passive in combating trafficking absent specific 
complaints.  Although police were often aware of underage 
prostitutes or other trafficking situations, they 
frequently did not intervene to protect victims or arrest 
probable traffickers without specific reports from third 
parties.  Police in some areas facilitated and accepted at 
face value efforts by pimps to obtain written statements by 
prostitutes, which "verified" that the prostitutes were of 
adult age and had consented to their roles.  Police in some 
areas generally accepted trafficking or trafficking-like 
situations, whether out of lack of awareness of trafficking 
as a crime, their direct or indirect involvement in 
trafficking, their individual financial interest in 
prostitution, lack of police resources for operations, or 
competing law enforcement priorities. 
 
To aid in trafficking investigations, cases involving 
Indonesian migrant workers, and other crimes, beginning in 
2003 the police posted liaison officers in Indonesian 
embassies in Saudi Arabia, Malaysia, Australia and 
Thailand.  These police liaison officers contributed to 
growing law enforcement cooperation particularly with 
Malaysia.  The Indonesian police liaisons in Australia and 
Saudi Arabia have also helped to investigate trafficking in 
the past. 
 
INVESTIGATIVE TECHNIQUES 
------------------------ 
 
In some instances, the police, particularly those who had 
received anti-trafficking training, used active 
investigation techniques to develop trafficking cases.  The 
police used undercover operations to some extent.  In the 
past, police occasionally employed electronic surveillance 
using technical expertise developed for counter-terrorism. 
Information collected through electronic surveillance is 
not admissible in Indonesian courts except in cases of 
terrorism.  The cooperation of victims and witnesses was 
important to police and prosecutors in making cases against 
traffickers.  According to a number of the police, GOI 
officials and NGOs, victims frequently avoided testifying 
because of the prolonged nature of court cases, their 
desire to return to their home areas and lack of financial 
assistance to maintain themselves.  This complicated 
prosecution efforts.  In some cases, police did not detain 
suspects, who then subsequently disappeared and did not 
present themselves in court. 
 
SPECIALIZED TRAINING 
-------------------- 
 
Update 
------ 
 
Training of law enforcement officials by USG and 
international NGOs greatly increased this year, with strong 
cooperation by Indonesian officials.  In 2006, the Asia 
Foundation trained 72 religious judges representing nearly 
60 percent of the 120 Islamic court judges in Aceh in 
adjudicating trafficking cases.  IOM has also trained 539 
prosecutors and 240 judges (including all 60 members of the 
Supreme Court), 539 prosecutors and 722 police.  DOJ has 
trained 200 police in 2006 and an additional 120 from 
 
January to February 2007 and 106 prosecutors and judges. 
Other governments and organizations have also done training 
of law enforcement officials.  Well in excess of a thousand 
police, prosecutors and judges were trained in 2006, not 
counting training done by those already trained by 
internationally-sponsored trainers.  Joint training has 
taken place as well, such as IOM training of police, 
prosecutors, immigration officials and judges in December 
Â¶2006. 
 
The Manpower Ministry trained labor inspectors and 
officials responsible for migrant workers on the worst 
forms of child labor and trafficking, a total of 172 in ten 
provinces. 
 
Indramayu Manpower office hosted the training on using 
Video Training and Campaign Kit in August 2006, attended by 
24 counselors who are part of the BP2TKI Manpower Ministry 
pilot project. End update. 
 
Beginning in 2003, the GOI and POLRI, using their own 
budgets, began to provide some training to officials and 
law enforcement officers on TIP and related subjects at the 
national and local levels, a positive change from previous 
years.  NGOs at times served as resource persons for such 
training.  POLRI has welcomed anti-trafficking training 
assistance from the U.S. via the Department of 
Justice/ICITAP, which continued in 2006 after a break in 
funding in 2005.  The International Organization for 
Migration (IOM) continued to provide some anti-trafficking 
training to the police over the past year. 
 
COOPERATION WITH OTHER GOVERNMENTS 
---------------------------------- 
 
The GOI cooperated with other governments, particularly 
Malaysia, in the investigation and prosecution of 
trafficking cases during this reporting period.  Indonesian 
and Malaysian law enforcement officers worked together to 
stop criminal operations trafficking women and girls into 
prostitution in Malaysia, and trafficking of babies to 
Malaysia.  Indonesian and Singaporean police also 
cooperated in the investigation 
of a ring sending Indonesian prostitutes to Singapore.  It 
was unclear whether the prostitutes were trafficked. 
 
In the past, Indonesia and Australia cooperated in the 
investigations of Australian pedophiles victimizing 
children in Bali, and syndicates trafficking women to 
Australia. 
 
Indonesian police and other officials cooperated actively 
with U.S. law enforcement to arrest and expel wanted 
American citizen pedophiles (see below). 
 
EXTRADITION 
----------- 
 
Indonesia maintains extradition treaties with only five 
countries or territories, but very seldom utilizes this 
mechanism to seek extradition of its citizens, preferring 
less formal options such as rendering and deportation. 
Indonesia does not have a history of extraditing or 
rendering its own citizens to other countries. 
 
Indonesia did not extradite any traffickers during this 
reporting period and there were no reports of such requests 
from other countries. 
 
Indonesian police and officials have cooperated with 
foreign governments, including the U.S. and Australia, in 
the apprehension and repatriation of foreign sex offenders. 
 
GOVERNMENT INVOLVEMENT IN OR TOLERANCE OF TRAFFICKING 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
Some government officials and individual members of the 
security forces facilitated, tolerated, or were involved in 
TIP on a variety of levels.  The GOI in past reports 
acknowledged this fact, which has been widely reported by 
groups working on trafficking.  The most common example of 
such complicity was in the production of national identity 
cards.  In local communities, low-level officials certified 
false information to produce national identity cards and 
family data cards for children to allow them to work as 
adults.  They commonly did so in order to collect bribes 
and also to assist poor families in gaining additional wage 
earners.  In most cases, these officials facilitated such 
cards without knowing the children will be trafficked.  In 
a much smaller number of cases, the local officials 
presumably were aware that they are facilitating 
trafficking.  Based on the identity cards, traffickers 
processed passports and work visas for children who 
otherwise would not be able to obtain such documents.  With 
less than 30 percent of all births registered in the 
country, and such registrations also subject to 
falsification, authorities often had little legal basis to 
challenge documents containing false information. 
 
Some officials in local Manpower offices (Disnaker) 
reportedly licensed and tolerated migrant worker recruiting 
agencies despite the officials' knowledge of the agencies' 
involvement in trafficking. In return for bribes, some 
Immigration officials turned a blind eye to potential 
trafficking victims, failing to screen or act with due 
diligence in processing passports and immigration control. 
Local governments' informal or formal regulation of and 
alleged profiteering from established prostitution zones in 
larger cities also raised concerns about local officials' 
involvement and tolerance of trafficking. 
 
Individual members of the police and military were 
associated with brothels and prostitution fronts, most 
frequently through the collection of protection money, 
which was a widespread practice.  Sometimes off-duty 
security force members worked as security personnel at 
brothels.  Security force members also involved themselves 
in prostitution as brothel owners or through other illicit 
business interests, according to NGOs and other reports. 
As one prominent example, NGOs continued to report the 
involvement of Indonesian navy personnel and police in the 
Dolly prostitution complex in Surabaya, one of Southeast 
Asia's largest brothel areas.  A 2005 NGO examination of 
trafficking in Papua also found indications of police and 
military personnel involved in trafficking. 
 
NGOs described the involvement in TIP of individual police 
and military members primarily as one of extorting 
protection money from brothel owners and pimps, and of not 
taking proactive steps to free underage or other trafficked 
prostitutes.  In past years, there have been reports of 
police officers assisting pimps to return runaway 
prostitutes to brothels.  The NGOs did not report any 
examples of security force members actively recruiting or 
forcing children into prostitution. 
 
Police, public order officials and military members 
sometimes clashed as a result of raids on prostitution 
areas, publicly highlighting the link between security 
force members and the sex trade.  Examples of such clashes 
occurred in Padang, West Sumatra, in 2005 and in Sukabumi, 
West Java, in February 2006. 
 
In some cases, the police tolerance of trafficking, 
profiteering from the sex trade, and/or lack of 
understanding of the law limited or delayed their actions 
 
in response to complaints.  On occasions in the past, 
national police headquarters intervened with local police 
units to generate actions, after the local units failed to 
respond to direct complaints. 
 
Police and officials often did not recognize the 
relationship of debt bondage and trafficking of women and 
girls for prostitution. 
 
DEBT BONDAGE INSTITUTIONALIZED 
------------------------------ 
 
The recruiting process for Indonesians working as unskilled 
or semi-skilled labor abroad tends to institutionalize debt 
bondage, which technically is illegal under Indonesian law. 
Migrant worker recruiting agencies commonly hold 
prospective workers in debt bondage.  The indebtedness 
stems from processing fees charged to the workers by the 
agencies and costs incurred by the agencies prior to the 
departure of workers for jobs overseas.  Prospective 
migrant workers can remain in holding centers for months at 
a time, awaiting placement and departure.  In some cases, 
such situations degenerate into jail-like conditions, with 
poor food and sanitation, and with workers unable to leave 
locked warehouses where they are housed.  There often 
appeared to be widespread societal acceptance and tolerance 
by GOI officials and law enforcement of such migrant worker 
conditions.  Situations of debt bondage commonly continued 
with overseas employers. 
 
The Manpower Ministry and the Jakarta police launched raids 
on unlicensed migrant worker agencies, some of which kept 
women and girls under inhumane conditions (see above). 
U.S.-funded NGOs, the ILO and others examined the basis for 
legal challenges to debt bondage and alternative means of 
organizing migrant worker recruitment.  There was a gradual 
increase in awareness among some Indonesian officials that 
the GOI should address the issue of debt bondage. 
 
STEPS TO END OFFICIALS' INVOLVEMENT IN TRAFFICKING 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
Update 
------ 
 
As reported above, the GOI has begun to seriously take 
action against officials involved in trafficking, including 
corruption charges, administrative sanctions, dismissals 
and transfers.  The impact of these few but unprecedented 
actions is beginning to change the culture of impunity. 
Unfortunately, this type of action is not being applied to 
military officials who abet trafficking, particularly of 
women and girls trapped in prostitution.  Muslim teachers 
in one community   related how military personnel visited a 
prostitution area daily to collect money from pimps, an 
area where many women and girls are known to be trafficked. 
End update. 
 
The GOI did not provide details regarding actions taken 
against civil officials suspected of involvement in 
trafficking.  From time to time, the GOI applied 
administrative sanctions against officials involved in 
passport or other document fraud.  Criminal prosecutions 
for such actions are not common.  There were no GOI reports 
of the security forces prosecuting or disciplining their 
own members for involvement in prostitution or other 
activities related to trafficking. 
 
FOREIGN PEDOPHILES PROSECUTED, DEPORTED 
--------------------------------------- 
 
Update 
------ 
 
 
On December 19, a court in Mataram, West Nusa Tenggara 
sentenced an Australian, Donald John Stern, to four years 
in jail.  Another Australian is currently on trial at the 
South Jakarta Court.  A third committed suicide believing 
police were about to arrest him.  There were no American 
citizen pedophiles extradited in 2006 and none are known to 
operate there now. Three American citizen pedophiles were 
extradited from Bali in 2005. 
 
During 2006 Consulate Surabaya Regional Security Officer 
and the FBI worked a joint anti-pedophile operation with 
Balinese police.  The operation resulted in the closure of 
a massage parlor and several arrests. 
 
Police say pedophile cases are particularly difficult to 
pursue since affected boys and girls and their families are 
reluctant to file reports against the perpetrators. End 
update. 
 
The police actively investigated reports of foreign 
pedophiles operating in Indonesia.  In 2004, these efforts 
led to the arrest, prosecution, and conviction of an 
Australian pedophile in Bali in May 2004, and of a Dutch 
pedophile in West Nusa Tenggara also in May 2004.  In 2005, 
a court in Bali sentenced a French pedophile to 30 months 
in jail.  Police in Bali arrested a suspected Dutch 
pedophile in July 2005, but the case remains under 
investigation.  In February 2006, the GOI deported an 
Australian pedophile who had escaped from a jail in western 
Australia. 
 
 
RATIFICATION OF INTERNATIONAL INSTRUMENTS 
----------------------------------------- 
 
Indonesia has signed and in most cases ratified 
international instruments related to the worst forms of 
child labor and the trafficking of women and children: 
 
-- The GOI signed ILO Convention 182 concerning the 
elimination of the worst forms of child labor and ratified 
this with Law No. 1 of 2000 on March 8, 2000. 
 
-- Indonesia ratified ILO Convention 29 on Forced Labor in 
Â¶1950.  The GOI ratified ILO Convention 105 on the Abolition 
of Forced Labor in 1999. 
 
-- Indonesia signed the Optional Protocol to the Convention 
on the Rights of the Child on the Sale of Children, Child 
Prostitution and Child Pornography, and ratified this in 
September 2001. 
 
-- Indonesia signed in December 2000 the UN Convention 
Against Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocol to 
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons.  The 
GOI has not yet ratified the Convention and Protocol. 
 
-- On September 25, 2003, Indonesia signed the Convention 
for 
the Suppression of the Traffic in Persons and the 
Exploitation of the Prostitution of Others, 1950, and the 
Convention's Final Protocol.  Indonesia has not yet 
ratified these instruments. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
IV. PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS 
----------------------------------------- 
 
GOVERNMENT ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS 
-------------------------------- 
 
UPDATE 
 
------ 
 
National and local level assistance efforts continued or 
increased over the past year, although they remained small 
in comparison with the scope of the problem. The police 
increased women's help desks in police departments from 237 
to 280 nationwide.  The GOI and police increased from 18 to 
38 the number of operational "integrated service centers," 
providing health services to TIP and other victims of 
violence. With U.S. assistance, the police upgraded such 
centers to become full medical recovery centers 
specifically for trafficking victims, and opened a third 
medical center.  The GOI operates four medical centers 
treating trafficking victims.  The GOI pays for about a 
third of the cost of treating victims by offering intensive 
care treatment for the cost of ordinary care funded by IOM. 
These trafficking victim recovery centers treated thousands 
of patients since opening in 2005.  The integrated service 
centers in Jakarta at the Kramatjati police hospital as 
well as service centers in Surabaya, Pontianak and Makassar 
support services such as temporary shelter, medical, 
psychological, and legal assistance provided at these 
centers. 
 
Authorities continued to round-up and deport a small number 
of foreign prostitutes without screening them for possible 
trafficking victims.   Various GOI offices and diplomatic 
missions received training on TIP victim recognition and 
assistance, training for personnel at the Mission in 
Malaysia, making great progress in 2006. 
 
As of March 2006, there were 41 hospitals with integrated 
service centers in 26 provinces, an increase from 11 in 
Â¶2005. 
 
The GOI at various levels and to varying degrees assisted 
its citizens who fell victim to trafficking.  National and 
local level assistance efforts continued or increased, but 
remained small in comparison with the scope of the problem. 
In general, the GOI provided modest but more structured 
assistance to Indonesians trafficked abroad.  In contrast, 
government assistance specifically for internal trafficking 
victims remained minimal.  Local government assistance 
usually appeared ad hoc and often focused on cases with a 
public profile. 
 
The police further increased the number of its women's help 
desks (RPK), units established to assist women and children 
who fall victim to violence including trafficking, and to 
help related investigations.  The total number of such 
units at the province and district levels has gradually 
increased from 163 in 2003 and 226 in 2005, to a total of 
280 women's help desks in 2006.  The women's desks provided 
temporary shelter, special police handling, and some level 
of legal services for victims.  The women's desks often 
cooperated with local NGOs, which arranged for medical and 
psychological services, and longer term shelter. Distrust 
of the police discouraged some victims from using these 
desks.  In 2006, the national police was in the process of 
restructuring womenQs help desks to become a Service and 
Protection Unit for Women and Children (P3A Unit) which 
will be established in every district/city level police 
office. 
 
An increasing number of NGOs and community based 
organizations have set up WomenQs Crisis Center, Drop in 
Centers or Shelters, and now the number of these centers 
has increased from 11 units to 34 units in 2006, in 15 
provinces.  End update. 
 
Local governments worked together with NGOs and civil 
society groups to establish and operate shelters for TIP 
victims, in key transit points like Dumai, Riau Province, 
 
and Batam, Riau Islands Province, and in Entikong on the 
West Kalimantan border with Malaysia.  Local governments 
also used social services offices and police women's desks 
as temporary shelters.  Women's bureaus in provinces like 
East Java, North Sumatra, and Riau Islands budgeted modest 
funding for victims' services. 
 
The Foreign Ministry operated shelters for trafficking 
victims and migrant workers at its embassies and consulates 
in a number of countries, including Malaysia, Saudi Arabia, 
Kuwait, and Singapore.  These diplomatic establishments 
sheltered thousands of Indonesian citizens, including 
trafficking victims.  Indonesian diplomatic missions, in 
coordination with other GOI agencies, assisted with 
repatriation of trafficking victims. 
 
The Manpower Ministry has an Overseas Worker Protection 
Directorate.  The GOI upgraded this office over the period 
2001-2003 and dramatically increased its budget.  The 
Directorate regulates migrant worker recruiting agencies, 
provides limited training to migrant workers, and assists 
and repatriates overseas workers fleeing abusive 
situations.  Some of the repatriated female migrant workers 
fit the definition of trafficking victims. 
 
The Social Affairs Ministry founded a Sub-Directorate of 
Social Assistance for Victims of Violence and Migrant 
Workers in 2001.  In 2002, the Ministry upgraded this 
office to become a Directorate, with greater authority and 
budget, responding in part to the demand for action against 
TIP.  In terms of trafficking, the Directorate primarily 
assisted victims returning from overseas since domestic 
cases normally fall under the responsibility of local 
governments.  The Ministry provided some repatriation 
assistance to tens of thousands of migrant workers, the 
vast majority of whom returned from Malaysia.  This 
included transportation, basic medical care, and food for 
some of these returnees. The Directorate provided some 
training to provincial Social Affairs offices.  The 
Ministry also operated women's rehabilitation centers and 
assists with crisis centers, including the Children's 
Crisis Center established in Jakarta in 2002. 
 
The provincial government in East Java established a 
women's crisis center in 2003 that serviced trafficking 
victims and other women who suffered violence. Police and 
public hospitals provided medical care to trafficking 
victims, in accordance with a GOI directive (see below). 
 
In 2004 the Women's Ministry, with input from international 
and local NGOs, finalized standard operating procedures 
(SOPs) to be used when assisting trafficking victims to 
ensure their protection.  This was in accordance with the 
anti-trafficking National Action Plan's goal of having the 
SOPs in place by 2004.  The Ministry began to train 
officials in the SOPs during 2005. 
 
VICTIM HEALTH CARE FACILITIES 
----------------------------- 
 
The Social Affairs Ministry, the Women's Ministry, the 
Health Ministry and POLRI signed a coordination agreement 
in October 2002 to provide "integrated service centers" 
(PPTs) for women and children who are victims of violence. 
As part of this MOU, the GOI assigned police hospitals, 
like the Kramat Jati police hospital in Jakarta and the 
Bhayangkara hospital in Surabaya, to be the medical 
treatment points for migrant workers who return from abroad 
with serious medical or psychological problems.  In other 
locations, public hospitals operate the service centers, in 
coordination with the ministries and the police. 
 
After 2002, the Jakarta police hospital, as a PPT, began 
 
treating hundreds of trafficking victims annually. With the 
assistance of a U.S.-funded IOM project, Indonesia police 
upgraded the Jakarta police hospital facility to become a 
full medical recovery center for victims of trafficking, 
the first in Indonesia.  The center provides comprehensive 
medical care, including psychological treatment, to TIP 
victims, most of whom have returned from abroad. The 
medical center, which officially opened in its new form in 
June 2005, has capacity for 30 in-patients. During 2006, 
the hospital treated 777 in-patients and 161 out-patients. 
 
IOM and Save the Children also supports the process of 
return and reintegration of trafficked persons, working 
with a variety of GOI agencies. In the period of March 2005 
to January 2007, IOM supported assistance provided to as 
many as 1,966 trafficking survivors (1,362 female, 153 
male, and 443 children) - 459 of them originated from West 
Kalimantan with the majority of these cases involving 
exploitation in Malaysia. 
 
Some government medical facilities and NGO clinics 
conducted HIV/AIDS screening, but this did not appear to be 
widespread or systematic. 
 
GOI SUPPORT FOR NGO SERVICES TO VICTIMS 
--------------------------------------- 
 
The GOI provided some funding to domestic NGOs and civil 
society groups that supported services for TIP victims, 
usually as part of a larger program rather than one focused 
exclusively on trafficking.  At the national level, for 
example, the People's Welfare Coordinating Ministry and the 
Social Affairs Ministry provided food assistance to social 
centers and safe houses nationwide.  Local governments in 
North Sulawesi, North Sumatra, West Kalimantan, Riau 
Islands, and East Java funded NGOs to provide services to 
some victims, including shelters, medical exams and 
training. 
 
SCREENING AND REFERRAL OF VICTIMS 
--------------------------------- 
 
In Jakarta, a screening system is in place at the 
international airport to refer cases of abused migrant 
workers and trafficking victims to the city's police 
hospital (see above).  NGOs active in migrant worker 
advocacy also identify and refer returned migrant workers 
who need medical attention.  An NGO screening process was 
also in practice in Surabaya. 
 
Women's help desks at provincial and district level police 
offices typically have formal or informal arrangements in 
place with local NGO's to provide short-term shelter and a 
modicum of care for trafficking victims.  In general, long- 
term care does not appear to be available.  A current U.S.- 
funded project, implemented by IOM, has begun to develop 
models of better and longer-term care for trafficking 
victims. 
 
RESPECT FOR THE RIGHTS OF VICTIMS 
--------------------------------- 
 
The GOI's written policy, found in its annual trafficking 
report, is that, "from a legal perspective, the Government 
treats persons who are trafficked not as criminals, but as 
victims who need help and protection."  The People's 
Welfare Coordinating Ministry, the Women's Ministry, and 
training conducted by international NGOs and DOJ/ICITAP, 
reinforced this policy during the year in public settings 
and trainings of police and other officials.  Police who 
received ICITAP training demonstrated greater awareness of 
and respect for TIP victims. 
 
Local government and police practice varied, particularly 
in the lower ranks of law enforcement agencies.  Local 
governments, exercising greater authority under the 
nation's decentralization program, sometimes enacted 
regulations that tend to treat trafficked prostitutes as 
criminals, contrary to national policy.  In many instances, 
GOI officials and police actively protected and assisted 
victims.  In other cases, police officers treated victims, 
particularly trafficked prostitutes, as criminals, 
subjected them to detention, and took advantage of their 
vulnerability to demand bribes and sexual services.  The 
media and lower level officials, including police, 
frequently failed to protect victims' identities and 
commonly provided victims' names to the public. 
 
The GOI's policy is not to detain or imprison trafficking 
victims.  Police implementation of this policy varies in 
practice.  Not all local government laws comply with this 
policy.  Local police often arrested prostitutes, 
presumably including trafficking victims, who operated 
outside recognized prostitution zones on charges of 
violating public order. Police raids on prostitute areas 
commonly resulted in the arrest of prostitutes, rather than 
users or pimps.  On occasion, the police detained victims, 
sometimes to gain their testimony or in the belief they 
were protecting the victims from traffickers.  In other 
cases, police detained victims in order to extract bribes. 
 
While there appeared to be a growing understanding of the 
need to protect Indonesian victims of trafficking, this was 
not the case for foreign prostitutes.  In Jakarta, police 
and immigration officials in August 2005 rounded up and 
deported foreign prostitutes from China, Russia and 
Uzbekistan without screening them as possible trafficking 
victims or protecting their identities from intrusive media 
coverage. 
 
ENCOURAGING VICTIMS TO ASSIST INVESTIGATIONS/PROSECUTIONS 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
The GOI encourages victims to assist in the investigation 
and prosecution of traffickers.  The GOI reported that 
victims frequently were reluctant or refused to provide 
testimony out of shame and fear of retribution against 
themselves and their families.  There are no specific legal 
mechanisms for victims to seek compensation from 
traffickers. 
 
In previous periods, there have been reports of police 
officers who refused to receive complaints from trafficking 
victims, but insisted instead that victims and traffickers 
reach an informal settlement (for example, payment of debts 
in return for a prostitute's release from a brothel). 
 
PROTECTIONS FOR VICTIMS AND WITNESSES 
------------------------------------- 
 
Update 
------ 
 
The Law and Human Rights Ministry and the Women's Ministry 
drafted a Witness and Victim Protection bill which was 
passed into law in 2006. End update. 
 
The functions of the women's help desks at provincial and 
district level police stations include protection of women 
and children during the police investigation process of 
crimes such as trafficking.  Some of the desks functioned 
reasonably well, while others did not function adequately. 
There were no specific reports of the GOI providing special 
protection to witnesses during court cases on trafficking. 
 
TRAINING FOR OFFICIALS TO RECOGNIZE/ASSIST VICTIMS 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
The National Action Plan calls for training of government 
officials in recognizing trafficking and assisting victims, 
to be carried out in the 2003-2007 timeframe.  The GOI 
conducted such training on an ad hoc basis through various 
seminars, workshops and government meetings.  POLRI and the 
Manpower Ministry both conducted anti-trafficking training, 
including victim recognition, over the past year. 
 
NGOs and international organizations have assisted in the 
training of Indonesian officials.  IOM and ICMC have worked 
with Indonesian diplomatic offices in Malaysia to improve 
their screening procedures for potential trafficking 
victims.  The Foreign Ministry discontinued the ICMC 
activity due to perceived political sensitivities in 
Malaysia. 
 
The relationship between Indonesian diplomatic missions and 
NGOs abroad that serve trafficking victims appears to vary 
greatly.  A 2005 survey of Indonesian diplomatic offices in 
Malaysia revealed some working frequently with NGOs and 
others not.  The availability of such NGOs was a factor. 
 
ASSISTANCE TO REPATRIATED NATIONALS 
----------------------------------- 
 
The GOI, both at the national and locals levels, provides 
some measure of assistance, including limited medical aid, 
shelter, and financial help, to its repatriated nationals 
who were trafficking victims.  In general, the government 
at various levels provided more attention and assistance to 
repatriated victims compared with victims of internal 
trafficking. 
 
NGO'S WORKING WITH TRAFFICKING VICTIMS 
-------------------------------------- 
 
ICMC/ACILS, in their 2003 book, identified 45 local NGO 
offices around the country that provide services to 
trafficking victims, most in the context of other social 
programs.  Some of the more prominent NGOs are Solidaritas 
Perempuan (Jakarta), LBH-Apik (Jakarta and West 
Kalimantan), Yayasan Mitra Kesehatan dan Kemanusiaan or 
YMKK (Batam), Rifka Anisa (Yogyakarta) and LADA (Lampung). 
Some labor unions also provided services to trafficking 
victims.  The activities of these groups related to TIP 
include:  legal assistance, prevention and education 
programs, medical services, clinics for children, research 
and advocacy, counseling, reproductive health, HIV/AIDS 
prevention, and shelters.  More NGOs have emerged over the 
past several years, including Migrant Care, currently a 
leading advocacy body for migrant worker rights and anti- 
trafficking, and Anak Bangsa, a pioneering NGO assisting 
victims along the Indonesia-Malaysia border area of West 
Kalimantan. 
 
The GOI's 2004-2005 trafficking report listed service 
providers for trafficking victims, including women's crisis 
centers, trauma centers, shelters and drop-in centers set 
up by local governments, NGOs, and community organizations 
in 14 provinces.  The report also documented dozens of 
legal aid organizations and their branches across Indonesia 
that have a mandate to provide legal assistance to victims 
of trafficking and other violence. 
 
The GOI continued strong cooperation with NGOs over the 
past year in the area of assistance to trafficking victims. 
In some cases government offices relied heavily on NGO 
inputs and advice.  GOI offices provided licenses to 
organizations and access to trafficking victims, included 
NGOs on national and local action committees, and 
interceded with law enforcement agencies in some cases to 
 
permit NGOs to carry out their activities.  NGOs frequently 
interacted with the police, though mutual suspicions 
limited the interaction in some areas. 
 
--------- 
Â¶V. HEROES 
--------- 
 
Wahyu Susilo is in the forefront of migrant workers issues 
in Indonesia through his organization "Migrant Care".  In 
2000, he initiated the establishment a consortium for the 
advocacy of Indonesian migrant workers, a network of 80 
organizations throughout Indonesia, actively advocating for 
the improvement of legislation and policy with regard to 
migrant workers protection.  Since migrant workers are 
prone to being trafficked during the employment process, 
Wahyu Susilo has tirelessly advocated for the protection of 
the rights of domestic and overseas Indonesian workers and 
campaigned for stronger regulations governing recruitment 
and control of employment agencies.  One example of Wahyu 
SusiloQs determination to protect overseas migrant workers 
is his work relaying first-hand information to the general 
public as well as Indonesian government on the names of 
overseas migrant workers whose lives are in danger, 
including those facing the death penalty in destination 
countries.  He also has documented thousands of Indonesian 
migrant workers who have disappeared overseas and lobbied 
the GOI to seek the whereabouts of these missing workers. 
Such information has helped enhance public awareness and 
appropriate action by the government. 
 
Employers, government officials and the media pay attention 
when Wahyu Susilo speaks about protecting migrant workers 
from human trafficking, labor abuse and other human rights 
violations by labor recruiters. Wahyu Susilo began helping 
to make the issue of migrant worker protection a priority 
in the country's national consciousness following the 
"Nunukan tragedy." In 2002, some 350,000 undocumented 
migrant workers were deported from Sabah, Malaysia, to the 
Indonesian frontier town of Nunukan on the island of Borneo 
resulting in the deaths of at least 85, with thousands of 
others starving and contracting various diseases due to the 
Indonesian government's lack of serious response. Susilo 
has consistently leveraged his reputation and relationship 
with the media and government to advocate ceaselessly for 
migrant worker protections.  His success in highlighting 
these issues has been threatening to some -- and since he 
is outspoken and well-known, he has become a target of acts 
of intimidation designed to silence him.  His dedication 
can in part be explained by his roots in a poor 
community where migrant work was one of the only options 
for economic survival. 
 
------------------ 
VI. BEST PRACTICES 
------------------ 
 
The International Organization for Migration (IOM) in 2006 
assisted in the return, recovery and reintegration of over 
1200 victims of trafficking in Indonesia.  IOMQs efforts 
begin in destination countries and end only when trafficked 
victims are settled into their home communities.  One part 
of their program entails working with the Indonesian 
Embassy and consulates in Malaysia, and to assist in the 
treatment and recovery of victims at recovery centers at 
the Indonesian Embassy in Kuala Lumpur.  IOM works with the 
Malaysian and Indonesian governments to escort trafficked 
workers across the border.  For IOM staff this has entailed 
hazardous duty of fighting off thugs who attempt to grab 
vulnerable victims as they walk from the border immigration 
post to a bus on the first stage of their journey home. 
Staff have been threatened while escorting victims. 
 
In Indonesia, after victims of trafficking have been 
identified, they are referred to Medical Recovery Centers 
that are based in Police Hospitals.  Currently, there are 
four Medical Recovery Centers in Police Hospitals in 
Jakarta, Surabaya, Makassar and Pontianak.  The Medical 
Recovery Center in Jakarta was the first to open and the 
largest, with the capacity to serve 30 victims of 
trafficking.  Virtually every day since the opening of the 
center in Jakarta, it has been filled to capacity.  With 
their consent, victims are provided with free and 
comprehensive medical and psychological care, including 
testing for sexually transmitted infections and HIV. 
Victims are put under the care and supervision of doctors, 
psychologists and social workers in the Recovery Centers. 
These medical recovery centers are strategically located at 
police hospitals so that the victims can be linked with 
appropriate law enforcement officials, if they so choose. 
After receiving appropriate health services from the IOM, 
and government, a network of over 80 NGOs and Faith Based 
Organizations (FBOs), partnering across Indonesia to 
facilitate the victims return home and reintegration into 
the community.  IOM works with government, local NGOs, Save 
the Children, FBOs and the individual victims to develop a 
reintegration assistance plan tailored to the victimQs 
specific needs, which may include the following: follow-up 
medical care and psychological counseling, housing support; 
employment and/or education counseling; vocational 
training; income generating tools, and legal assistance. 
Importantly, the NGO and FBO will monitor the victim 
throughout the reintegration period to ensure successful 
reintegration.  During 2006, 1268 victims have been 
assisted through the comprehensive victim assistance 
program. 
 
HEFFERN