09ADANA66
SE TURKEY SECURITY INCIDENTS: OCTOBER 26 - NOVEMBER 01,
Tue Nov 03 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
VZCZCXRO7130
RR RUEHDA
DE RUEHDA #0066/01 3071153
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 031153Z NOV 09
FM AMCONSUL ADANA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4791
INFO RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 1333
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 1103
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 1400UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ADANA 000066 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR DS/IP/NEA, DS/IP/ITA, INR AND NEA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PTER PINR CASC TU
SUBJECT: SE TURKEY SECURITY INCIDENTS: OCTOBER 26 - NOVEMBER 01, 
2009 
 
¶1. The following security incidents for the period of October 26 
- November 01, 2009, were compiled by the security assistant at 
Consulate Adana from RSO sources, to include Turkish security 
contacts, government officials and media. Similar reports have 
been previously shared informally by e-mail. Post is now sending 
this information in cable format to ensure wider and more 
regular distribution. The RSO uses the information to determine 
the security situation and trends of violence and crime 
throughout Turkey. The RSO shares the information with the 
country team and visas viper coordinator. 
 
¶2. Military operations against the Kurdistan Workers' Party 
(PKK) as reported by the Turkish General Staff: 
 
¶A. Weapons, ammunition, and equipment seized: 
 
Siirt - 10.31.09: 1 G-3 infantry rifle, 3 rounds of RPG-7 
ammunitions. 
 
Van - 10.31.09: 1 Kalashnikov rifle magazine and various 
clothing. 
 
Hakkari - 10.24.09: 1 round of RPG-7 ammunition. 
 
Sirnak - 10.24.09: 1 round of mortar ammunition. 
 
¶B. PKK members captured or surrendered: 
 
Kahramanmaras - 10.30.09: 1 PKK member surrendered. 
 
10.26.09 through 11.01.09: Security forces captured 1 PKK member 
alive. 
 
October 2009: A total of 22 terrorists were captured: 3 dead, 6 
alive and 13 surrendered. 
 
¶C. PKK attacks: 
 
Hakkari - 10.28.09: A hand-made IED was found and destroyed. 
 
¶3. Media reports related to PKK and pro-Kurdish organizations: 
 
¶A. Anti-PKK operations: 
 
10.26.09 through 11.01.09: Turkish Armed Forces (TAF) anti-PKK 
operations in SE Turkey continue.  Many armored vehicles, 
military personnel and ammunition were sent to operation areas 
in Bingol, Hakkari, Sirnak and Tunceli. 
 
Mus - 10.11.09: TAF launched a region-wide operation. 
 
¶N. Iraq - 10.31.09: A pro-Kurdish web site reported that TAF 
ambushed PKK targets in the Zap District. 
 
¶N. Iraq - 10.31.09: TAF anti-PKK operations continue. 
 
Hakkari - 10.30.09: TAF artillery teams bombed PKK positions in 
¶N. Iraq. 
 
¶N. Iraq - 10.29.09: TAF bombed the Ciyares area of the Zap 
Region. 
 
Bingol - 10.26.09: TAF killed 5 PKK members. 2 civilians and 1 
security personnel were wounded in the operation. 
 
¶B. Arrests: 
 
Diyarbakir - 10.31.09: 3 people who threw Molotov cocktails at a 
supermarket were sentenced between 7 and 11 years in prison on 
the charge of "carrying out illegal action on behalf of the 
PKK," and "making propaganda for the PKK." 
 
Bitlis - 10.31.09: DTP Chairman of Tatvan is on trial on the 
charge of "praising the crime and the criminal." 
 
Diyarbakir- 10.29.09: Security forces caught 7 people trying to 
recruit members for the PKK. Clothing, organizational documents 
and digital equipment were seized in the operation. 
 
Sanliurfa - 10.29.09: Security forces detained 1 person 
suspected of terrorism. 
 
Siirt - 10.29.09: Security forces caught 2 people trying to 
recruit members for the PKK. The suspects were later arrested on 
the charge of "assisting and harboring the PKK."  28 of 30 
people were later freed. 
 
Siirt - 10.28.09: Security forces detained and later arrested 8 
people on the charge of "assisting and harboring the PKK." 
 
ADANA 00000066  002 OF 004 
 
 
 
Diyarbakir - 10.27.09: Security forces detained 12 people trying 
to recruit members for the PKK. 7 of 12 people later were 
arrested on the charge of "assisting and harboring the PKK." 
 
Adana - 10.27.09: The Chairman of the Adana Branch of the Human 
Rights Association (IHD) was sentenced to 3 years in prison on 
the charge of "instigating hatred and animosity." 
 
Siirt - 10.27.09: DTP Chairman of Pervari, BDP district chairman 
and a DTP official were detained on the suspicion of terrorism. 
 
Hakkari - 10.27.09: 1 person was arrested on the charge of 
"being member of the PKK." 
 
Siirt - 10.27.09: Security forces stormed the buildings of 
STAY-DER (Solidarity Union of Families of Detainees) and SI-DER 
(Union to Fight against Poverty) and detained over 30 people on 
the suspicion of terrorism. 
 
Diyarbakir - 10.27.09: 14 people, including DTP and Human Rights 
Union officials, are on trial for "making propaganda for the 
PKK." 
 
Diyarbakir - 10.27.09: Aysel Tugluk, a Kurdish member of the 
DTP, was sentenced to 18 months in jail on the charge for 
"making propaganda for the terror organization PKK." 
 
Diyarbakir - 10.27.09: DTP Mayor of Sur has been acquitted of 
the charge of making propaganda for the PKK. 
 
Mus - 10.16.09: DTP Varto District Chairman, who was detained on 
the suspicion of terrorism, was released. 
 
Batman - 10.26.09: Security forces detained 4 people on the 
charge of "making propaganda for the PKK."  It was reported that 
the suspects chanted, "Long live Apo!" during a football match. 
Apo is a familiar name for Ocalan. 
 
¶C. Other media stories about PKK: 
 
11.01.09: According to recent figures from the military, in the 
first 10 months of this year, 120 PKK members surrendered to 
security forces. In addition to the 120 that surrendered between 
January and October of this year, a total of 140 terrorists were 
captured in the same period, 89 alive and 51 dead. This number 
brings the total number of terrorists that have been rendered 
inactive to 260. In the same period, 54 members of the Turkish 
security forces were killed. The number of clashes has been much 
less this year in comparison with the same period in previous 
years. 
 
Hakkari - 10.31.09: PKK members kidnapped and killed a civilian. 
 
10.31.09: According to the pro-PKK ANF web site, despite the 
inactivity period, TAF launched 45 operations in October, 
including 7 air-strikes (3 in Hakkari, 2 in Tunceli, 2 in 
Bingol) and 27 artillery strikes (5 in Hakkari, 21 in northern 
Iraq, and 1 in Sirnak). 14 PKK members were killed in the same 
period. 1 civilian was wounded in a TAF landmine blast. ANF also 
reports that a Turkish soldier serving obligatory military duty 
in N. Cyprus escaped and joined PKK. 
 
Hakkari - 10.31.09: According to a pro-PKK web site, the area 
around Zavite Village in the Cukurca District was mined by TAF. 
 
Adana - 10.31.09: A pro-Kurdish web site has claimed that 
members of the United High School Students (LOB) were threatened 
by a group of TNP officers. 
 
Bingol - 10.30.09: Hundreds of people joined in the funeral 
ceremony of a killed PKK member and chanted slogans in favor of 
PKK and Ocalan. No clash or arrest was reported. 
 
Gaziantep - 10.30.09: Members of the anti-PKK groups, Families 
of Martyrs and Foundation of Veterans, protested the surrender 
of PKK members at the Habur Border Gate. 
 
Hakkari - 10.30.09: TAF declared areas of the province 
off-limits to the public due to impending military operations. 
 
Hakkari - 10.29.09: Almost 1000 people gathered in DTP's 
Republic Day march. Approximately 20-30 PKK supporters stoned 
security forces after the march. Police intervened with tear gas 
bombs and sticks. No injuries or arrests were reported. 
 
Adana - 10.29.09: Many people gathered in Sofulu District to 
protest the incidents during the surrender of PKK members at the 
Habur Border Gate. 
 
ADANA 00000066  003 OF 004 
 
 
 
10.29.09: Abdullah Ocalan, the jailed leader of the PKK, may 
receive permission to watch television broadcasts from the 
state-run Radio and Television Corporation (TRT) after he is 
transferred to a new building currently under construction on 
Imrali Island in the Marmara Sea.  Ocalan currently has limited 
access to print and other media and no access to television. 
 
¶N. Iraq - 10.29.09 through 10.27.09: 92 HPG (People's Defense 
Force) warriors graduated from training camps. The commander of 
the terror group said that they will not accept any concessions 
without the leadership of Abdullah Ocalan. 
 
Diyarbakir - 10.29.09: Thousands of people joined in the funeral 
ceremonies of 2 PKK members. Demonstrators chanted slogans in 
favor of PKK and Ocalan. 
 
Tunceli - 10.29.09: PKK/HPG has banned civilian entry to local 
hunting grounds, cautioning residents that TAF placed undercover 
operatives in the region. 
 
10.28.09: One of PKK's top level administrators, Zubeyir Aydar, 
sent a letter to President Obama calling for the removal of PKK 
names from a list of international drug smugglers. 
 
Elazig - 10.28.09: 5 corpses belonging to PKK members were 
brought to Firat University's morgue. North Kurdistan Public 
Initiative has called for protests during the upcoming funeral 
ceremonies. 
 
Bingol - 10.27.09:  A pro-Kurdish web site has claimed that 
Turkish troops opened fire on civilians, wounding 2 villagers. 
10.27.09: A group of 15 PKK members residing in Europe alleged 
Turkey denied them the necessary entry visas to return to the 
country under government reforms aimed at expanding Kurdish 
rights. 
 
10.27.09: 870 PKK members have applied for benefits under the 
repentance law between June 1, 2005 and June 15, 2009. According 
to a report, 636 PKK members were released without charge as a 
result of this law. Sentences of 30 were reduced. Demands of 124 
were rejected and investigations have been under way for 78 PKK 
members. Most recently, on October 19, 34 PKK members from 
Makhmour refugee camp and Qandil Mountain surrendered to Turkish 
authorities at Habur border gate under the framework of this 
law. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¶4. Media reports on significant crime or security incidents: 
 
Gaziantep - 10.11.09: Security forces seized 4 unregistered 
pistols and detained 4 people in an anti-smuggling operation. 
 
Turkey wide - 10.31.09: According to media reports, "security 
forces are on high alert against a possible suicide attack," 
based on an intelligence alert sent by the Security General 
Directorate to all related security units. The method and type 
of the possible suicide action is still unknown. Consulate 
contacts in the Adana police added they have not yet received an 
official memorandum from the Intelligence Directorate. 
 
Kahramanmaras - 10.31.09: The Chairman of the Kahramanmaras 
Branch of the Alperen Ocaklari (fanatic nationalist group linked 
to the ultra nationalist BBP or Great Unity Party) made a press 
statement to protest DTP's provocative attitudes and the GOT's 
Kurdish and Armenia initiatives. 
 
Diyarbakir - 10.30.09: Security forces seized 1 Kalashnikov 
rifle, 2 pistols, 161 rounds of ammunition, and 11 cell phones 
and detained 9 people in an organized crime operation. 
 
Gaziantep and Kilis - 10.29.09: Security forces caught 10 people 
in an anti-gang operation. 
 
Van - 10.28.09: Turkish security forces opened fire on an 
Iranian fuel-smuggler, who was heavily wounded in the operation. 
 
Van - 10.28.09: Human Rights Union's Director has claimed that 3 
people, who were killed in TAF's home raids, were at first 
caught alive and then executed by the soldiers. The Director has 
called TBMM's (Turkish Grand National Assembly) Human Rights 
Commission to deal with the incident. 
 
 
ADANA 00000066  004 OF 004 
 
 
Siirt - 10.27.09: Security forces raided 24 separate addresses 
in anti-smuggling and organized crime operations. 
 
Van - 10.27.09: Unidentified people set 11 homes on fire in the 
past week. 
 
Tunceli - 10.27.09: Security forces seized 7,000 rounds of 
ammunition and arrested 2 people. 
 
Van - 10.26.09: Iranian troops opened fire on a group of 
smugglers who were trying to enter Turkey illegally. 1 smuggler 
was killed and 1 was wounded. 
 
Diyarbakir - 10.26.09: Security forces seized 26 unregistered 
pistols and 27 magazines in an organized crime operation. 2 
people were detained. 
 
¶5. Illegal immigrant arrests: 
 
10.25.09 through 10.29.09: Security forces captured and deported 
287 illegal immigrants from: Hakkari, Sanliurfa, Canakkale, 
Balikesir, Agri, Edirne, Sirnak, Van, Hatay, and the borders of 
Iran, Iraq, Syria and Greece. 2 Turks assisting them were caught 
in the operations. 
 
¶6. Counter-narcotic operations: 
 
In 2009, police confiscated 562 kilogram of heroin, 87 kilograms 
of hashish and 16 kilograms of poppy gum and arrested 35 of 61 
people in anti-narcotics operations. 
 
Hakkari - 10.30.09: Security forces confiscated 210 kilograms of 
hashish and arrested 2 people. 
 
Hakkari - 10.30.09: Security forces seized 210 kilograms of 
hashish and arrested 2 people. 
 
Diyarbakir - 10.30.09: Security forces seized 463 kilograms of 
hashish and arrested 5 people. 
 
Van and Istanbul - 10.30.09: Security forces seized 95 kilograms 
of hashish and arrested 3 people. 
 
Osmaniye - 10.28.09: Security forces seized 17 kilograms of 
hashish and arrested 1 person. 
 
Bitlis - 10.27.09: Security forces seized 6 kilograms of hashish 
and arrested 1 person. 
 
Diyarbakir - 10.27.09: Security forces confiscated 231 kilograms 
of hashish and 103 kilograms of cannabis seeds. 2 people were 
arrested in the operations. 
 
Diyarbakir - 10.27.09: Security forces seized 25 kilograms of 
hashish and arrested 3 people. 
 
Van - Security forces confiscated 39 kilograms of hashish and 
arrested 2 people. 
 
Van - 10.26.09: Security forces confiscated 108 kilograms of 
hashish and detained 3 people. 
 
Van - 10.26.09: Security forces confiscated 11 kilograms of 
hashish and arrested 3 people. 
DARNELL