09AITTAIPEI1395
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Tue Nov 24 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0003
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1395/01 3280840
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 240840Z NOV 09
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2800
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 9529
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0926UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001395 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/P, EAP/PD - THOMAS HAMM 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused news 
coverage November 24 on AIT Chairman Raymond Burghardt's visit to 
Taiwan; on the year-end city mayors' and county magistrates' 
elections around the island; and on Taiwan's falling unemployment 
rate from September to October.  The pro-independence "Liberty 
Times" ran a banner headline on page two, reading "Meeting [AIT 
Chairman] Raymond Burghardt, [DPP Chairwoman] Tsai [Ing-wen]:  the 
United States Should Eliminate Taiwan People's Grave Concerns [over 
U.S.-China Relations]." 
 
¶2. Several editorials and commentaries discussed AIT Chairman 
Burghardt's visit to Taiwan and U.S.-Taiwan relations in the wake of 
U.S. President Barack Obama's China trip.  A column in the 
mass-circulation "Apple Daily" said Burghardt's visit to Taiwan in 
the wake of Obama's China visit is a standard operating procedure of 
the State Department and that Obama's tactful acceptance of China's 
sovereignty over Taiwan signified a major change in U.S. policy.  A 
column in the pro-independence "Liberty Times" said Obama had to 
keep a low-profile manner during his recent trip to China because, 
given the United States' weakening national strength, the United 
States is no longer able to "preach" or "rectify" China as it did 
before.  An op-ed in the China-focused "Want Daily" discussed 
Obama's China trip and said Washington will not give up on Taiwan, 
but Taiwan's importance will be increasingly marginalized under the 
framework of U.S. core interests.  An op-ed in the pro-independence, 
English-language "Taipei Times" said Obama's China trip "contained 
some very troubling aspects for Taiwan" as he "allowed the Chinese 
leadership to completely frame the interchanges on the Taiwan issue 
and demonstrated a disregard of the US' vital role in helping to 
keep Taiwan free of Chinese control or rule."  An editorial in the 
conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post," 
however, welcomed Burghardt's visit to reassure Taiwan that "Obama's 
China trek did no harm to Taiwan's national interest."  An editorial 
in the pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" discussed 
Burghardt's remarks and said the controversy caused by the U.S. beef 
imports in Taiwan was not a "phony issue" as described by Burghardt 
but one genuinely concerning the health safety the Taiwan people. 
End summary. 
 
A) "A Huge Warning Signal for Taiwan-U.S. Relations" 
 
Columnist Antonio Chiang wrote in his column in the mass-circulation 
"Apple Daily" [circulation: 540,000] (11/24): 
 
"Immediately following [U.S. President Barack] Obama's trip to 
China, AIT Chairman Raymond Burghardt came to Taiwan, reiterating 
that the U.S. position toward Taiwan remains unchanged.  This is the 
standard operating procedure of the U.S. State Department.  To put 
it more bluntly, [Washington] is just trying its upmost to placate 
[Taiwan].  But Ma Ying-jeou was saying that Taiwan-U.S. relations 
over the past six decades have never been as good as now.  Does [he] 
mean that Burghardt is here on a holiday? 
 
"It is very obvious that Taiwan-U.S. relations have been moving 
backwards and turning cold since Obama took over the helm.  This is 
mainly because the U.S. national strength is declining while that of 
China is on the rise, and partly because the Ma administration has 
been tilting toward mainland China.  But the Ma administration has 
been feeling good about itself all the time.  The joint communiqu 
statement inked by Obama and [Chinese President] Hu Jintao nearly 
formally accepted mainland China's sovereignty over Taiwan, which is 
a harmful development for Taiwan, but the Ma administration acted 
like a frog sitting in the slowly boiling water, taking pleasure in 
the comfort and warmth [of the situation]. 
 
"All the previous U.S. presidents would mention the three 
[U.S.-China] communiqus in tandem with the 'Taiwan Relations Act 
(TRA)' when they visited mainland China.  The fact that Obama 
deliberately ducked mentioning the TRA this time is a huge warning 
signal [for Taiwan], but the Ma administration just laughed it off. 
Obama vaguely brought up the TRA in the press conference afterwards, 
and the Ma administration was overjoyed [by the move], believing 
that it was a rare move, which will be favorable for Taiwan.  [The 
Ma administration's performance] was akin to self hypnosis.  In the 
joint statement, Obama and Hu not only reiterated respect for each 
other's sovereignty and territorial integrity but also further 
emphasized that they were the core interests [for both sides].  The 
fact that Obama, using diplomatic rhetoric tactfully, expressed his 
acceptance of China's sovereignty over Taiwan is a major policy 
change, and Taiwan should remain vigilant about it. ..." 
 
B) "Rising Vigorously While Obama Lowers His Head [Submissively to 
China]" 
 
Chin Heng-wei, editor-in-chief of Contemporary Monthly, wrote in his 
column in the pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 
680,000] (11/24): 
 
"The message [sent out by the] U.S. President [who] visited China 
 
was quite simple:  the United States is now in a position of weak 
national strength, so it is unable to 'preach' or 'rectify' China as 
it used to.  The United States and China are intertwined with each 
other in terms of trade and economics; China is the United States' 
biggest creditor, yet Beijing can hardly get itself away clean from 
the huge amount of its 'foreign exchange reserves.'  As a result, 
both the United States and China have no alternative but to seek a 
way to 'work with each other,' a way that will be beneficial for 
both.  Obama's trip this time was aimed at resolving the trade and 
economic unbalances between the United States and China. ...  But it 
was all up to China to decide whether it wants to change its policy. 
 This is the reason why Obama had to keep a low-profile manner. ..." 
 
 
C) "Will the United States Give up on Taiwan?" 
 
Xie Shengyou, visiting professor at the University of Bamberg in 
Germany, opined in the China-focused "Want Daily" [circulation: 
10,000] (11/24): 
 
"[U.S. President Barack] Obama visited China, and both China and the 
United States released a joint statement -- a move that met the core 
interests of the two countries.  Honestly speaking, [Chinese 
President] Hu Jintao defeated Obama in the game this time.  Even 
though Obama verbally mentioned the Taiwan Relations Act, such a 
legal foundation for U.S. arms sales to Taiwan was missing in the 
Sino-U.S. joint statement.  Does [it mean that] the United States 
has given up on Taiwan? ... 
 
"Obama said in both Tokyo and Shanghai that the United States will 
not [seek to] contain China because Washington needs Beijing's 
[cooperation] in many ways:  continuing to purchase U.S. treasury 
bonds; working together to address the financial crisis; and helping 
to deter Pyongyang and Iran from developing nuclear weapons. 
Nonetheless, it is still too early to say that China can be treated 
as an equal of the United States and work together with Washington 
as the two major nations in the world to resolve global problems. 
As a matter of fact, there is no fundamental change to Sino-U.S. 
relations, and there is a long way for China to become a fully 
responsible big country in the world. ... 
 
"U.S. foreign policy has its continuity and consistency.  Besides, 
for the sake of its own core interests, the United States will 
continue to act in accordance with the Taiwan Relations Act to sell 
defensive weapons to Taiwan and to strengthen cooperation with 
Taiwan.  But given mainland China's growing political and economic 
strength, Washington will gradually come to realize or, further, to 
acknowledge Beijing's position.  Washington will not give up on 
Taiwan, but Taiwan's importance will be increasingly marginalized 
under the framework of U.S. core interests.  This is a [trend] to 
which the Taiwan people with growing Taiwan-centric consciousness 
must pay attention." 
 
D) "Burghardt's Visit to Taipei" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (11/24): 
 
"... The haste with which Burghardt is visiting Taipei -- just a 
week after President Obama left China -- is greatly appreciated, of 
course.  That shows Washington wants Taipei to understand as soon as 
possible Uncle Sam won't walk out on Taiwan while trying to win 
Chinese 'friendship.'  Washington knows full well Taipei must be 
seriously concerned because President Obama mentioned only briefly 
the Taiwan Relations Act of 1979, which promises U.S. assistance, 
particularly in the form of arms sales, to the island to defend 
itself against possible attack from the People's Republic. ... 
 
"Obama didn't make mention of the act in Shanghai nor in his talks 
with Chinese President Hu Jintao in Beijing.  But he told the 
American press of one of the most important pillars of U.S. foreign 
policy vis--vis China and Taiwan.  Burghardt described Obama's 
mention of the act as motivated by 'a personal desire to make sure 
it's mentioned.'  Burghardt had to calm the jitters of our 
government leaders roused by Obama's omission of mention about the 
1979 act in Shanghai and his cursory remarks in Beijing.  Burghardt 
also had to inform Taipei the United States is still reviewing the 
sales of F-16 C/D fighters.  Taiwan needs them as soon as 
practicable.  At any rate, we are glad the United States saw to it 
that Taipei was reassured almost at once that Obama's China trek did 
no harm to Taiwan's national interest." 
 
E) "Obama's Jarring First Trip to China" 
 
Former Washington correspondent Charles Snyder opined in the 
pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] (11/24): 
 
"US President Barack Obama's maiden trip to China contained some 
 
very troubling aspects for Taiwan. Obama allowed the Chinese 
leadership to completely frame the interchanges on the Taiwan issue, 
and demonstrated a disregard of the US' vital role in helping to 
keep Taiwan free of Chinese control or rule.  At one point, Obama 
came within a split-second of declaring that Taiwan is part of 
China. Throughout the trip, the existence of the Taiwan Relations 
Act (TRA) was virtually forgotten, and Obama ducked the issues of 
China's military threat to Taiwan and the need for the US to help 
Taiwan defend itself. ...  In a joint press conference, Chinese 
President Hu Jintao said Obama 'on various occasions has reiterated' 
that the US 'respects China's sovereignty and territorial integrity 
when it comes to Taiwan,' and Obama echoed that commitment in the 
context of a one-China policy. Does that mean Obama winked and 
conceded China's territorial claims to Taiwan during their private 
talks? ... 
 
"The most jarring moment came during the 'town hall' session on 
Obama's first day in China. The meeting was closely orchestrated by 
the Chinese leaders, and questions were tightly scripted. The Taiwan 
question was picked via the Internet from a Taiwan businessman 
operating in China, who said he is "worried" about US arms sales and 
that his business is doing well because of the Taiwanese 
government's current cross-strait policy.  Obama said he backed a 
one-China policy, and praised the reduction in cross-strait tension, 
saying he hoped the improvement would continue 'between Taiwan and 
the rest of -- and the People's Republic.'  He was about to declare 
Taiwan to be part of China, reflective of a predilection to see 
reality in that way. It was, in the word of a leading Washington 
expert in China and Taiwan, a reflection of his 'mind set.'  How did 
he get this 'mind set?'  Surely the administration's experts on 
China know that 'official' US policy is that the status of Taiwan is 
undetermined and solvable only with the approval of the Taiwanese 
people. They are too savvy to give him a bum steer. ..." 
 
F) "U.S.-Taiwan Beef Flap Is Not Phony Issue" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" [circulation: 
20,000] editorialized (11/24): 
 
"Speaking with reporters yesterday morning, American Institute for 
Taiwan Chairman Raymond Burghardt stated that the simmering 
controversy over a protocol signed Oct. 22 between the U.S. and 
Taiwan's Chinese Nationalist Party (Kuomintang) government to 
liberalize U.S. beef imports was a 'phony issue.' ...  Contrary to 
the sentiments expressed by the AIT chairman, demands raised by 
consumer, and health safety protection groups and the DPP for 
renegotiation of the October 22 protocol aim to guard against 
genuine and grave dangers to both the health security of our 23 
million citizens and the health of our democracy and are not 
'anti-American' but pro-health and pro-democracy. 
 
"First, it is necessary to recognize that there are genuine health 
safety concerns associated with US beef products, especially ground 
beef and 'offals' which are known to carry higher risk of BSE, which 
can cause the fatal variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (vCJD) in 
humans, and other pathogens.  BSE is particularly worrisome because, 
as acknowledged by the U.S. Department of Agriculture's own Food 
Safety and Inspection Service, there are no effective preventative 
tests or effective treatment for BSE and because prions, the 
suspected agent, cannot be killed by cooking, even by microwave, 
which means that consumers cannot "protect themselves. In sum, there 
is no 'acceptable' level of risk for the entry of BSE into Taiwan's 
food chain. 
 
"Contrary to claims by President Ma Ying-jeou and other KMT 
government officials, the October 22 protocol provides weaker 
protection for Taiwan consumers than similar agreements signed 
between Washington and Japan and South Korea. ...It is worth noting 
that U.S. based consumer and health safety organizations, such as 
the Consumers Union, have expressed little confidence in the 
effectiveness of the procedures put in place by USDA, which has a 
vested interest in beef exports, to protect even the health of US 
citizens.  Ma's claim that Taiwan had no option but to accept such 
liberalization as part of its obligations as a member of the World 
Trade Organization disregards the WTO's Agreement on Application of 
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, which gives member states the 
power to carry out import risk assessments and implement import 
controls over goods which may pose serious health risks. ...  The 
continued defiance of this principle by the KMT government, 
including its refusal to submit agreements signed with the 
authoritarian People's Republic of China for legislative 
ratification, constitute a 'clear and present' threat to the 
survival of Taiwan's democracy as well as our national and health 
security." 
 
STANTON