09DUBLIN502
IRELAND'S NOMINEE FOR EU COMMISSIONER
Wed Nov 25 00:00:00 +0100 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Dublin
VZCZCXRO8481
PP RUEHDBU RUEHFL RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHNP RUEHROV RUEHSL RUEHSR
DE RUEHDL #0502/01 3291303
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 251303Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY DUBLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0320
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHBL/AMCONSUL BELFAST PRIORITY 1109C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 DUBLIN 000502 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/24/2019 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINR ECON EUN EI
SUBJECT: IRELAND'S NOMINEE FOR EU COMMISSIONER 
 
REF: DUBLIN 416 AND PREVIOUS 
 
DUBLIN 00000502  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Robert J. Faucher.  Reasons 1.4(b/d). 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY: A highly placed official (PROTECT) in the 
Prime Minister's office told us that Ireland's nominee for 
the first post-Lisbon European Commission, Maire 
Geoghegan-Quinn, was tapped not only for her qualifications 
but also for domestic and EU-wide political reasons.  Ireland 
hopes for an economic portfolio of "moderate" importance, and 
nominating a woman with Geoghegan-Quinn's background was 
thought to improve the chances of garnering such a portfolio. 
 Geoghegan-Quinn's resume suggests she could handle a 
Commission job well, and we do not expect her past 
association with anti-Lisbon crusader Declan Ganley to affect 
her candidacy.  She is currently a member of the European 
Court of Auditors and served three times as a cabinet 
minister during 22 years as a member of the Irish parliament. 
 END SUMMARY. 
 
---------------------------------- 
FACTORS DETERMINING THE NOMINATION 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (C) After Prime Minister Brian Cowen announced 
Geoghegan-Quinn's nomination on November 17, Poloff talked to 
John Callinan (PROTECT), Assistant Secretary General of the 
European and International Affairs Division in the Department 
of the Prime Minister.  Callinan said Cowen had decided on 
Geoghegan-Quinn personally, and that, given that all of the 
top contenders had roughly equivalent personal 
qualifications, two factors dominated in his decision-making 
process: domestic political considerations, and the desire 
for an important portfolio for the next Irish EU 
Commissioner.  Geoghegan-Quinn was the contender who best fit 
the bill in both areas. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
DOMESTIC POLITICS: THE COALITION'S SLIM MAJORITY 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶3. (C) Callinan confirmed the widely held assumption of press 
and pundits that Cowen wanted to nominate someone of his own 
party (centrist Fianna Fail), but that he could not afford to 
lose a seat in the Irish parliament with the governing 
coalition holding only a four-seat majority.  This ruled out 
nominating not only a current member of parliament but also a 
sitting minister, as all cabinet ministers also hold 
parliament seats.  Geoghegan-Quinn represented a good 
solution to this dilemma.  She is a Fianna Fail member who 
has had ample experience both as a cabinet minister and as a 
member of parliament; she left electoral politics in 1997 but 
has current EU experience as a member of the European Court 
of Auditors since 2000. 
 
------------------------------------- 
EU POLITICS: GETTING A GOOD PORTFOLIO 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (C) Callinan said the desire to optimize Ireland's chances 
of getting as important a Commission portfolio as possible 
was a primary factor in Cowen,s decision to nominate 
Geoghegan-Quinn.  Callinan told us Cowen had spoken "many 
times" to Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso, who makes 
the final decision on which portfolios each new Commissioner 
will get.  Cowen had discussed possible nominees and made 
known to Barroso which portfolios Ireland wanted most. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
GOING FOR MID-IMPORTANCE ECONOMIC POST 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (C) Callinan said that Ireland was shooting for an 
economic portfolio of mid-level importance.  Cowen did not 
believe Ireland, as a small EU member state, had a chance at 
a high-importance portfolio this time around for three 
reasons.  First, outgoing Irish EU Commissioner Charlie 
McCreevy had had a high-importance portfolio, Internal 
Market, for the past five years; second, McCreevy, rightly or 
wrongly, was not well thought of in Brussels ) the general 
consensus was that he had not worked hard nor performed at a 
level worthy of the portfolio; and third, despite the 
resounding success of the October 2 referendum (reftels), the 
trauma of the Lisbon Treaty debate had weakened Ireland's 
hand in Brussels.   In this context, what Ireland wanted to 
avoid if at all possible was a low-importance portfolio, such 
as "anything to do with linguistics." 
 
------------------------------------- 
GOING FOR "FORWARD-LOOKING" PORTFOLIO 
------------------------------------- 
 
 
DUBLIN 00000502  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶6. (C) In contrast to what is widely reported in the Irish 
media, Callinan said Ireland did not want the budget 
portfolio.  Neither was agriculture its top choice.  Although 
Ireland would be relatively satisfied with agriculture, as 
the EU's Common Agricultural Policy was very important to 
Ireland, it would prefer a more "forward-looking portfolio, 
such as one covering research and development or knowledge 
society.  R&D or knowledge society, said Callinan, would fit 
with how Ireland wants to position itself coming out of the 
global recession. 
 
----------------------------------- 
NOMINEE FITS BARROSO'S, PM'S, BILLS 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (C) Given the considerations described in paras 3-6 above, 
Callinan said, Geoghegan-Quinn was again the best choice. 
Not only did she have the governmental and political 
background to command a decent portfolio (see paras 10-11 
below for biographic information), but she is also a woman ) 
and Barroso had pointedly called for member states to 
nominate women for the next Commission.  Her qualifications 
did not necessarily stand out from those of other possible 
nominees (Callinan mentioned former European Parliament 
president Pat Cox as the second choice, followed by former PM 
and EU Ambassador to the U.S. John Bruton). All have 
impressive resumes that would augur a successful term as 
Commissioner, Callinan said.  However, unlike Cox and Bruton, 
Geoghegan-Quinn is a Fianna Fail member and a woman. 
 
--------------------------------- 
NOMINEE AND ANTI-LISBON CRUSADER? 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶8. (C) Callinan confirmed press reports that, during her time 
in the private sector from 1997-2000, Geoghegan-Quinn had sat 
on the board of the Ganley Group, a company run by Declan 
Ganley, who spearheaded the successful anti-Lisbon campaign 
in 2008 and played a prominent, if belated, role in the 
September 2009 "no" campaign.  Callinan added, though, that 
at the time, Ganley was known only as one of the "most 
successful and forward-looking entrepreneurs in Ireland." 
His views on the EU were unknown until recent years, and 
therefore inconsequential.  In fact, Callinan opined, 
Geoghegan-Quinn's association with the Ganley Group, a 
company specializing in investment in emerging technologies, 
only strengthens the case that she could obtain the type of 
forward-looking economic portfolio that Ireland wants for its 
EU Commissioner. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
COMMENT: GEOGHEGAN-QUINN WILL BE COMPETENT 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶9. (C) Geoghegan-Quinn, who has worked in Luxembourg since 
2000 and retired from Irish politics in 1997, is not known 
personally to us.  Her background (see paras 10-11) and 
reputation in Ireland indicate, however, that she may be 
expected to be a competent Commissioner and interlocutor with 
the U.S.  Her ample ministerial experience gives her 
familiarity with the cabinet-level type of work that closely 
resembles that of an EU Commissioner, and her EU-related 
experience ) both as Minister of State for European Affairs 
and as a member of the European Court of Auditors ) 
indicates a good grounding in the how the EU works.  END 
COMMENT. 
 
---------------------------- 
GEOGHEGAN-QUINN'S BACKGROUND 
---------------------------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) Maire Geoghegan-Quinn was born in 1950 in County 
Galway in the west of Ireland.  Her academic degree is in 
education.  She is married with two adult children.  She is a 
member of the Fianna Fail party (centrist), and served as a 
member of the Irish parliament for 22 years, from 1975-1997. 
In 1979 Geoghegan-Quinn became Ireland's first female cabinet 
minister, when she was appointed Minister for the Gaeltacht, 
the Gaelic-speaking areas of Ireland.  She remained in that 
position until 1981, following that with service as cabinet 
minister in other departments or in a slightly lower-ranking 
minister of state position on many occasions:  in 1982, she 
was Minister of State for Education; from 1987-91 she was 
Minister of State for European Affairs; from 1992-93, 
Geoghegan-Quinn was Minister for Tourism, Transport and 
Communications, and from 1993-94 she was Minister of Justice. 
 She left politics in 1997 and worked for the next three 
years as a business consultant and print and broadcast 
journalist.  She served on the Board of Directors of Aer 
Lingus and the Ganley Group, Declan Ganley's private equity 
firm specializing in start-up companies in new technology 
fields.  From 2000 until now, she has worked as a member of 
 
DUBLIN 00000502  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
the European Court of Auditors, the Luxembourg-based 
institution that monitors and audits the collection and 
expenditure of EU funds. 
 
------------------------ 
REPUTATION FOR TOUGHNESS 
------------------------ 
 
¶11. (C) Geoghegan-Quinn is known for her toughness.  At a 
meeting in November 1991 she told the then-Prime Minister, 
Charles Haughey, that the people of her constituency, Galway 
West, never wanted to see his face on an election poster 
again.  In opposition to Haughey's leadership she resigned as 
Minister of State.  Three months later, the efforts of 
Geoghegan-Quinn and other members of the so-called "Country 
and Western Alliance," which included Brian Cowen, led to 
Haughey's being replaced as Prime Minister and Fianna Fail 
leader by Albert Reynolds.  Geoghegan-Quinn was appointed 
Minister for Tourism, Transport and Communications for her 
loyalty to Reynolds.  In 1993, as Minister for Justice, 
Geoghegan-Quinn introduced substantial reform legislation, 
including the decriminalization of homosexuality.  Widely 
tipped to be the first female Prime Minister, she challenged 
Bertie Ahern for the position when Reynolds retired, in 
November 1994.  However, with the odds stacked against her on 
the day the Fianna Fail members of parliament voted on who 
should replace Reynolds, she withdrew from the contest and 
Ahern became Prime Minister.  In 1997 she resigned from Irish 
politics, citing invasion of privacy in reference to 
newspaper reports about her son's having been expelled from 
school.  When then-Prime Minister Ahern appointed her to the 
European Court of Auditors, press and pundits interpreted it 
as a low-key but lucrative end to a political career. 
FAUCHER