06MANAGUA2691
FSLN TRANSITION TEAM SEEKS SOCIAL INVESTMENT,
Wed Dec 13 00:00:00 +0100 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXRO4439
PP RUEHLMC
DE RUEHMU #2691/01 3472018
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 132018Z DEC 06
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8434
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS PRIORITY 0866
RUEHLMC/MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORP WASHDC PRIORITY
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 MANAGUA 002691 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/13/2016 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PINR KDEM NU
SUBJECT: FSLN TRANSITION TEAM SEEKS SOCIAL INVESTMENT, 
POVERTY ALLEVIATION, AND ECONOMIC/AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT 
ASSISTANCE 
 
REF: A. MANAGUA 2673 
     ¶B. MANAGUA 2624 
     ¶C. MANAGUA 2611 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul A. Trivelli. Reasons 1.4 (B,D). 
 
¶1.  (U) Summary:  Ambassador and country team members 
recently presented an overview of USG programs and their 
parameters to President-elect Daniel Ortega's transition 
team.  The Ambassador reiterated our commitment to working 
with a democratic Nicaraguan government that supports open 
markets and cooperates on security issues, noting that the 
protection of U.S. citizens and investments in Nicaragua is 
essential to ensuring bilateral cooperation.  He also 
explained that most of our aid programs are tied to 
legislative requirements, for example, the annual 527 
Property Waiver and Trafficking in Persons (TIP) reports. 
Ortega transition team members were particularly interested 
in USG support that promotes social investment, alleviates 
poverty, and fosters economic and agricultural development. 
The team members, who were surprised and enthused by the 
reach and scope of our assistance in Nicaragua, will next 
meet with the appropriate U.S. counterparts to discuss 
specific program details.  End Summary. 

¶2.  (C) On December 11, Ambassador presented a ninety-minute 
overview of USG programs and their parameters and distributed 
written materials to President-elect Daniel Ortega's 
transition team.  Representing the Sandinista National 
Liberation Front (FSLN) were Rodolfo Delgado Romero, Paul 
Oquist, Silvio Conrado, and Samuel Santos.  Santos and Oquist 
were clearly in command of the Ortega team, asking most of 
the questions and offering constructive comments.  In 
addition to the Ambassador, the Embassy team included the 
DCM, USAID director, regional agricultural attache, 
Millennium Challenge Compact-Nicaragua (MCC) deputy director, 
public affairs counselor, political counselor, acting 
economic counselor, property office director, milgroup 
attache, INL-Managua director, and Peace Corps country 
director. 
 
¶3.  (U) The Ambassador reiterated our commitment to Nicaragua 
and to continue our assistance programs as long as 
Nicaragua's government remains democratic, supports open 
markets, and cooperates on security issues of mutual concern. 
 Citing current cases involving a U.S. citizen who was almost 
lynched by a mob, and a questionable court order on the 
Atlantic Coast which has halted the exploration activities of 
two U.S. oil firms, the Ambassador explained that the 
protection of U.S. citizens and U.S. investments in Nicaragua 
is essential to ensuring bilateral cooperation.  He also 
noted that Nicaraguan government cooperation is crucial to 
the success and viability of our health and education 
programs. 
 
¶4.  (U) Remarking that USG support for Nicaragua averages USD 
50 million per year, plus the MCC's USD 175 million that will 
be disbursed over a five-year period, the Ambassador 
explained that most of our aid programs are tied to 
legislative requirements, for example, the annual 527 
Property Waiver, and Human Rights, Trafficking in Persons 
(TIP), Religious Freedom, and counternarcotics reports. 
Additionally, the MCC is bound by 16 specific indicators; a 
participating country must remain within these parameters to 
remain eligible.  The Ambassador added that U.S. taxpayers 
provide USG assistance funds, and therefore, we must account 
for their use and the results produced.  The Ambassador 
further mentioned that we boost Nicaragua's development 
through our substantial financial contributions to the OAS, 
IDB, UN, and the World Bank. 
 
¶5.  (U) Embassy presenters highlighted the successful 
outcomes in the annual TIP report and 527 property waiver as 
key markers for a large part of our non-humanitarian, 
non-commercial assistance programs.  Polcouns explained that 
Nicaragua had been placed on the TIP watch list in 2004, but 
after the GON made considerable progress in addressing 
Nicaragua's trafficking problems, it was raised back to 
Category 2.  Embassy's property officer shared our concern 
over the new Nicaraguan property institute, National Reformed 
Urban and Rural Property Institute (INPUR), which transfers 
property resolution authority from the Executive to an 
independent entity and in the process, could slow or 
complicate property resolutions. 
 
¶6.  (U) Ortega transition team members were particularly 
interested in USG support that promotes social investment, 
alleviates poverty, and fosters economic and agricultural 
development.  Team members requested assistance in addressing 
Nicaragua's energy crisis and in helping Nicaragua take 
better advantage of CAFTA.  They also inquired whether the 
MCC could be expanded or additional funds provided.  The 
USAID director and the acting economic counselor mentioned a 
USAID consultant and OPIC projects that may help Nicaragua 
address its short-term and mid-term energy needs.  Regarding 
CAFTA, presenters highlighted the technical, environmental, 
and labor support programs the USG provides to Nicaragua and 
other CAFTA countries. 
 
¶7.  (U) The Ambassador related how a U.S. consultant working 
with Nicaragua's Tax Authority (DGI) was instrumental in the 
DGI's ability to modernize its tax collection system and 
substantially increase revenues.  He also mentioned the role 
of the resident U.S. Treasury advisor who works with the 
Central Bank and Finance Ministry to assist Nicaragua in 
developing a sustainable Treasury bond system.  Regarding the 
MCC, the Ambassador shared that the U.S. Congress is 
currently reviewing a proposal that would allow eligible 
countries to sign concurrent compacts. 
 
BIOS 
- - - 
 
¶8. (U) Rodolfo Delgado Romero: Delgado is a founder and the 
current director of FSLN-associated think tank, the Institute 
of Nicaraguan Studies (IEN).  He received an MBA from the 
Central American University (UCA) and has written extensively 
on public administration.  Delgado served on the board that 
was charged with liquidating the assets of the failed 
Sandinista-associated Interbank. 
 
¶9.  (U) Paul Oquist Kelley: Oquist is a UNDP development 
consultant who renounced his U.S. citizenship in the 1980s, 
joined the Sandinista revolution and became a Nicaraguan 
citizen.  He expects to retire from the UNDP within a year 
and has requested a transfer to Managua so he can assist the 
new Ortega government.  Along with Delgado, Oquist is a 
founding member of the IEN and still serves on its board of 
directors.  He received a PhD from UC Berkeley in political 
science and was a Fulbright scholar in Chile. 
 
¶10.  (C) Silvio Conrado:  Conrado is a long-time financial 
adviser to the FSLN and former Central Bank board member.  In 
2003, he was charged, but acquitted by a Sandinista judge, of 
rape and child molestation.  He was a Fulbright scholar at 
Rice University where he received a graduate degree in 
Economics.  Conrado studied high school at the Christian 
Academy in Berkley, California.  (Comment: Conrado, whose 
alleged engagement in child molestation and rape was 
mentioned in our 2003 Human Rights report, appeared a bit 
wary, likely because he knows that we are familiar with his 
case.  End Comment.) 
 
¶11.  (U) Samuel Santos Lopez: Santos is the FSLN's Foreign 
Affairs Secretary and a candidate for foreign minister.  See 
Ref. C for more information. 
 
COMMENT 
- - - - 
 
¶12.  (U) The assistance overview was a cordial step in our 
efforts to build a constructive bilateral relationship.  On 
December 13, Santos told us that following the meeting, 
transition team members met to assess its outcome.  They 
concluded the meeting was a great success and were enthused 
by the cooperation and assistance opportunities we presented. 
 Santos recounted that they were surprised and pleased by the 
reach and scope of our assistance in Nicaragua and will next 
meet with the appropriate U.S. counterparts to discuss 
specific program details. 
TRIVELLI