04HELSINKI1547
FINLAND: VIEWS ON THE DECEMBER 13-14 GAERC
Fri Dec 10 00:00:00 +0100 2004
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Helsinki
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L HELSINKI 001547 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/ERA AND EUR/NB, PRAGUE FOR HYATT 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/09/2014 
TAGS: PREL ETTC XF CH HR IR TU UP FI EUN EU GAERC
SUBJECT: FINLAND: VIEWS ON THE DECEMBER 13-14 GAERC 
 
REF: STATE 258831 
 
Classified By: POL Chief John Hall for reasons 1.5(B) and (D) 
 
¶1. (U) We met with Finnish MFA EU Correspondent Kimmo 
Lahdevirta to discuss the agenda for next week's GAERC 
meeting and the European Council meeting to follow.  Finnish 
views, by issue: 
 
¶2. (C) China Arms Embargo: Lahdevirta said his understanding 
is that the EU has reached consensus on revisions to the Code 
of Conduct, except for two issues: a difference of views 
regarding the primacy of national law in some cases, and 
whether to make the Code legally binding.  He opined that the 
first issue ought to be resolved fairly easily, but the 
second is much more difficult and may have to be carried over 
into Luxembourg's presidency.  Finland strongly favors making 
the Code legally binding, he said, but "a whole host of 
others" are opposed.  The GoF, Lahdevirta added, has not 
wanted to link lifting of the embargo with completion of work 
on the Code of Conduct.  We said this did not seem logical -- 
if the Finns want a legally binding Code of Conduct, one 
would think that the best tactic to get it would be to insist 
on the embargo staying in place until their demand is met. 
 
¶3. (C) Ukraine: Lahdevirta agreed that the EU and the U.S. 
are on the same wavelength regarding the election and 
post-election developments.  He remarked that the 
demonstrations in Kiev clearly show strong pro-change, 
pro-modernization sentiments, but do not necessarily show a 
pro-Western feeling.  In any case, he said, the Finns are 
pleased and relieved that so far there has been no bloodshed, 
and feel it is "important to emphasize the integrity of 
Ukraine against any secession."  The GoF wonders if enough 
time remains to complete the technical arrangements for a new 
vote on December 26, but if the vote is held, it is important 
that Western nations field as many observers as possible. 
Finland is considering on a national basis whether it can 
increase its own contribution. 
 
¶4. (C) Middle East: Lahdevirta did not see any difference 
between EU views and the U.S. position of reftel.  In 
particular, he agreed that the Palestinian Authority must be 
headed by a legitimate leadership, and must show that it can 
work.  It is also important that Israel and the Palestinians 
cooperate on planning for Gaza withdrawal, "so that no 
vaccuum develops between them." 
 
¶5. (C) Iran: Lahdevirta said he expected the GAERC to 
reassert the necessity for Iran to stick to its commitments 
-- and for the international community to be given the 
opportunity to verify that.  Iran must understand that 
without such verification, there is no possibility of 
anything happening on the "carrot" side.  He said it seems it 
will take quite some time before things change for the better 
in Iranian society -- although on the other hand, events in 
Ukraine show that change can happen rapidly. 
 
¶6. (C) Turkey: Lahdevirta said the Finns expect Turkey and 
Croatia to be the most sensitive issues at the European 
Council meeting.  The Finns are cautiously optimistic that 
the Council will agree to begin accession talks for Turkey, 
although the date remains up in the air.  In any case, the 
firm GoF view is that the question before the EU is 
negotiation on full Turkish membership, not on some lesser 
status.  Lahdevirta remarked that a Turkish indication of 
willingness to recognize Cyprus would obviously be an 
important step that would certainly help "pave the way." 
 
¶7. (C) Croatia: Drawing on reftel points, we stressed the 
need to keep the pressure on Croatia to cooperate with the 
ICTY.  The Finns expect that the idea of agreeing to set a 
date for negotiations, but making it conditional on 
cooperation with ICTY, will be acceptable to a majority of EU 
nations -- but perhaps not all. 
MACK