04TELAVIV6504
WB/G SITREP: ISRAELI TROOPS RE-ENTER KHAN YUNIS
Wed Dec 22 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEL AVIV 006504 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR BURNS/SATTERFIELD/DIBBLE 
 
NEA/SA/EX FOR RICHIE 
 DEPT FOR DS/IP/ITA 
 DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA 
 
DRL FOR A/S CRANER 
 NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN 
 
USAID FOR DCHA, DCHA/FPP, PRM FOR DEWEY/GREENE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG PHUM PREL PTER ASEC CASC GZ IS
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: ISRAELI TROOPS RE-ENTER KHAN YUNIS 
KILLING ONE AND INJURING THREE PALESTINIANS: ONE ISRAELI 
KILLED AND EIGHT PALESTINIANS ARRESTED IN THE WEST BANK: 
DECEMBER, 22, 2004 (1500 HOURS LOCAL) 
 
 
This is a joint ConGen Jerusalem/Embassy Tel Aviv cable. 
 
Â¶1.  (SBU) Summary: One Palestinian was killed and three 
others wounded as Israeli forces re-entered the Khan Yunis 
refugee camp on December 22 in an effort to halt mortar and 
rocket attacks on nearby settlements.  Palestinian gunmen 
shot and killed an Israeli security guard December 22 who was 
protecting construction equipment near the separation barrier 
in the southern West Bank.  On December 21, the IDF arrested 
eight Palestinians in the West Bank, including a leader of 
the Al-Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades in the Jenin area.  End Summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
(SBU) ATTACKS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Deaths: Palestinian gunmen December 22 shot and killed an 
Israeli security guard who was protecting construction 
equipment near a section of the separation barrier west of 
Hebron.  The IDF is conducting searches of Palestinian 
villages in the area to apprehend the gunmen. 
 
-- Injuries: Nil. 
 
-- Arrests: On December 21, the IDF arrested a leader of the 
Al-Aqsa Martyrs, Brigades in the Jenin area, Bassam Shayk, 
according to Israeli and Palestinian reports. 
 
-- Arrests: On December 21, seven other Palestinians were 
arrested in different areas of the West Bank, according to 
Palestinian media. 
 
-- Explosions: On December 21, IDF soldiers found a box 
containing explosives near the village of Ramin, east of 
Tulkarm, according to Palestinian reports.  The explosives 
were safely detonated with no reported injuries. 
 
-- Attacks: On December 21, Palestinian gunmen hurled Molotov 
cocktails, and shot at IDF soldiers in Beit Forik village 
near Nablus, according to Palestinian reports.  No casualties 
or injuries were reported. 
 
(SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS 
 
-- Marking the end of the 40-day mourning period for Yasser 
Arafat, thousands of Palestinians attended the memorial 
service in Ramallah on December 21, according to Palestinian 
newspapers.  Similar memorial services were held in other 
West Bank towns. 
 
-- The Palestinian Legislative Council (PLC) will hold a 
two-day session December 22-23 to deliberate the draft 
election law, according to Palestinian dailies. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
(SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Palestinian and Israeli media reported that a 
20-year-old Palestinian was killed by Israeli gun fire in the 
Khan Yunis refugee camp on December 22 (see "injuries.") 
 
-- Injuries: Palestinian media reported that three 
Palestinians, including two children, were wounded by Israeli 
gunfire in Khan Yunis refugee camp on December 22 (see 
deaths). 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: The IDF and Israeli media reported that 
more than 15 rockets and mortars have been launched from the 
Khan Yunis refugee camp at nearby settlements since December 
18, prompting Israeli troops to re-enter the area on the 
morning of December 22. 
 
-- Shootings: According to the IDF, Israeli troops shot at 
three Palestinian suspects, severely injuring one and 
moderately injuring the other two on December 21 (see 
"injuries.") 
 
-- Explosions: Nil. 
 
(SBU) INCURSIONS/DEMOLITIONS: Israeli media reported that IDF 
troops re-entered the Khan Yunis refugee camp on December 22 
after previously withdrawing on December 18-19 (see "deaths" 
and "injuries.") 
 
(SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS: 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was closed on December 22, with a major detour at 
Netzarim Junction. 
 
-- Erez Crossing was open for internationals and for a 
limited number of Palestinians, with 16 merchants crossing 
into Israel on December 22. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone remained closed, but 60 factory 
owners were allowed entry on December 22. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers and 
closed for the import of aggregates used in construction. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was open, but reportedly operating slowly. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was closed December 22. 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan checkpoint was closed.  Toufah checkpoint 
was closed for residents of al-Mowassi. 
 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
KURTZER