04TELAVIV6453
WB/G SITREP: PALESTINIAN TUNNELERS RESCUED ALIVE;
Mon Dec 20 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEL AVIV 006453 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR BURNS/SATTERFIELD/DIBBLE; 
NEA/SA/EX FOR RICHIE; DEPT FOR DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR 
DS/IP/NEA; 
DRL FOR A/S CRANER; NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN; 
USAID FOR DCHA, DCHA/FPP, PRM FOR DEWEY/GREENE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG PHUM PREL PTER ASEC CASC GZ IS
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: PALESTINIAN TUNNELERS RESCUED ALIVE; 
PALESTINIAN PRISONER RELEASE APPROVED: DECEMBER 20, 2004 
(1400 HOURS LOCAL) 
 
 
This is a joint ConGen Jerusalem/Embassy Tel Aviv cable. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: A total of 11 Palestinians were killed and 
another 49 were wounded in clashes that erupted during an IDF 
incursion into the Khan Yunis December 17-18 intended to stop 
mortar and rocket fire on Israeli and Israeli settler towns. 
Some 127 families (600 people) fled their homes during the 
IDF operation and were accommodated in two UNRWA schools in 
the area.  When the IDF withdrew at 2200 hours December 18, a 
total of 44 housing units (housing 57 families or 308 people) 
had been destroyed, and another three (accommodating 25 
people) had been heavily damaged.  The families housed in the 
UNRWA school returned to their homes on December 19, after 
the IDF withdrawal.  Five Palestinians reportedly killed 
December 17 in the collapse of a weapons smuggling tunnel 
along the Egyptian-Rafah border were rescued alive after 
having been trapped for more than 12 hours.  Palestinian 
militants fired a total of 13 Qassam rockets at Israeli and 
Israeli settler towns and villages December 17-19.  Two, 
possibly three, Israelis were lightly wounded by the rockets. 
 In the West Bank, a total of six Palestinians were injured, 
one of them seriously, during three separate clashes between 
Palestinians and IDF soldiers December 19 in Beituniya, near 
Ramallah, Tulkarem, and Halhul, near Hebron.  The GOI 
December 19 approved the release of 170 Palestinian prisoners 
in accordance with an agreement made between Egypt and Israel 
for the release of Azzam Azzam.  End Summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injuries: Three Palestinians were injured during clashes 
with the IDF December 19 in Beituniya near Ramallah. 
 
-- Injuries: Two Palestinians were wounded December 19 in 
clashes with the IDF in Tulkarem. 
 
-- Injury: Two Palestinians December 19 stabbed and 
moderately wounded an Israeli in the Abu Tur neighborhood of 
Jerusalem.  The circumstances of the incident are unclear. 
 
-- Injury: A Palestinian was seriously wounded during clashes 
with the IDF December 19 in the village of Halhul north of 
Hebron. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) ARRESTS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Curfew/Arrests: The IDF December 18 imposed a curfew on 
Qalqiliya and conducted searches in the city.  The IDF 
arrested at least nine Palestinians during the operation. 
 
-- Arrests: The IDF December 18 arrested 11 Palestinians in 
Hebron, Bethlehem, and Tulkarem  Palestinians fired shots at 
IDF soldiers operating in Tulkarem  There were no injuries 
reported from this incident. 
 
-- Shooting: Palestinian gunmen December 18 fired on IDF 
soldiers operating in the Askar refugee camp near Nablus. 
There were no injuries reported in this incident. 
 
-- Arrests: The IDF arrested 14 Palestinians during 
operations overnight December 19-20 in several localities in 
the West Bank, including seven arrests in the Balata refugee 
camp in Nablus. 
 
-- The Israeli Border police December 20 arrested a 
Palestinian in possession of a knife at the Kalandia 
checkpoint north of Jerusalem who apparently intended to 
attack the Israeli border guards. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) DEMOLITIONS: 
 
-- The IDF entered December 20 the village of Arraba near 
Jenin and blew up the homes of PIJ and al-Aqsa Martyrs, 
Brigades activists who are currently in Israeli custody. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) PALESTINIAN PRISONERS: 
 
-- An Israeli ministerial committee headed by Prime Minister 
Sharon approved December 19 the release of 170 Palestinian 
prisoners in accordance with an agreement made between Egypt 
and Israel for the release of Azzam Azzam.  According to 
press reports, 120 Fatah activists will be released along 
with 50 Palestinians arrested inside Israel without legal 
entry permits.  Palestinian Authority (PA) officials 
criticized the prisoner release as insufficient, adding that 
the decision to release prisoners was not coordinated with 
the PA and that priority should be given to those prisoners 
serving lengthy sentences. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- Hamas marked the 17th anniversary of the founding of the 
movement with a march December 18 through the West Bank city 
of Nablus.  A similar march took place in Tulkarem 
 
-- The Palestinian Authority (PA) will hold a memorial 
service December 21 for Yasir Arafat in Ramallah.  Senior 
Arab officials including Egyptian Intelligence Director Omar 
Sulayman and the Jordanian Minister of Interior are expected 
to attend the observance marking the end of the 40-day 
mourning period since the death of Arafat. 
 
-- Following a brief stopover in Amman for meetings with 
Jordanian officials, Prime Minister Abu Ala,a and PLO chief 
Abu Mazen are expected December 20 to arrive in Ramallah. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths/Injuries: UNRWA reported that a total of 11 
Palestinians were killed and another 49 were wounded in 
clashes that broke out during the December 17-18 IDF 
incursion into the Khan Yunis refugee camp (see 
"Incursions/Demolitions"). 
 
-- Death: UNRWA reported that one Palestinian, reportedly 
affiliated of the PRC, died December 17 of wounds he 
sustained during the September 30 IDF incursion into the 
Jabaliya refugee camp. 
 
-- Injuries: Israeli media reported that five Palestinians 
reportedly killed December 17 in the collapse of a weapons 
smuggling tunnel along the Egyptian-Rafah border, were 
rescued alive after having been trapped for more than 12 
hours.  Media reports December 18 put the number of rescued 
men at six, rather than the five initially reported December 
¶17. 
 
-- Injuries: The IDF reported that IDF soldiers shot and 
wounded two Palestinians December 19 near Rafah. 
 
-- Injury: The IDF reported that IDF soldiers shot and 
wounded one Palestinian December 19 when they opened fire on 
three "Palestinian suspects" north of Khan Yunis. 
 
-- Injuries: Israeli media reported that three Israelis were 
lightly injured in a December 19 Qassam rocket attack on the 
Israeli town of Sderot.  The IDF reported two Israelis 
wounded in the same attack (see "Rockets/Mortars"). 
 
-- Injuries: UNRWA reported that two Palestinians, including 
a four-year-old girl, were injured December 18 in Rafah in 
exchanges of fire between IDF soldiers and Palestinian 
militants.  A third Palestinian was injured later the same 
day. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: The IDF reported that Palestinian 
militants fired a total of 13 Qassam rockets at Israeli and 
Israeli settler towns and villages December 17-19.  Israeli 
media reported that three Israelis were lightly injured; the 
IDF reported that two Israelis were injured in the same 
attack (see "Injuries"). 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: The IDF reported that Palestinian 
militants fired a total of ten mortar shells and two 
anti-tank rockets at IDF targets in the Gaza Strip December 
18-19. 
 
-- Shootings: The IDF reported that Palestinian militants 
launched a total of nine shooting attacks against IDF and 
Israeli settler targets in the Gaza Strip December 17-20. 
 
-- Explosions: UNRWA and Israeli media reported that IAF 
helicopter gunships fired two rockets at what was reportedly 
a Hamas weapons workshop inside a house in Gaza City December 
¶17.  The house was heavily damaged, but no injuries were 
reported. 
 
-- Explosions: UNRWA reported that IAF aircraft fired two 
missiles at an open area northeast of Shaykh Zayed City (a 
neighborhood of Gaza City) December 19.  Israeli media 
reported that the rockets were targeting a Qassam rocket 
launcher.  UNRWA reported that a group of boys had been 
playing in the area. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) INCURSIONS/DEMOLITIONS: 
 
-- UNRWA reported that some 30 IDF tanks, APCs and bulldozers 
entered the southern area of Khan Yunis refugee camp December 
17 in response to continued mortar and rocket fire from the 
Khan Yunis area into the Gush Katif settlement bloc and into 
Israel.  The ground forces, supported by helicopter gunships 
and UAVs, leveled buildings and were met with fierce 
resistance from Palestinian militants who gathered to repel 
the incursion using small arms, IEDs and anti-tank rockets. 
At the end of the first day, a total of nine Palestinians had 
been killed and another 30 were injured, according to UNRWA. 
Some 127 families (600 people) fled their homes during the 
IDF operation and were accommodated in two UNRWA schools in 
the area.  The incursion continued for a second day December 
18 with IAF aircraft targeting rocket and mortar launching 
sites, and bulldozers destroying houses and razing fields. 
When the IDF withdrew at 2200 hours December 18, a total of 
11 Palestinians had been killed and 49 were wounded in the 
two-day incursion.  A total of 44 housing units (housing 57 
families or 308 people) had been destroyed, and another three 
(accommodating 25 people) had been heavily damaged.  The 
families housed in the UNRWA school returned to their homes 
on December 19, after the IDF withdrawal from the area. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS: 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was open December 18-20, with a major detour at 
Netzarim Junction. 
 
-- Erez Crossing was open for internationals and for a 
limited number of Palestinians December 17-19.  No laborers 
were authorized entry, but a total of 38 merchants crossed 
into Israel December 17, none crossed on December 18, and 59 
crossed into Israel on December 19. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone remained closed December 18-20. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers December 
18-20, but was open for the import of aggregates used in 
construction December 19.  On December 20, UNRWA reported 
that Sufa Crossing was closed as the IDF searched for tunnels 
in the area. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was open December 18-20. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was closed for arrivals and departures 
December 18-20. 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan checkpoint was closed December 18-20. 
Toufah checkpoint was open for residents of al-Mowassi. 
 
¶10.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- Israeli media reported December 17 that 11 new families 
had recently moved to the  northern Gaza Strip settlement of 
Nissanit, raising the number of families living there to 304. 
 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
KURTZER