04ANKARA5847
DEMARCHE ON OSCE ELECTION OBSERVATION MISSION TO
Fri Oct 15 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 005847 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL UP TU
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE ON OSCE ELECTION OBSERVATION MISSION TO 
UKRAINE 
 
REF: STATE 220961 
 
¶1.  We presented reftel demarche October 14 to Turkish MFA 
Eastern Europe Department official Yavuz Evirgen.  Evirgen 
and MFA OSCE Section Head Korkut Gungen acknowledged that MFA 
officials are consulting with each other continuously in 
monitoring Ukrainian election developments. 
 
¶2.  Evirgen advised that three parliamentarians from the 
Turkish Grand National Assembly (TGNA) have volunteered to 
monitor the Ukrainian elections:  one member from the Council 
of Europe delegation and two from the OSCE delegation.  He 
expressed regret that no Turkish academic from the Higher 
Education Council has volunteered.  Evirgen was not sure 
which TGNA parliamentary members would participate in the 
possible second round on November 21 because Parliamentary 
committees are currently being reorganized, but promised to 
advise us if there are additional volunteers.  He was 
personally optimistic that a high level of observers would 
facilitate a good election and also noted that three 
parliamentarians are planning to monitor the upcoming 
elections in Belarus. 
 
EDELMAN