04DJIBOUTI1373
REPORT OF CONDEMNATION OF DJIBOUTI IN PORTO-ALLEGRE
Wed Oct 27 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Djibouti
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS DJIBOUTI 001373 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV ELAB PHUM BR DJ
SUBJECT: REPORT OF CONDEMNATION OF DJIBOUTI IN PORTO-ALLEGRE 
(BRAZIL) MEETING 
 
 
¶1. (U) Alleged violations of labor rights have come to the 
forefront of opposition party attentions after the Fourth 
Congress of International Education held in Porto-Allegre, Brazil 
16-26 July, 2004.  In its first few issues back from their summer 
holiday, La Realite, the opposition journal published by the 
Republican Alliance for Democracy (ARD), reported that the Porto- 
Allegre Congress on Education in global progress condemned 
Djibouti's union liberties and that a six point resolution was 
passed which demanded an end to alleged violations of labor 
rights there. End summary. 
 
¶2. (U) The Congress of International Education, an international 
education union from 161 countries, which represents 315 
organizations in which 26 million persons are affiliated. Two 
Djibouti education syndicates were represented in the fourth 
Congress: First Degree Syndicate (SEP) and Second Degree 
Syndicate (SYNESED). SEP and SYNESED are both affiliated with the 
Union of Djibouti Workers (UDT). Souleiman Ahmed Mohamed, ex- 
General Secretary of SYNESED and current Deputy General Secretary 
of UDT attended the congress. According to Ahmed, Djibouti was 
condemned for blocking development of syndicate liberties and 
violations of ILO Conventions. The Congress voted unanimously to 
approve a six-point resolution, according to the La Realite 
report. It reportedly required the Government of Djibouti to 
proceed unconditionally with the professional reintegration of 
all those who were sanctioned because of their union activities. 
The congress asked Djibouti to put an end to the obstacles to 
union liberties, to recognize and respect their freedom and 
independence as they are affiliated with international 
organizations like the International Confederation of Free 
Syndicates (CISL) and the International Education Congress. The 
final requirement was that Djibouti should open negotiations with 
unions and the chaotic situation has to come to an end. 
 
¶3. (U) Post would appreciate any information Embassy Brasilia can 
provide on this conference and any resolutions passed concerning 
Djibouti.