04TAIPEI3153
MEDIA REACTION: TAIWAN'S ARMS PROCUREMENTS
Fri Oct 08 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TAIPEI 003153 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/RSP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - 
ROBERT PALLADINO 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: TAIWAN'S ARMS PROCUREMENTS 
 
 
"America, Please Sign Again a Joint Defense Treaty 
[with Taiwan] If [You] See Taiwan as a `Partner'" 
 
Chen Charng-ven, a professor of law in Taipei, said in 
an op-ed in the conservative, pro-unification "United 
Daily News" (10/7): 
 
". The writer can fully understand [Deputy 
Undersecretary of Defense Richard] Lawless' position in 
maintaining the United States' and Taiwan's interests. 
But his speech deserves more thorough consideration 
when it is the taxpayers of Taiwan who have to pay the 
bills from the arms deals. 
 
"First, [is it true that] if the special arms budget 
fails to pass, it will signify that Taiwan pays no 
attention to its national security?  The NT$610 billion 
arms deal does not necessarily equal national security. 
[Taiwan's] national security hinges on its goodwill 
gestures to maintain peace, its orderly administration 
of domestic affairs, its people's self-confidence and 
also the development of mainland China; it does not 
necessarily rely on its arms procurements. . The best 
example is the former Soviet Union, which collapsed 
partly because of its excessive dedication to military 
buildups without recognizing its limits.  Also, the 
weapons that Taiwan plans to buy from the United States 
do not certainly guarantee [complete satisfaction of] 
Taiwan's `national security' needs. 
 
"Second, [is it true that] the United States and `other 
countries' will doubt Taiwan's commitment toward its 
own national defense should the budget fail to pass? 
The writer is very curious: what other countries, in 
addition to the United States, are concerned about 
Taiwan's security?  In fact, Lawless' statement just 
underscored one thing, namely, Taiwan and the United 
States no longer shares a joint defense treaty, and the 
United States has no obligations under international 
law to defend Taiwan.  If Lawless can truly represent 
Washington by saying that `the U.S. government will 
stand firmly as the backing for Taiwan's self-defense' 
and if Washington is really interested in being 
Taiwan's partner, [we hope that] Washington could re- 
sign a joint defense treaty with Taiwan and guarantee 
the security of Taiwan as a `partner.'  If the United 
States is willing to do so, it may be worthwhile for 
the taxpayers in Taiwan to pay NT$610 billion or even 
more money for our security. ." 
 
PAAL