05PRETORIA56
SOUTH AFRICAN RELIEF EFFORTS FOR TSUNAMI VICTIMS
Wed Jan 05 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Pretoria
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS PRETORIA 000056 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/S TCRAIG AND KGAITHER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AEMR EAID PGOV
SUBJECT: SOUTH AFRICAN RELIEF EFFORTS FOR TSUNAMI VICTIMS 
 
REF: SECSTATE 959 
 
¶1. Per reftel, Econoff delivered talking points to South 
Africa's Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA) Assistant 
Director on the USA Desk Liezl Combrink.  Combrink thanked 
Econoff for the delivered talking points and noted that the 
SAG established a DFA Relief Coordinating Center to be the 
official entity for fielding private-sector donation requests 
for Tsunami relief.  DFA Officers Johan van Wyk (27) (84) 
514-7094 and Johan Paschals (27) (73) 332-0842 are the points 
of contact at the Center. 
 
¶2. Paschals told Econoff that the Center is encouraging 
interested donors to make contributions to a relief fund 
being administered by the South African Red Cross.  He said 
that as of January 5 between R2-3 million ($350-525k) had 
been donated.  Paschal said that Minister of Health Ms. Manto 
Tshabalala-Msimang and Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry 
 
SIPDIS 
Ms. Buyelwa Sonjica are attending the donor meeting in 
Indonesia and would have a much better idea of what the 
specific needs are following the donor meeting.  He said the 
SAG would announce its disaster relief plan at the January 11 
donor conference in Geneva. 
 
¶3. Paschals also noted other private relief efforts such as 
Pick'n Pay grocery store receptacles accepting cash or 
in-kind contributions.  Other relief fund have been announced 
by the Anglican Church, the South African Tamil Federation, 
the Council of Muslim Theologians, Netcare, First National 
Bank, and the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty 
to Animals.  In addition, Western Cape Premier Ebrahim Rasool 
presented a check of R500,000 ($88k) to Indonesia's 
Ambassador Abdul Nasier on behalf of the Western Cape 
Government and investment/offshore company OASIS towards 
relief efforts in Sri Lanka, Indonesia, and the Maldives. 
Several medical relief teams have also been organized by the 
private sector. 
HARTLEY