05PRETORIA942
SOUTH AFRICA - NASA VISIT EVALUATES SOUTH AFRICA'S
Fri Mar 04 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Pretoria
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PRETORIA 000942 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR OES/PCI/SHAW, OES/STC/ROTTIER, OES/SAT 
STATE ALSO FOR AF/S, AF/EPS 
EUCOM FOR J5 
OSD FOR AFRICA 
MADRID FOR NASA/MWATKINS 
NASA WASHDC FOR KRIEGER, CARROLL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KSCA SENV ECON PREL TSPL SF
SUBJECT: SOUTH AFRICA - NASA VISIT EVALUATES SOUTH AFRICA'S 
POTENTIAL TO HOST DEEP SPACE NETWORK ARRAY SITE 
 
Ref: A) Johannesburg 116; B) State 15423 
 
Sensitive but unclassified, protect accordingly. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary.  A six-member delegation from National 
Aeronautic and Space Administration (NASA) Headquarters and 
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory had a productive visit to 
South Africa January 28 through February 8.  The group, 
accompanied by Embassy Defense Attache, made site visits and 
held technical discussions on a South African-based tracking 
station under consideration for NASA's Deep Space Network 
(DSN) Array.  SAG representatives, and in particular, the 
highly-motivated Department of Science & Technology, are 
cooperating to the fullest extent possible with NASA in the 
selection effort.  End summary. 
 
Background and Introduction 
 
¶2.  (SBU) NASA's DSN must be capable of mapping the 
universe, moon, and planetary bodies for further 
international human space exploration.  To improve its 
current capability, NASA may establish a new space vehicle 
tracking station to project into deep space and receive 
signals from various stars and galaxies.  It is evaluating 
potential sites for the tracking station in Australia, Spain 
and South Africa, and could reach a decision in March 2005. 
 
¶3.  (U) South Africa is keenly interested in hosting a deep 
space vehicle tracking station for the DSN Array.  Astronomy 
is a top priority in the national R&D strategy.  The 
Southern Africa Large Telescope (SALT) project, involving 
collaboration with a number of U.S. and foreign academic 
institutions, will soon be completed.  South Africa also is 
competing actively to host the Square Kilometer Array (SKA) 
radio telescope, which will be the largest space receiving 
surface in existence. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) In support of its effort to be selected, South 
Africa's Department of Science and Technology (DST) 
submitted a detailed technical analysis to NASA.  The South 
African cabinet approved the proposal to invite NASA to 
consider South Africa as a site for a tracking station.  On 
January 28 through February 8, DST hosted a team from NASA, 
led by Dr. Barry Geldzahler, Program Executive for Space 
Operations Deep Space Network, and accompanied by Embassy 
Defense Attache Col. Michael Muolo, who has extensive 
professional experience and expertise in space policy 
issues. 
 
Site Visits and Meetings Productive 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The NASA delegation visited four sites in the 
Northern Cape province to evaluate climatic conditions, 
geology, radio interference, and general infrastructure 
capacity.  Provincial and municipal government 
representatives committed to cost-sharing for power, water 
and sewage costs associated with the project, which they 
expect to provide a major economic boost to the region.  The 
group also met with representatives of SA Telkom and 
parastatal energy company Eskom, to discuss communications 
and power requirements, and to learn about the capacity of 
South African companies to fabricate components, such as 
antennas, for the station. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) DST representatives organized and participated in 
the site visits and meetings.  DST continues to respond to 
follow up questions from NASA regarding local manufacturing 
capabilities and other requirements for hosting a tracking 
station.  In addition, DST has agreed to consider cost- 
sharing for infrastructure costs. 
 
Other Positive Outcomes 
 
¶7. (U) On February 7, Dr. Geldzahler and Marcus Watkins, 
NASA Representative to Spain, participated in an outreach 
program with selected students and teachers from nine high 
schools in the Johannesburg area, organized by the Consulate 
General's Public Affairs Section (Ref A).  The NASA 
officials fielded questions on "dark energy," NASA budgets, 
job opportunities in aerospace and broader foreign policy 
issues, and helped to deepen students' interest in space and 
science. 
DST Follow-Up with Ambassador 
 
¶8. (SBU) Soon after the visit, Director-General for Science 
& Technology Dr. Rob Adam requested a meeting with 
Ambassador Frazer to underscore the strong SAG interest in 
hosting a NASA DSN Array space vehicle tracking station. 
During the February 11 meeting, the Ambassador told Dr. Adam 
that NASA would base its decision on technical merit, but 
encouraged the government of South Africa to convey its 
strong support for the project through a letter from 
President Mbeki to President Bush, or from the Minister of 
Science & Technology to an appropriate counterpart. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Comment:  If South Africa were selected, the DSN 
Array project would generate significant economic benefits 
as well as a major infusion of technology from the U.S.  It 
would also provide an excellent boost for expanded S&T 
cooperation between the U.S. and South Africa, and for the 
bilateral relationship. However, it should be noted that 
NASA plans to develop a next generation DSN Array network 
have not yet advanced very far within the agency, and it 
will likely take time before decisions are reached on the 
array and any new NASA DSN site. 
 
¶10. (U) NASA Headquarters cleared this message. 
 
FRAZER