09PRETORIA1717
SOUTH AFRICA'S NEW POLICE COMMISSIONER HITS THE
Tue Aug 25 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Pretoria
VZCZCXRO0252
PP RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHJO RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHSA #1717/01 2370731
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 250731Z AUG 09
FM AMEMBASSY PRETORIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9418
INFO RUCNSAD/SOUTHERN AF DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PRETORIA 001717 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/S AND INL/AAE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PINR SF KCRM WMN SOCI PREL
SUBJECT: SOUTH AFRICA'S NEW POLICE COMMISSIONER HITS THE 
GROUND RUNNING 
 
¶1.  (U) Summary:  President Zuma recently appointed 
Bhekokwakhe Hamilton Cele as South Africa National Police 
Commissioner (SAPS).  Cele replaces former Jackie Selebi, who 
was placed on administrative leave in January 2008 following 
allegations of corruption. In the interim, the SAPS suffered 
from lack of leadership and by association remained under a 
cloud of suspicion.  Selebi's contract finally expired at the 
end of June 2009.  With the appointment of Cele as 
Commissioner, the SAPS has an opportunity to put the Selebi 
era behind it and move forward.  Post offers below background 
on South Africa's new top cop.  Cele's very active first 
weeks in office offer promising signs that the former teacher 
and longtime ANC insider is serious about tackling crime. 
End summary. 
 
--------------------------------- 
BACKGROUND ON THE NEW POLICE BOSS 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) Bheki Cele was born on April 22, 1952 in uMzumbe near 
Port Shepstone, KwaZulu Natal (KZN).  Cele's mother died when 
he was nine months old, and his father died when he was in 
high school.  He was raised by relatives and was a 
disciplined student. In a local interview, Cele said, "I 
remember when I was doing matric, I only had one shirt but it 
was the cleanest in the class.  The teachers asked me if I 
had a new shirt for everyday, and were amazed when I told 
them that I only had one shirt and washed it every evening." 
 
¶3. (U) As a young teacher at Mbumbulu south of Durban, Cele 
joined the ANC underground and was instrumental in founding 
the National Education Union of South Africa, now known as 
the South African Democratic Teachers' Union (SADTU).  In the 
early 1980's, Cele joined the United Democratic Movement 
(UDF), and founded youth organizations aligned to the African 
National Congress.  In 1984, state police attempted to arrest 
Cele for his political activities, but  he managed to  escape 
and fled to Angola, where he met Jacob Zuma and joined the 
ANC's military wing, UMkhonto weSize. In 1987, Cele was 
smuggled back into South Africa but was soon captured by 
state police and imprisoned on Robben Island until 1990. 
Upon his release, Cele continued his involvement with the ANC 
and was tapped to co-ordinate the organization's security and 
peace initiatives.  In 1994, he was elected to the KZN 
Provincial Executive Committee and became a member of the 
KwaZulu-Natal Legislature. He also served as the chairperson 
of the Safety and Security Portfolio Committee and the 
chaired the chairpersons of the KZN Legislature. In 2001, 
Cele was appointed the chairperson of the biggest ANC region 
in KZN, eThekwini (Durban Municipality).  He is credited for 
getting the eThekwini region to back Zuma prior to the 2007 
ANC Polokwane conference. 
 
¶4. (U) In 2004, Cele was appointed KZNMEC (member of 
Executive Council a provincial "Minister") for Transport, 
Community Safety and Liaison.  Under newly elected KZN 
Premier Zweli Mkhize, Cele retained his cabinet position as 
MEC for Transport, Community Safety and Liaison.  He is a 
member of the KZN Provincial Legislature and a member of the 
KZN Executive Council.  Cele is also a member of the National 
Executive Committee (NEC) 
 
¶5. (U) In 2004, he launched Catching Crime on the Highway, an 
initiative to unite the crime fighting efforts of the road 
traffic inspectorate and the KZN South African Police 
Services (SAPS). Cele is a flamboyant person and is known for 
QServices (SAPS). Cele is a flamboyant person and is known for 
his brightly colored, matching Stetson hats and scarves. 
 
---------------- 
LEADERSHIP STYLE 
---------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Cele is a champion of rural development and as MEC 
developed Operation kuShunquthuli, which brought road 
infrastructure development to previously neglected rural 
communities.  Cele also took a strong stance against mini bus 
related crime and reckless driving. Cele is a popular 
political figure and consistently ranks as  one of KZN's top 
five ANC leaders.  As MEC, Cele developed the reputation as a 
no-nonsense crime fighter and has often exhorted local police 
not to die with their guns in their holsters.  He has often 
intervened in mini-bus industry clashes and has shut down 
mini-bus depots when violence could not be controlled.  He 
has drawn disapproval from members of the public for 
defending the reckless driving of ministerial security 
convoys.  Interestingly, he has shunned VIP protection for 
himself. 
 
PRETORIA 00001717  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
------------------------------------ 
PROPOSED CRIME MEASURES SPARK DEBATE 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Barely one week in office, Cele called for a law 
change to make sure police can shoot at dangerous criminals 
instead of being "handcuffed."  Cele plans to ask Parliament 
to amend the Legal Code, Section 49 (guidelines for police 
officers to us deadly force) when it reconvenes this month. 
He said he would also ask for an amendment of Section 26 
(Search and seizure without a warrant), to give police 
greater powers to intervene in domestic violence.  He told 
Parliaments portfolio committee, the post-apartheid version 
of Section 49 forced police to think twice before shooting. 
Cele said the high number of police fatalities proved that 
when faced with hardened criminals, they could not afford to 
hesitate.  It was up to Members of Parliament to "take 
collective responsibility" to ensure the law was fair and did 
not afford criminals "greater rights" than their victims.  He 
said Section 26 of the act must change to remove the onus on 
police to ask permission before entering premises where 
domestic abuse is under way.  "We have a man (beating) his 
wife and (police have to say) "please can I come in." 
 
¶8.  (U) Cele said he has committed his services to ensuring 
the murder and rape is not the norm.  The commissioner just 
recently wrapped up a tour of all nine provincial police 
stations in South Africa. Cele met with all divisional 
commissioner and management officers to discuss crime 
fighting initiatives.  He said Senior Commissioners will 
spend time in problematic policing areas so they can have 
first hand experience of how to deal with such issues. He has 
also tasked his commissioners with ensuring coming up with 
strategies of cracking down on shopping center robberies. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Bheki Cele commented that he wants to create a 
country "where people aren't told they're safe, but actually 
feel safe", and that he is on a mission to change the image 
of the police and boost their morale.  As history has shown, 
high levels of morale are a preconditions for peak 
performance that is required for ensuring the safety of 
visitors and locals alike, especially at times of hosting a 
major international event like the FIFA 2010.  The outspoken 
Cele said his mandate is to ensure that all South Africans 
are safe where ever they are.  He remarked that the country 
should strive to reach a point where rape and murder is 
viewed as abnormal. He said that he would like one day for a 
young girl to be able to walk alone from a nightclub or else 
where without any fear of attack, abuse or rape. The 
controversial Cele, known as something of a Durban fashion 
trend setter, has proudly donned a police officer's uniform 
and is making an impressive debut as South Africa's new top 
cop. 
 
 
GIPS