06BOGOTA2282
BLUE LANTERN: EAVESDROPPING EQUIPMENT LICENSE
Tue Mar 14 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Bogota
VZCZCXYZ0040
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBO #2282 0731311
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 141311Z MAR 06
FM AMEMBASSY BOGOTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3105
INFO RUEHME/AMEMBASSY MEXICO 6727UNCLAS BOGOTA 002282 

SIPDIS 

SIPDIS 

DDTC: PETER DADE 

E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC KOMC MX CO US
SUBJECT: BLUE LANTERN: EAVESDROPPING EQUIPMENT LICENSE 
968580 

REF: STATE 36063 

¶1. SUMMARY: Post visited the offices of Eagle Commercial on 
Wednesday, March 8th to verify the information requested 
reftel.  The company was founded in Bogota, Colombia by 
Arquemidis Bonilla Vega in 1997 and is a registered 
distributor, importer, exporter, and retailer of electronic 
and communications equipment.  Eagle Commercial represents 
three other U.S. manufacturers of sensitive technology and 
has contracts with the U.S. Embassy in Bogota along with the 
Colombian military and police.  Eagle Commercial is located 
in a secure building in a relatively safe part of Bogota. END 
SUMMARY 

¶2. The following are answers to DDTC's questions: 

Q: Is Eagle Commercial S.A. a reputable firm? 

A: Econoff determined that Eagle Commercial is a reputable 
firm that has dealings with the GOC, USG and others.  Post's
FCS office has an on-going relationship with Eagle Commercial 
S.A. and recently provided them with assistance in signing a 
representation agreement with Taser Stun Guns from the U.S. 
Eagle Commercial is certified to sell security equipment by 
the Colombian Ministry of Defense and is ISO 9000 certified 
byBvQi in Colombia.  During a visit to Eagle Commercial's 
offices in Bogota, econoff was shown copies of the last two 
years of annual updates submitted to DDTC and obtained a copy 
of Eagle's registration letter from DDTC: number 0906-487. 
Lastly, Harris Corporation of Melbourne Florida renewed the 
Latin American representation agreement it has with Eagle 
Commercial in January of 2006. 

Q: Does Eagle have a history/track record of legitimate 
electronics business dealings? 

A: Eagle Commercial began operations in 1997 and currently 
represents the following U.S. companies; Pen-Link, iCOM, 
RACOM and Harris Corporation at either a regional or local 
level.  Econoff paid a surprise visit to Eagle Commercial and 
during the visit obtained copies of Harris Corporation's 
representational agreements, contracts with the Ministry of 
Defense, and documentation related to the Nuevo Leon 
contract.  The visit revealed that Eagle Commercial is a 
well-established company with records dating back over 
several years.  Additionally, econoff toured the facilities, 
which house 21 full-time employees and are fully equipped for 
the sale and distribution of electronics. 

Q: Does Eagle have the requisite local security in the case 
that the equipment transits Colombia before reaching Mexico? 

A: Econoff toured the Eagle Commercial facilities and 
determined that the company possesses sufficient security 
measures to keep the Harris Corporation eavesdropping 
equipment safe should it get shipped to Bogota.  Eagle 
Commercial's Bogota offices are located in a popular 
restaurant and business district close to several Embassies. 
Inside the facility, there are full-time security guards and 
sound proof glass.  Inside of the offices, there are digital 
surveillance cameras as well as voice and email recording 
systems monitoring phone conversations and computer activity. 
 Each Eagle Commercial employee is investigated for any 
derogatory information and is given a three-month trial 
period during which time the new employee is closely 
monitored. 

¶3. Comment: Econoff is confident that Eagle Commercial is a 
legitimate business and is equipped to protect the sensitive 
technology contained in the Nuevo Leon contract. 
Additionally, Eagle Commercial is the only legitimate 
distributor/representative of Harris Corporation in Latin 
America and would be the only source from which the State of 
Nuevo Leon could purchase this specific Harris Corporation 
technology. END COMMENT 

WOOD 

=======================CABLE ENDS============================