05DUBLIN1022
COLOMBIA THREE TURN THEMSELVES IN
Thu Aug 18 00:00:00 +0200 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Dublin
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L DUBLIN 001022 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/31/2015 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PTER KCRM EI CO
SUBJECT: COLOMBIA THREE TURN THEMSELVES IN 
 
REF: A. DUBLIN 1006 AND PREVIOUS 
     ¶B. BOGOTA 7727 
 
Classified By: Deputy Chief of Mission Jonathan S. Benton; Reasons 1.4 
(B) and (D). 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary: On August 18, the Colombia Three voluntarily 
presented themselves to the Irish police.  The Irish 
Department of Justice (DOJ) believes that the Garda will 
release the men and turn to the Director of Public 
Prosecutions for a decision on charges.  The DOJ has also 
asked for Embassy assistance in obtaining information on the 
FARC, in anticipation of legal cases against the Colombia 
Three.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  (C) On August 18, Irish Department of Justice (DOJ) 
Secretary General Sean Aylward informed Ambassador that the 
 
SIPDIS 
Colombia Three (James Monaghan, Niall Connelly, and Martin 
McCauley, who fled Colombia following convictions last 
December for training the FARC) would voluntarily present 
themselves to the Irish police (Garda) (ref A).  Under a 
prior arrangement with the Garda, the three arrived 
separately with their respective legal representatives at 
three police stations in Dublin.  DOJ Assistant Secretary Ken 
O'Leary told Emboff that the Garda were questioning the men 
in connection with possible offenses under Irish law, ranging 
from use of fake travel documents to participation in 
terrorist activities.  O'Leary believed that the Garda would 
release the men after questioning and would prepare a report 
for the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP), James 
Hamilton, who would have responsibility for deciding on 
charges.  (Under Irish law, the Garda cannot hold a suspect 
for more than 12 hours without bringing charges.  The DPP 
would have no time limit within which to announce charges if 
the men were released within 12 hours.) 
 
¶3.  (C) Anticipating likely legal cases against the Colombia 
Three, O'Leary asked for Embassy/USG recommendations on 
open-source information (websites and published reports) 
regarding the FARC.  He also requested USG intelligence on 
the FARC's relationship with the IRA, particularly with the 
Colombia Three.  Embassy is pursuing these requests. 
 
¶4.  (U) The Irish television station, RTE, reported that the 
Garda had "arrested" Connelly for obtaining a false Irish 
passport, an offense under Section Four of the Criminal 
Justice Act.  RTE also reported that Monaghan and McCauley 
were speaking with the Garda on a voluntary basis and that 
the Garda had been in touch with the Colombia Three's legal 
representatives since their return to Ireland.  O'Leary later 
clarified for Emboff that Connelly had not been charged, but 
rather was being "questioned under caution" with regard to 
the passport issue. 
 
¶5.  (C) Rita O'Hare, Sinn Fein representative to the United 
States, told Embassy that Sinn Fein was considering a 
statement on the matter.  She believed that the statement, if 
issued, would refer to the importance of enabling the 
Colombia Three to get on with their lives and their families. 
 
KENNY