09DUBLIN156
IRISH GOVERNMENT'S BUDGET -- POLITICS TRUMPS
Wed Apr 08 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Dublin
VZCZCXRO2665
PP RUEHDBU RUEHFL RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHNP RUEHROV RUEHSR
DE RUEHDL #0156/01 0981452
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 081452Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY DUBLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9927
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHBL/AMCONSUL BELFAST PRIORITY 0979
RUEATRS/TREASURY WASHDC PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 DUBLIN 000156 
 
SIPDIS 
 
TREASURY FOR ATUKORALA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/08/2019 
TAGS: EFIN ECON PREL PGOV EUN EI
SUBJECT: IRISH GOVERNMENT'S BUDGET -- POLITICS TRUMPS 
ECONOMICS 
 
REF: A. DUBLIN 146 
     ¶B. 08 DUBLIN 571 
 
DUBLIN 00000156  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
Classified By: PEO Chief Ted Pierce.  Reasons 1.4(b/d). 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: On April 7 the Irish government released a 
supplementary budget in response to the dramatic 
deterioration in the government's finances.  Despite 
pre-budget calls for a focus on spending cuts (ref A), the 
government's budget is weighted toward tax increases, such as 
a doubling of the income levy (ref B).  The Finance Minister 
also announced plans to create a government agency that will 
oversee the disposal of "troubled" assets on Irish banks' 
books.  The tax increases will do nothing for consumer 
confidence and may serve to prolong the economic downturn. 
The government already expects to face an attack by the 
political opposition.  It did not have the political will to 
face down the unions and others who opposed spending cuts. 
At some point, however, the government will need to do 
something about the outsized public-sector pay bill and 
welfare entitlements.  End Summary 
 
¶2. (U) On April 7, Finance Minister Brian Lenihan announced 
the government's supplementary budget designed to help 
rectify the government's poor fiscal situation. 
Significantly, the government outlined a three-year plan to 
reach a budget deficit of 8.5 percent of GDP in 2011 (the 
pre-budget figure is just under 13 percent).  The package of 
measures is projected to shrink the government's 2009 deficit 
by EUR 3.3 billion (USD 5 billion) but the deficit will still 
be about 10.75 percent of GDP.  The package is weighted in 
favor of tax increases over spending cuts (55 percent to 45 
percent), in spite of the fact that most economists 
highlighted the need for more action on the spending than the 
revenue side.  Taxes will still make up a majority of the 
2010 package but spending cuts will be in the majority in 
¶2011. 
 
¶3. (U) The government expects the economy to contract by 
eight percent in 2009 (private economists suspect it will be 
higher) and almost three percent in 2010.  Prices are 
estimated to fall (deflation) by almost four percent this 
year and unemployment will rise to an average rate of 12.6 
percent in 2009 on its way to 15.5 percent in 2010. 
 
Revenues 
-------- 
 
¶4. (U) The government expects to raise EUR 1.8 billion (USD 
2.6 billion) from tax increases in 2009.  The biggest 
moneymakers will be the doubling of both the income levy 
(introduced in October 2008) and the health levy.  According 
to Ulster Bank, the changes in these levies will reduce 
take-home pay for households earning between EUR 50,000 (USD 
70,000) and EUR 100,000 (USD 140,000) by four to six percent. 
 Other measures include an increase in the capital gains tax; 
mortgage interest relief to be reduced and later abolished; 
an increase in excise taxes on cigarettes; and an increase in 
deposit interest tax. 
 
Expenditures 
------------ 
 
¶5. (U) Spending cuts will amount to about EUR 1.5 billion 
(USD 2.2 billion).  The government only lightly touched 
public-sector pay (one-third of overall spending) and social 
welfare benefits (40 percent of spending).  The budget 
introduces an early retirement scheme for public-sector 
employees that should induce many employees to leave 
voluntarily.  In addition, the under-20 job seeker's 
allowance will be halved and Christmas bonus payments will be 
eliminated in 2009.  Capital expenditures will fall by EUR 
576 million (USD 880 million), mainly in transport, social 
housing, and water projects, and will be cut by EUR 1.3 
billion (USD 1.9 billion) in 2010 and EUR 2.4 billion (USD 
3.5 billion) in 2011. 
 
The "Bad Bank" 
-------------- 
 
¶6. (U) Minister Lenihan also announced the establishment of 
the National Asset Management Agency (NAMA) which will deal 
with "distressed" land and property development assets held 
by Irish banks.  The details of the plan are still being 
worked out but the idea is to have NAMA buy the loans from 
the banks at an "appropriate price."  Because these loans 
will be transferred at a discount to book value (currently 
EUR 80-90 billion/USD 115-130 billion), the banks will incur 
 
DUBLIN 00000156  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
a loss on these transfers.  In order to avoid a further 
recapitalization of the banks because of this, these loans 
will be replaced on the banks' books by zero-risk-weighted 
government bonds, thus reducing the overall risk weighting of 
the banks' assets.  We will follow this plan quite closely as 
more details become available. 
 
¶7. (C) On April 7, Econoff spoke with Kevin Cardiff 
(protect), Second Secretary General at the Department of 
Finance, who said that the pricing of assets should be 
finished within three months.  Cardiff said he will need 
about 30 more staff members, who will come in on a contract 
basis, to set up NAMA and value the banks' assets.  He hinted 
that, given the work he and his colleagues have already done, 
the assets will be discounted by around 50 percent.  He also 
said that, while this program is modeled on the Resolution 
Trust Corporation that was put in place following the savings 
and loan collapse in the U.S. in the late 1980s, NAMA "will 
be in no hurry to dispose of the assets."  Cardiff said that 
they could and would hold the assets for "a decade or more if 
it took that long to get the right price." 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶8. (C) Despite much post-budget hand-wringing by economists 
here about the preponderance of tax increases in the plan, 
the government clearly did not have the will to take on 
(again) the trade unions and others who were pushing for 
higher taxes instead of spending cuts.  This political 
decision, though, could have serious economic repercussions. 
With significantly lower take home pay (and even less next 
year), consumer confidence may not rebound so consumers will 
continue to keep their wallets shut.  The government seems to 
want to buy time -- maybe waiting until the June local and 
European elections and the October re-run of the Lisbon 
Treaty referendum are over -- before it takes on the 
unavoidable challenge of cutting public sector pay and 
welfare entitlements. 
FAUCHER