09DUBLIN89
IRELAND - NINTH ANNUAL TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS (TIP) REPORT
Thu Feb 26 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Dublin
VZCZCXRO3663
RR RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHIK RUEHLZ RUEHROV RUEHSR
DE RUEHDL #0089/01 0571732
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 261732Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY DUBLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9816
INFO RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDC
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RUEHUJA/AMEMBASSY ABUJA 0090
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 0201
RUEHBL/AMCONSUL BELFAST 0916
RUEHOS/AMCONSUL LAGOS 0109UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 26 DUBLIN 000089 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, PRM 
STATE FOR EUR/PGI, EUR/WE 
STATE FOR USAID 
 
E.O.  12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD ASEC PREF ELAB EI
SUBJECT: IRELAND - NINTH ANNUAL TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS (TIP) REPORT 
 
DUBLIN 00000089  001.2 OF 026 
 
 
 
THIS IS A CORRECTED COPY OF PREVIOUSLY SENT CABLE, DUBLIN 81. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  Ireland made great strides during the reporting 
period to counter trafficking in persons (TIP) in the country.  In 
addition to the new Criminal Law (Human Trafficking) Bill 2007, 
which became law in June, new immigration legislation, which 
includes protections for trafficking victims, is in process.  In 
April 2007, the Government signed the Council of Europe Convention 
on Action Against Trafficking in Human Beings (CoE Convention). 
Enactment of the new immigration legislation will be the final step 
to enable the GOI to ratify the CoE Convention. 
 
Ireland's newly-created Anti Human Trafficking Unit (AHTU), whose 
Executive Director reports to the Minister for Justice, has gotten 
off to strong start.  In the past year, the AHTU has begun to 
implement a data collection strategy, spearheaded multiple 
awareness-raising campaigns, established a forum for NGOs working on 
trafficking-related issues, and has nearly completed a national 
action plan. 
 
The Garda (police) have been actively focusing on trafficking 
offenses and have collaborated on many multinational efforts.  While 
there have not yet been any convictions under the new legislation, 
two victims are cooperating with the Garda and further 
investigations are in process.  Additionally, over 700 Garda have 
completed human trafficking awareness courses and all incoming Garda 
are trained on the topic. 
 
The overall estimated number of suspected trafficking victims 
remained small during the year, with roughly 40 suspected victims 
encountered by police and NGOs.  This is primarily a result of 
enhanced awareness on the part of law enforcement, NGOs, and the 
general public. 
 
¶2.  Summary Continued: (SBU) Post has engaged the Irish Government 
at the highest levels to stress Ireland's role in fighting European 
and global trafficking.  We also have urged the Government to 
continue their development of a national action plan.  The 
Ambassador, DCM, POL/ECON chief, and Embassy political officers 
discussed trafficking with the Department of Foreign Affairs, 
Department of Justice, the Health Service Executive, the Irish 
Naturalisation and Immigration Service, and the Garda National 
Immigration Bureau as well as numerous NGOs.  Post will continue to 
urge the Government and NGOs to improve cooperation to identify, 
assess, and prosecute cases of trafficking.  End summary. 
 
¶3. (SBU/NF) Comment:  Post strongly believes that Ireland's enhanced 
efforts to combat trafficking in recent years merit a return to Tier 
1 status.  Prior to 2006, Ireland was not included in the TIP 
report.  In 2006, it was ranked as a Tier 1 country and the 
statement "The Government of Ireland fully complies with the minimum 
standards for the elimination of trafficking" was included in the 
text.  In 2007, Ireland was defined as a "special case" and in 2008 
it was downgraded to Tier 2.  Since its initial ranking in 2006, 
Ireland Ireland's anti-trafficking program including legislation, 
victim support, and awareness raising activities has become more 
robust each year.  Ireland has promptly addressed every action item 
recommended by the USG, and all levels of the Irish government show 
a willingness and desire to combat any suspected trafficking 
activities within its borders or by its citizens.  Nonetheless, even 
as Ireland's counter-trafficking initiatives have markedly improved, 
its TIP report ranking has worsened.  We believe this is 
counter-productive. Moreover, we fear that a continued Tier 2 
ranking in 2009 could have a sustained negative impact on Irish 
cooperation in other fields.  During a recent discussion on the 
possibility of Ireland accepting detainees from Guantanamo - a top 
priority of the Obama Administration - a senior Department of 
Justice official expressed only tentative support and remarked that 
the 2008 TIP ranking was essentially a slap in the face by the USG 
given the hard work and political capital expended on implementing 
Ireland's anti-trafficking programs.  End Comment. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The following items are keyed off reftel. 
 
Overview of a country's activities to eliminate trafficking in 
persons: 
 
-- A. What is (are) the source(s) of available information on 
 
DUBLIN 00000089  002.2 OF 026 
 
 
trafficking in persons?  What plans are in place (if any) to 
undertake further documentation of human trafficking?  How reliable 
are these sources? 
 
Information is obtained through the Department of Justice Anti-Human 
Trafficking Unit (AHTU), Garda Siochana (police), various Government 
agencies, NGOs, Interpol, Europol and Frontex.  Other trans-national 
lines of communication and bi-lateral co-operation with other law 
enforcement agencies provide the Garda with data relating to 
international trends/patterns in the area of human trafficking. 
Ireland also participates at various levels (policy, prevention, 
investigations, support) in relevant national and international fora 
in the area of human trafficking.  The Anti-Human Trafficking Unit 
(AHTU) has implemented, with effect from January 1, 2009, a data 
collection strategy which is closely modelled on data collection 
systems being developed at the EU level.  The goal of this strategy 
is to collect information on cases of possible/suspected trafficking 
by means of a standardised template from a variety of different 
sources (including NGOs, Government Agencies, Garda, etc). 
Reporting agencies are asked to report any cases of potential 
trafficking they encounter to the AHTU.  Sources are very reliable 
and have undertaken extensive efforts in past year to document 
activities. 
 
-- B. Is the country a country of origin, transit, and/or 
destination for internationally trafficked men, women, or children? 
Does trafficking occur within the country's 
borders?  If so, does internal trafficking occur in 
territory outside of the government's control (e.g. in a 
civil war situation)?  To where are people trafficked? 
For what purposes are they trafficked?  Provide, where 
possible, numbers or estimates for each group of 
trafficking victims.  Have there been any changes in the 
TIP situation since the last TIP Report (e.g. changes in 
destinations)? 
 
Ireland is, on a limited scale, a destination and transit country 
for international trafficking victims.  There is no clear estimate 
on the number of victims.  Many NGOs make referrals among themselves 
and with the police.  Most victims are ultimately referred to 
Ruhama, an NGO that aids prostitutes.  A Ruhama representative said 
that most of the 44 victims they had encountered during the year 
were identified as young foreign women between 18 and 25 years of 
age from Eastern Europe and Africa (Nigeria was specifically named). 
 Multiple NGOs have mentioned the increasing role of the internet in 
creating virtual brothels. 
 
In September 2007, a widely accepted study conducted by researchers 
from National University of Ireland (NUI) and Trinity College 
reported that the minimum estimated number of trafficking victims 
for sexual exploitation into Ireland over a seven year period 
(2000-2006) was 76.  Although some NGOs argued that this estimate 
was too low, most agreed that the report was a positive step in 
identifying the extent of the trafficking problem in Ireland. 
Ruhama said that their staff had encountered about 150 trafficking 
victims during this same time period.  Ruhama took part in the data 
gathering portion of the NUI study, but according to the 
researchers, a significant number of Ruhama's cases were not 
accepted due to lack of information in the case files.  The full 
report can be found at http://www.nuigalway.ie. 
 
Unaccompanied minors entering Ireland continued to be an area of 
concern for both the Government and NGOs.  When minors (anyone under 
17) come to Ireland without a parent or guardian, they are 
automatically placed into care facilities overseen by the Health 
Services Executive (HSE), the administrative body that runs the 
healthcare system.  According to HSE officials, the majority of 
these children travel to Ireland to join their families who have 
already established residency or are waiting for an asylum decision. 
 However, those children not reunited with their families are placed 
in foster care or in a Government-run hostel.  An NGO representative 
who works directly with separated children said that these children 
are vulnerable to being trafficked.  Garda indicate that gangs are 
increasingly organizing the trafficking of minors into Ireland as 
they can easily escape from HSE custody.  Since 2001, 388 
unaccompanied immigrant children have disappeared from state care; 
it is not known how many, if any, of these children were 
subsequently trafficked. 
 
 
DUBLIN 00000089  003.2 OF 026 
 
 
-- C. What kind of conditions are the victims trafficked into? 
 
NGO and Government contacts agreed that the majority of suspected 
trafficking cases involved women who were brought into Ireland for 
the sex industry.  Garda believe that organized criminal gangs of 
foreign nationals facilitated much of the suspected sex trade 
trafficking and that these gangs also arranged for the victims' 
employment and accommodation in brothels. 
 
The HSE have advised that some children who go missing and have been 
retraced are found in brothels, restaurants and private households 
where they may have been used as domestic slaves.  They do not 
maintain statistics on the number of these children.  Children who 
have been successfully traced were found in various towns throughout 
the State.  The two suspected victims, located by the Garda 
Siochana, who have been granted recovery and reflection periods (one 
of whom has been granted a temporary residency) were discovered in 
the sex industry. 
 
-- D. Vulnerability to TIP: Are certain groups of persons more at 
risk of being trafficked (e.g. women and children, boys versus 
girls, certain ethnic groups, refugees, IDPs, etc.)? 
 
Most cases involved Eastern European women, with a limited number of 
people from Asia, Africa and South America.  During investigations, 
many women interviewed stated that they had been recruited in their 
home countries, where they had already been working in the sex 
industry, and that they had traveled voluntarily.  Garda National 
Immigration Bureau (GNIB) officials suspect some use of fraudulent 
documentation in cases involving victims from West Africa and non-EU 
East European nations. 
 
There has been a rise in awareness among law enforcement personnel 
and NGO communities regarding trafficking for labor during the past 
year.  This has been a result of specific trafficking-identification 
training efforts by the police force as well as concentrated efforts 
by NGOs to make trafficking for labor exploitation a part of 
trafficking discussions and campaigns. 
 
In terms of children, information provided by the Health Services 
Executive (HSE) to date indicates that in the underage category 
Chinese nationals are at the greatest risk of being trafficked. 
 
The data collection strategy which has recently been implemented by 
the AHTU, will address many of the difficulties that have been 
encountered to date in terms of providing detailed data in relation 
to trafficking in human beings.  All data will be centrally collated 
from a wide range of organizations and analyzed with a view to 
finding patterns in terms of a demographic profile of those 
trafficked, means by which victims were recruited and the services 
victims of trafficking have received, etc. 
 
-- E. Traffickers and Their Methods: Who are the 
traffickers/exploiters?  Are they independent business people? 
Small or family-based crime groups?  Large international organized 
crime syndicates?  What methods are used to approach victims?  For 
example, are they offered lucrative jobs, sold by their families, or 
approached by friends of friends?  What methods are used to move the 
victims (e.g., are false documents being used?).  Are employment, 
travel, and tourism agencies or marriage brokers involved with or 
fronting for traffickers or crime groups to traffic individuals? 
 
NGOs and Garda indicate that traffickers run the range from 
organized crime to small operations.  Intelligence available to the 
Garda indicates that the bulk of the traffickers are a small group 
of individuals, some of whom are also involved in other forms 
criminality.  Experience of interaction with suspected victims would 
indicate that people/family known to them or their extended or 
adoptive family offer better jobs or an improved standard of living 
in Ireland or Western Europe.  Many of the cases under investigation 
in Ireland have involved the use of forged documents.  However, this 
is not always the case, as people travel on their own documents and 
only realize what type of situation they will be in once they arrive 
in Ireland.  For example, it has been established in some instances 
that women who believed they were coming to Ireland to work in 
legitimate professions ended up working in exploitative situations, 
including prostitution. 
 
In terms of children, it is the experience of the HSE that alleged 
 
DUBLIN 00000089  004.2 OF 026 
 
 
traffickers are likely to be non-nationals and some are compatriots 
of their victims. 
 
In January 12 2009, three Brazilian women pled guilty to brothel 
keeping.  They were not believed to be working as prostitutes 
themselves.  In December 2008, Welsh police arrested two individuals 
on charges of trafficking into and out of the UK. These individuals 
were associated with at least 9 brothels in the Republic of Ireland. 
 
 
SETTING THE SCENE FOR THE GOVERNMENT'S ANTI-TIP EFFORTS: 
 
-- A. Does the government acknowledge that trafficking is a problem 
in the country?  If not, why not? 
 
The Irish Government acknowledges that Ireland is a destination 
country for trafficking and that a small number of trafficking 
victims have been identified.  It has not found evidence that the 
problem presently exists on any significant scale.  It actively 
investigates all credible allegations of trafficking. 
 
-- B. Which government agencies are involved in anti-trafficking 
efforts and which agency, if any, has the lead? 
 
The Anti-Human Trafficking Unit in the Department of Justice has 
overall administrative responsibility for policy development and 
coordination of the Government's response to trafficking in persons. 
 In order to carry out that role effectively and to implement and 
facilitate a multidisciplinary approach, the AHTU works in close 
cooperation with a wide variety of relevant Government Agencies and 
Departments, in addition to NGOs and International Organizations 
(IOs) working in the anti-trafficking field.  This inter-party 
cooperation is chiefly conducted through a series of groups 
consisting of a High Level Interdepartmental Group, which is 
comprised of high level management from different Government 
Departments and Agencies, a Roundtable Group consisting of members 
of Government Departments and Agencies and members of NGOs and IOs, 
and a series of Working Groups made up of NGOs, IOs, Government 
Agencies and Departments. 
 
Furthermore, the Department of Justice has a significant role in 
anti-trafficking efforts as it has the lead responsibility for 
policy in relation to criminal law and law enforcement, 
immigration/border control and gender equality.  However, other 
Government Departments and agencies also have an important role to 
play reflecting their particular policy and/or operational 
responsibilities. 
 
The Garda, as the national police force, is responsible for the 
prevention and investigation of criminal offences including human 
trafficking.  Within the Garda, the Garda National Immigration 
Bureau (GNIB) and the Garda National Bureau of Criminal 
Investigation (NBCI) have been assigned particular responsibilities 
in this regard.  The assets of all suspects are investigated and 
where there is a possibility to seize assets, which are believed to 
be the proceeds of crime, this is vigorously pursued by the Criminal 
Assets Bureau. 
 
Along with the specialized units referred to earlier, an additional 
250 Garda officers from the various Garda Operational Divisions 
throughout the country have received training in the investigation 
of Trafficking in Human Beings.  Additionally, 520 Garda officers, 
again from the various Operational Divisions throughout the country, 
have received awareness training to identify victims of human 
trafficking.  The Garda supports the efforts of the Irish 
Naturalisation and Immigration Service (INIS), which is the lead 
agency in Ireland for all immigration related matters.  The training 
provided has been developed in conjunction with the International 
Organisation for Migration and course participants receive 
presentations from various NGOs. 
 
The Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment, the Department 
of Foreign Affairs, the Department of Health and Children, the 
Office for the Minister for Children and the Health Service 
Executive all have statutory responsibilities in this area.  The 
Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment exercises vigilance 
to ensure work permits are not issued to persons who are likely to 
traffic persons.  The Department of Foreign Affairs exercises 
vigilance to ensure visas are not issued where trafficking may 
 
DUBLIN 00000089  005.2 OF 026 
 
 
occur.  Finally the Department of Health and Children have statutory 
obligations in relation to child protection and welfare. 
 
-- C.  What are the limitations on the government's ability to 
address this problem in practice?  For example, is funding for 
police or other institutions inadequate?  Is overall corruption a 
problem?  Does the government lack the resources to aid victims? 
 
Until 2008, the Irish Government enjoyed a budget surplus, and there 
are no unique limitations on resources to address trafficking.  The 
global recession has led to broad cuts in public spending, but 
anti-trafficking efforts do not appear to be adversely impacted at 
this time.  Irish police and border authorities are competent and 
well-run.  On June 7, a new Criminal Law (Human Trafficking) entered 
into force.  This brings Ireland into conformity with UN, EU and CoE 
anti-trafficking regulations and gives police more precise legal 
tools.  A limitation on the Government's ability to address 
trafficking would be lack of experience with TIP issues, since 
immigration into Ireland, including illegal immigration, is a 
relatively new phenomenon.  The Government is now striving to deploy 
the necessary staff, resources, and procedures to deal with this 
increased flow. 
 
In terms of children, funding has historically been a challenge. 
There are considerable additional costs associated with bringing 
accommodation and care provision to the required standards. 
However, due to additional funding being made available in the last 
year, considerable progress has been made in developing more 
appropriate accommodation, particularly for the under-17 age group. 
A new residential home that satisfies the required Health 
Information and Quality Authority (HIQA) standards for children who 
have been or are at risk of being trafficked opened in 2008.  Two 
more residential homes are due to open in 2009. 
 
The HSE is also currently developing an operational plan that will 
advance the decentralization of the Dublin based Service for 
Separated Children Seeking Asylum (SCSA).  This plan aims to 
increase the range of placement options including increasing the 
number of foster placements and presents a move away from 
accommodating children in Dublin hostels.  It is envisaged that this 
development will facilitate the HSE in providing increased 
protection for potential victims of trafficking. 
 
-- D. To what extent does the government systematically monitor its 
anti-trafficking efforts (on all fronts -- prosecution, victim 
protection, and prevention) and periodically make available, 
publicly or privately and directly or through regional/international 
organizations, its assessments of these anti-trafficking efforts? 
 
The Interdepartmental High Level Group is responsible for 
development and monitoring of policy in this area.  The Roundtable 
Group and its five working Groups are given updates of developments 
at each meeting and have the opportunity to make recommendations and 
input into policy formulation and development. 
 
The AHTU, in conjunction with stakeholders, will assess the number 
of possible cases of trafficking which are not subsequently deemed 
to be suspected cases.  The data gathered through this system will 
be used to form the bedrock of information which will help to 
establish the nature and extent of trafficking, any trends which 
emerge in this regard, the impact of anti-trafficking activities and 
service provided to victims and to direct policy in this regard. 
 
All of the information is provided to the AHTU in an anonymous form 
with the suspected person's details retained by the reporting 
agency.  Victims are given a unique ID code, which is used for 
tracking purposes.  This is to ensure that data protection 
legislation is not violated.  The database is also routinely 
examined to ensure that any possible duplication is kept to a 
minimum. 
 
In relation to monitoring of prosecutions, arrangements are being 
developed for GNIB to record relevant details in relation to 
suspected traffickers' demographic characteristics, whether any 
involvement with organized crime is suspected, the role of the 
trafficker in the trafficking process and traffickers' relationship 
with their victims.  Suspected trafficker interaction with the 
criminal justice system is also closely monitored. 
 
 
DUBLIN 00000089  006.2 OF 026 
 
 
The AHTU will provide an analysis of the data collected by 
Government agencies and NGOs on a regular basis throughout the year. 
 These results will provide statistics regarding the number of 
possible victims encountered, the number of victims formally 
identified and given recovery and reflection periods and temporary 
residence permits, information about services accessed by the victim 
and the number of convictions and prosecutions. 
 
Ireland is also part of a European G6 Initiative against human 
trafficking.  This initiative involves six European countries (UK, 
Poland, Italy, Netherlands, Spain and Ireland) and includes sharing 
best practices of anti-trafficking efforts.  The GNIB works under 
the Irish National Police but carries out its immigration functions 
on behalf of the Minister of Justice.  This system ensures a sharing 
of information among immigration policy-makers, immigration 
officers, and national police.  A GNIB official represents Ireland 
at the EU Border Agency in Warsaw. 
 
INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION OF TRAFFICKERS 
 
-- A. Existing Laws against TIP: Does the country have a law or laws 
specifically prohibiting trafficking in persons- both for sexual 
exploitation and labor?  If so, please specifically cite the name of 
the law(s) and its date of enactment and provide the exact language 
[actual copies preferable] of the TIP provisions.  Please provide a 
full inventory of trafficking laws, including non-criminal statutes 
that allow for civil penalties against alleged trafficking crimes 
(e.g., civil forfeiture laws and laws against illegal debt). Does 
the law(s) cover both internal and transnational forms of 
trafficking?  If not, under what other laws can traffickers be 
prosecuted?  For example, are there laws against slavery or the 
exploitation of prostitution by means of force, fraud, or coercion? 
Are these other laws being used in trafficking cases? 
 
The Criminal Law (Human Trafficking) Act, 2008, became operational 
on 7 June 2008 and creates offences of trafficking in children and 
adults for the purposes of their sexual or labor exploitation or the 
removal of their organs.  It also makes it an offence to sell or 
offer for sale or to purchase or offer to purchase any person for 
any purpose.  Penalties of up to life imprisonment apply in respect 
of these offences.  It is not a defense for the trafficker to argue 
that the person consented to the commission of any of the acts. 
Furthermore, under section 5 of the Act, any person who knowingly 
solicits or importunes a trafficking victim for the purposes of 
sexual exploitation shall be guilty of an offence and liable on 
conviction on indictment to an unlimited fine or a term of 
imprisonment not exceeding 5 years or both.  On summary conviction a 
fine not exceeding 5,000 or a term of imprisonment not exceeding 12 
months or both apply. 
 
Section 7 of the Criminal Law (Human Trafficking) 2008 Act provides 
for extra territorial jurisdiction where an Irish citizen or 
resident conspires, incites or commits acts which would be offences 
under this Act if they were committed in Ireland and also where the 
victim of such acts committed outside Ireland is an Irish citizen. 
Penalties of up to life imprisonment and an unlimited fine apply in 
respect of these offences. 
 
As with other offences contained in the Act, the maximum penalty for 
committing or attempting to commit any of the above offences is an 
unlimited fine and/or life imprisonment. 
 
The Act covers both internal and transnational forms of trafficking 
and also provides for the prosecution of bodies corporate. 
 
Prior to the enactment of the 2008 Act, the Garda utilized the 
provisions of Illegal Immigrants (Trafficking) Act, 2000 in cases 
where human trafficking was suspected.  Of particular relevance is 
section 2 of the Act, which relates to the facilitation and 
organization of the illegal entry of persons into the State for 
gain.  Penalties include: 
-- On summary conviction, a fine not exceeding Euro 1,500 (USD 1950) 
or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12 months or both. 
 
 -- On conviction on indictment, to a fine or to imprisonment for a 
term not exceeding 10 years or both. 
 
Section 3 of the Child Trafficking and Pornography Act 1998, as 
amended by Section 3 of the Criminal Law (Human Trafficking) Act 
 
DUBLIN 00000089  007.2 OF 026 
 
 
2008 which increased the age by which a person can be regarded in 
law as a child from 17 to 18 years old, created the offence of 
Trafficking of Children for the Purpose of Sexual Exploitation. 
Section 3 (1) makes it an offence to organize or knowingly 
facilitate child trafficking - that is, the entry into, transit 
through or exit from the State of a child for the purpose of his or 
her sexual exploitation.  It is also an offence to provide 
accommodation to a child for this purpose.  The offence is 
punishable on conviction by up to life imprisonment.  Under Section 
3(2) any person who detains or restricts the personal liberty of a 
child for the purpose of the child's sexual exploitation is liable 
on conviction to up to 14 years imprisonment.  The same penalty 
applies to persons who organize or knowingly facilitate such taking, 
detaining or restricting of children's liberty for that purpose. 
 
The Criminal Assets Bureau Act 1996 established the Criminal Assets 
Bureau (CAB).  The functions of CAB under section 4 of the Act are: 
 
 
 -- the identification of the assets, wherever situated, of persons 
which derive or are suspected to derive, directly or indirectly, 
from criminal activity, 
 
 -- the taking of appropriate action under the law to deprive or to 
deny those persons of the assets or the benefit of such assets, in 
whole or in part, as may be appropriate, and 
 
 -- the pursuit of any investigation or the doing of any other 
preparatory work in relation to any proceedings arising from the 
objectives mentioned in paragraphs (a) and (b). 
 
In addition, the Proceeds of Crime (Amendment) Act 2005 allows CAB 
to seize assets that were generated in foreign jurisdictions.  The 
Act allows CAB to cooperate fully with other international assets 
recovery agencies. 
False imprisonment is an offence under section 15 of the Non-Fatal 
Offences against the Person Act 1998 and is punishable by up to life 
imprisonment. 
 
The Slave Trade Act 1824 renders all operations in connection with 
the slave trade illegal and slavery or servitude is prohibited under 
the Irish Constitution (Article 40). 
 
-- B. Punishment of Sex Trafficking Offenses: What are the 
prescribed and imposed penalties for trafficking people for sexual 
exploitation? 
 
Under the Human Trafficking Act, penalties of up to life 
imprisonment apply in respect of these offences.  It is also an 
offence for a person to solicit for prostitution a person who he/she 
knows or has reasonable grounds for believing is a trafficked 
person.  A person (other than the trafficked person) who accepts or 
agrees to accept a payment, right, interest or other benefit from a 
person for this purpose also commits an offence.  The penalty is up 
to five years imprisonment or an unlimited fine or both on 
conviction on indictment. 
 
Under the Illegal Immigrants (Trafficking) Act 2000, the penalty can 
include up to a Euro 1,500 (1,950 USD) fine and 12 months in jail. 
If a case is appealed to the district court, then the penalty is a 
maximum of ten years imprisonment.  There is no cap on the fine. 
 
Under the Child Trafficking and Pornography Act 1998 the penalty is 
up to life imprisonment. 
 
-- C. Punishment of Labor Trafficking Offenses: What are the 
prescribed and imposed penalties for trafficking for labor 
exploitation, such as forced or bonded labor?  If your country is a 
source country for labor migrants, do the government's laws provide 
for criminal punishment -- i.e. jail time -- for labor recruiters 
who engage in recruitment of workers using knowingly fraudulent or 
deceptive offers with the purpose of subjecting workers to 
trafficking in the destination country?  If your country is a 
destination for labor migrants, are there laws punishing employers 
or labor agents who confiscate workers' passports or travel 
documents for the purpose of trafficking, switch contracts without 
the worker's consent as a means to keep the worker in a state of 
service, or withhold payment of salaries as means of keeping the 
worker in a state of service? 
 
DUBLIN 00000089  008.2 OF 026 
 
 
 
The Criminal Law (Human Trafficking) Act 2008 creates the offence of 
trafficking for the purpose of labor exploitation: Section 1 defines 
labour exploitation as: 
"labour exploitation" means, in relation to a person (including a 
child): 
 
(a) subjecting the person to forced labour, 
 
(b) forcing him or her to render services to another, or 
 
(c) enslavement of the person or subjecting him or her to servitude 
or a similar condition or state. 
 
Section 4, inter alia, creates the offence of trafficking in persons 
other than children for the purpose of labor exploitation.  (Section 
2 deals with child trafficking.) 
 
Section 4: (1)Trafficking of persons other than children: 
(1). A person (in this section referred to as the "trafficker") who 
trafficks another person (in this Act referred to as the "trafficked 
person"), other than a child or a person to whom subsection (3) 
applies, for the purposes of the exploitation of the trafficked 
person shall be guilty of an offence if, in or for the purpose of 
trafficking the trafficked person, the trafficker - 
 
(a) coerced, threatened, abducted or otherwise used force against 
the trafficked person, 
 
(b) deceived or committed a fraud against the trafficked person, 
 
(c) abused his or her authority or took advantage of the 
vulnerability of the trafficked person to such extent as to cause 
the trafficked person to have had no real and  acceptable 
alternative but to submit to being trafficked, 
 
(d) coerced, threatened or otherwise used force against any person 
in whose care or charge, or under whose control, the trafficked 
person was for the time being, in order to compel that person to 
permit the trafficker to traffick the trafficked person, or 
 
(e) made any payment to, or conferred any right, interest or other 
benefit on, any person in whose care or charge, or under whose 
control, the trafficked person was for the time being, in exchange 
for that person permitting the trafficker to traffick the trafficked 
person. 
 
(2) In proceedings for an offence under this section it shall not be 
a defense for the defendant to show that the person in respect of 
whom the offence was committed consented to the commission of any of 
the acts of which the offence consists. 
 
(3) A person who traffics a person who is mentally impaired for the 
purposes of the exploitation of the person shall be guilty of an 
offence. 
 
(4)  A person who - 
 
 (a) sells another person, offers or exposes another person for sale 
or invites the making of an offer to purchase another person, or 
 
 (b) purchases or makes an offer to purchase another person, shall 
be guilty of an offence. 
 
(5) A person who causes an offence under subsection (1), (3) or (4) 
to be committed shall be guilty of an offence. 
 
(6) A person who attempts to commit an offence under subsection (1), 
(3), (4) or (5) shall be guilty of an offence. 
 
(7) A person guilty of an offence under this section shall be liable 
upon conviction on indictment - 
 
(a) to imprisonment for life or a lesser term, and 
(b) at the discretion of the court, to a fine. 
 
(8) In this section "mentally impaired" has the same meaning as it 
has in the Criminal Law (Sexual Offences) Act 1993. 
 
 
DUBLIN 00000089  009.2 OF 026 
 
 
In addition to the Criminal Law (Human Trafficking Act) 2008, the 
entire range of statutory employment rights and protections 
availabQ in Ireland are applicable equally to foreign nationals and 
Irish workers.  Persons who have been trafficked for the purposes of 
labor exploitation can seek legal redress and compensation through a 
number of State bodies that deal specifically with work related 
rights and entitlements.  These include the Employment Appeals 
Tribunal (EAT), the Labour Relations Commission (LRC), the Labour 
Court and the Equality Tribunal.  There are no fees charged for 
claims taken to these employment rights bodies nor is it necessary 
to be legally represented at hearings. 
 
Legislation of relevance to victims trafficked for the purposes of 
forced labor include the following: 
 
The Organisation and Working Time Act 1997 states that the maximum 
average working week for many employees cannot exceed 48 hours. 
This does not mean that a working week can never exceed 48 hours; it 
is the average that is important.  Disputes in relation to the Act 
can be referred to a Rights Commissioner. 
 
The National Minimum Wage Act 2000 provides that the minimum wage 
rate for an experienced adult employee from July 1, 2007 is euro 
8.65 (USD 11) an hour.  An experienced adult employee for the 
purposes of the National Minimum Wage Act is an employee over the 
age of 18 who has an employment of any kind in any 2 years. 
Disputes in relation to the Act can be referred to either an 
inspector from the National Employment Rights Authority to 
investigate or to a Rights Commissioner, but not to both. 
 
Under the Unfair Dismissals Acts 1977 to 2001 circumstances in which 
unfair dismissal can occur are where: 
-- An employer terminates an employee's contract of employment, with 
or without notice, or 
-- An employee terminates his/her contract of employment, with or 
without notice, due to the conduct of his/her employer. This is 
known as constructive dismissal. 
 
If an employee is dismissed from his/her employment, he or she may, 
under certain conditions, bring a claim for unfair dismissal against 
the employer.  The Unfair Dismissals legislation in Ireland does not 
actually protect an employee from dismissal; rather it provides a 
system of appeal whereby employees can question the fairness of 
their dismissal after it has occurred.  Disputes in relation to the 
Act can be referred to a Rights Commissioner or to the Employment 
Appeals Tribunal. 
 
There are two distinct pieces of legislation in place in Ireland 
which set out important rights for citizens and specifically outlaw 
discrimination when it occurs.  The Employment Equality Act 1998 and 
the Equal Status Act 2000 as amended by the Equality Act 2004 outlaw 
discrimination in employment, vocational training, advertising, 
collective agreements, the provision of goods and services and other 
opportunities to which the public generally have access. 
Specifically, service providers, agencies and anyone providing 
opportunities to which the public have access, cannot discriminate 
against citizens on nine distinct grounds, as follows: 
 
-- gender 
-- marital status 
-- family status 
-- sexual orientation 
-- religion 
-- age (does not apply to a person under 16) 
-- disability 
-- race 
-- membership of the Traveller community. 
 
All claims must be referred to the Equality Tribunal with the 
exception of claims about gender discrimination in employmeQ which 
can be referred to either the Circuit Court or the Equality 
Tribunal, but not both. 
 
The Employment Permits Act, 2003 introduced a revised legislative 
basis for work permits, including penalties for employers for 
illegal employment of non-nationals. This Act provides legislative 
protection against the labour exploitation of non-nationals. 
 
The Terms of Employment (Information) Acts, 1994 and 2001 require 
 
DUBLIN 00000089  010.2 OF 026 
 
 
employers to provide employees with a written statement of certain 
particulars of their employees' terms of employment.  The employer 
must provide the written statement of particulars within 2 months of 
the date of commencement of employment.  The written statement must 
include particulars of the terms of employment relating to the name 
and address of the employer, the place of work, job title/nature of 
the work, date of commencement of the employment, the expected 
duration of contract, rate or method of calculation of pay, hours of 
work, rest periods, paid leave, pensions and notice entitlements. 
An employer is required to notify an employee of any changes to the 
particulars contained in the statement within one month after the 
change takes effect.  Employees may make a complaint to a Rights 
Commissioner where he/she believes that his/her employer has failed 
to provide a written statement or to notify the employee of changes 
to the particulars contained in the statement. 
 
The Payment of Wages Act, 1991 provides a right of complaint to a 
Rights Commissioner for any employee who has had an unlawful 
deduction made from wages.  Under this Act employers are obliged to 
provide a statement of pay with every wage payment.  A pay slip must 
show gross wages and itemize all deductions.  If the Rights 
Commissioner decides that a complaint is well founded, he/she shall 
order the employer to pay compensation to the employee. 
Alternatively, the employee may sue for wages in the ordinary 
courts.  Where the employee's wages are governed by an Employment 
Regulation Order or Registered Employment Agreement, the employer 
will be guilty of an offence under the Industrial Relations Acts if 
they fail to pay wQes or if they pay less than the statutory 
prescribed rate.  The Labour Inspectorate will seek to recover pay 
arrears in any such instances and will, if necessary, initiate legal 
proceedings. 
 
Ireland's comprehensive body of employment rights legislation, which 
protects employees against arbitrary behavior by employers, applies 
to all workers employed on an employer-employee basis in Ireland. 
The Protection of Employee's (Part-Time) Work Act, 2001 also 
provides that all employee protection legislation applies to a 
person, irrespective of his or her nationality or place of 
residence, who has entered into a contract of employment that 
provides for his or her being employed in the State or who works in 
the State under a contract of employment. 
 
Under this legislation, a person, irrespective of nationality or 
place of residence, who works in the State under a contract of 
employment, has the same rights under Irish employment rights 
legislation as Irish employees. 
 
Labour Inspectors pursue allegations of worker mistreatment and when 
evidence of non-compliance with the relevant employment rights 
legislation is found, the Inspectorate seeks redress for the 
individual/s concerned and, if appropriate, a prosecution is 
initiated.  Employers are required to maintain records in respect of 
such employees and these records, together with other substantiating 
evidence, for example, a statement from an employee, provide the 
essentials of a basis for legal proceedings.  Failure to maintain 
adequate records by an employer is an offence. 
 
The Social Partnership Agreement "Towards 2016" sets out a number of 
commitments with regard to employment standards and compliance, 
including: 
 
-- a trebling in the number of Labour Inspectors, 
-- greater coordination among organizations concerned with 
compliance, 
-- provision for joint investigations between the Labour 
Inspectorate, the Revenue Commissioners and the Department of Social 
and Family Affairs, 
-- new requirements in respect of record keeping by employers, 
-- enhanced employment rights awareness activity, 
-- the introduction of a new and more user-friendly system of 
employment rights compliance, and 
-- increased resourcing of the system and higher penalties for 
non-compliance with employment law. 
 
"Towards 2016" provides that the number of Labour Inspectors will be 
progressively increased from 31 to 90 beyond 2007 as part of the 
initiative to increase the staffing resources of the Employment 
Rights Bodies generally. 
 
 
DUBLIN 00000089  011.2 OF 026 
 
 
"Towards 2016" is an active social partnership agreement with clear 
deliverables agreed between the Government, employers bodies, trade 
unions and the community and voluntary sector.  Such agreements have 
been part of economic and social policy in Ireland since the 
"Programme for National Recovery" was agreed in 1987. 
 
-- D. What are the prescribed penalties for rape or forcible sexual 
assault? 
 
Under Irish Law, the maximum sentence possible for rape is life 
imprisonment (eight years is the average sentence), and the maximum 
possible sentence for aggravated sexual assault is life 
imprisonment. 
 
-- E. Law Enforcement Statistics: Did the government prosecute any 
cases against human trafficking offenders during the reporting 
period?  If so, provide numbers of investigations, prosecutions, 
convictions, and sentences imposed, including details on plea 
bargains and fines, if relevant and available.  Please note the 
number of convicted traffickers who received suspended sentences and 
the number who received only a fine as punishment.  Please indicate 
which laws were used to investigate, prosecute, convict, and 
sentence traffickers.  Also, if possible, please disaggregate 
numbers of cases by type of TIP (labor vs. commercial sexual 
exploitation) and victims (children under 18 years of age vs. 
adults).  If in a labor source country, did the government 
criminally prosecute labor recruiters who recruit workers using 
knowingly fraudulent or deceptive offers or by imposing fees or 
commissions for the purpose of subjecting the worker to debt 
bondage?  Did the government in a labor destination country 
criminally prosecute employers or labor agents who confiscate 
workers' passports/travel documents for the purpose of trafficking, 
switch contracts or terms of employment without the worker's consent 
to keep workers in a state of service, use physical or sexual abuse 
or the threat of such abuse to keep workers in a state of service, 
or withhold payment of salaries as a means to keep workers in a 
state of service?  What were the actual punishments imposed on 
persons convicted of these offenses?  Are the traffickers serving 
the time sentenced?  If not, why not? 
 
The Garda takes a pro-active approach and attempts to ensure that 
any allegations relating to the trafficking of human beings for 
sexual exploitation are vigorously pursued and thoroughly 
investigated.  Operation 'Snow' is an operation which specifically 
strives to identify unaccompanied children who seek to enter the 
State.  Where unaccompanied children are identified, the 
circumstances are investigated at the point of entry and if there 
are any concerns about the welfare of the child he/she is placed 
into the care of the Health Service Executive which has statutory 
responsibility for the care and protection of children.  Where a 
child is in the company of an adult and there are concerns about the 
welfare of the child then he/she is also placed into the care of the 
Health Service Executive. 
 
Targeted Garda operations have uncovered a small number of suspected 
trafficking cases.  During 2008, NGOs referred a total of 21 cases 
of females who they believe were suspected victims of human 
trafficking.  As part of the asylum process a total of 29 females 
reported that they were victims of human trafficking.  All of these 
females were provided with accommodation and other support by the 
Reception and Integration Agency (RIA).  Ten of these females were 
common to both lists.  Thus, there were a total of 40 females who 
were referred to the Garda for consideration as suspected victims of 
human trafficking. 
 
Two suspected victims were granted a 60 days recovery and reflection 
period and one of those was subsequently granted a 6-month temporary 
residency period.  Both were offered access to accommodations and 
additional services provided by the State.  One female is currently 
being provided with accommodation and assistance through the direct 
provision services of RIA and the second female is in the care of an 
NGO that is funded by the State.  In no instance has a person who is 
potentially a suspected victim of trafficking been removed from the 
State and the public policy of the State is that no potential victim 
or suspected victim of human trafficking will be removed while their 
circumstances are being considered and/or investigated.  Two persons 
were deemed to be suspected victims of trafficking.  The remaining 
cases are under active consideration. 
 
 
DUBLIN 00000089  012.2 OF 026 
 
 
There have been no convictions under the Criminal Law (Human 
Trafficking) Act 2008 to date.   Since September 2000, over 100 
people have been arrested and detained in respect of alleged 
breaches of Section 2 Illegal Immigrants (Trafficking) Act 2000. 
Five people have been convicted of 25 individual breaches of Section 
2 of the Illegal Immigrants (Trafficking) Act, 2000.  There are also 
an additional three people before the Courts on charges under 
Section 2.  Section 2 of this Act creates an offence in relation to 
the known facilitation or organization of entry into the State of a 
person who the organizer knows or has reasonable cause to believe to 
be an illegal immigrant or a person who intends to seek asylum. 
 
Targeted Garda operations and an awareness-raising campaign have 
been successful in disrupting trafficking activity.  In one recent 
case (December 2008) an identified suspect is believed to have left 
the jurisdiction before he could be apprehended.  He is believed to 
have returned to China.  However, it is anticipated he will return 
to Ireland and at that stage the investigation will be pursued to 
its conclusion. 
 
In another case, a Congolese national man was recently convicted and 
sentenced to 15 years imprisonment for sexual violence offences. 
One of the victims was a 15 year old girl he claimed he married 
after paying "a dowry of a goat, a length of fabric, a frying pan 
and euro 500 (USD 640)."  Another was a 13 year old girl that he 
and his wife had brought to Ireland to "help rear their children." 
In this particular case the Director of Public Prosecutions 
instructed prosecution for other serious offences and a charge of 
trafficking was not forthcoming. 
 
Ireland has been and is actively involved in cross-border, 
trans-national trafficking investigations.  A joint police 
trafficking investigation between Ireland and Romania resulted in 
the prosecution of four people in Romania for trafficking for the 
purpose of labor exploitation type offences. 
 
-- Operation 'Baghdad' was a Eurojust Operation which targeted Iraqi 
traffickers across Europe.  Ireland actively participated in this 
operation which led to over 100 arrests across Europe. 
 
-- A suspected international child trafficker for sexual 
exploitation, Peter Sarfo, was arrested in Ireland and extradited to 
the Netherlands where he is now awaiting trial. 
 
Ireland is aware that other jurisdictions are encountering 
difficulties in securing prosecutions/convictions under trafficking 
legislation, inter alia, because of difficulties in establishing 
proof and evidence.  In recent instances two suspected victims of 
tafficking were interviewe by the Garda.  Both returned to their 
home counries.  One was provided with assistance by his Embssy in 
Ireland; the other returned without assisance.  Both cases are 
under active investigation with a view to identifying the suspects. 
In one case the crime of trafficking occurred outside of Ireland and 
information is being prepared for transmission, via Interpol, to the 
jurisdiction where the offence occurred.  In the second case a 
request has been sent, via Interpol, to have an additional interview 
conducted with the suspected victim. 
 
-- F. Does the government provide any specialized training for 
government officials in how to recognize, investigate, and prosecute 
instances of trafficking? Specify whether NGOs, international 
organizations, and/or the USG provide specialized training for host 
government officials. 
 
Training and Awareness-Raising has been provided to more than 770 
members of the Garda.  This is provided as an introduction to human 
trafficking and sets out the various indicators of human 
trafficking.  The training is provided by the International 
Organisation for Migration (IOM) with input from NGOs and the Garda 
National Immigration Bureau. 
 
The Garda has placed particular importance on ensuring that its 
members receive training which will equip them to tackle the 
phenomenon of human trafficking.  A continuous professional 
development training course entitled 'Tackling Trafficking in Human 
Beings: Prevention, Protection and Prosecution' has been designed by 
the Garda, assisted by the International Organisation for Migration 
(IOM).  The aim of the course is to alert operational personnel 
within the Garda to the existence of the phenomenon of trafficking 
 
DUBLIN 00000089  013.2 OF 026 
 
 
and to empower them to identify victims so as to provide for their 
wellbeing and to ensure initiation of criminal investigations, where 
appropriate.  Members of the Police Service of Northern Ireland 
(PSNI) have attended this training and the Head of the United 
Kingdom Human Trafficking centre (UKHTC) has made presentations at 
each of these training courses, emphasizing the international and 
cross-border co-operation between police forces.  250 members of the 
Garda have been provided with this training course and 520 
Probationer Garda officers have received awareness training as part 
of their final phase of training. 
 
The Garda also regularly participates in courses organized by CEPOL, 
the European Police College, related to human trafficking.  These 
courses are targeted at senior police officers who are responsible 
for prosecution services countering trafficking cases or organized 
crime cases, members of lecturing staff in national police training 
colleges, Chiefs of Police and Government officials from relevant 
Ministries dealing with issues around human trafficking. 
 
Personnel attached to the Garda Training College and GNIB attended a 
course provided by the International Organisation for Migration 
titled "The Training of Border Guards, Border Police and Customs 
Officials in identifying of and providing assistance to the victims 
of trafficking".  This course was sponsored by the Belgian and 
Hungarian Governments in co-operation with the European Commission. 
 
In addition to members of the Garda, Awareness Raising Training was 
also provided between July 2008 and February 2009 to more than 130 
persons as an introduction to human trafficking and setting out the 
indicators of human trafficking.  The training was provided by the 
International Organisation for Migration (IOM) with input from 
NGOs/HSE, the Garda National Immigration Bureau and the Anti-Human 
Trafficking Unit.  Among those provided with the training were 
members of staff from the following organizations: 
 
-- Labour Inspectors from the National Employment Rights Authority, 
-- Health Services Executive, 
-- Irish Naturalisation and Immigration Service (INIS), 
-- Office of the Refugee Applications Commissioner (ORAC), 
-- the Victim's Support Helpline, 
-- the Victim of Crime Office, 
-- the Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment, 
-- Youth Detention Schools, 
-- the Probation Service, 
-- the Anti-Human Trafficking Unit, 
-- Inspectors from the Private Security Authority, 
-- Social Welfare Inspectors from the Department of Social and 
Family Affairs. 
 
--G. Does the government cooperate with other governments in the 
investigation and prosecution of trafficking cases? If possible, 
provide the number of cooperative international investigations on 
trafficking during the reporting period? 
 
Yes.  Examples of international police cooperation include: 
 
-- Exchange of liaison officers between GNIB and United Kingdom 
Border Agency (UKBA). 
-- Sharing immigration related information between the GNIB and the 
UKBA. 
-- Continuous liaison with the UK trafficking initiative Operation 
'Pentameter I' and 'Pentameter II' - a GNIB Liaison Officer was 
appointed to ensure full coordination. 
-- In September 2006, the Irish and UK Governments signed a 
Memorandum of Understanding in relation to facilitating the 
systematic exchange of immigration related information. 
-- Appointment of a GNIB Liaison Officer to deal with Europol and 
Interpol to specifically deal with requests from both organizations. 
 
-- Appointment of GNIB personnel as Airline Liaison officers who are 
intermittently based at hub-airports in other EU Member States. 
-- Provision of access to Interpol's I-24/7 global police 
communications system at all Ports of Entry in the State thereby 
enabling immediate access to information held by Interpol relating 
to immigration matters. 
-- A member of the Garda is currently seconded to Interpol HQ in 
Lyon working as a Criminal Intelligence Officer in the Trafficking 
in Human Beings sub-directorate. 
-- Participation by representatives of the Garda in the Interpol 
 
DUBLIN 00000089  014.2 OF 026 
 
 
Working Group on trafficking in human beings. 
-- Regular liaison between the Irish and French immigration 
personnel. 
-- The secondment of a UK Immigration Service Officer to the British 
Embassy in Dublin to liaise with GNIB. 
-- Appointment of GNIB officers to liaise with the UK Immigration 
Service and the Police Service of Northern Ireland (in relation to 
the land border between Ireland and Northern Ireland). 
-- International Investigations with other States on an ongoing 
basis. 
-- Frontex sharing of information and regular attendance at 
meetings. 
-- OSCE (Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Central 
Europe), attendance at meetings on Trafficking in Human Beings. 
-- Council of Europe. 
-- UN and UNGIFT. 
 
-- H. Does the government extradite persons who are charged with 
trafficking in other countries?  If so, please provide the number of 
traffickers extradited during the reporting period, and the number 
of trafficking extraditions pending. In particular, please report on 
any pending or concluded extraditions of trafficking offenders to 
the United States. 
 
Ireland extradites persons in certain circumstances with those 
countries with which it has extradition agreements in place. 
However, Irish courts take a very exacting approach toward such 
requests.  Requests that do not fully comply with the standards set 
by the courts are often delayed or denied, as the legal presumption 
is against extradition.  In addition, Irish courts will deny an 
extradition request if they feel that the defendant will not be 
given the same guarantees available under the Irish constitution in 
the requesting jurisdiction. 
 
As of February 2008, the Irish Parliament had enacted four 
agreements - the U.S.-EU Extradition Agreement, the U.S.-Ireland 
Extradition Agreement, the U.S.-EU Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty, 
and the U.S.-Ireland Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty.   The 
Department of Foreign Affairs had drawn up a diplomatic note to be 
exchanged with the U.S. stating that Ireland has completed its 
internal procedures for the entry into force of the US/Ireland 
Extradition and Mutual Legal Assistance Agreements.  The Department 
of State was prepared to exchange instruments of ratification and 
was developing a draft protocol of exchange to be exchanged with the 
Irish bilaterally. 
 
Within the European Union, persons can also be returned to their own 
jurisdiction under the provisions of the European Arrest Warrant Act 
¶2004.  Extradition in Ireland is governed by the Extradition Act 
1965 as amended and the European Arrest Warrant Act 2003 as amended. 
 Part II of the Extradition Act 1965 applies to non EU countries 
including the U.S. and the European Arrest Warrant (EAW) Act 2003 
governs extradition arrangements with Member States of the EU. 
 
In 2008 there were no requests under Part II of the Extradition Act 
1965 as amended in relation to trafficking offenders. 
 
The Central Authority for Mutual Assistance and Extradition received 
3 EAWs for trafficking offences in 2008; one from Lithuania, one 
from Italy and one from France.  In two cases the offenders were 
surrendered (Lithuania and Italy) and the other case is pending 
(France). 
 
-- I. Is there evidence of government involvement in or tolerance of 
trafficking, on a local or institutional level?  If so, please 
explain in detail. 
 
There is no evidence of Government involvement in or tolerance of 
trafficking, on a local or institutional level. 
 
-- J. If government officials are involved in trafficking, what 
steps has the government taken to end such participation?  Please 
indicate the number of government officials investigated and 
prosecuted for involvement in trafficking or trafficking-related 
corruption during the reporting period.  Have any been convicted? 
What sentence(s) was imposed?  Please specify if officials received 
suspended sentences, or were given a fine, fired, or reassigned to 
another position within the government as punishment.  Please 
indicate the number of convicted officials that received suspended 
 
DUBLIN 00000089  015.2 OF 026 
 
 
sentences or received only a fine as punishment. 
 
There is no evidence of Government involvement in or tolerance of 
trafficking, on a local or institutional level. 
 
-- K. Is prostitution legalized or decriminalized?  Specifically, 
are the activities of the prostitute criminalized?  Are the 
activities of the brothel owner/operator, clients, pimps, and 
enforcers criminalized? 
Are these laws enforced?  If prostitution is legal and regulated, 
what is the legal minimum age for this activity? Note that in many 
countries with federalist systems, prostitution laws may be under 
state or local jurisdiction and may differ among jurisdictions. 
 
Prostitution itself is not illegal under Irish law, but it is an 
offense to solicit another person for the purposes of prostitution, 
to be involved in organized prostitution, or to live off the 
proceeds of a third party's income from prostitution (pimping). 
Under the Criminal Law Amendment Act 1885, it is also illegal to 
procure a woman or girl to become a prostitute, to leave the country 
to become a prostitute, or to leave her usual place of abode to 
become a prostitute.  Brothels, defined as establishments of two or 
more women made available for prostitution, are illegal.  Under the 
above mentioned Act, it is an offence to detain any woman or girl 
against her will in a brothel.  A woman or girl is deemed to have 
been detained in a brothel where, inter alia, property belonging to 
her is withheld. 
 
-- L. For countries that contribute troops to international 
peacekeeping efforts, please indicate whether the government 
vigorously investigated, prosecuted, convicted and sentenced 
nationals of the country deployed abroad as part of a peacekeeping 
or other similar mission who engage in or facilitate severe forms of 
trafficking or who exploit victims of such trafficking. 
 
Ireland's military is small.  Nonetheless, ten percent of the force 
- about 800 troops - is dedicated to peacekeeping duties, most 
prominently in Chad and Kosovo.  The Department of Defence ensures 
that commanding officers and military police personnel on 
international peacekeeping missions abroad are constantly vigilant 
in the area of Human Trafficking.  In the past, one reported case 
involving as Irish soldier on an overseas mission was fully 
investigated by military police but turned out not to constitute 
human trafficking. 
 
Pursuant to section 169 of the Defence Act 1954 it is possible to 
prosecute offences under the Criminal Law (Human Trafficking) Act 
2008, where an investigation discloses evidence to support such 
offences.  No offenses have been detected and no prosecutions 
against a member of the Permanent Defence Force have taken place to 
date. 
 
 
-- M. If the country has an identified child sex tourism problem (as 
source or destination), how many foreign pedophiles has the 
government prosecuted or deported/extradited to their country of 
origin?  What are the countries of origin for sex tourists?  Do the 
country's child sexual abuse laws have extraterritorial coverage 
(similar to the U.S. PROTECT Act)?  If so, how many of the country's 
nationals have been prosecuted and/or convicted under the 
extraterritorial provision(s) for traveling to other countries to 
engage in child sex tourism? 
 
Ireland does not have an identified child sex tourism problem.  The 
Government has authority to deport non-national pedophiles according 
to the strictures of its extradition treaty with the country of 
origin of the arrested individual.  In addition, the Child 
Trafficking and Pornography Act has extraterritorial coverage. 
 
PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS 
 
-- A.  What kind of protection is the government able under existing 
law to provide for victims and witnesses?  Does it provide these 
protections in practice? 
 
Witness protection for victims of trafficking:  Under the Criminal 
Justice (Human Trafficking) Act 2008, specific measures are 
legislated in order to provide greater protection to those 
participating in court proceedings involving cases of human 
 
DUBLIN 00000089  016.2 OF 026 
 
 
trafficking. 
 
Section 10 (1) provides: 
 
-- In proceedings for an offence under section 2 or 4, or section 3 
(other than subsections (2A) and (2B)) of the Act of 1998, or 
incitement or conspiracy to commit any such offence, all persons, 
other than officers of the court, persons directly concerned in the 
proceedings and such other persons (if any) as the judge of the 
court may determine, shall be excluded from the court during the 
proceedings. 
 
Provisions are also contained within the Act to protect the identity 
of the victim from being publicized in the media.  Section 11 (1) 
provides: 
 
-- "Where a person is charged with an offence under section 2 or 4, 
or section 3 (other than subsections (2A) and (2B)) of the Act of 
1998, any person who publishes or broadcasts any information, 
including- 
 
 (a)  any photograph of, or that includes a depiction of, the 
alleged victim of the offence, or 
 (b)  any other representation of the physical likeness, or any 
representation that includes a depiction of the physical likeness, 
of the alleged victim of the offence, that is likely to enable the 
identification of the alleged victim of the offence, shall, subject 
to any direction under subsection (2), be guilty of an offence and 
shall be liable upon conviction on indictment to a fine, or 
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 10 years, or both." 
 
The Criminal Evidence Act 1992, is amended under section 12 Criminal 
Law (Human Trafficking) Act 2008 to include reference to trafficking 
in human beings in terms of section 2, 4 and 7.  This means that it 
will be possible for an alleged victim of trafficking to give 
evidence through a live television link, with the leave of the court 
in the case of adults, from either within the State or abroad. 
 
-- B.  Does the country have victim care facilities (shelters or 
drop-in centers) which are accessible to trafficking victims?  Do 
foreign victims have the same access to care as domestic trafficking 
victims?  Where are child victims placed (e.g., in shelters, foster 
care, or juvenile justice detention centers)?  Does the country have 
specialized care for adults in addition to children? 
Does the country have specialized care for male victims as well as 
female?   Does the country have specialized facilities dedicated to 
helping victims of trafficking? 
Are these facilities operated by the government or by NGOs?  What is 
the funding source of these facilities? Please estimate the amount 
the government spent (in U.S. dollar equivalent) on these 
specialized facilities dedicated to helping trafficking victims 
during the reporting period. 
 
The Reception and Integration Agency (RIA), a Government Agency, 
provides accommodation, as an interim measure, to all potential or 
suspected adult victims of trafficking referred to RIA by the Garda 
National Immigration Bureau (GNIB).  This arrangement has operated 
satisfactorily in a small number of cases of suspected trafficking 
to date. 
 
Potential and suspected victims of trafficking are given the same 
accommodation as that provided to any newly arrived asylum seekers 
in direct provision, i.e., accommodation in a reception centre.  The 
reception centers at which victims are accommodated include a 
medical center on-site, managed by the Health Service Executive 
(HSE). 
 
Accommodation for suspected victims of sexual exploitation is also 
provided by the NGO Ruhama.  This accommodation is provided for the 
duration of a period of recovery and reflection and for the duration 
of the temporary residence permit. 
 
The Health Service Executive (HSE) has responsibility for children 
under legislation as set out in Section 5 of the Child Care Act 
¶1991.   Section 5 provides: "Where it appears to a health board that 
a child in its area is homeless, the board shall enquire into the 
child's circumstances, and if the board is satisfied that there is 
no accommodation available to him which he can reasonably occupy, 
then, unless the child is received into the care of the board under 
 
DUBLIN 00000089  017.2 OF 026 
 
 
the provisions of this Act, the board shall take such steps as are 
reasonable to make available suitable accommodation for him." 
 
There is no specific funding set aside for support services provided 
to victims of trafficking as this in not the norm in the Irish 
context.  Instead funding for victims of trafficking is provided 
from overall Departmental/Organizational budgets.  Similarly, 
funding to organizations is not specifically for the provision of 
assistance to suspected victims of trafficking.  Rather, it is a 
matter for such organizations to determine how funding is spent. 
Therefore it is not possible to provide a financial estimate of the 
precise amount of funding allocated to the services to victims of 
trafficking. 
 
Ruhama has been allocated euro 250,000 (USD 321,600) in 2009 from 
the Probation Service from their budget allocation for "Assistance 
to Voluntary Bodies," part of which relates to its work for dealing 
with trafficking in women for the purposes of sexual exploitation. 
This funding amounts to approximately half of Ruhama's budget. 
Ruhama has also been allocated euro 62,000 (USD 79,700) in 2009 
from the Commission for the Support of Victims of Crime for the 
purposes of accompanying women who appear before a court. 
 
-- C.  Does the government provide trafficking victims with access 
to legal, medical and psychological services?  If so, please specify 
the kind of assistance provided. Does the government provide funding 
or other forms of support to foreign or domestic NGOs and/or 
international organizations for providing these services to 
trafficking victims?  Please explain and provide any funding amounts 
in U.S. dollar equivalent.  If assistance provided was in-kind, 
please specify exact assistance.  Please specify if funding for 
assistance comes from a federal budget or from regional or local 
governments. 
 
Legal Services 
 
Arrangements are being finalised for the provision of legal advice 
and legal aid by the Legal Aid Board in civil and criminal cases. 
Legal advice will be provided in the context of civil actions in 
relation to relevant judicial and administrative proceedings.  Legal 
Aid means representation by a solicitor or barrister in civil 
proceedings in the District, Circuit, High and Supreme Courts. 
Legal Aid is available also for representation before the Refugee 
Appeals Tribunal.  Persons who are granted legal advice and/or legal 
aid must pay a contribution to the Board.  However, the intention is 
this will be waived in the case of potential or suspected victims of 
trafficking. 
 
The Legal Aid Board also provides legal advice and legal aid, i.e. 
representation in court, to complainants in certain cases of sexual 
assault in circumstances where the defendant wishes to question a 
witness in relation to their sexual history.  However, in terms of 
its mandate under legislation, the Legal Aid Board cannot provide 
legal aid in criminal cases to victims of trafficking. 
Consequently, approval has been sought to provide legal services of 
this nature on an administrative basis until the necessary 
legislative amendments can be made. 
 
Medical and Psychological Services 
 
These services are provided to all victims of trafficking in health 
centres managed by the HSE at the reception centres of the Reception 
and Integration Agency at which they are accommodated. 
 
-- D. Does the government assist foreign trafficking victims, for 
example, by providing temporary to permanent residency status, or 
other relief from deportation?  If so, please explain. 
 
The Immigration, Residence and Protection Bill, which is currently 
before the Irish Parliament, provides for certain immigration 
protections relating to periods of recovery and reflection and 
temporary residence.  Section 127 of the Bill provides for a 
recovery and reflection period of 45 days and, in circumstances 
where the victim wishes to assist the authorities in any 
investigation or prosecution arising, the possibility of a renewable 
temporary permission of 6 months to enable him or her to do so. 
 
Following the enactment of the Criminal Law (Human Trafficking) Act 
2008 in June 2008, the Minister for Justice, Equality and Law Reform 
 
DUBLIN 00000089  018.2 OF 026 
 
 
put in place an administrative framework providing for periods of 
recovery and reflection and temporary residence.  That framework, 
introduced in accordance with the Minister's executive power to 
manage migration, broadly reflects the provisions in the 
Immigration, Residence and Protection Bill and will operate until 
such time as the Bill comes into effect.  During debate before the 
Irish Parliament, the Minister indicated an intention to increase 
the period of recovery and reflection to be afforded a suspected 
victim from 45 days to 60 days.  A legislative amendment to give 
effect to this proposal is to be brought forward.  In the interim 
period, the current administrative arrangements provide for the 60 
days recovery and reflection period. 
 
These measures are intended to address the immediate and medium term 
concerns of a trafficking victim with regard to their permission to 
remain in the State.  The granting of a period of recovery and 
reflection is not dependent on the suspected victim's cooperation in 
any investigation or prosecution.  The period of temporary residence 
is to allow the victim to assist the Garda or other relevant 
authorities in any investigation or prosecution arising.  These 
provisions are in line with the Council of Europe Convention in 
Action against Trafficking in Human Beings, the United Nations 
Protocol (2000) and the European Union Directive (Directive 
2004/81/EC) on the residence permit issued to victims of 
trafficking. 
 
With regard to any longer term prospect of a victim of human 
trafficking being allowed to remain in the State, it may be possible 
for a victim to seek to regularize his or her residence in the State 
through the making of an application for permission to remain in 
accordance with existing immigration schemes.  Also, where there are 
compelling circumstances of a humanitarian nature the Minister for 
Justice, Equality and Law Reform may, at his or her discretion, 
grant permission to remain.  While it is recognized that victims of 
human trafficking often seek to return to their home country, it is 
open to victims to seek to resolve their longer term status in this 
way. 
 
-- E. Does the government provide longer-term shelter or housing 
benefits to victims or other resources to aid the victims in 
rebuilding their lives? 
 
Victims of trafficking have the same rights as any Irish citizen in 
relation to access to social services, which includes access to 
health care, accommodation, education and material assistance. 
 
In terms of access to the labor market, Ireland also provides 
victims of trafficking with an immigration stamp 3 during the course 
of the 60 day recovery and reflection period.  An immigration stamp 
3 does not provide access to the labor market and is normally 
provided to visitors to Ireland or to dependent spouses. 
 
Should a temporary residence permit be granted to a victim of 
trafficking, an immigration stamp 4 can be issued.  An immigration 
stamp 4 entitles victims to unrestricted access to the labor 
market. 
 
-- F. Does the government have a referral process to transfer 
victims detained, arrested or placed in protective custody by law 
enforcement authorities to institutions that provide short- or 
long-term care (either government or NGO-run)? 
 
In the event that a Superintendent of GNIB deems that a person who 
has been placed in custody for other offences is a potential 
suspected victim of trafficking, then he/she can refer that person 
to the appropriate accommodation which is provided by RIA or to an 
NGO. 
 
-- G. What is the total number of trafficking victims identified 
during the reporting period?  Of these, how many victims were 
referred to care facilities for assistance by law enforcement 
authorities during the reporting period?  By social services 
officials?  What is the number of victims assisted by 
government-funded assistance programs and those not funded by the 
government during the reporting period? 
 
During 2008, NGOs referred a total of 21 cases of females who they 
believe are suspected victims of human trafficking.  As part of the 
asylum process a total of 29 females have reported that they were 
 
DUBLIN 00000089  019.2 OF 026 
 
 
victims of human trafficking.  As part of the asylum process all of 
these females are provided with accommodation and other support by 
RIA.  Ten of the females are common to both lists.  This gives a 
total of 40 females who have been referred to the Garda as suspected 
victims of human trafficking. 
 
Two suspected victims have been granted a 60 days recovery and 
reflection period and one of those has now been granted a 6 months 
temporary residency period.  Both were offered access to the 
accommodation and additional services provided by the State.  One of 
these two females is currently being provided with accommodation and 
assistance through the direct provision services of RIA and the 
second female is in the care of an NGO that is funded by the State. 
In no instance has a person who is potentially a suspected victim of 
trafficking been removed from the State and the public policy of the 
State is that no potential victim or suspected victim of human 
trafficking will be removed while their circumstances are being 
considered and/or investigated.  Two persons have not been deemed to 
be suspected victims of trafficking.  The remaining cases are under 
active consideration. 
 
-- H. Do the government's law enforcement, immigration, and social 
services personnel have a formal system of proactively identifying 
victims of trafficking among high-risk persons with whom they come 
in contact (e.g., foreign persons arrested for prostitution or 
immigration violations)?  For countries with legalized prostitution, 
does the government have a mechanism for screening for trafficking 
victims among persons involved in the legal/regulated commercial sex 
trade? 
 
Through the provision of training, designed to assist in identifying 
such criminal activity where it is taking place, members of the 
Garda are empowered to efficiently and effectively investigate 
criminal acts involved in human trafficking, while treating victims 
with the utmost sensitivity.  GNIB has developed appropriate 
communications channels with the Health Service Executive and RIA to 
ensure the welfare of suspected victims of human trafficking is 
provided for while an investigation into the alleged criminality is 
completed. 
 
Staff in children detention schools all receive extensive child 
protection training which includes training in identifying and 
dealing with children who are suspected of having been trafficked. 
There are standard procedures in place to respond to suspicions of 
any child protection issues, including trafficking, which involve 
reporting the matter to both the Garda and the Health Service 
Executive. 
 
The Garda, in particular GNIB, has built up links/relationships with 
all recognized State agencies, NGOs and other voluntary 
organizations operating in this area.  The various Working Groups 
established by the AHTU provide a forum to further develop Ireland's 
responses to all of the issues of human trafficking.  The Garda 
plays an active part in each of the Working Groups and is 
represented at a senior level on each group. 
 
Insofar as child victims of trafficking are concerned the HSE 
assesses each child's case independently and places them in 
accommodation that it deems would provide the safest and most 
appropriate placement.  The option considered to be safest to date 
in the majority of cases has been foster placement.  However, the 
HSE recognizes that as tracking and monitoring processes are refined 
and improved, the number of identified victims may increase and in 
preparation for this eventuality a policy and operational plan is 
currently being completed by the HSE.  The Dublin based Service for 
Separated Children Seeking Asylum (S.C.S.A.) will take 
responsibility for providing the full range of supports including 
placement/accommodation to child victims of trafficking. 
 
-- I. Are the rights of victims respected?  Are trafficking victims 
detained or jailed?  If so, for how long?  Are victims fined?  Are 
victims prosecuted for violations of other laws, such as those 
governing immigration or prostitution? 
 
The rights of victims are respected and it is not the State's policy 
to detain or imprison persons whom are known to be victims of 
trafficking.  Victims are not prosecuted for breaches of immigration 
or other laws in circumstances where they are suspected to be 
victims of human trafficking.  If a prosecution has commenced or is 
 
DUBLIN 00000089  020.2 OF 026 
 
 
being considered, the facts of each case are relayed to the Director 
of Public Prosecutions, who has the discretion to terminate a 
prosecution or not commence a prosecution if the person is a 
suspected victim of human trafficking. 
 
-- J. Does the government encourage victims to assist in the 
investigation and prosecution of trafficking?  How many victims 
assisted in the investigation and prosecution of traffickers during 
the reporting period?  May victims file civil suits or seek legal 
action against traffickers?  Does anyone impede victim access to 
such legal redress?  If a victim is a material witness in a court 
case against a former employer, is the victim permitted to obtain 
other employment or to leave the country pending trial proceedings? 
Are there means by which a victim may obtain restitution? 
 
The Government encourages victims of trafficking to assist the Garda 
with investigations and prosecutions by offering them a temporary 
residence permit.  The temporary residence permit is granted 
following the expiry of a recovery and reflection period on the 
condition that the victim cooperates with the Garda with 
investigation and prosecutions.  The permit lasts for a period of 
six months and can be renewed thereafter for as long as an 
investigation or prosecution is on-going. 
 
During this time, victims have access to legal aid and advice which 
is to be provided by the Legal Aid Board.  These arrangements are 
currently being finalized.  Victims are entitled to the same access 
to legal redress as Irish citizens and are not impeded in any way in 
this regard.  If victims wish to take a civil case against a 
trafficker for the purposes of obtaining compensation, they can be 
assisted in taking such a case by the Legal Aid Board.  Victims may 
also receive compensation in a criminal case under the Criminal 
Justice Act 1993 on the basis of personal injury or loss resulting 
from the offence or through applying to the Criminal Injuries 
Compensation Tribunal which compensates victims of crime for out of 
pocket expenses. 
 
If a victim is a material witness in a court case against a former 
employer and has been working in the State for more than 12 months, 
there is no restriction on him/her changing employment.  Situations 
where a person has been in the State for less than 12 months are 
dealt with on a case by case basis and proof would be required that 
they are taking a case against a former employer.  Decisions as to 
whether a person can enter, remain or leave the State are made by 
the Department of Justice, Equality and Law Reform.  It should also 
be noted, that on being granted a temporary residence permit, a 
victim is issued with a stamp 4 which allows him/her unrestricted 
access to the labor market. 
 
Currently two suspected victims are actively assisting Garda 
officers with investigations.  In addition, there are a number of 
other investigations ongoing where persons, who are potentially 
suspected victims of trafficking, are likely to assist in 
investigations. 
 
-- K. Does the government provide any specialized training for 
government officials in identifying trafficking victims and in the 
provision of assistance to trafficked victims, including the special 
needs of trafficked children?  Does the government provide training 
on protections and assistance to its embassies and consulates in 
foreign countries that are destination or transit countries?   What 
is the number of trafficking victims assisted by the host country's 
embassies or consulates abroad during the reporting period?  Please 
explain the type of assistance provided (travel documents, referrals 
to assistance, payment for transportation home). 
 
The Garda has placed particular importance on ensuring that its 
members receive training which will equip them to tackle the 
phenomenon of human trafficking.  A continuous professional 
development training course entitled 'Tackling Trafficking in Human 
Beings: Prevent, Protection and Prosecution' has been designed by 
the Garda, assisted by the International Organisation for Migration 
(IOM) and the UK Human Trafficking Centre.  The aim of the course is 
to alert operational personnel within the Garda to the existence of 
the phenomenon of trafficking and to empower them to identify 
victims so as to provide for their wellbeing and to ensure 
initiation of criminal investigations, where appropriate.  Members 
of the PSNI have also attended this training.  250 members of the 
Garda have been provided with this training course and 520 
 
DUBLIN 00000089  021.2 OF 026 
 
 
Probationer Garda officers have received awareness training as part 
of their final phase of training. 
 
Awareness Raising Training has been provided, since July 2008, to in 
excess of 130 persons as an introduction to human trafficking and 
setting out the indicators of human trafficking.  The training has 
been provided by the International Organisation for Migration (IOM) 
with input from NGOs, the HSE, the Garda National Immigration Bureau 
and the Anti-Human Trafficking Unit.  Among those provided with the 
training include staff from the following organisations: 
 
-- Labour Inspectors from the National Employment Rights Authority 
-- Health Services Executive 
-- Irish Naturalisation and Immigration Service (INIS) 
-- Office of the Refugee Applications Commissioner (ORAC) 
-- the Victim's Support Helpline 
-- the Victim of Crime Office 
-- the Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment 
-- Youth Detention Schools 
-- the Probation Service 
-- the Anti-Human Trafficking Unit 
-- Inspectors from the Private Security Authority 
-- Social Welfare Inspectors from the Department of Social and 
Family Affairs 
 
The Department of Education and Science has agreed to involve 
teachers and students in raising awareness of trafficking in human 
beings.  Sample case studies supplied by the International 
Organisation for Migration (IOM), UNHCR and the Migrants Rights 
Centre of Ireland have been made available to the Coordinator of the 
Civil, Social and Political Education (CSPE) course in Secondary 
schools.  These materials will be distributed to teachers in 
selected schools on a trial basis with a view to having the topic of 
human trafficking addressed as part of the 'Human Rights' module of 
the CSPE program.  It is anticipated that this can then be rolled 
out on the CPSE curriculum for the 2009 - 2010 academic year in a 
series of three to four lessons over the year. 
 
Information on the trafficking of human beings and details of the 
Irish 'Blue Blindfold' website address has been placed on the 
Department of Foreign Affairs Internet Website and Intranet Sites. 
In addition, there is currently a proposal to hold information 
sessions concerning the trafficking of human beings in the near 
future with: 
 
-- Department of Foreign Affairs for staff who will be taking up 
posts in overseas missions. 
-- Department of Enterprise Trade and Employment for staff approving 
work permit applications. 
 
-- L. Does the government provide assistance, such as medical aid, 
shelter, or financial help, to its nationals who are repatriated as 
victims of trafficking? 
 
There is no evidence to date that an Irish national has been 
trafficked.  Such assistance will be provided if the occasion 
arises. 
 
-- M. Which international organizations or NGOs, if any, work with 
trafficking victims?  What type of services do they provide?  What 
sort of cooperation do they receive from local authorities? 
 
Established in 1989, Ruhama is a Dublin-based NGO that works with 
women involved in prostitution.  As part of its overall work, Ruhama 
also provides assistance to women who have been trafficked into 
Ireland for the purposes of sexual exploitation.  Ruhama regards 
prostitution and commercial sexual exploitation as violence against 
women and violations of women's human rights.  Services offered by 
Ruhama include accommodation, outreach, advocacy, befriending, 
counseling and development. 
 
The Sexual Violence Centre in Cork provides counseling and support 
to teenagers, women and men who have been raped or are survivors of 
child sexual abuse.  The organization is recognized as a center of 
expertise in this area and provides training and education for a 
range of organizations and agencies.  The Centre is also involved in 
research, is on a number of committees and aims to influence social 
policy and improve legislation for victims of sexual violence.  In 
addition, the Centre is also involved in developing awareness 
 
DUBLIN 00000089  022.2 OF 026 
 
 
raising through its work with high school students in the tenth 
grade. 
 
The Migrant Rights Centre of Ireland (MRCI) is a national 
organization concerned with the rights of migrant workers and their 
families.  The organization was set up in 2001 to bridge a gap in 
support structures and information provision for migrant workers and 
their families.  Since then MRCI has evolved to become a national 
organization.  Its primary aims are the provision of supports to 
migrant workers and their families, empowering migrant workers 
through community work practice and achieving policy change. 
 
The Immigrant Council of Ireland (ICI) is a national, independent 
non-governmental organization that promotes the rights of migrants 
through information, legal advice, advocacy, lobbying, research and 
training work.  The ICI is also an Independent Law Centre. 
 
Established in 1951, the International Oraganisation for Migration 
(IOM) in Ireland is the leading inter-governmental organization in 
the field of migration and works closely with governmental, 
intergovernmental and non-governmental partners.  Ireland has been 
an IOM Member State since 2002.  Since then, it has become actively 
engaged in a number of thematic areas which all seek to positively 
contribute to facilitating and managing migration.  IOM Dublin 
currently runs assisted voluntary return and reintegration programs 
funded by the Department of Justice, Equality and Law Reform that 
are open to asylum seekers and irregular migrants from non-EEA 
(European Economic Area) countries who wish to return home 
voluntarily but do not have the means, including the necessary 
documentation, to do so. 
 
In Ireland, the Representation of the United Nations High 
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) works with government as well as 
civil society partners to support the building of the asylum system. 
 The organization carries out the mandate of UNHCR to safeguard the 
rights and well-being of refugees in cooperation with the 
authorities.  UNHCR activities aim to ensure that everyone can 
exercise the right to seek asylum in Ireland and find safety if they 
are in need of protection.  In terms of involvement in 
anti-trafficking activities the UNHCR are represented on a number of 
the working groups who are responsible for examining various 
trafficking issues. 
 
PREVENTION 
 
-- A. Did the government conduct anti-trafficking information or 
education campaigns during the reporting period?  If so, briefly 
describe the campaign(s), including their objectives and 
effectiveness.  Please provide the number of people reached by such 
awareness efforts, if available.  Do these campaigns target 
potential trafficking victims and/or the demand for trafficking 
(e.g. "clients" of prostitutes or beneficiaries of forced labor)? 
(Note: This can be an especially noteworthy effort where 
prostitution is legal. End Note.) 
 
Ireland conducted an awareness raising campaign under the European 
G6 Initiative Against Trafficking in Human Beings.  The G6 
initiative is a coordinated European initiative to tackle the 
trafficking of human beings involving Ireland, the UK, the 
Netherlands, Poland, Italy and Spain with support from Europol, 
Interpol and Eurojust.  It was agreed that a shared multinational 
campaign would be run in participating states designed to raise 
awareness and discourage demand for services of victims of sexual 
and labor exploitation.   The Irish campaign was launched by the 
Minister for Justice, Equality and Law Reform and the Garda 
Commissioner on October 21, 2008.  The awareness raising campaign 
targeted the general public, law enforcement and other professionals 
who come into contact with victims of trafficking during the course 
of their work.  The campaign uses the "Blue Blindfold - Don't Close 
your Eyes to Human Trafficking" concept developed by the UK Human 
Trafficking Centre. 
 
The campaign had the following components: 
 
-- Newspaper Advertisements were launched at the start and end of 
the campaign. 
-- A total of 1,250 packs containing 3 posters, 1,000 leaflets and 
200 business cards were produced and issued to Airports/Ports/Train 
Stations/Bus Stations, Garda stations, NGOs, RIA Accommodation 
 
DUBLIN 00000089  023.2 OF 026 
 
 
Centres, Local Health Offices, Health Centres, Hospitals, Citizen 
Information Centres, Libraries, and educational organizations. 
-- Stripline and column advertisements were posted on the two Luas 
(public transport in Dublin) lines for 3 weeks. 
-- A skyscraper advertisement on the RTE website (national 
television and radio service) was posted for 3 weeks. 
-- Advertisements were placed in the match programs for three rugby 
international competitions. 
-- Advertisements were placed in the 'In Touch' magazine, which 
circulated with the Irish Independent newspaper on November 3, 
¶2008. 
-- A dedicated website, www.blueblindfold.gov, established that, 
inter alia, sets out the indicators of trafficking. 
 
As a result of the campaign a number of calls and e-mails were were 
received by the Garda and are being investigated.  An evaluation of 
the campaign is underway at present. 
 
The Anti-Human Trafficking Unit arranged for funding under the 
National Women's Strategy for Ruhama (an NGO which provides support 
services to women involved in prostitution and other forms of 
commercial sexual exploitation) for the making of a 3-minute film 
and a 50-second advertisement designed to educate customers and 
potential customers on the exploitation underpinning the commercial 
sex industry and to address the demand side of sex trafficking by 
drawing attention to the penalty provisions which apply.  The 
50-second advertisement was launched on November 10 and has since 
been aired regularly on the national television stations, RTE, TV3 
and the sports television station, Setanta. 
 
Both the Executive Director of the Anti-Human Trafficking Unit and 
representatives of the Garda National Immigration Bureau 
participated on a Crimecall television program, which has some 
400,000 viewers that focused on trafficking in human beings on June 
¶24. 
 
Publication of articles concerning trafficking in human beings 
 
An article is to be published in the first edition of 2009 of the 
Irish Judicial Studies Journal which has members of the judiciary as 
its target audience. 
 
Articles are to be published in CitizeNews (teachers union magazine) 
and the Newsletter of the National Education Welfare Board. 
 
An article is to be published in the next issue of the Taxi 
Regulator's Newsletter, which issues to all taxi drivers. 
 
Articles have been published in the Irish Naturalisation and 
Immigration Service (INIS) and Office of the Refugee Applications 
Commissioner (ORAC) Newsletters. 
 
Addresses have been made by the Executive Director of the Anti-Human 
Trafficking Unit to: 
(a) Conference in Cork on Child Trafficking on May 17. 
(b) the Irish Institute of European Affairs on May 21. 
(c) Moldovan prosecutors in the Director of Public Prosecutions 
Office on June 18. 
(d) The Hidden Economy Monitoring Group of Government, Trade Union 
and Business sectors on November 26. 
 
Addresses by a member of the Anti-Human Trafficking Unit on G6 
Awareness Raising Initiative were made at the following: 
(a) Jesus College, Cambridge University - Crime Symposium - on 
September 5. 
(b) 9th Meeting of the Interpol Working Group on Trafficking on 
September 24. 
(c)  Yorkshire Europe Group in Brussels on June 11. 
 
The Executive Director of the AHTU chaired the workshop on 
trafficking in human beings at a Conference by the Association of 
Criminal Justice Research and Development on October 10. 
 
On 3 December, 2008 members of the European Parliament launched a 
campaign to have the Blue Blindfold concept against human 
trafficking adopted throughout the European Union.  The 'Blue 
Blindfold' concept, initially developed by the United Kingdom, has 
as its message 'Don't close your eyes to Human Trafficking'.  The 
blindfold represents the risk of people closing their eyes to 
 
DUBLIN 00000089  024.2 OF 026 
 
 
indicators of human trafficking and being unaware of the crime going 
on around them.  The launch involved the display of campaign 
materials used by the UK and Ireland was represented at the launch 
by staff of the Anti-Human Trafficking Unit, who displayed the 
literature from the Awareness Raising Campaign in October, 2008. 
 
-- B. Does the government monitor immigration and emigration 
patterns for evidence of trafficking?  Do law enforcement agencies 
screen for potential trafficking victims along borders? 
 
Prior to 2001, information recorded by the Garda relating to 
non-nationals was held by use of a paper based system which, as the 
numbers of immigrants increase, quickly became inadequate.  In 2001 
a computer-based Garda National Immigration Bureau Information 
System (GNIB IS) was designed, developed and implemented by the 
Garda in order to: 
 
-- Streamline the registration and renewal of registrations of 
non-nationals. 
-- Strengthen security at the frontiers of the State. 
-- Effectively manage and monitor the execution of deportation 
orders. 
-- Facilitate the availability of immigration related information to 
those tasked with implementing immigration related legislation. 
 
The information held on the GNIB-IS, is utilized for the following 
purposes: 
 
-- Preventing entry into the state of persons who possess an adverse 
immigration history. 
-- Establishing if non-nationals have fulfilled their obligation to 
register. 
-- Ensuring non-nationals do not remain in the State beyond the 
period allowed. 
-- Locating persons avoiding deportation. 
-- Processing applications for naturalization. 
-- Establishing if non-nationals are complying with their conditions 
for entry into the State. 
-- Providing information to immigration/police authorities in other 
states. 
-- Preventing the illegal movement of persons within the UK/Ireland 
Common Travel Area. 
 
Through a range of management reports,  immigration-related issues 
are monitored on a daily basis enabling identification of patterns, 
trends, and modus operandi with regard to a wide range of 
immigration related criminal activity.  Detection and investigation 
of potential incidents of human trafficking is facilitated by the 
GNIB IS. 
 
-- C. Is there a mechanism for coordination and communication 
between various agencies, internal, international, and multilateral 
on trafficking-related matters, such as a multi-agency working group 
or a task force? 
 
The Anti-Human Trafficking Unit has overall administrative 
responsibility for coordinating the Government's response to 
trafficking in persons.  In order to carry out that role effectively 
and to implement and facilitate a multidisciplinary approach, the 
AHTU works in close cooperation with a wide variety of relevant 
Government Agencies and Departments in addition to NGOs and 
International Organizations (IOs) working in the anti-trafficking 
field. 
 
The Garda has, over a number of years, established key strategic 
relationships and alliances with all relevant stakeholders and 
partners involved in the immigration process.  There are regular 
exchange fora to ensure information sharing and a holistic 
Governmental approach to the phenomenon of trafficking in human 
beings. 
 
-- D. Does the government have a national plan of action to address 
trafficking in persons?  If the plan was developed during the 
reporting period, which agencies were involved in developing it? 
Were NGOs consulted in the process?  What steps has the government 
taken to implement the action plan? 
 
The National Action Plan (NAP) to Prevent and Combat Trafficking in 
Human Beings is currently being finalized for submission to the High 
 
DUBLIN 00000089  025.2 OF 026 
 
 
Level Interdepartmental Group and the Minister for Justice, Equality 
and Law Reform in the near future and publication thereafter.  The 
NAP has a strong focus on preventing trafficking in human beings 
becoming a major issue in Ireland.  The NAP is being developed under 
four main headings: 
 
-- Prevention and Awareness Raising, 
-- Prosecution of Traffickers, 
-- Protection of Victims and 
-- Child Trafficking. 
 
The Plan will set out the structures to facilitate Ireland's 
compliance with all of the relevant international instruments and 
will therefore allow for ratification of the Council of Europe 
Convention on Action Against Trafficking in Human Beings and the UN 
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, 
Especially Women and Children when the structures have been put in 
place. 
 
The National Action Plan is being developed by the Anti-Human 
Trafficking Unit with input provided from a number of other 
Government Departments and State agencies as necessary.  Those asked 
to provide input include: 
 
-- Irish Naturalisation and Immigration Service 
-- Garda 
-- Health Service Executive 
-- Department of Foreign Affairs 
-- Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment 
-- Department of Education & Science 
-- Office of the Minister for Children 
-- Director of Public Prosecutions 
-- National Employment Rights Authority 
 
A public consultation was held at the formulation of the National 
Action Plan.  Interested groups or individuals were asked to make 
submissions under four different headings, which included Prevention 
and Awareness Raising, Prosecution of Traffickers, Protection of 
Victims and Child Trafficking. 
 
This allowed for the views of the public and relevant governmental 
and non-governmental stakeholders engaged in the fight against human 
trafficking to be taken into account.  Those organizations that 
provided input via the consultation process included: 
 
-- The Immigrant Council of Ireland 
-- The Human Rights Committee of the Law Society 
-- Daughters of Charity - Vincentian Refugee Centre 
-- HSE - Balseskin Refugee Health Screening Team 
-- Irish Human Rights Commission 
-- Dept. of Political Science and Sociology, NUIG & Irish School of 
Ecumenics, TCD 
-- Barnardos 
-- Amnesty International - Irish Section 
-- Ruhama 
-- United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 
-- Irish Women Lawyers Association 
-- MRCI - Migrant Rights Centre Ireland 
-- Irish Refugee Council 
-- IOM - International Organisation for Migration 
-- Integrating Ireland 
-- Dominican Justice Office 
-- One in Four 
-- Irish Federation of University of Women 
-- Stop Sex Trafficking 
-- International Human Rights Network 
-- APT - Act to Prevent Trafficking 
-- UNICEF 
-- Curam. 
 
The Interdepartmental High Level Group will be responsible for 
monitoring the implementation of the National Action Plan.  The High 
Level Group will be complemented by the Non-Governmental and 
Governmental Roundtable Forum on Combating Human Trafficking and the 
working groups will also be involved in the implementation of the 
Plan. 
 
In addition, a consultation will be held mid-way through the 
implementation of the Plan to take into account the views of 
 
DUBLIN 00000089  026.2 OF 026 
 
 
relevant governmental and non-governmental stakeholders engaged in 
the fight against human trafficking having regard to the 
developments in the period following the publication of the plan. 
Views will be collated centrally by the Anti-Human Trafficking Unit 
and circulated to the High Level Group, Roundtable Forum, and other 
relevant stakeholders. 
 
-- E: What measures has the government taken during the reporting 
period to reduce the demand for commercial sex acts?   (see ref B, 
para. 9(3) for examples) 
 
Legislative Actions 
 
Under Section 5 of the Criminal Law (Human Trafficking) Act 2008 it 
is an offence for a person to solicit for prostitution a person who 
he/she knows or has reasonable grounds for believing is a trafficked 
person.  A person (other than the trafficked person) who accepts or 
agrees to accept a payment, right, interest or other benefit from a 
person for this purpose also commits an offence.  The penalty for 
these offences can be up to five years imprisonment and an unlimited 
fine on conviction on indictment. 
 
Section 7 of the Criminal Law (Human Trafficking) 2008 Act provides 
for extra territorial jurisdiction where an Irish citizen or 
resident conspires, incites or commits acts which would be offences 
under this Act if they were committed in Ireland and also where the 
victim of such acts committed outside Ireland is an Irish citizen. 
Penalties of up to life imprisonment and an unlimited fine apply in 
respect of these offences. 
 
The maximum penalty for committing or attempting to commit any of 
the above offences is an unlimited fine and/or life imprisonment. 
 
Television Advertisements Targeted at Purchasers of Sexual Services 
 
The Anti-Human Trafficking Unit arranged funding, under the National 
Women's Strategy, for Ruhama (an NGO which provides support services 
to women involved in prostitution and other forms of commercial 
sexual exploitation) for the making of a short three-minute film and 
a 50-second advertisement designed to educate both purchasers and 
potential purchasers of sexual services to the exploitation 
underpinning the commercial sex industry and to address the demand 
side of sex trafficking.  The 50-second advertisement was launched 
on November 10 and has since been aired regularly on the national 
television station, RTE, and the sports television station, 
Setanta. 
 
G6 Awareness Raising Campaign 
 
Ireland has taken the lead role in the awareness raising strand of 
the G6 anti-trafficking program.  It ran a shared multinational 
campaign designed to raise awareness and discourage demand for 
services of victims of sexual and labor exploitation in 
participating States.  The Irish campaign was launched by the 
Minister for Justice, Equality and Law Reform and the Garda 
Commissioner on 21 October 2008.  The Awareness Raising campaign 
targets the general public, law enforcement and other professionals 
who may come into contact with a victim of trafficking during the 
course of their work.  The campaign uses the "Blue Blindfold - Don't 
Close your Eyes to Human Trafficking" symbol developed by the UK 
Human Trafficking Centre. 
 
-- F. Required of all Posts: What measures has the government taken 
during the reporting period to reduce the participation in 
international child sex tourism by nationals of the country? 
 
Section 7 of the Criminal Law (Human Trafficking) 2008 Act provides 
for extra territorial jurisdiction where an Irish citizen or 
resident conspires, incites or commits acts which would be offences 
under this Act if they were committed in Ireland and also where the 
victim of such acts committed outside Ireland is an Irish citizen. 
Penalties of up to life imprisonment and an unlimited fine apply in 
respect of these offences. 
 
¶5.  (U) Point of Contact for this report is Political Officer Jami 
Papa, Office Tel: 353-1-630-6275, Fax: 353-1-667-0056, E-mail: 
PapaJL@state.gov.