04BRASILIA1098
BRAZIL'S 2004 BUDGET BLUES
Fri May 07 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Brasilia
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 BRASILIA 001098 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NSC FOR DEMPSEY 
TREASURY FOR OASIA - SEGAL 
STATE FOR EB/IFD/OMA - O'REILLY AND WHA/EPSC 
STATE PASS FED BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR ROBITAILLE 
USDA FOR FAS/FAA/TERPSTRA 
USDOC FOR 4332/ITA/WH/OLAC 
USDOC FOR 3134/USFCS/OIO/WH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EFIN PGOV EINV SOCI PREL BR
SUBJECT: BRAZIL'S 2004 BUDGET BLUES 
 
REF: A) Brasilia 936 
     B) Brasilia 291 
     C) Sao Paulo 557 
     D) Brasilia 661 
     E) Brasilia 873 
     F) Brasilia 644 
     G) Brasilia 1048 
 
This cable is Sensitive but Unclassified, please protect 
accordingly. 
 
SUMMARY AND COMMENT 
------------------- 
 
¶1.  (U) A high debt-service burden and extensive earmarking 
leave Brazil's federal government with little room for 
maneuver in its Reals 413 billion (USD 137 billion) 2004 
budget as it tries to pursue its social-policy goals while 
addressing public concerns over security, unemployment and 
growth.  In 2003, overall public-sector interest outlays of 
9.48% of GDP turned the GoB's hard-won primary surplus of 
4.32% of GDP into a nominal deficit of 5.16%.  This year 
there is some relief on the interest front, as the return of 
financial-market confidence has reduced rates on Brazilian 
debt.  The GoB estimates interest outlays of about 7.4% of 
GDP in 2004.  Given the GoB's resolute pursuit of a 4.25% of 
GDP primary surplus, that would cause the projected nominal 
deficit to fall to about 3.15% of GDP.  Discretionary 
expenditures (program funds and investment outlays) amount 
to about 13% of all federal outlays, including interest 
payments and mandated transfers to states and 
municipalities.  The transfers reduce the revenue available 
to the federal government by 15-16%. 
 
¶2. (U) The GoB's commitment to an austere fiscal policy, 
even as economic growth remains feeble, has made it the 
target of sustained criticism.  Pressure is building, 
through a series of strikes and work slowdowns and landless- 
movement squatter invasions, for larger-than-budgeted public- 
sector wage increases and additional money for resettlement 
efforts (refs C and E).  Official data shows that, by some 
measures, President Lula's Workers' Party government spent 
less on social programs in its first year than its 
predecessor did the year before. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Despite these pressures, we see no danger of a 
change in the GoB's commitment to its primary-surplus goal 
this year: Lula has made defense of his team's economic 
policy a constant feature in his public appearances.  Two 
April 15 actions reinforced this commitment: the Senate 
budget committee endorsed the multi-year budget plan, and, 
separately, Lula sent Congress the 2005 Budget Guidelines 
Bill, both of which set a 4.25% primary-surplus target for 
¶2005.  We do expect the GoB to tinker around the edges of 
the budget in this municipal-election year, including by 
accelerating the expenditure of some higher-than-projected 
tax collections from the first quarter of 2004 and finding 
even more "savings" by cutting expenditures from program 
budgets.  But we believe these adjustments will always be 
made with the overriding primary surplus goal in sight.  END 
SUMMARY AND COMMENT. 
 
 
                           Table I 
           Public Sector Primary Surplus Breakdown 
                      (Percent of GDP) 
 
                         2003           2004 
 
Federal Government       4.17%          4.18% 
Social Security         -1.74%         -1.73% 
State Governments        1.89%          1.80% 
-----------------        ----           ---- 
Public Sector 
 Primary Surplus         4.32%          4.25% 
 
- Public Sector 
  Interest Payments/1    9.48%          7.4% 
-----------------        ----           ---- 
Nominal Deficit          5.16           3.15 
Sources: Central Bank, Ministries of Planning and Budget, 
Finance 
/1 Note: Central Bank Chairman Meirelles in public comments 
April 29 estimated that 2004 interest outlays could be as 
low as 7.15% of GDP. 
 
Budget Outline 
-------------- 
 
¶4. (U) Brazil's federal government collects 23% to 24% of 
GDP at the federal level.  About two-thirds of this (16.23% 
of GDP) is projected in 2004 to come from taxes and 
"contributions," the largest of which are personal and 
corporate income taxes (5.1% of GDP), COFINS (a payroll 
contribution whose revenues, at 4.3% of GDP, are earmarked 
for social-security expenditures) and the CPMF, a financial 
transactions "contribution" (1.5% of GDP).  The remaining 
one-third is made up of private sector social-security 
contributions (at 5.48% of GDP) and of other income (2.25% 
of GDP, including dividends from parastatals, fees, 
royalties, and worker unemployment insurance fund payments. 
"Importation Taxes," i.e., tariffs, are projected at Reals 
9.2 billion or 0.54% of GDP for 2004). 
 
¶5. (U) A constitutional revenue-sharing scheme mandates the 
transfer of 47% of all personal and corporate income taxes 
and 57% of the federal Industrial Production Tax (the "IPI") 
to states and municipalities.  In recent years these 
transfers have reduced overall federal income by about 15%- 
16%.  They have also given the federal government an 
incentive to create a series of "contributions," which, 
unlike "taxes," are exempt from the constitutionally- 
mandated transfer arrangements.  After transfers, net 
federal income (including social security contributions) 
currently fluctuates around 20% of GDP.  Brazil's total tax 
burden, once state and municipal taxes (notably the ICMS) 
are added in, was over 36% of GDP in 2003. 
 
 
                          Table II 
                       Federal Income 
                 Billions of Reals (Nominal) 
 
                    2002      2003      2004      2004 
                    Executed  Executed  Law       After 
                                              Sequestration 
 
Total Income        324.02    359.98    413.47    407.14 
 - % of GDP          24.1%     23.8%     24.9%     24.5% 
 
 - of which taxes   224.27    247.18    279.92    274.90 
 - other income      27.29     31.01     39.72     38.12 
 - Worker Guarantee 
    Fund Income       1.92      1.67      1.57      1.57 
 
Social Security 
   Contributions     71.03     80.12     92.58     92.82 
 
Transfers to States 
 and Municipalities  52.28     56.86     64.27     61.50 
  - % of GDP          3.88%     3.75%     3.87%     3.70% 
 
Net Federal Income  271.74    303.13    349.19    345.64 
 - % of GDP          20.19%    20.00%    21.00%    20.79% 
 
Source: Ministry of Planning and Budget 
¶6. (U) To meet their primary-surplus goals, GoBs of recent 
years have limited non-debt-interest federal expenditures to 
between 17% and 18% of GDP.  The Lula government cut such 
expenditures in its first year, 2003, to 17.53% of GDP from 
17.83% of GDP in 2002.  It projects a rise to 18.3% of GDP 
in 2004 (Tables I - III).  Almost 87% of federal spending, 
including federal-level interest payments and transfers to 
the states and municipalities, is earmarked or otherwise not 
discretionary, i.e. committed to salaries and benefits. 
Salaries and benefits (including pensions for government 
employees) have swallowed as much as 30.85% of non-interest 
expenditures in recent years. 
 
¶7. (U) Constitutional and legislative earmarking leaves the 
federal government insufficient money to make interest 
payments on the debt and for required program expenditures 
and investment.  In addition to the mandatory transfers to 
states, income from many taxes is earmarked.  Revenues from 
"contributions," which are taxes in all but name, are 100% 
earmarked.  Income from the CPMF, for example, which hits 
financial transactions, legally is required to be spent for 
Social Security, the Combat Against Poverty Fund, and health 
programs.  The solution to this budgetary Gordian knot was a 
legislative/budgetary artifice, the so-called "DRU," that de- 
links 20% of federal tax and contribution receipts (after 
the required transfers to states) from the earmark 
calculation.  This gives the GoB some margin to cover 
interest payments, wages and benefits and have a little 
money left over for discretionary expenditures.  To obtain 
original passage of the measure in the early 1990s, it was 
made nominally temporary; in December 2003 Lula's GoB 
achieved its latest extension, this time through 2007. 
 
¶8. (U) After making wage and benefit payments, social 
security payments and other obligatory expenditures (and 
having netted out interest payments and transfers to the 
states) the GoB is left with between 20% and 22% of its 
expenditures to allocate at its discretion among ministries 
to cover program expenses (utilities, travel costs, etc) and 
investment (everything from computer upgrades at ministries 
to selected infrastructure projects - see Table III). 
(Note: Discretionary expenditures are about 13% of federal 
outlays if interest payments and transfers to states are 
included in the calculation.)  It is this discretionary 
portion of the budget which invariably is sequestered to 
meet primary-surplus goals.  There are limits on how much 
the GoB can try to save on these program expenses; the 
savings effort last year at times left some ministries 
struggling to pay their electricity bills.  In early 2003, 
Lula's then-incoming GoB cut these discretionary 
expenditures by over Reals 4 billion in nominal terms from 
2002, primarily by cutting investment outlays (see Table 
III). 
 
 
                          Table III 
            Federal Expenditures, Primary Surplus 
                 and Social Security Deficit 
                 Billions of Reals (Nominal) 
 
                    2002      2003      2004      2004 
                    Executed  Executed  Law       After 
                                              Sequestration 
¶I. Expenditures     240.00    265.54    307.35    304.22 
 - % of GDP          17.83%    17.53%    18.48%    18.30% 
a) Salaries and Government Benefits, including Pensions 
                     74.04     78.97     83.70     84.71 
- % of expenditures  30.85%    29.74%    27.23%    27.84% 
- % of GDP            5.50%     5.21%     5.03%     5.09% 
 
b) Private Sector Social Security Benefits 
                     88.03    107.13    122.19    122.05 
- % of expenditures  36.68%    40.35%    39.76%    40.12% 
- % of GDP            6.54%     7.07%     7.35%     7.34% 
 
c) Other Obligatory Expenditures 
                     21.81     27.37     30.92     32.23 
- % of expenditures   9.09%    10.31%    10.06%    10.60% 
- % of GDP            1.62%     1.81%     1.86%     1.94% 
 
d) Discretionary Expenditures 
                     56.12     52.06     70.54     65.23 
- % of expenditures  23.38%    19.61%    22.95%    21.44% 
- % of GDP            4.17%     3.44%     4.24%     3.92% 
 
II. Primary Surplus (without Social Security) 
                     48.74     64.60     71.46     70.64 
 - % of GDP           3.62%     4.26%     4.30%     4.25% 
 
Social Security Deficit 
                    -17.00    -26.40    -29.62    -29.23 
 - % of GDP          -1.26%    -1.74%    -1.78%    -1.76% 
 
Overall Federal Primary Surplus /1 
                     31.92     38.74     41.85     41.42 
 - % of GDP           2.37%     2.56%     2.52%     2.49% 
 
1/ State-level savings and earnings from financial 
parastatals, not included here, increase the overall public 
sector primary surplus (see Table I). 
 
Source: Ministry of Planning and Budget 
 
2004 Expenditure Tensions 
------------------------- 
 
¶9. (U) The Lula administration, under the authority of the 
Fiscal Responsibility Law (LRF), started 2004 by freezing 
Reals 6.6 billion in expenditures from the 2004 budget law 
approved previously by Congress. This was a GoB step to re- 
assert revenue realities (Ref B).  The Congress had adopted 
a series of optimistic revenue assumptions, including real 
GDP growth of 4% (versus 3.51% in the administration budget 
proposal) to justify the increased spending, most of which 
would have gone to finance pork-barrel investment (ref A). 
To soften the political impact of its spending freeze, the 
GoB said at the time that it would contemplate unfreezing 
some expenditures relatively early in the year, should 
revenues be higher than it projected. 
 
¶10. (U) Revenues through March have in fact been running 
ahead of projections: Ministry of Finance data show first- 
quarter federal revenues at Reals 75.3 billion, up 13.9% 
from the same period of 2003.  This represents a real 
increase of about 7.7% (deflating using the IGP-DI, a broad 
inflation index).  This resulted in a first-quarter 2004 
primary surplus of Reals 20.3 billion, well ahead of the 
Reals 14.5 billion target, despite having to offset an 
unexpectedly negative income of Reals 2.2 billion from 
parastatals (mostly accounted for by Petrobras dividend 
payments).  By comparison, the first-quarter surplus in 2003 
was Reals 22.8 billion, with parastatals contributing Reals 
3.2 billion to the positive outcome.  This implies a large 
positive swing in the federal-level surplus. 
 
Wages and Strikes 
----------------- 
 
¶11. (U) The GoB set aside Reals 1.5 billion in the 2004 
budget to accommodate projected wage increases for public- 
sector workers ranging from 7.1% to 29.4% (depending on the 
job category).  Under the threat of a general strike by 
government workers (Ref C), the GoB has improved its offer 
to the 9.5% to 32.3% range, an action that reportedly would 
increase the fiscal impact of the wage settlement by 500 
million Reals, for a total fiscal impact of about 2 billion 
Reals.  This new offer comes after the GoB's announcement of 
Reals 1.7 billion for the resettlement of landless movement 
(MST) families (ref E), an amount also not accounted for in 
the original GoB budget proposal.  These increased 
expenditures will need to be offset through reduced 
investment, greater savings in program expenses, and/or 
using some of the greater-than-anticipated revenues from the 
first quarter, which the GoB originally planned to hold in 
reserve until later in the year (ref B). 
 
¶12. (U) Refs A and G reports on Lula's oft-delayed decision, 
originally expected April 15, on the size of this year's 
increase in the minimum wage.  Explaining the delay, Lula 
told reporters that he needed to weigh carefully the social 
implications of the size of the minimum-wage increase 
against the need to invest to facilitate future economic 
growth, implying that the latter would have to be reduced to 
offset higher-than-planned wage expenditures.  Despite 
substantial pressure for a significant increase, in the 
event Lula raised the minimum wage by 1.2% in real terms 
(Reals 20), to Reals 260.  When coupled with a parallel 
increase in a social assistance payment, the 20-Reals 
increase should add Reals 677.7 million in expenditures 
beyond those envisioned in the 2004 budget document during 
the remainder of this calendar year.  This remains well 
within the budgetary cushion that higher-than-anticipated 
revenues have won the GoB. 
 
Investments 
----------- 
 
¶13. (U) The easiest target of cuts have been discretionary 
investment expenditures.  When it first came into office in 
January 2003, the Lula administration cut investment 
expenditures in nominal terms from the Reals 10.9 billion in 
the last year of the FHC administration to Reals 6.957 
billion in 2003 (an even more substantial cut in real 
terms).  And, while the Congress budgeted investment 
expenditures at Reals 12.9 billion for 2004, the GoB's 
freezing of expenditures cut that by almost Reals 6 billion. 
Through March 2004, only Reals 54.8 million in investments 
had been executed, Reals 47.4 million of which was by the 
Air Force.  This inability to finance substantial 
investment, particularly infrastructure investment, at the 
federal level increases the importance of Brazil's effort to 
attract investment to infrastructure projects through Public 
Private Partnerships (PPPs - Ref F). 
 
 
                          Table IV 
                 Federal Budget By Function 
                      Billions of Reals 
                           2002      2003    2004 
                         Executed  Executed  Law 
 
 Pensions (public & private) 
                        123.22    145.48    160.71 
 - % of Expenditures     51.3%     55.4%     52.4% 
 
 Sanitation              0.097     0.06       0.19 
 - % of Expenditures     0.04%     0.02%      0.06% 
 
 Health                  25.43     27.17     33.10 
 - % of Expenditures     10.6%     10.4%     10.8% 
 
 Public Security          2.20     2.41       2.72 
 - % of Expenditures     0.92%     0.92%      0.89% 
 
 Education               13.22     14.22     13.85 
 - % of Expenditures      5.5%     5.4%       4.5% 
 
 Defense                 12.62     11.57     11.95 
 - % of Expenditures      5.3%      4.4%      3.9% 
 
Social Programs           6.51      8.42     13.17 
 - % of Expenditures      2.7%      3.2%      4.3% 
 
Source: Ministry of Planning and Budget 
 
 
Social Programs 
--------------- 
 
¶14.  (U) Lula's PT government has come in for considerable 
criticism over the low level of spending on social programs. 
There is some official data to indicate that Lula spent less 
on social programs in the first year of his administration 
than his predecessor Fernando Henrique Cardoso (FHC) did in 
2002, his last.  There was a decrease in nominal terms of 
the budget of the Social Assistance Ministry, which fell 
from Reals 1.2 billion in 2002 to Reals 1.0 billion in 2003. 
The GoB, however, claims an increase in social expenditures, 
from Reals 6.5 billion to Reals 8.4 billion, based on more 
inclusive measures of social-assistance programs scattered 
through many ministries.  By this measure, social spending 
increased 18% in real terms as well as increasing as a 
percent of GoB expenditures (to 3.2% from 2.7% in 2002). 
The Congress budgeted a much larger increase, to Reals 13.2 
billion for 2004, representing 4.2% of expenditure, in part 
as financing for a new secretariat to manage hunger 
alleviation programs, including the Bolsa Familia program 
(Table IV). 
 
Public Security 
--------------- 
 
¶15. (U) Polling data have consistently shown that the poor 
public-security situation is the area of greatest public 
dissatisfaction with the GoB's record.  While the state 
governments carry the main responsibility for public 
security and much of the expenditure burden, the perception 
of governmental inaction taints all levels of government. 
Federal public security expenditures have in fact increased 
slightly in real terms since the last year of the Cardoso 
government, and are budgeted to do so again in 2004. 
However, public-security spending still accounts for less 
than 1% of the federal budget and stands to decline slightly 
as a percent of expenditures inn the 2004 budget (Table IV). 
Industrial Policy 
----------------- 
 
¶16. (U) The GoB's splashy March 31 announcement of amounts 
to be spent on its industrial policy caused some market and 
media concern that this spending might endanger the GoB's 
2004 budget target.  The monies involved, however, are 
mainly earmarks for sector-specific lending by the Economic 
and Social Development Bank (BNDES) and majority state-owned 
Banco do Brasil.  Out of BNDES' total 2004 lending target of 
Reals 15.05 billion for industrial development, the 
industrial policy earmarks Reals 3.61 billion for the 
software, pharmaceuticals, capital goods and 
microelectronics sectors.  The money is supposed to be 
destined primarily for modernizing plant and equipment in 
these capital-intensive sectors (ref D).  A further Reals 
550 million is slated to come from the 2004 budget to create 
research and development incentives, including by increasing 
staff at Brazil's Intellectual Property Institute (INPI) to 
ensure patent applications are given quicker handling. 
 
Military Expenditures 
--------------------- 
 
¶17. (U) Brazil's defense budget (excluding pensions and 
benefits) fell in nominal terms from Reals 12.6 billion 
(0.94% of GDP or 5.26% of federal expenditures after state 
transfers and interest payments are netted out) in 2002 to 
Reals 11.6 billion (0.76% of GDP) in 2003, representing 
4.41% of expenditures.  While Congress subsequently budgeted 
defense expenditures to increase to Reals 11.95 billion in 
2004, this would still represent a reduction to 3.9% of 
federal non-interest expenditures and a fall to 0.72% of 
projected GDP. 
 
¶18. (U) The biggest question mark on military expenditures 
is the much-postponed decision on the purchase of new 
fighter aircraft to replace Brazil's aging fleet of Mirage 
2000's.  Many of the financing plans presented by the 
competing consortia have a grace period before repayments 
begin, so these expenditures may well not figure in this 
year's budget even if the GoB were to sign a contract, which 
seems most unlikely.  On the other hand, payments for Lula's 
new Airbus ACJ reportedly are to come out of the Air Force 
budget beginning this year.  Although the Airbus financing 
plan for the $56.7 million plane was not detailed in the 
budget document, one media account said that an initial $1 
million would be due upon contract signature, followed by a 
$15.2 million (about Reals 45.6 million) payment later this 
year, out of an Air Force 2004 equipment budget in the 2004 
budget law approved by Congress of Reals 213 million. 
 
Social Security Deficits 
------------------------ 
 
¶19. (U) Aside from payments on the existing public-debt 
stock, the biggest looming threat to GoB budgetary health 
comes from the private-sector social security pension system 
(INSS).  While Lula's public-sector pension reforms last 
year should help "staunch the bleeding" in the public-sector 
pension system, keeping the deficit in this part of the 
system relatively constant at 3% - 3.5% of GDP for the next 
several years, the INSS system covering the private sector 
is a different story.  Contributions into that system are 
not keeping pace with benefit payments.  The INSS deficit 
widened from 1.26% of GDP in 2002 to 1.74% of GDP in 2003 
and preliminary reports for 2004 suggest the deficit 
continues to widen well beyond the 1.76% of GDP deficit the 
GoB projected.  Analysts predict that this growing deficit 
over the medium run will more than offset the savings 
attained in the public-sector pension reform of 2003 (Refs A 
and G).  An idea of the scale of the issue can be gleaned 
from the fact that the INSS (private-sector) pensions are 
expected to account for 40% of federal non-interest 
expenditures in 2004 (Table II).   While these expenditures 
are offset in part by contributions, covering the deficit 
will consume 9.6% of federal non-interest outlays. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶20. (SBU) Lula is personally committed to the primary 
surplus goal and gives all the signs of being more than ever 
convinced that current tight monetary and fiscal policies 
are necessary to set the stage for sustained growth. 
Questioned by a recent interviewer whether he is committed 
to this year's primary-surplus target of 4.25%, his 
exasperation-tinged response was: "It won't change, it won't 
change, it won't change!"  Nevertheless, the GoB is under 
substantial pressure to increase expenditures, and it has 
begun to accommodate these demands at the margins.  Better- 
than-expected revenues in the first quarter make this 
possible without vitiating the primary-surplus target, but 
the GoB originally had planned to hold any higher-than- 
expected revenues in reserve.  Should the current positive 
revenue trend not be borne out for the full year, the GoB 
would have to sequester more program spending.  Investment 
expenditures likely would suffer even more under that 
scenario.  All of this reinforces the importance of the GoB 
attracting private investments in infrastructure. 
 
HRINAK