05BRASILIA1936
BRAZIL - INFO FOR SECRETARY MINETA ON UPCOMING WHTI
Wed Jul 20 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Brasilia
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRASILIA 001936 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR SECRETARY OF TRANSPORTATION MINETA'S OFFICE 
STATE PASS USTR 
NSC FOR CRONIN 
USDOC FOR 4332/ITA/MAC/WH/OLAC/JANDERSEN/ADRISCOLL/MWAR D 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USCS/OIO/WH/RD/DDEVITO/DANDERSON/EOL SON 
USAID FOR LAC/SA 
HOMELAND SECURITY CENTER FOR ICE OIA PAUL HAZELGREN 
DOT/OST/David DeCarme 
EB/TRA/AN/Caron DeMars 
WHA/EPSC/Suzanne Sheldon 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AORC EAIR ELTN EWWT
SUBJECT: BRAZIL - INFO FOR SECRETARY MINETA ON UPCOMING WHTI 
MEETING 
 
REF: BRASILIA 132219 
 
¶1. Per reftel request, we are sending the following 
information regarding the upcoming Western Hemisphere 
Transportation Initiative (WHTI) ministerial-level 
conference that will be held in Guaruja, Brazil, August 25- 
¶26.  (Contrary to the information in the cable, the 
conference will not be held in Brasilia.)  We confirmed that 
the Brazilian Minister of Transportation, Alfredo Pereira do 
Nascimento, will participate in the conference.  We also 
want to convey that the GOB Ministry of Transportation 
considers Secretary Mineta's participation to be "extremely 
important." 
 
¶2. In terms of a bilateral meeting, Minster Nascimento has 
already received a number of requests for bilateral meetings 
from other ministers who will be in attendance.  Minister 
Nascimento has not yet decided if he will stay for bilateral 
meetings on August 25 (after presiding over the opening of 
the conference) or return for the bilateral meetings on 
August 26 (before he presides over the conclusion of the 
conference).  U.S. Embassy Brasilia offers its assistance in 
scheduling such a meeting. 
 
¶3. There are a number of important bilateral issues that 
Secretary Mineta could address in a meeting with Minister 
 
SIPDIS 
Nascimento.  A brief outline follows: 
 
-- Maritime Transport Agreement:  After several years of 
negotiations, we have finalized the text for a Maritime 
Transport Agreement.  The Agreement is essentially only 
pending scheduling the signing.  We had previously agreed 
with DOT/Marad and the GOB to hold the signing in 
Washington; however, if Secretary Mineta comes to Brazil, 
this may be an opportune time to sign the Agreement in 
Brazil (whether in Guaruja or during an additional leg to 
Brasilia). 
 
-- Maritime Security:  Several maritime security initiatives 
are underway, including the DHS Container Security 
Initiative (CSI), a Department of Energy Megaports 
Initiative (for screening against nuclear/radioactive 
material), and the U.S. Coast Guard inspections of ports. 
 
-- Varig crisis:  Varig (Brazil's flagship civair carrier) 
filed for bankruptcy protection in June because of its 
enormous debt and inability to pay its airplane lessors.  At 
this time it is unclear that Varig will be able to 
restructure its debt and/or attract the investments 
necessary to survive. 
 
-- Aviation Security:  After some tense negotiations, Brazil 
agreed to share Passenger Name Record (PNR) data with DHS in 
April.  Transportation Security Administration (TSA) has had 
some trouble getting Brazil to nail down dates for a round 
of airport inspections, but it looks as though they may 
begin in August. 
 
-- Infrastructure Investment:  Brazil is developing Public 
Private Partnership (PPP) regulations to encourage 
investments into public infrastructure, primarily in the 
land transportation sector and port infrastructure.  U.S. 
Federal Highway Administration officials will be visiting 
Brazil July 24-27, and are scheduled to meet with Brazil's 
WHTI director among other engagements. 
 
¶4. Please direct future inquires and information regarding 
Secretary Mineta's or other DOT officials' participation in 
 
SIPDIS 
the WHTI conference to Brasilia Econ Officer Jared Banks, 
banksj@state.gov, (55 61) 3312-7154, and Matt Bowlby in Sao 
Paulo, bowlbymc@state.gov, (55 11) 5186-7218. 
 
MANGANIELLO