05BRASILIA3277
BRAZIL:  2005 ANNUAL TERRORISM REPORT
Fri Dec 16 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Brasilia
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRASILIA 003277 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR S/CT AND TTIC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER ASEC KCRM EFIN KHLS KPAO BR
SUBJECT: BRAZIL:  2005 ANNUAL TERRORISM REPORT 
 
-------------------------------- 
Tri-Border Area 
(Argentina, Brazil and Paraguay) 
-------------------------------- 
 
(Please review with submissions from other TBA posts.) 
 
¶1.  The Tri-Border Area (TBA) -- where Argentina, Brazil and 
Paraguay converge -- has been characterized as a regional hub 
for Hizballah and HAMAS fundraising activities.  However, the 
region is more widely known as a center for arms and drug 
trafficking, contraband smuggling, document and currency 
fraud, money laundering, and the manufacture and movement of 
pirated goods. 
 
¶2.  In December 2005, senior level U.S. officials attended a 
meeting of the 3 1 Group of the Tri-Border Area, a security 
mechanism established by the three TBA countries in 1998, and 
to which the United States was invited in 2002.  The 3 1 
group serves as a continuing forum for fostering cooperation 
and terrorism prevention among the four countries.  At the 
December, 2005 meeting, participants concluded that according 
to available information, no operational acts of terrorism 
have been detected in the Tri-Border Area.  However, 
international terrorist financing and money laundering with 
roots in the TBA remain an area of heightened concern.  The 
parties agreed that, in the event that any activities are 
detected that could contribute even indirectly to terrorists 
acts, including their financing, they would cooperate to 
deter such acts.  They also agreed to conduct a concerted 
effort to foster legitimate economic activity in the TBA. 
 
¶3.  Brazil, Argentina and Paraguay held a tripartite meeting 
at Foz de Iguacu, Brazil October 26 and 27, 2005, at which 
time the parties received the status of ongoing 
Argentina-Paraguay joint patrols on border waterways.  The 
Brazil delegates noted that the Maritime Police Special Unit 
(NEPOM) in Foz de Iguacu is operating regularly.  The Finance 
Intelligence Units of the 3 1 met in Asuncion, Paraguay 
October 10-12, 2005 and established a technical working group 
to formulate a strategic analysis of trends in the TBA. 
 
------ 
BRAZIL 
------ 
 
¶4.  Brazil continues to extend practical and effective 
support for US counter-terrorism efforts.  For example, the 
Government of Brazil diligently pursues investigative leads 
provided by US intelligence, law enforcement and financial 
agencies regarding terrorist suspects.  The GOB has accepted 
USG training and technical assistance and remains interested 
in participating in additional programs.  The U.S. Embassy in 
Brasilia facilitated the provision of an anti-money 
laundering course with an anti-terror finance component to 
Brazilian Federal Police in 2004. 
 
¶5.  Although the Government of Brazil is committed to the 
fight against terrorism, lack of resources and inadequately 
trained personnel hamper its response.  The United States 
continues to work with Brazil in several bilateral, 
multilateral and international fora to identify groups and 
individuals suspected of possible links to terrorist groups. 
Specialists from the United States work with elements of the 
Brazilian Government responsible for combating terrorism, 
including the Federal Police and the Brazilian Intelligence 
Service.  Brazil is increasingly capable of monitoring 
domestic financial operations and effectively utilizes its 
financial intelligence unit, the Financial Activities 
Oversight Council (COAF), to identify possible funding 
sources for terrorist groups.  Recent bilateral assistance 
and training provided by the USG to COAF emphasized upgrades 
to its database and data collection mechanism.  In January 
2005, the Brazilian Federal Police inaugurated a Regional 
Field Office in Foz do Iguacu, Parana, to coordinate its 
intelligence and enforcement efforts in the TBA. 
 
¶6.  Through the COAF, Brazil has carried out name checks for 
persons and entities on the UNSCR 1267 and 1373 terror 
finance lists, but has so far not found any assets, accounts 
or property in the names of persons or entities on the UN 
terror-finance lists.  Under current Brazilian law the GOB 
would require a judicial order to freeze terrorist assets. 
 
¶7.  Since taking office in January 2003, Brazilian President 
Lula da Silva has vigorously condemned terrorism.  The Lula 
administration, however, does not acknowledge the presence of 
terrorist groups on Brazilian soil and insists that no 
identifiable terrorist incidents have occurred in the 
country.  In 2003, the Brazilian Chamber of Deputies passed a 
bill on cyber-crime aimed at preventing terrorist hack 
attacks, but the bill continues to languish in the Brazilian 
Senate. 
 
¶8.  There are no significant impediments to the prosecution 
or extradition of suspected terrorists by Brazil, although 
Brazil's legal procedures are often tedious and protracted. 
Brazilian law prohibits the extradition of Brazilian citizens 
and allows only very measured and careful consideration for 
the extradition of naturalized citizens (for previous crimes 
and drug trafficking only)  and foreigners (for all but 
ideological or political crimes).  On August 24, 2005, the 
Brazilian Federal Police, in cooperation with Interpol agents 
in Brazil, arrested Colombian Revolutionary Armed Forces 
(FARC) "spokesman" Francisco Antonio Cadena Collazos under an 
international order for his capture. 
 
¶9.  In May 2004, the Government of Brazil at the initiative 
of the Chief of the Presidency's Institutional Security 
Office created a technical team composed of representatives 
from five key ministries and the three branches of the Armed 
Forces to formulate a national policy to combat terrorism. 
The group delivered to the President its recommendations 
which will serve as the basis for future legislation.  This 
bill will call for the establishment of a national authority 
for combating terrorism. 
 
¶10.  In November 2004, President Lula and Russian Federation 
President Vladimir V. Putin issued a joint declaration 
calling for compliance with the United Nations Resolution 
1540 and 1566.  These resolutions deal with the prevention of 
access to weapons of mass destruction by non-state agents and 
with the threats to international peace and security raised 
by terrorism.  President Lula also declared himself in favor 
of entering negotiations on a Universal Convention on 
International Terrorism and the International Convention to 
Fight Acts of Nuclear Terrorism, all within the framework of 
the United Nations.  Brazil has signed all of the fourteen 
current UN conventions on terrorism and its legislature has 
ratified thirteen.  The ratification process for the 
fourteenth instrument is underway. 
 
CHICOLA