06PHNOMPENH1606
TIP MEETING WITH CAMBODIAN POLICE DEPUTY
Wed Sep 06 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXYZ0005
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHPF #1606/01 2491119
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 061119Z SEP 06
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7262
INFO RUEHBK/AMEMBASSY BANGKOK IMMEDIATE 1773UNCLAS PHNOM PENH 001606 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EAP/MLS, G/TIP AND EAP/RSP 
BANGKOK FOR ICE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PREL CB KWMN
SUBJECT: TIP MEETING WITH CAMBODIAN POLICE DEPUTY 
COMMISSIONER 
 
REF: A. A) SECSTATE 123359 
 
     ¶B. B) PHNOM PENH 1424 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Summary.  On September 5, the Acting DCM delivered 
the Tier 2 Watch List Action Plan demarche to Lieutenant 
General Neth Savoeun of the Cambodian National Police, 
emphasizing the recommendations in the reftel.  The A/DCM 
asked that Cambodian police consider the recommendations as a 
way to help improve their TIP-fighting abilities.  The 
Lieutenant General agreed with the recommendations but added 
that the police would need time to review its TIP plan to 
revise areas where shortcomings are identified.  The case of 
an American citizen arrested for TIP was also discussed.  End 
Summary. 
 
¶2.  (U)  Acting DCM was accompanied by poloff (notetaker) and 
Pol/Econ LES staffmember; Savoeun was accompanied by Ung 
Sokhunthea, head of the CNP's Anti-TIP Department; Kirth 
Chantharith, chief of staff at the MOI; and Chea Peou, 
assistant to Commissioner General of National Police. 
 
MOI Deputy Commissioner Discusses TIP 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  On September 5, the Acting DCM delivered the 
Trafficking in Persons demarche to Lieutenant General Neth 
Savoeun, the Deputy Commissioner General of National Police 
and presented copies of the reftel A non-paper in English and 
Khmei.  The A/DCM noted that the RGC made good progress in 
previous rating period, and as a result had been upgraded 
from Tier 3 to the Tier 2 Watchlist in the 2006 TIP Report. 
She went on to press Savoeun in three areas.  First she asked 
that the police speed up investigations of establishments 
known to have trafficking victims for sale, especially in 
Phnom Penh's Street 63 and Toul Kork areas.  Second, she 
stated the Embassy is aware of a number of indebted Chinese 
and Vietnamese nationals coming to work in karoke and massage 
parlors in Cambodia.  She asked that the Cambodian National 
Police (CNP) investigate such nationals coming to work in 
Cambodia with any eye towards reducing the number of 
trafficking victims.  Third, the A/DCM stated that the USG is 
concerned with how official corruption aids TIP. 
Specifically, she stated that USG is concerned that 
establishments offering TIP victims continue to operate 
because of corruption. 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  Savoeun thanked the A/DCM for her recommendations. 
 He noted that the Ministry of Interior signed a Memorandum 
of Understanding with the International Justice Mission (IJM) 
that very day.  He also highlighted that the CNP organized a 
seminar the previous month with the NGOs and the 
representatives of various Embassies about TIP.  Savoeun 
stated that the CNP has been doing its best to fight TIP. 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  Regarding the A/DCM recommendations, Savoeun 
stated that he would forward them to Commissioner General of 
the Police Hok Lundy.  He agreed that CNP should speed up its 
investigations.   Savoeun stated that a few months ago, the 
CNP came across some cases of Vietnamese trafficking victims; 
he said that the CNP is cooperating with neighboring 
countries on such transnational TIP cases.  He said that he 
has reminded government officials that they cannot 
 
participate in illegal activity as well as investigated which 
officials were abusing the law.  Savoeun promised to check 
the CNP's TIP strategy to see where the plan was lacking 
based on the recommendations.  He also promised to have a 
meeting with all provincial police commissioners in one month 
and highlight the importance of TIP.  Finally, the CNP Deputy 
Commissioner punctuated the conversation by stating that the 
CNP will not rest until Cambodia is Tier 1. 
 
Amcit TIP Case 
-------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  The A/DCM thanked Savoeun for his work and the 
commitment of the RGC to support anti-TIP measures.  She also 
asked about the case of Amcit Terrence Darrell Smith, who was 
arrested in Sihanoukville on July 31 on charges of 
debauchery.  Smith and his Vietnamese wife were recently 
released from a prison in Sihanoukville on bail.  Savoeun 
stated that the case has been sent to the courts and promised 
to contact the Ministry of Justice and look into the matter. 
He also offered to work with the courts to issue a letter to 
the Embassy requesting that Smith not receive USG assistance 
to leave the country while his case was pending in the 
Cambodian courts.  (Note: Smith is wanted in the state of 
Oregon on 17 counts of debauchery.  End Note.) 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU)  Neth Savoeun responded favorably on TIP-related 
matters.  So far this year, however, little in terms of 
concrete progress in terms of arrests, prosecutions, and 
rescue of TIP victims has resulted when compared with 
statistics from the previous year.  IJM has complained that 
their MOU agreement with the MOI has been stalled for months. 
 The Ambassador presented the demarche (reftel B) to DPM and 
Minister of Interior Sar Kheng.  This time, we wanted to 
reinforce with the CNP leadership several specific areas in 
which they could make useful inroads before the next TIP 
review.  The next few months will see if positive action will 
result, and the Embassy will continue to press the RGC for 
tangible results.  Septel describes recent anti-prostitution 
raids in Phnom Penh that did nothing to further the RGC's 
anti-TIP agenda.  End Comment. 
 
 
MUSSOMELI