07PHNOMPENH820
GLOBAL WITNESS REPORT: ACCUSATIONS, THREATS,
Fri Jun 15 00:00:00 +0200 2007
CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXRO6030
PP RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM RUEHNH
DE RUEHPF #0820/01 1660528
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 150528Z JUN 07
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8570
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHBK/AMEMBASSY BANGKOK PRIORITY 2317
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 PHNOM PENH 000820 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/MLS AND DRL 
BANGKOK FOR REO JIM WALLER 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/15/2017 
TAGS: ECON PGOV PHUM SENV CB
SUBJECT: GLOBAL WITNESS REPORT: ACCUSATIONS, THREATS, 
RESULTS? 
 
 
Classified By: Pol/Econ Chief Margaret McKean; Reason 1.4 (b) (d) 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary.  On June 1, U.K.-based Global Witness made 
public a 95-page "Cambodia's Family Trees" report.  The 
report's content is extremely confrontational by Cambodian 
standards as it accuses well-connected government and 
military officials of illegal logging activity, kidnapping, 
and attempted murder.  Unhelpfully, the Cambodian Government 
responded by banning the report and calling on other 
governments to cut off funding to Global Witness.  On June 
13, United Nations Cambodia Office of the High Commissioner 
for Human Rights (UNOHCHR) Deputy Representative Henrik 
Stenman visited Pol/Econoffs requesting Embassy assistance 
for a Cambodian printer, XXXXXXXXXXXX, who is receiving death 
threats linked to his role in publishing the Khmer-language 
version of Global Witness report.  In addition to the 
reported death threat, one provincial governor (who also is 
Prime Minister Hun Sen's brother) was quoted making 
inflammatory comments interpreted by Global Witness as a 
threat to Global Witness representatives who come to 
Cambodia.  When the dust settles, it is uncertain what the 
report's impact on Cambodia's environment will be -- as in 
other Southeast Asian cultures, the Khmer balk at the 
confrontational approach.  While other NGOs chug along with 
quiet and often effective strategies working with the 
government, Global Witness may have only served to further 
shut down an avenue of communication.  End summary. 
 
 
BACKGROUND: GLOBAL WITNESS IN CAMBODIA 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) Global Witness came to Cambodia in 1995 with a 
mission to stop illegal logging and to improve governance, 
transparency and accountability in the country's forest 
industry.  In 1999 the Consultative Group of donor countries 
established a "Forest Crimes Monitoring Unit" to help the 
Royal Government of Cambodia (RGC) build its own capacity to 
prevent illegal logging.  Donors appointed Global Witness as 
the independent monitor of this process.  Global Witness 
published reports in 2001, March 2002, and July 2002 citing 
links between RGC and military officials and illegal logging 
activity.  (Note:  The reports are available on the Global 
Witness website www.globalwitness.org.)  By 2003, the RGC had 
had enough of the allegations and fired Global Witness 
denouncing the organization as having a "hostile, untruthful, 
unjust and destructive attitude" that damaged the RGC.  The 
organization no longer has an office in the Cambodia but 
continues to report on the logging situation here.  Global 
Witness published "Taking a Cut: Institutionalised Corruption 
and Illegal Logging in Cambodia's Aural Wildlife Sanctuary" 
in 2004, and the most-recent June 2007 report, "Cambodia's 
Family Trees: Illegal Logging and the Stripping of Public 
Assets." 
 
REPORT ACCUSATIONS 
------------------ 
 
¶3.  (U) The report is bold in its accusations of nepotism and 
criminal activities.  It calls out Prime Minister Hun Sen's 
first cousin Dy Chouch (a.k.a. Hun Chouch), Dy Chouch's 
ex-wife Seng Keang, and Khun Thong, an in-law of the Minister 
for Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, as leaders of 
Cambodia's most powerful logging syndicate.  It alleges the 
Prime Minister's 4,000-member bodyguard unit, known as the 
Royal Cambodian Armed Forces Brigade 70 (Brigade 70), is 
financed by illegal logging activities.  It lists illegal 
activities by logging players: kidnapping, attempted murder, 
tax evasion, fraud, and illegal logging.  Finally, it blames 
the international donor community for allowing the RGC to 
exploit international aid without accountability. 
 
¶4.  (U) On page 73 of the report, Global Witness features 
information on U.S. assistance to the RGC military.  The text 
raises concerns that U.S. fiscal year 2006 funding for 
military trucks and spare parts could inadvertently support 
the Royal Cambodian Armed Forces' alleged illegal logging 
activity.  The text does make reference to USG policy not to 
support units or individuals who have committed human rights 
violations. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) On June 7, the Ambassador spoke with a Global 
Witness representative at the latter's request.  The 
Ambassador expressed USG support for the broad concerns cited 
in the Global Witness report including illegal logging, 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000820  002 OF 003 
 
 
corruption, and land grabbing.  The Ambassador added, 
however, that most of the specific allegations against 
individuals found in the Global Witness report were 
unsubstantiated and lacked credible evidence.  He further 
questioned the effectiveness of Global Witness's approach in 
helping prevent the deforestation of Cambodia's rainforest. 
Regarding US military assistance, the Ambassador noted that 
any such equipment would be carefully monitored and that 
better training of Cambodia's police and military could 
actually help prevent the problems Global Witness seeks to 
counter. 
 
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE: BAN THE REPORT 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (U) Minister of Information Khieu Kanharith came out with 
a government ban on the Global Witness report shortly after 
it was released to the public.  Later the Cambodian Embassy 
in London issued a statement appealing to donor states to cut 
off their financial support for Global Witness.  The RGC 
justified their obstructive reaction by stating the report's 
allegations are not true.  The RGC is also spotlighting 
information in the report attributed to anonymous or 
confidential sources which they say is unreliable.  They say 
 
SIPDIS 
they will conduct their own investigation into the report's 
claims through Cambodia's current independent forest sector 
monitor, Societe Generale de Surveillance. 
 
¶7.  (C) In separate meetings with Deputy Prime Minister Sok 
An, Foreign Minister Hor Namhong, and Om Yentieng, a close 
advisor to the Prime Minister, the Ambassador bluntly 
informed them that efforts to ban the Global Witness report 
would prove counterproductive and ineffective.  By seeking to 
ban the report, he explained, many observers would conclude 
that the allegations in the report must be accurate.  Om 
Yentieng confided that the Prime Minister had wanted to 
ignore the report, but other CPP members insisted on a more 
confrontational approach.  The Ambassador urged RGC officials 
and the Global Witness representative to engage in a quiet, 
candid dialogue about corruption and illegal logging. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Other environmental NGOs in Cambodia say most of 
the information in the Global Witness document is old news -- 
having either made an appearance in previous Global Witness 
reports or been taken as common knowledge by groups long ago. 
 The difference in this report is that Global Witness decided 
to name the high-level government officials and their family 
members who are allegedly involved in illegal activity. 
Additionally, Global Witness purposely released the report 
just in advance of the June 19-20 government-donor 
coordination meeting.  Partly because of this, the RGC likely 
felt pressed to rebut the reports allegations.  However, the 
severe response makes the government look bad.  Particularly 
when the report hubbub is likely to blow over on its own and, 
in fact, already seems to be doing so.  In the case of the 
2004 Global Witness report, the RGC banned that edition, too, 
but found itself able to skate by the report's allegations 
without having to take serious steps towards reform.  (Note: 
Interestingly, President of human rights NGO LICADHO Dr. Kek 
Galabru told Poloff that when the RGC banned the 2004 
reports, about 2,000 copies of it were seized at the 
international airport in Phnom Penh.  The reports soon 
disappeared, Galabru said, through the hands of airport 
workers and others who were eager to read the information. 
End note.) 
 
THREATS AND INTIMIDATION 
------------------------ 
 
¶9.  (C) On June 13, United Nations Cambodia Office of the 
High Commissioner for Human Rights (UNOHCHR) Deputy 
Representative Henrik Stenman and Human Rights Officer Julie 
De Rivero visited Pol/Econoffs requesting Embassy assistance 
for a XXXXXXXXXXXX, who is receiving death 
threats because of his role publishing the Khmer version of 
the controversial report.  XXXXXXXXXXXX.  Via 
UNOHCHR, he applied for a tourist visa to the U.S. to visit 
his son, mother- and sister-in-laws in Minnesota for up to 
three months until he feels it is safe to return to Cambodia. 
 He is currently set to travel to the U.S. on June 15. 
 
¶10.  (C) Unconfirmed media reports stated Prime Minister Hun 
Sen's brother, Kampong Cham province governor Hun Neng, 
issued an open-ended threat to any Global Witness staff who 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000820  003 OF 003 
 
 
comes to Cambodia that he would "hit them until their heads 
are broken."  Kek Galabru XXXXXXXXXXXX told Poloff most Global Witness staff left the country 
in anticipation of threats and before the recent report was 
published.  WildAid Program Manager Michelle Owen said that 
other environmental NGOs in Cambodia decided not to publicly 
support or confirm any of Global Witness's findings 
specifically because they worry the RGC might retaliate 
against them.  USAID-funded WildAid operates on a 
working-level with Forest Administration rangers and military 
police to conduct confiscations of luxury wood and other 
natural products.  Owen said the WildAid does not face many 
threats or intimidation in their day-to-day work.  However, 
she says there have been a few violent incidents in the past 
year when she has wondered if someone with government 
connections might be involved.  On the other hand, WildAid's 
director insists that the highest level of the RGC are always 
responsive to her concerns and have intervened to assist in 
protecting the areas under WildAid management. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶11. (SBU)  The mission of watchdog groups such as Global 
Witness demands they make public allegations of corruption 
and harmful government activities.  However, in the Cambodian 
culture, like other Southeast Asian cultures, such an 
approach to problems often only serves to shut down 
communication.  The public calling out of government 
officials does not give them an opportunity to "save face," 
as is so important in Khmer society.  Arguably, Global 
Witness can have adverse effects on their own cause by 
working outside cultural norms.  The Global Witness report 
itself tells of Cambodia's unchecked forest degradation by 
government officials despite Global Witness's past efforts. 
The Danish assistance organization, Danida, stated in their 
2007 Atlas of Cambodia that forest changes accelerated more 
between 2002 and 2005 than in previous periods.  Global 
Witness's method of approach has alienated the Cambodian 
Government and has not prevented damage to Cambodia's 
forests.  Unlike the watchdog groups, other environmental 
NGOs such as WildAid use quieter tactics and tend to work 
together with the Cambodian Government to reach their 
ecological goals. 
MUSSOMELI