05SANJOSE1875
POLL SHOWS A MAJORITY OF COSTA RICANS CONTINUE TO
Wed Aug 17 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy San Jose
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SAN JOSE 001875 
 
SIPDIS 
 
WHA/CEN 
EB FOR WCRAFT, BLAMPRON 
E FOR DEDWARDS 
WHA/EPSC FOR KURS, LGUMBINER 
STATE PASS TO USTR FOR RVARGO, CPADILLA, AMALITO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD ECPS ECON PREL PGOV SOCI CS
SUBJECT: POLL SHOWS A MAJORITY OF COSTA RICANS CONTINUE TO 
SUPPORT CAFTA-DR 
 
REF: (A) SAN JOSE 01073 
 
     (B) SAN JOSE 01787 
 
¶1.  Summary.  A July 2005 CID/GALLUP poll contracted by the 
daily newspaper "La Republica" and local television network 
Repretel reveals a slightly decreasing majority of Costa 
Ricans support the U.S.-Central American-Dominican Republic 
Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR) and believe the agreement 
will bring at least some benefits to the country.  Despite 
mounting pressure to move forward on this issue, President 
Pacheco is maintaining a go-slow approach and has not yet 
sent the agreement to the Legislative Assembly for 
ratification, the only CAFTA-DR signatory country not to 
have already done so. End Summary. 
 
¶2.  CID/Gallup conducted the poll by telephone and personal 
interviews of 1,230 adults (over 18) from all areas of 
Costa Rica between July 23 and 30, 2005.  The margin of 
error is stated to be plus or minus 2.8 percent with a 95 
percent confidence level.  The poll revealed that 67 
percent of those polled had heard or read at least "a 
little" about CAFTA-DR, an increase from 54 in May and 44 
percent in February.  The knowledge level of CAFTA-DR was 
proportional to the education level achieved by the 
respondent; 85 percent of those having at least one year of 
University-level education had some knowledge of the 
agreement, 71 percent of those completing their high school 
studies, and 58 percent of those completing primary 
education. 
 
¶3.  As compared to a similar CID/Gallup poll conducted in 
May 2005 (Ref A), the most recent poll results showed that 
those who responded that they were "somewhat" or "very 
much" in favor of CAFTA-DR decreased from 61 to 56 percent. 
Those who responded that they were "somewhat" or "very 
much" opposed to the agreement fell from 32 to 30 percent. 
Since the U.S. approved CAFTA-DR in late July 2005, this 
issue has been discussed almost daily in the local media. 
Looking closer into the breakdown of the responses to this 
question, 21 percent of respondents said they were very 
much in favor of CAFTA-DR (21 and 23 in May and February, 
respectively), 35 percent somewhat in favor (40 and 33), 13 
percent somewhat opposed (17 and 14), and 17 percent very 
much opposed (15 and 16). 
 
¶4.  The poll also asked the following question to those who 
said they knew at least "a little" of the agreement: 
"Taking everything into account, how much do you think 
Costa Rica will benefit from CAFTA-DR?"  Responses revealed 
that 54 percent think that Costa Rica will benefit "a lot" 
or "some," compared to 53 percent in May 2005.  Those who 
think the country would benefit "little" or "not at all" 
constituted 33 percent of the responses, down from 39 
percent in May.  Those having no response or opinion were 
twelve percent of the respondents, up from nine in May. 
Responses to a follow-up poll question in this area 
revealed that 47 percent believe the benefits will be 
realized in less than three years; 27 percent believe the 
benefits will be realized between three and five years; and 
21 percent responded more than five years. 
 
¶5. Comment: Although not directly comparable because of 
many factors such as the methods of conducting the surveys 
and the questions asked, the latest UNIMER (Ref B) and 
CID/Gallup polls show that a strong majority know or have 
heard about CAFTA-DR.  Both recent polls show that a 
majority of respondents: (1) are in favor of CAFTA-DR, and 
(2) believe that the agreement will bring benefits to the 
country. 
FRISBIE