06SANJOSE1513
COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR TONY CAMBAS
Fri Jul 07 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy San Jose
VZCZCXYZ0013
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHSJ #1513/01 1881912
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 071912Z JUL 06
FM AMEMBASSY SAN JOSE
TO RUEHSN/AMEMBASSY SAN SALVADOR 4053
INFO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5539UNCLAS SAN JOSE 001513 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID OTRA CS
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR TONY CAMBAS 
 
REF: SAN SALVADOR 01731 
 
¶1. Embassy San Jose is pleased to grant country clearance to 
Tony Cambas from Booz Allen, Hamilton,Inc. who will be in 
Costa Rica from July 16-27, 2006.  The purpose of this trip 
is to implement the second phase of the risk management 
training under FASTrade's CAFTA-DR Action Plan. 
 
¶2.  Control Officer: POC is Maria Villanueva, Economic 
Assistant, who can be reached at the office (506)519-2419 or 
fax (506)519-2364.  The Embassy after-hours emergency phone 
number is (506)220-3127. 
 
¶3.  Upon arrival in country all TDY visitors are to make 
contact with their Embassy Control Officer for information 
regarding a security briefing. 
 
¶4.  Accommodations: Post understands hotel reservations have 
been made by traveler at the Real Inter Continental.  The per 
diem rate for San Jose is $104.00 for lodging, and $67.00 
M&IE.  Hotels in San Jose require a minimum notice of 72 
hours if canceling or changing reservations.  Travelers must 
notify the Embassy 72 hours in advance if schedule changes. 
Hotels will assess a one-day charge if they do not receive 
advance notice of cancellation or changes.  Prior to arrival 
in Costa Rica, travelers should provide the RSO office the 
hotel and/or phone numbers for point of contact, as this is 
required information for TDY registration and Emergency 
contact. 
 
¶5. Transportation:   The only taxis available at the airport 
are the Taxi Aeropuerto orange taxis found outside the 
arrival hall.  Tickets for the orange taxis are sold at a 
ticket booth located immediately outside the arrival hall 
exit doors.  Fares (payable in U.S. dollars or local 
currency) vary according to destination but the cost of a 
standard orange taxi ticket to the Embassy is $14, to the 
Intercontinental Hotel is $14 and to downtown San Jose is 
$14.  Vans are also available at increased cost.  If you miss 
the ticket counter or otherwise need assistance with orange 
taxi service, the company has an individual posted curbside 
from where the orange taxis are dispatched.  Taxi Aeropuerto 
also offers pick-up service and transportation to the airport 
for departing passengers.  Reservations can be made 24 hours 
a day by phoning (506)221-6865. 
 
Elsewhere in San Jose, official taxis are considered safe 
when using standard security precautions.  Official taxis 
have a yellow triangle on the door, an identification number, 
a taxi light on the roof of the car, and generally have 
working meters.  Ask if the meter is functioning before 
entering the cab.  If the meter is not functioning, the cost 
of the fares should be negotiated prior to entering the cab. 
Official taxis are also easily obtainable from hotels. 
 
Unofficial taxis come in all shapes and sizes and should be 
avoided. 
 
¶6.  Public Affairs:  Please note that the Public Affairs 
Office is the Embassy's designated point of contact with the 
press.  If visitors have been scheduled for press events by 
local partner organizations or others, please inform the 
Embassy's Public Affairs Office.  Should   visitors be 
approached by the press with questions or a request for an 
interview, they should refer the press to the Embassy Public 
Affairs Office.  In short, post requests that visitors not 
speak with the press before consulting with the Public 
Affairs office (506)519-2441. 
 
¶7. Travel documents/Threat assessment/Local conditions: All 
official visitors must travel with passports, preferably 
official or diplomatic.  Without these documents, travelers 
lack official status in the eyes of the Costa Rican 
Government.  However, no repeat no visa is necessary. 
 
During this time of heightened security alerts, all travelers 
should consult the Department's website for the latest public 
announcement or other safety notices at www.usembassy.or.cr 
or www.usembassy.or.cr/osac.html. 
 
Costa Rica is currently rated as a "high" crime threat post. 
The increasing use of violence during the commission of a 
street crime is a threat to all visitors.  Travelers are 
urged to exercise caution, as in any large city.  Local law 
enforcement agencies are not up to U.S. standards and have 
limited capabilities.  Jewelry should not be worn on the 
streets.  Large amounts of cash should not be displayed.  The 
downtown area of San Jose should be avoided at night because 
of the increase of criminal activity that occurs in this 
area. 
 
Credit card fraud and credit card "number skimming" is a 
rapidly growing crime.  Visitors should avoid using debit 
cards for point-of-sale purchases, as a skimmed number can be 
used to clean out an account.  Visitors should check their 
credit card accounts frequently. 
 
Visitors are advised to avoid unofficial moneychangers who 
may offer better rates but who often trade in counterfeit 
currency.  The present rate of exchange is approximately 513 
Costa Rican colones to one dollar.  Accommodation exchange is 
available at a comparable rate at the airport. 
 
Visitors should exercise caution if they will be driving in 
Costa Rica.  The combination of poor road conditions, erratic 
driving, and pedestrian and animal traffic on the roads make 
driving very treacherous.  Costa Rica has one of the highest 
accident rates per automobile in the world.  The Embassy 
strongly recommends against driving outside of the San Jose 
area at night.  Vehicles should not be left unattended or 
packages left visible inside them. 
Costa Rica is an earthquake zone and periodically experiences 
significant tremors. 
 
Visitors should be careful not to eat peanuts or products 
made from peanuts grown in Costa Rica because they may harbor 
aflatoxin, which is suspected in the causation of liver 
cancer. 
 
¶8.  Mandatory Personal Security Training:  Effective January 
1, 2005, all American personnel traveling to post for a TDY 
of 30 days or more at an overseas location under COM 
authority must complete appropriate overseas personal 
security training prior to travel.  It is the responsibility 
of the sponsoring office to verify that this training has 
been completed as outlined in State cable 66580, dated 25 
March 2004. 
 
¶9. Laptops:  Please be advised that State Department 
regulations prohibit installation or use of privately-owned 
computers in any State Department building.  Visitors must 
notify the Regional Security Office in advance if they intend 
to use U.S. Government-owned portable computers in the 
Chancery. 
LANGDALE