05TUNIS2418
CONTINUED GLOWING TUNISIAN PRESS COVERAGE OF FM
Mon Oct 31 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tunis
P 311515Z OCT 05
FM AMEMBASSY TUNIS
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9107UNCLAS TUNIS 002418 
 
 
STATE FOR NEO/FO (GRAY), NEA/MAG (LAWRENCE), NEA/PPD 
(FERNANDEZ, SMITH, AGNEW), NEA/PI (MULENEX, KIRBY), NEA/PA, 
NEA/IPA, I/GNA, DRL, CWG-PD, EB/CIP (SHIPMAN) 
NSC FOR POUNDS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO PREL PGOV ECON TS
SUBJECT:  CONTINUED GLOWING TUNISIAN PRESS COVERAGE OF FM 
ABDALLAH'S VISIT TO THE US 
 
Ref Tunis 2353 
 
¶1. The glowing Tunisian press coverage of FM Aballah's visit 
to the US (detailed in reftel) continued with placements of 
another article on FM Abdallah's activities in the US in all 
but one daily newspapers on the weekend of October 22-23. 
While headlines differed slightly, the text of the 
accompanying articles in all newspapers was that of the 
government's press agency, TAP.  Translation of the TAP 
article in is para 3. 
 
¶2.  Headlines included: 
 
"The political impact of Ben Ali's accomplishments extends 
beyond its borders."  "Common will to support the friendly 
relationship between the two countries." "Washington praises 
the Tunisian help for the Hurricane Katrina victims" 
Privately owned Arabic language daily "Ash Shourouq" (10/23) 
 
"Minister of Foreign Affairs meets with high level American 
officials: delight in the exceptional relationship and 
praise for Ben Ali's accomplishments" government-owned 
Arabic language daily "As Sahafa" (10/22) 
 
"Common political will to reinforce friendly relations 
between the two countries."  Privately owned French language 
daily "Le Quotidien" (10/22) 
 
"Gordon England: The political influence of President Ben 
Ali is remarkable and greatly surpasses the geographic 
proportions of Tunisia" ruling party paper "Le Renouveau" 
(10/22) 
 
"MFA meetings in Washington: Intense Tunisian-American 
meetings on all current issues" government-owned French 
language daily "La Presse" (10/22) 
 
"Friendly Relations and Fruitful Cooperation" Privately 
owned French language daily "Le Temps" (10/22) 
 
¶3. Begin translation: 
 
"During his visit to Washington, Mr. Abdelwaheb Abdallah, 
Minister of Foreign Affairs, had a number of meetings with 
high officials in the American administration and with 
members of the US Congress. 
 
At the White House, the Minister of Foreign Affairsr met 
with Mr. J.D. Crouch, Deputy National Security Adviser to 
President Bush. The meeting was an opportunity to review the 
friendly bilateral relations between the United States and 
the republic of Tunisia and to highlight the political will 
of both countries to further reinforce them.  It was also an 
opportunity for consultation on regional and international 
current issues. 
 
Mr. Abdelwaheb Abdallah also met with Mr. Gordon England, 
Deputy Secretary of Defense.  They congratulated each other 
on the excellent bilateral friendly relations and fruitful 
cooperation both in political and military fields. On this 
occasion, Mr. Gordon England extended to the Minister of 
Foreign Affairs the thanks of the US Government for the help 
received from Tunisia for the victims of Hurricane Katrina, 
qualifying this as an authentic gesture of friendship.  He 
praised President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali's achievements, 
which transcend the geographic boundaries of Tunisia. 
 
The Minister of Foreign Affairs also met with Mark Kirk, 
Republican Congressman from Illinois and member of the House 
Budget Committee, and with Marilyn Musgrave, Republican 
Congresswoman from Colorado and president of the 
Subcommittee for Small Business Enterprises.  The Minister 
of Foreign Affairs presented his hosts with the political, 
social and economic development achievements that took place 
in Tunisia and exchanged with them views on regional and 
international issues of common interest. 
 
The Ambassador of Tunisia in Washington offered an Iftar in 
honor of the Minister of Foreign Affairs which was attended 
by a large number of high-ranking officials and friends of 
Tunisia, among whom were the Deputy Secretary of State for 
International Organizations, the Deputy Secretary of State 
for the Middle East, Congressman Charles Taylor, chairman of 
the Sub-Committee for Interior and Environmental Affairs, 
and Mrs. Esther Coopersmith, a well known figure in 
Washington DC." 
 
HUDSON