06TUNIS807
NASA SCIENTISTS ENGAGE YOUTH ON SOLAR RESEARCH IN
Thu Apr 06 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tunis
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTU #0807 0961226
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 061226Z APR 06
FM AMEMBASSY TUNIS
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0338UNCLAS TUNIS 000807 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR R, NEA/PPD (FERNANDEZ, RSMITH, AGNEW) NEA/MAG 
(WILLIAMS, LAWRENCE), OES (SENSENEY, MCCAFFREY), PA 
(FRANKLIN, PRICE) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TSPA KPAO TS
SUBJECT: NASA SCIENTISTS ENGAGE YOUTH ON SOLAR RESEARCH IN 
TUNISIA 
 
REF: 05 TUNIS 2333 
 
¶1. SUMMARY. On March 23-24, 2006, four NASA scientists 
addressed Tunisian youth interested in science and solar 
research at the main Tunisian public science center. 
Following up on a successful visit in fall 2005, the 
scientists participated in workshops with the Tunisian Young 
Scientists Association, as well as other interested students. 
 Two lectures, discussions and a model rocket launch improved 
Tunisian understanding of US scientific policies, gave 
students exposure to the latest research, and paved the way 
for other USG engagement of a key audience of youth.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  While enroute to monitor a March 29 total solar eclipse 
in Libya, four NASA scientists participated in science 
workshops and lectures, which maintained momentum with the 
young Tunisian students recruited during an October 2005 
annular eclipse program (reftel) in the southern Tunisian 
city of Douz.  Lead NASA astrophysicist, Joseph Davila, who 
also participated in the October program, organized 
presentations primarily for the Tunisian Young Scientists 
Association (AJST), which has active ties with NASA and was 
documented in the documentary "Kussuf," jointly funded by the 
OES bureau and Embassy Tunis' PD section.  NASA colleagues 
Michael Comberiate, Madhulika Guhathakurta and Orville St. 
Cyr accompanied Davila. 
 
¶3. The NASA scientists' first event was held in Tunis at the 
new American Corner established by the Embassy's Public 
Affairs office at AMIDEAST.  The lecture, "Stereo: Three 
Dimensional Observations of the Sun," drew a crowd of about 
70 students.  This was impressive, as Tunisian students were 
on spring break at the time.  Interested students were 
provided with a brief tour and orientation of American 
Corner, encouraging them and their families and friends to 
use this space in the future.  Students appeared quite 
pleased to learn about the American Corner and how they could 
use it to study and do research, including on the Internet. 
 
¶4. The second NASA lecture was given at the Cite des Sciences 
public exposition center in Tunis and was open to both AJST 
members and the general public.  This lecture drew about 
90-100 students from AJST and 15-20 other young people.  The 
topic was "Using Miniature Rockets for Science within NASA." 
After the presentation, students peppered Davila with 
questions for over 40 minutes, until the Mr. Hassan Akrout, 
head of the AJST, closed the session.  Students continued to 
swarm Davila after the lights were turned off, and followed 
him outside to continue their questions and requests for 
follow-up information. 
 
¶5.  The scientists and the students also participated in a 
launch of model rockets at the Tunisian military base, Borj 
El Amri, where the students were able to show the scientists 
the progress of their work in the science club.  This event 
was restricted to only the students and the scientists. 
Press coverage of the visit was positive, and appeared in two 
of the main Tunisian daily papers, Ash Sharouq and La Presse. 
 
 
¶5. COMMENT: Science is clearly a topic of interest to 
Tunisian youth, and programming such as this fosters good 
bi-lateral relations while allowing us to reach a key 
audience.  Embassy Tunis would like to thank both NASA, and 
State's OES Bureau for providing the program direction and 
funding to make this event possible.  Post will look for 
similar opportunities to continue to engage these groups in 
the future.  END COMMENT. 
HUDSON