08TUNIS142
TUNIS ANNUAL CRIME EVALUATION QUESTIONNAIRE (ACEQ)
Thu Feb 14 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tunis
VZCZCXYZ0011
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTU #0142/01 0450904
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 140904Z FEB 08
FM AMEMBASSY TUNIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4427
INFO RHMCSUU/FBI WASHINGTON DC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS TUNIS 000142 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR DS/IP/ITA, DS/IP/NEA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PTER TN
SUBJECT: TUNIS ANNUAL CRIME EVALUATION QUESTIONNAIRE (ACEQ) 
SPRING 2008 
 
REF: SECSTATE 7551 
 
¶1.  (U) Embassy Tunis responses to ACEQ keyed to paragraphs 
in reftel: 
 
¶2.  (paragraph 6) (U) (E) CRIMINAL ELEMENTS ROAM FREELY DAY 
OR NIGHT AND TARGET EMBOFF AND AFFLUENT RESIDENTIAL AREAS FOR 
BURGLARY. 
 
Although the Tunisian police are omnipresent, criminals take 
advantage of vacant residences in Emboff and affluent 
neighborhoods during regular business hours when the 
residents are at work.  Criminals are known to ring doorbells 
of residences and wait.  If there is no response, they enter 
the yard and search for an unsecured window or door in order 
to gain entry to the home.  If someone answers the bell, they 
make a ruse as if they are with the municipality and move on. 
 Criminals also move on if the residence cannot be easily 
entered. 
 
The headquarters for the African Development Bank (ADB) is in 
Tunis and its 1000 or so employees' homes are scattered 
throughout metropolitan Tunis.  The ADB security officer 
reported to the RSO that residences which are burglarized are 
usually unsecured. 
 
In 2007, one Embassy home was burglarized.  While the owners 
were out, thieves took advantage of an improperly secured 
door grill and forcibly entered the residence.  They stole 
some jewelry.  The visit of the local guards may have 
disturbed the thieves since the home's electronics were still 
in place. 
 
Although the American Cooperative School of Tunis (ACST) is 
not under Chief of Mission authority, it is located across 
the highway from the Embassy compound and a majority of 
Mission children attend ACST.  In March 2007 a teaching 
assistant had her purse snatched by two men on a speeding a 
motorbike as she exited the school's front gate. 
 
Car theft is uncommon and carjacking is unheard of.  Smash 
and grab thefts are more common should the vehicle owner 
leave a valuable item, such as a laptop computer, in plain 
sight. 
 
¶3.  (paragraph 7) (U) (A) SURROUNDED BY LOW-CRIME BUFFER 
ZONES, WHICH DETER CRIMINAL ELEMENTS FROM ENTERING EMBOFF 
NEIGHBORHOODS. 
 
It is generally safe to walk day or night in Emboff 
neighborhoods.  The majority of Embassy-leased residences are 
located in north suburban Tunis.  High crime areas are 
located closer to Tunis proper. 
 
¶4.  (paragraph 8) (U) (A) ARE DETERRED BY RISK OF 
CONFRONTATION AND ENGAGE PRINCIPALLY IN CRIMES BY STEALTH; 
BURGLARIES OF OCCUPIED RESIDENCES ARE USUALLY AVOIDED. 
 
The most common criminals are pickpockets, purse-snatchers 
and snatch-and-run cell-phone thieves who primarily work in 
the high-traffic tourist areas such as the Tunis medina and 
the central market, as well as other large Tunisian cities. 
 
Burglaries do not exclusively focus on the expatriate 
community, the growing Tunisian middle class offers criminals 
more opportunity for theft.  Since most burglaries are crimes 
of opportunity, a well-secured home is often reason enough 
for the thieves to move on.  With this in mind, middle class 
Tunisian families have taken measures to improve their 
residential security by installing grillwork over their 
windows and doors, something the Embassy also does. 
Residential break-ins occur often during the day when homes 
are unoccupied, although occupied break-ins are not unheard 
of.  It can be assumed that burglars are prepared for 
confrontation, but are generally not predisposed to it. 
 
5  (paragraph 9) (U) (A) UNARMED OR ARMED WITH NON-LETHAL 
WEAPONS. 
 
Although criminals are prepared to be confrontational, most 
generally avoid gratuitous violence.  For the most part, 
crimes of stealth are usually committed by a thief who is 
unarmed or armed with non-lethal weapons.  However, it has 
also been noted that criminals will rifle through a woman's 
purse on a crowded bus or train, undeterred by onlookers. 
For this reason, the RSO discourages Embassy personnel from 
using the public buses or overcrowded trains.  It is also 
becoming more common for victims to notice their bag or 
 
jacket was sliced open and valuable contents stealthily 
removed after walking through or standing in a crowded area. 
 
Violent crime remains relatively rare in affluent areas where 
most expatriates reside.  It is illegal to possess a firearm 
without government approval and the government will authorize 
approval to carry a firearm only in the most grievous and 
extreme circumstances.  Even then, a heavy burden is placed 
upon the citizen to justify the request. 
 
¶6.  (paragraph 10) (U) (B) OPERATE IN GROUPS OF TWO TO FOUR 
INDIVIDUALS, ARE PREPARED TO BE CONFRONTATIONAL, BUT 
GENERALLY AVOID GRATUITOUS VIOLENCE. 
 
¶7.  (paragraph 11) (U) (B) LOCAL POLICE OR NEIGHBORHOOD 
ASSOCIATIONS ARE PARTIALLY EFFECTIVE AT DETERRING CRIME, AND 
RESPONSES TO ALARMS OR EMERGENCY CALLS ARE SUFFICIENTLY 
PROMPT AND EFFECTIVE TO DISRUPT/NEUTRALIZE BURGLARIES. 
 
Beside the police, the Embassy local guard force is an 
effective tool for preventing burglaries.  Their regular, yet 
random, visits to Embassy residences include checking the 
yard for unauthorized people and ensuring that vehicles are 
properly secured.  The guards are also made aware when 
residents are out of town to check that the home is secured. 
Embassy guards also have a quicker response time than the 
police and can be dispatched by the RSO, Post One or FSNI at 
any time. 
 
The most effective deterrent is the resident.  Emboffs are 
encouraged to use home alarms and instructed to use all 
security devices including locks and grills.  Guards are 
dispatched to activated alarms when notified. 
 
¶8.  (paragraph 12) (U) (A) POLICE ARE PROFESSIONAL, WELL 
TRAINED, UNFAILINGLY COOPERATIVE, AND RESPONSIVE TO REQUESTS 
FROM POST. 
 
The Tunisian police are relatively well trained and 
professional.  Many senior officials have received advanced 
training in Western Europe or the United States.  Embassy 
requests for assistance and investigation of Embassy 
residence and vehicle burglaries are prompt and thorough. 
Tunisian police have relatively good success capturing these 
criminals. 
GODEC