08BASRAH78
REO BASRAH HOUSING
Tue Sep 23 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
REO Basrah
VZCZCXRO9173
PP RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHBC #0078 2670856
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P R 230856Z SEP 08
FM REO BASRAH
TO RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD PRIORITY 0382
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0799
RUEHBC/REO BASRAH 0836UNCLAS BASRAH 000078 
 
SIPDIS 
 
BAGHDAD FOR OPA AND MANAGEMENT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AMGT ASEC ABLD
SUBJECT: REO BASRAH HOUSING 
 
¶1.      (SBU)  Summary:  REO Basra's most immediate goal is to be 
able to capitalize on improved security conditions by 
significantly increasing movements in and out of Basra Air 
Station (BAS).  Completion of 45 ballistic housing units (BHUs) 
will add 90 additional rooms and will enable the REO to bring 
112 additional Triple Canopy (TC) security guards and Personal 
Security Detachment (PSD) personnel.  The additional guard force 
will enable REO Basra to make movements independently outside 
the BAS..  In the end, the REO's population will increase to 307 
personnel, which will occupy all available living space.  The 
improved security situation in Basra has sparked much interest 
among other USG agencies and international organizations to 
establish a presence at the REO.  Unfortunately, these 
expectations should be tempered by the fact that the housing 
shortage will continue even after the 45 BHUs are completed. 
Additional housing units will have to be built before the REO 
can accommodate any increase in population.  Now is the time to 
evaluate and plan for additional requirements beyond what has 
already been factored into the plan.  End Summary 
 
Background and Current Status 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶2.      (SBU)  The BHU contract was awarded by KBR to a British 
firm called "Reyam"  in May 2007, at a cost of $2.5 million 
after a competitive bidding process.  Construction began in 
September 2007, with an expected completion date of March 2008. 
Reyam, however, encountered difficulties with the management of 
the local labor force.  In addition, the company itself also had 
financial problems throughout.  Even 6 months after the original 
expected completion date, Reyam is still struggling to complete 
the project.  As a result of all the problems, beginning around 
the middle of August, KBR, the prime contractor for the project, 
brought in additional resources of their own to help complete 
the work.  According to the KBR Project Manager on site, he 
expects completion by the middle of November 2008. 
 
Full House from the Moment the Ribbon is Cut 
--------------------------------------------- ------------------ 
 
¶3.      (SBU)  The 45 BHUs represent 90 rooms, which will bring 
the total number of rooms to 172.  Most of the additional rooms 
will house the new 112 TC guards and will reduce the level of 
overcrowding under the overhead cover - currently, more than 200 
people literally squeeze into living spaces, sometimes 3 or 4 to 
a room, that were originally designed to house only 80 people. 
The majority of the rooms will be double occupancy and are 
already projected to be fully occupied.  The total REO 
population will increase to about 307 after the expansion. 
 
Need to Manage Expectations 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.      (SBU)  The improved security situation in Basra has 
sparked much interest among other USG agencies and international 
organizations to establish a presence at the REO.  However, REO 
Basra will not be able to accommodate any new personnel beyond 
what has already been planned, unless new housing is built.  In 
fact, if the REO were to be staffed to full authorized strength, 
we would face an immediate shortage of five rooms. 
 
¶5.      (SBU)  Comment:  We foresee growing interest in using the 
REO as a platform (housing, life support, logistics, movements 
and security), not only for State Department personnel, but also 
for a growing number of other USG agencies and VIP visitors. 
Even with the new housing, if/when it is completed, Embassy 
demands will probably continue to outstrip REO capacities, 
especially if some unlikely, yet viable, contingencies are 
considered.  For example, the REO already houses some American 
PRT members and their contractors.  But the PRT, being that it 
does not fall under the REO, was never factored into REO housing 
requirements.  The new expansion was designed to fulfill 
existing REO requirements, not possible future PRT ones.  If at 
some point in the future the UK-led PRT were to become a US PRT, 
new housing would be required.  Any such future staffing 
requirements for the REO should be evaluated carefully and 
approved by the REO, OPA, and the Embassy Management Office.  It 
is not too early to begin planning for such contingencies, in 
case they become real.  End Comment 
 
NEGRON