08HELSINKI406
FINLAND:  COMMENTS ON GYMNICH SEPTEMBER 5-6
Thu Sep 04 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Helsinki
VZCZCXRO5273
RR RUEHAG RUEHAST RUEHDA RUEHDF RUEHFL RUEHIK RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHLN
RUEHLZ RUEHPOD RUEHROV RUEHSR RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHHE #0406/01 2481343
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 041343Z SEP 08
FM AMEMBASSY HELSINKI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4529
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 0097UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HELSINKI 000406 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EUN PREL PGOV GG PHUM RU FI
SUBJECT: FINLAND:  COMMENTS ON GYMNICH SEPTEMBER 5-6 
 
REF: A. STATE 93264 
     ¶B. STATE 93272 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  PolOff delivered points from reftels to 
Markku Lampinen, Deputy Director Deputy European 
Correspondent, Unit for European Common Foreign and Security 
Policy on September 3. Lampinen stated that the extraordinary 
European Council (EC) meeting on Monday (September 1) left 
less for the Foreign Ministers to discuss. He stated that the 
Government of Finland (GOF) is pleased with the EC meeting's 
outcome, where a consensus message to Russia was crafted 
without resorting to sanctions. He expects Georgia/Russia to 
dominate the discussion on September 5-6. Regarding the 
Middle East Peace Process, he expects discussion on how the 
process should proceed despite internal Israeli political 
changes.  On Transatlantic relations, Lampinen discussed 
possible opportunities to enhance EU-US cooperation and 
commented on the need to consider new and traditional threats 
within EU Security strategy.  He suggested 
Afghanistan/Pakistan would have a place on the agenda due 
partly to the recent French military casualties there. 
Lampinen did not comment on the Balkans.   End Summary. 
 
Russia/Georgia 
----------------- 
¶2.  (SBU)  According to Lampinen, the ministers could reach 
some decisions in their Friday and Saturday meetings on the 
concept for the European Security and Defense Policy (ESDP) 
mission.  He stated that two things were required before the 
ESDP mission could move forward.  First, the mission needs a 
UN Security Council green light for peacekeeping operations 
to go forward.  Second, Lampinen stated that a paper on the 
proposed EU-OSCE platform and how to bring the different 
actors together (EU, UN, OSCE, US, Russia, World Bank) will 
be presented in Vienna by early next week.  He said that the 
target number for the proposed ESDP civilian mission is 200, 
with ten from Finland, and noted that the ESDP presence would 
facilitate Russian withdrawal from safety zones as part of 
the "Six Point Plan" by putting international observers in 
place.  He stated that there would be one chairman or high 
level representative for the program.  Lampinen also noted 
that Sarkozy is to visit Moscow soon and reconvey the OSCE 
Chairman's message to move forward with concrete deployment 
of the remaining agreed-upon OSCE observers. Based on the 
Partnership Agreement (EU-Russia) negotiations postponement, 
ideas for constructive cooperation with Russia in one of the 
"four common spaces" (economic; freedom, security and 
justice; external security; research and education) could 
come up. 
 
Middle East & Peace Process 
------------------------- 
¶3. (SBU)  Lampinen believes EU positions will remain the same 
in spite of the upcoming Israeli Prime Minister change and 
that the peace process should continue despite Israel's 
internal politics.  The EU would convey the message to the 
Israelis that they need to see real improvements on the 
ground for Palestinians, especially relative to settlements, 
road blocks and check points.  Lampinen noted that while they 
welcomed the removal of some check points, they weren't the 
most relevant check points to Palestinian everyday life, and 
while they welcomed the freed prisoners, the Israelis still 
hold around 10,000 in prison.  (Note: When asked about FM 
Stubb's current visit (September 2) to the Middle East, 
Lampinen related that Stubb wanted to go for some time, and 
so far, the trip is going well. End Note) 
 
¶4. (SBU) On Lebanon and Syria, Lampinen felt there would be a 
positive outcome with the unity government in Lebanon, that 
Lebanon could elect a president and finally establish 
diplomatic relations with Syria and mark the border, though 
nothing has occurred yet.  He believes that even with 
Hezbollah in government, extremist disarmament and the Harare 
murder investigation should continue and that the EU should 
support unity and the integrity of the Lebanese army.  GoF is 
in favor of improvement in EU-Syrian relations on the 
condition that Syria shows a "constructive attitude" and 
supports democratic development in Lebanon and enhances its 
own social reforms.  France has proposed the signing of the 
long-tabled EU-Syria Association Agreement. 
 
EU Security Strategy & Transatlantic Relations 
--------------------------------------------- - 
¶5. (SBU) Lampinen remarked that Sarkozy has consistently 
favored improved Transatlantic relations.  The ministers 
expect an interim report from High Representative Solana as 
to the current state of work on revisions to the 2003 
security strategy.  The work proceeds through the European 
Institute for Security Studies (ISS) seminars with the next 
scheduled for Helsinki September 18 and 19 and the revised 
document expected in December.  Lampinen stated that the 
 
HELSINKI 00000406  002 OF 002 
 
 
EU-US strategic dialogue should reflect current international 
challenges and international agendas, including enhanced 
EU-NATO cooperation.  He reiterated Foreign Minister Stubb's 
wish to invite the NATO Secretary General to address the 
Foreign Ministers and come to other EU fora.  Lampinen also 
remarked that while the security strategy would look at new 
threats and global challenges, it also had to look at 
traditional security threats starting with European 
stability.  He mentioned the need to identify fields where 
Transatlantic relations could be enhanced.  For example, the 
GoF would like EU-US cooperation to extend beyond political 
and security subjects and include science and technology, and 
expand on development policy. 
 
Afghanistan/Pakistan 
--------------------- 
¶6. (SBU) Lampinen said that Afghanistan and Pakistan did not 
originally appear on the agenda, but with the recent loss of 
French troops, they are a source of great concern. 
Ultimately, Afghanistan must find a political solution and 
the EU should try to guarantee security for the August 2009 
Afghan elections.  Lampinen hoped that a high level EU 
delegation will visit Pakistan soon to establish a dialogue 
even though the current Pakistani domestic political 
situation is unclear.  GoF thinks the EU should react to the 
refugee problem and the humanitarian situation caused by the 
Taliban fighting. Lampinen mentioned that GoF favors doubling 
the size of EUPOL operations and is looking for more people 
to send. 
BARRETT