08SANAA1559
AMEMB SANAA 9/20 DAILY SITREP
Sat Sep 20 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Sanaa
P 201110Z SEP 08
FM AMEMBASSY SANAA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0333UNCLAS SANAA 001559 
 
OP CENTER, NEA/FO, NEA/ARP, M, AND NEA/SCA/EX 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PTER YM
SUBJECT: AMEMB SANAA 9/20 DAILY SITREP 
 
¶1. Security: The MSD team has been deployed to augment 
security at the Hadda Apartment Complex.  One of the ARSOs is 
currently conducting a security review of all official 
American residential areas in order to determine where host 
nation assets could be deployed to be most useful.  Based 
upon ARSO assessments, RSO will request that host nation 
security place road blocks and increase manpower in those 
areas. 
 
¶2. Consular: NSTR. 
 
¶3. Media: NSTR. 
 
¶4. TDY Assistance: An ARSO from Muscat will arrive on 
September 21 to assist the Regional Security Office with 
daily operations for three weeks. 
 
¶5. Investigation: The forensics team's preliminary 
investigations reveal that four suicide vests were detonated 
rather than three as was originally believed.  Grenade 
fragments and unexploded grenades were also located.  These 
may have been used as a backup detonation device for the 
explosive belts.  Crime scene work at the Embassy is expected 
to take several more days.  Investigators located two more 
bullet strikes on the EMR, raising the total of known bullet 
strikes on the Ambassador's residence to eight. 
 
¶6. Town Hall: Post held a well-attended Town Hall on 9/20 for 
all official Americans.  The RSO briefed the community on the 
specifics of the attack, and the Ambassador encouraged 
everyone to consider the option of Authorized Departure.  The 
Ambassador and RSO also outlines what steps have been taken 
to beef up security at the Embassy, the Sheraton, the Hadda 
apartment complex, and other USG-leased residences.  At the 
conclusion of the Town Hall, we reminded the community that 
the RMO/P will be in town for three days beginning on Mon 
9/22 and encouraged people to make appointments to see him as 
they weighed their options about AD. 
 
¶7. ROYG Contacts: The Ambassador is trying to call on Deputy 
Prime Minister Alimi, currently out of Sana'a, to discuss our 
post-attack needs; he also has an appointment with FM Qirbi 
on Mon 9/20.  He plans to see the President once Saleh 
returns from his travels in other Yemeni provinces. 
 
SECHE