06ADANA131
TURKEY: SOUTHEAST TURKEY POLITICAL FIGURE BIOGRAPHIES
Mon Jun 05 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
VZCZCXRO7947
RR RUEHAST
DE RUEHDA #0131/01 1561349
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 051349Z JUN 06
FM AMCONSUL ADANA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4171
INFO RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 0720
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 0621
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 0771
RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 ADANA 000131 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOT FOR INTERNET DISTRIBUTION 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PHUM CASC TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY: SOUTHEAST TURKEY POLITICAL FIGURE BIOGRAPHIES 
 
 
ADANA 00000131  001.3 OF 006 
 
 
¶1. (U) EFKAN ALA, DIYARBAKIR GOVERNOR 
 
Efkan Ala was born in Erzurum in 1965, graduated from the 
Political Science Faculty of Istanbul University, and did his 
bachelor's degree in Economics. Ala lived in England in order to 
develop his language skills and carry out studies on Governing 
Systems. Ala has served, in sequence, as a Sub-governor, Deputy 
Governor, Section Director at the Interior Ministry, and General 
Director at the Ministry of Tourism. Ala has also served as a 
member to the Quality Support Committee of the World Tourism 
Organization and has carried out studies at UNICEF to meet 
fundamental needs in Turkey. Ala served as Governor of Batman 
province from January 30, 2003 to September 14, 2004 and was 
appointed Governor to Diyarbakir province on September 14, 2004. 
Ala was nominated by the U.S. Consulate in Adana for the IV 
program for FY-2006, and completed a three-week program in the 
United States in March of 2006. Ala is married and has two 
children. He speaks fair English. 
 
¶2. (U) OSMAN BAYDEMIR, DIYARBAKIR MAYOR 
 
Osman Baydemir was born in Dokuzceltik village of Diyarbakir on 
June 06, 1971. He completed his primary and secondary school 
education in Diyarbakir, and enrolled at Faculty of Law of Dicle 
University in 1990. Following his graduation from the Law 
Faculty in 1994, he completed his one-year apprenticeship in 
practicing law at the Bar Association of Diyarbakir, and served 
as an attorney in November 1995. He became a member of Human 
Rights Association's Chapter in Diyarbakir in 1995, and soon 
thereafter was elected as a member to the Executive Board. He 
was elected as the National Vice President of  HRA in 1997, and 
served as the President of HRA's Diyarbakir Chapter and National 
Vice President of HRA until he was nominated for Diyarbakir 
deputyship on the DEHAP ticket in the November 3, 2002 General 
Election. Baydemir took English classes in San Francisco, CA 
from May 2003 to December 2003. Baydemir was elected as 
Diyarbakir Metropolitan Mayor at the Local Elections on March 
28, 2004.   He is a member of the Diyarbakir Bar Association, 
Societal Judiciary Research Foundation, and a founding member of 
the Migration and Humanitarian Cooperation, and of the Human 
Rights Foundation of Turkey. He is married to Attorney Reyhan 
Yalcin, who is the Vice National President of the Human Rights 
Association in Turkey, and has one son. 
¶3. (U) SEZGIN TANRIKULU, PRESIDENT OF DIYARBAKIR BAR ASSOCIATION 
Sezgin Tanrikulu  was born in Diyarbakir in 1958, and has been 
practicing law since earning his law degree from the Law Faculty 
of Istanbul University in 1984. Tanrikulu received a Master's 
Degree in Public Law from the Dice University of Diyarbakir in 
¶1992. He is currently the representative of the Diyarbakir 
Chapter of the Human Rights Foundation established in Diyarbakir 
in 1988, and was elected President of the Diyarbakir Bar 
Association for a second term. Tanrikulu represented relatives 
of ten prisoners allegedly beaten to death by security personnel 
in the Diyarbakir Prison in September 1996. He was the first 
lawyer to bring a case before the European Human Rights Court. 
Attorney Tanrikulu received the prestigious Robert F. Kennedy 
Award for Human Rights in 1977. Tanrikulu is married and has two 
children. His wife, Attorney Remziye Tanrikulu, participated in 
an IV program in the United States. 
¶4. (U) TAH?R ELG?, VICE PRESIDENT OF DIYARBAKIR BAR ASSOCIATION 
 
Tahir Elgi was born in January 01, 1966 in Hisar village of 
Cizre, S?rnak province. He completed his secondary school 
education in Cizre and enr?olled at the Law Faculty of Dicle 
University in Diyarbak?r in 1986. He graduated from the Law 
Faculty in 1991, and has been practicing law in Diyarbak?r since 
¶1992. Elci mostly defended cases of human r?ghts violations, 
torture, disappearances under detention, mysterious killings, 
and forcibly displaced people during the 1992-2002 period. Elci 
served as an Executive Board Member and Vice President of  the 
Diyarbak?r Bar Association between 1998-2002, and  is currently 
the Vice President of the Bar Association respons?ble for Human 
Rights Law. Elci is also a founding member of the Human Rights 
Foundation of Turkey. Between 1997-2005, Elci attended various 
meetings in England, France, and Germany, as a speaker on 
varying aspects of the human rights issues, particularly, 
torture, arbitrary executions, and child rights violations. 
Attorney Elci is an occasional contributor to the national 
Radikal newspaper and Diyarbakir and Izmir Bar Associations' 
bulletins. Elci, who speaks intermediate level English, is 
married and has two children. 
 
¶5. (U) ZULAL ERDOGAN BILAL, GENERAL SECRETARTY OF DIYARBAKIR BAR 
ASSOCAITION 
 
Zulal Erdogan Bilal was born in Samandag of Hatay in July 8, 
¶1968. She completed her primary and secondary education in 
 
ADANA 00000131  002.3 OF 006 
 
 
Samandag and graduated from the Law Faculty of Dicle University 
in 1989. Erdogan Bilal has been practicing law in Diyarbakir 
since December 1990 and has been mainly handling cases at 
criminal courts. She is also doing her bachelors degree in 
Special Law at the Law Faculty of Dice University. Erdogan Bilal 
has been active in the following positions at the Diyarbakir Bar 
Association: member to Children's Rights Commission from 1996 to 
1998; Women's Rights Commission's secretary from 1999 to 2000; 
Women's Rights Commission's Vice President from 2000 to 2002; 
Women's Rights Center's President from 2002 to 2004; and she is 
currently the General Secretary of the Bar Association. Erdogan 
Bilal is married, has two children, and speaks 
intermediate-level English. 
 
¶6. (U) SABIH ATAC, FORMER PRESIDENT OF THE BATMAN BAR ASSOCIATION 
 
Sabih Atac was born in Dargecit township of Mardin in 1960. 
After his family moved from Mardin to Batman in 1963, he 
attended primary school in Batman and graduated from senior high 
school in Mardin. He enrolled at the Law Faculty of Ankara 
University in 1978 and graduated in 1982, and has been 
practicing law in Batman ever since. Attorney Atac served as the 
President of the Batman Bar Association from 1993 to 2000. 
Although Attorney Atac is mainly interested in criminal cases, 
he occasionally takes care of legal-dispute cases, and some 
cases at the former State Security Courts.  He is active in 
industry in Batman now, and is part-owner of a plaster factory, 
as well as a capital partner in an oil exploration and 
infrastructure joint venture.  Attorney Atac is a founding 
member of Executive Board of the Human Rights Association's 
Batman Chapter, and Batman's Petroleum University Foundation. 
Atac, who is married, is a former IV grantee, and speaks no 
English. 
¶7. (U) SAH?SMA?L BED?RHANO?LU, PRESIDENT OF GUNSIAD 
(The Association of Industrialists and Businessmen from 
Southeast) 
 
Sahismail Bedirhano?lu  was born in January 20, 1961 in Dicle 
township of Diyarbak?r. He graduated from the Education Faculty 
of Dicle University in Diyarbak?r. Mr. Bedirhano?lu has been 
involved in commercial activities since 1985. He owns a 
Diyarbak?r-based pharmaceutical company with branches in Elaz??, 
Van, and Malatya provinces. He also sells medical equipment. 
Bedirhano?lu was elected as the President of D?S?AD for two 
terms, and currently is the President of G\NS?AD. Bedirhanoglu, 
a long-term contact of the U.S. Consulate in Adana, offers 
thoughtful, knowledgeable, pragmatic viewpoints on Turkey's 
Kurdish question, and just returned form a three-week long IV 
program in the United States. Bedirhano?lu is married and has 
two children.  His wife is a practicing pharmacist.  He speaks 
no English. 
 
¶8. (U) NEDIM DENGIZ, GENERAL SECRETARY OF GUNSIAD EXECUTIVE BOARD 
 
Nedim Dengiz was born in Diyarbakir in January 01, 1969. Dengiz 
completed his elementary and senior high school education in 
Diyarbakir and graduated from the Business Administration 
Faculty of Anadolu University in Kutahya. Dengiz started his 
commercial life at Dengiz Trade Company and is currently doing 
business in both the construction and food sectors. He has also 
made some investments in education. Mr. Dengiz is a founding 
member of DISIAD (Industrialists and Businessmen from Diyarbakir 
Association) and a member to GUNSIAD (Southeastern 
Industrialists and Businessmen Assocaition), Chamber of Commerce 
and Industry of Diyarbakir, DOGUNSIFED (East and Southeastern 
Industrialist- Businessmen Federation), and TURKONFED (Turkish 
Enterprise and Business Confederation). 
 
¶9. (U) ABDURRAHMAN KURT, AKP DIYARBAKIR PROVINCIAL CHAIRMAN 
 
Abdurrahman Kurt was born in Diyarbakir on June 27, 1968. After 
completing his secondary school education in Diyarbakir, Mr. 
Kurt graduated from the Civil Engineering Faculty of Istanbul 
Yildiz Technical University, and is still taking classes in 
International Political Economy and Business at the Beykent 
University. Mr. Kurt worked on the construction of 1400 villas 
at the Marmara Uyum Kent Villalari project in 1993 and worked as 
Construction Supervisor at the Eyup Municipality in Istanbul 
after the 1994 local elections. Kurt took an active role in the 
post-earthquake relief distribution activities in Adapazari. He 
is also the president of Turkish Airline's Civilian Solidarity 
Platform of the Victim Families of the Plain Crash in 
Diyarbakir. Kurt was re-elected as AKP's Diyarbakir Provincial 
Chairman on May 2006. Kurt has been a licensed parachutist since 
1984, "C" class licensed glider operator since 1985, has been 
trained as a diver, plays soccer, and loves swimming and playing 
billiards. Mr. Kurt has also obtained certificates for 
 
ADANA 00000131  003.3 OF 006 
 
 
completing speed-reading and Writers' School Seminar classes. He 
is married and has three children. He speaks some English, but 
is not confident to use it in extensive conversations. 
 
¶10. (U) FARUK BALIKCI, PRESIDENT OF SOUTHEAST JOURNALISTS 
ASSOCIATION AND DOGAN NEWS AGENCY REPRESENTATIVE 
 
Faruk Balikci was born in Diyarbakir in 1961 and started his 
career as a journalist at the Anadolu News Agency in 1983. 
Balikci has been working for the Dogan News Agency (DNA) since 
its 1987 merging from the Hurriyet and Milliyet daily 
newspapers. Mr. Balikci has been concurrently holding the 
President of Southeastern Journalists Association and DNA 
Representative positions since 2003. Balikci has received three 
awards from the Southeastern Journalists Association and one 
award from the Musa Anter (a mysterious killing victim Kurdish 
journalist/writer) and Metin Goktepe (another Kurdish journalist 
killed by GOT forces under detention) competitions in news and 
photography branches. Balikci has written a book on his memoirs 
in Southeastern Turkey, titled "On Both Sides of Death." 
 
¶11. (U) FIRAT AYDINAY, IHLAS NEWS AGENCY SOUTEAST ANATOLIA 
REGIONAL DIRECTOR 
 
Firat Aydinay was born in Van in April 20, 1974 and completed 
his elementary and secondary education there. Aydinay withdrew, 
for economic reasons, from his education at Economics and 
Administrative Sciences Faculty of Gazi University in Ankara 
when he was a sophomore. Mr. Aydinay worked as a substitute 
teacher in a village of Van for two years, and then worked for 
Tercuman and Milliyet newspapers. He started working in Ihlas 
News Agency's office in Van in 1996 and has been the Southeast 
Anatolia Regional Director of the same agency since 2000. 
Aydinay traveled to Iraq to follow the developments during the 
Gulf War, and briefly stayed in Iraq and Iran to do professional 
studies. He is a founding member of the Lake Van Journalists 
Association, and he is currently the Executive Board President 
of the Southeastern Newspapers and Television News Reporters 
Association ,which is heavily engaged in promoting the 
professionals skills of reporters in Diyarbakir and provinces 
surrounding it. Aydinay is also a member of the Human Rights 
Committee within the body of the Diyarbakir Governorate, and has 
contributed to the preparation of the reports concerning 
conditions and shortcomings in Child Orphanages and Child 
Protection Facilities.  He also participated in the 
investigations concerning claims of "Mass-Graves in Kulp" of 
Diyarbakir. From April 01, 2006 to April 23, 2006. Aydinay 
participated in various seminars in Washington, Texas, and 
Indianapolis under the Department of State's Edward Murrow 
Program. Aydinay is married and his wife is an English teacher. 
 
¶12. (U) EYYUP KACAR, ANADOLU NEWS AGENCY DIYARBAKIR REGIONAL 
DIRECTOR 
 
Eyyup Kacar was born in Egil township of Diyarbakir in 1961. Mr. 
Kacar had to withdraw from school when he was a sophomore at the 
Business Department of the Faculty Through Correspondence 
because of his workload. He started his career as a journalist 
at Milliyet newspaper's office in Diyarbakir in 1984, and then 
was transferred to Hurriyet in 1987. Kacar has been working for 
the Anadolu News Agency since 1994 and has been the Regional 
Director since 1999. 
 
¶13. (U) NIZAMETTIN KAPLAN, NTV'S REGIONAL REPRESENTATIVE 
 
Nizamettin Kaplan was born in Diyarbakir in January 01, 1971. He 
is a sophomore at the Social Sciences Faculty of the Anadolu 
University Through Correspondence. Mr. Kaplan worked for Gunes 
newspaper until 1984, then switch to Hurriyet until 1987, before 
transferring to Cumhuriyet until 1994.  In 1996 he started to 
work for the National Press Agency's Regional Office and has 
been the Regional Representative of the NTV television station 
since 1996. 
 
¶14. (U) NEVZAT B?NGVL, SKYTURK REPRESENTATIVE 
 
Nevzat Bingvl was born in Karl?ova township of Bingvl in 
December 31, 1964. Bingvl completed his elementary and secondary 
school education in Bingvl and graduated from the Economic and 
Administrative Faculty of Anadolu University in 1987. He worked 
in the tourism sector for three years. Following the First Gulf 
War in 1991, Mr. Bingvl returned to Diyarbak?r and opened a 
publicity and public polling company. In 1993, Bingvl 
established the Can-TV and Radio stations in Diyarbak?r, the 
first ever private radio and TV stations in eastern and 
southeastern Turkey. He served as the ATV representative in 
¶1997. Bingvl reported news from Northern Iraq, Iran, Armenia, 
 
ADANA 00000131  004.3 OF 006 
 
 
and Syria for ATV. Bingvl resigned from ATV in 2000 and erected 
the G|n-TV channel in Diyarbak?r. Bingvl has been working for 
the Cukurova Media Group (Sky-T|rk-TV, Show-TV, Aksam Newspaper) 
since 2003 and has traveled to Iraq a number of times since 
¶2003. He interviewed the armed Ansar-al Islam members, took 
pictures of the armed Shia Bedir Forces, and reported on Turkish 
Forces' control of Bamerni airport in Northern Iraq. Bingvl 
wrote "Northern Front," a book which narrates the 2003 Iraq 
conflict , as well as "Kurds Without Identification in Syria." 
Mr. Bingvl, who is married and has two children, speaks some 
English. 
 
¶15. (U) MAHMUT ORAL, CUMHURIYET CORRESPONDENT 
 
Mahmut Oral was born in 1967 in Diyarbakir where he completed 
his primary and secondary school education. Semi-completing his 
education in Tourism at Hacettepe University in Ankara, Oral 
started journalism in 1990 in Istanbul and has been working for 
TV channels and national news agencies in Diyarbakir since 1994. 
Oral started working for Cumhuriyet daily in 1998, and he is 
currently the paper's Diyarbakir Representative. Oral is also 
the Vice President of Southeastern Newspaper and Television 
Reporters Association, an executive member in charge of 
Southeastern Journalists Association's Foreign Affairs. Oral is 
an active member of the Sarmasik Anti-poverty and Sustainable 
Development Association, Consumers' Rights Association, and 
Journalist's Union of Turkey. In addition, Oral voluntarily 
undertakes activities for children with UNICEF and he 
occasionally contributes to UNICEF's news bulletins. A recent 
IV'er to the United States, Mr. Oral is married and has two 
children. 
 
¶16. (U) ARIF ARSLAN, CAGDAS NEWSPAPER IN BATMAN 
 
Arif Arslan was born in Bismil township of Diyarbakir in 1960. 
After completing his elementary and secondary school education 
in Batman, he completed most of his education at a two-year 
Professional High School (Vocational School) affiliated with 
Dicle University. He was assigned as editor in charge of the 
local Cagdas newspaper in Batman in 1984. A holder of the Yellow 
Press Card, Mr. Arslan has been in journalism for 20 years and 
has won awards from the Journalists Associations of Turkey, the 
Cukurova Journalists Association, the German Adenauer 
Foundation, Nezih Demirkent, Metin Goktepe, and Southeastern 
Journalists Association. In addition, he is a recent IV'er to 
the United States. Arslan represents many national news agencies 
in Batman. Arslan is married and has five children. 
 
¶17. (U) MEHMET KILICLAR, MARDIN GOVERNOR 
 
Mehmet Kiliclar was born in Artova township of Tokat in 1965, 
and graduated from the political Science Faculty of Ankara 
University in 1984. He took Office as a candidate sub-governor 
in Samsun in 1985, and served as deputy sub-governor in Sarikaya 
(Yozgat) and Haymana  (Ankara), and as sub-governor in 
Kovancilar (Elazig).  Kiliclar served within the Interior 
Ministry in the following capacities: Chief Inspector; Interior 
Ministry's Representative for the Prime Ministry's Human Rights 
Office; Interior Ministry's Data Processing Office Director. 
Kiliclar was appointed as Mardin's Governor on December 30, 
¶2005. Kiliclar stayed in Atlanta, GA between 1990-1991, for one 
year, to learn English and conduct professional training.  He 
has attended professional seminars in France and Singapore, and 
a Public Administration seminar in Japan. Governor Kiliclar is 
married, has two children, and speaks English reasonably well. 
 
¶18. (U) METIN PAMUKCU, MARDIN MAYOR 
 
Metin Pamukcu was born in Mardin in 1961. After completing his 
high school education, he started to work at the Industry and 
Technology Directorate in 1979. Six months after completing his 
compulsory military service, Mayor Pamukcu established a food 
distribution company, which he expanded over time and which 
currently employs 75 persons at three food distribution 
companies. Pamukcu served as the President of Mardin's Soccer 
Team during 1994-1995. Pamukcu became actively engaged in 
politics in 2004 with his work with the Saadet Party (Felicity 
Party) and was elected as Mayor of Mardin from Saadet's ticket. 
Mayor Pamukcu shifted to the AKP (Justice and Development Party) 
soon after he was elected to the office. 
 
¶19. (U) YUSUF YAVASCAN, SANLIURFA GOVERNOR 
 
Yusuf Yavascan was born in 1956 in Eskisehir where he completed 
his elementary and secondary school education. Yavascan 
graduated from the Law Faculty of Istanbul University in 
February of 1979, and practiced law for one year. Yavacan 
 
ADANA 00000131  005.3 OF 006 
 
 
started his career with the Interior Ministry as an apprentice 
administrator at the Eskisehir Governorate in May of 1980. He 
worked as acting sub-governor in Eldivan (Cankiri), Cerkes 
(Cankiri) and concurrently held the mayoralty position there as 
well (Note: 1980 military coup period). Yavascan was appointed 
as sub-governor to Golpazari township (Bilecik) after 
successfully completing the sub-governors course in 1983. 
Yavascan served as sub-governor in Tutak (Agri) in 1987, as 
deputy governor of Erzurum in 1989 and became an Interior 
Ministry Inspector in November of 1990. After carrying out that 
position for 14 years, Yavascan was appointed as Agri Governor 
with a cabinet decision on September 17, 2004 and was 
transferred to Sanliurfa on December 30, 2005. Yavascan is 
married, has three children, and speaks some English.  He is 
focused on developing faith tourism in Sanliurfa and is working 
on a project with the mayor to expand the holy area near the 
historical Fish Pond and Urfa castle.. 
 
 
¶20. (U) UGUR BUYUKBURC, RECTOR, HARRAN UNIVERSITY OF SANLIURFA 
Ugur Buyukburc was born in Antakya in November 04, 1945 and 
completed his primary and secondary school education in Ankara. 
Buyukburc graduated in 1967 from the Field Crops faculty and 
Their Rehabilitation Department of the Agricultural Faculty of 
Ankara University. He worked for the Sugar Plant of Turkey in 
Adapazari from July 1967 until February 1968. Upon winning the 
exam for doing his bachelors degree in Germany, Prof. Buyukburc 
studied "Meadows and Feed Crops" at the Goethe Institute, doing 
his doctorate on the Cultivation of Field Crops at Bonn 
University. After completing his studies on "The Impact of 
Different Water Table Levels on Minerals in Feed Crops," 
Buyukburc returned to Turkey in 1972, and started to work at the 
General Directorate of State Production Farms until October 
1973, and completed his military service in May 1975. Buyukburc 
held various positions from 1975 to 1978 at the Ministry of 
Agriculture, Forestry and Village Affairs and became an 
Associate Professor at the Agricultural Faculty of Ankara 
University in April of 1981. Prof. Buyukburc was appointed 
Director of the Research Office in the Ministry of Agriculture, 
Forestry and Village Affairs in 1984 and as the Director of 
Ankara Provincial Control Laboratory of the Ministry until 1990. 
Buyukburc was appointed as associate professor to the 
Agricultural Faculty of Cumhuriyet University in Tokat in March 
1991 and earned his professorship in October 1991. Buyukburc has 
been the Rector of Harran University since 1999. 
 
¶21. (U) ISMAIL DEMIRKOL, PRESIDENT, CHAMBER OF COMMERCE AND 
INDUSTRY OF SANLIURFA 
 
Ismail Demirkol was born in Sanliurfa in 1943 and completed his 
elementary and secondary school education there. After 
graduating from the Economics School of Istanbul University, 
Demirkol went into auto and appliances trade and served in many 
associations and foundations as a founding member or as an 
administrator. Demirkol has been the President of the Sanliurfa 
Chamber of Commerce and Industry for an uninterrupted six terms. 
 
¶22. (U) KEMAL POLAT, VICE PRESIDENT, CHAMBER OF COMMERCE AND 
INDUSTRY OF SANLIURFA 
 
Kemal Polat was born in Suruc township of Sanliurfa in 1963. He 
completed his primary and secondary school education in 
Sanliurfa and went into business in 1985 selling plumbing 
materials. Polat started investing in (cotton) ginning and 
garments in 1995, and is currently engaged in the import-export 
and petroleum trade. Polat was elected to the board of the 
Sanliurfa CCI in 1999, and is currently the Vice President of 
the chamber. Mr. Polat is married and has four children. 
 
¶23. (U) BEKIR SITKI BAYSOY, VICE PRESIDENT, CHAMBER OF COMMERCE 
AND INDUSTRY OF SANLIURFA 
 
Bekir Sitki Baysoy was born in Sanliurfa in 1963 and completed 
his primary and secondary school education there. Baysoy 
graduated from the Sciences Faculty of Dicle University in 
Diyarbakir in 1982 and started his business as a broker of 
perishables and was elected as the President of the Perishable 
Brokers Association between 1999-2000. Baysoy also served as a 
member of the Executive Board of CHP's (Republican Peoples 
Party) provincial office. Baysoy is engaged in the household 
appliance trade and is currently one of the Vice Presidents of 
CCI. Baysoy is married and has three children. 
 
¶24. (U) AHMET ESREF FAKIBABA, SANLIURFA MAYOR 
 
Fakibaba was born in Birecik township of Sanliurfa in 1951 and 
graduated from the Medical School of Ataturk University in 
 
ADANA 00000131  006.3 OF 006 
 
 
Erzurum in 1975. Fakibaba received his specialty in surgery from 
the First Aid Hospital in Taksim (Istanbul) in 1982; he worked 
in the Social Security Hospital of Sanliurfa for 11 years. He 
resigned from his position as the Principal Doctor of the Social 
Security Hospital to run in Sanliurfa's Mayoral elections on the 
AKP ticket, and was elected mayor on March 29, 2004. Mayor 
Fakibaba is married, has three children, and speaks English. 
 
¶25. (U) SEHMUS ULEK, NATIONAL VICE PRESIDENT OF MAZLUMDER (Human 
Rights Association of Oppressed People) 
 
Sehmus Ulek was born in Siverek township of Sanliurfa on 
February 01, 1960. He graduated from the Communication Faculty 
of the Ankara Gazi University in 1983 and from the Law Faculty 
of the Diyarbakir Dicle University in 1995. Mr. Ulek is the 
founder of the Sanliurfa Chapter of MAZLUMDER in 1997 and served 
as the president until 2003, and has been the National Vice 
President of the same organization since 2000. Ulek was elected 
as the Vice President of the Sanliurfa Bar Association in the 
November 2004 elections. Ulek worked as a public employee in 
various public offices from 1981 until when he started 
practicing law in 1996. Ulek is married and has five children. 
REID