06KHARTOUM1400
Darfur - Emergency Food Security Program
Tue Jun 13 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO6989
PP RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #1400/01 1641209
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 131209Z JUN 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3199
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 001400 
 
SIPDIS 
 
AIDAC 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR AF/SPG, PRM, AND ALSO PASS USAID/W 
USAID FOR DCHA SUDAN TEAM, AFR/SP 
NAIROBI FOR USAID/DCHA/OFDA, USAID/REDSO, AND FAS 
USMISSION UN ROME 
GENEVA FOR NKYLOH 
NAIROBI FOR SFO 
NSC FOR JBRAUSE, NSC/AFRICA FOR TSHORTLEY 
USUN FOR TMALY 
BRUSSELS FOR PLERNER 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: EAID PREF PGOV PHUM SOCI SU
SUBJECT:  Darfur - Emergency Food Security Program 
Recommendations 
 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  Food security in Darfur remains critically fragile 
due to prevailing insecurity, and prospects for a return 
to relative food security are bleak.  Despite the signing 
of the Darfur Peace Agreement, internally displaced 
persons (IDPs) lack access to agricultural land, and non- 
governmental organization (NGO) access to some food- 
insecure areas remains restricted.  The U.N. Food and 
Agriculture Organization (FAO) and NGO partners, however, 
report some success in reducing food insecurity in 
certain locations through a variety of aid interventions. 
From May 24 to June 1, a USAID Darfur Field Office (DFO) 
agriculture and livestock specialist traveled through 
South and North Darfur, evaluating FAO's seed 
distributions, meeting with partners, and visiting Abu 
Shouk, Al Salaam, Dereig, Otash, and Zam Zam IDP camps. 
The DFO recommends that the USAID Office of U.S. Foreign 
Disaster Assistance (USAID/OFDA) consider support for the 
following agriculture and livestock sector interventions: 
reduced direct seed distributions of sorghum and millet, 
seed multiplication through market mechanisms, vegetable 
garden and environmental projects, and training and 
equipping of community animal health workers (CAHW).  End 
Summary. 
 
------------------------ 
FAO and Partner Programs 
------------------------ 
 
¶2.  Three million people in Darfur have restricted access 
to land resulting in diminished crop cultivation and an 
increased dependence on food assistance.  FAO and NGOs 
are implementing agriculture and livestock programs that 
provide millet, sorghum, and vegetable seeds; tools; 
poultry; and veterinary drugs, vaccines, and training. 
The success of these programs has been mixed, with the 
cumulative impact still inadequate to meet household 
needs.  In addition, displacement and insecurity continue 
to disrupt agriculture and livestock projects and 
aggravate food security. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
Saturation Point Reached for Seed Distributions 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶3.  Millet and sorghum direct seed distributions have 
likely reached a saturation point, given the large 
amounts of seed distributed by FAO (700 metric tons in 
2006) and as evidenced by low grain prices at local 
markets.  Demand is also low as many farmers are now 
living in IDP camps.  If seed gaps are determined to 
exist, supporting local seed multiplication projects 
through a market mechanism would more efficiently 
transfer seed from producers to farmers in need. 
USAID/OFDA may consider supporting seed multiplication 
and scaling down direct seed distributions. 
 
----------------------------- 
Strengthening Garden Projects 
----------------------------- 
 
¶4.  Vegetable garden projects in the IDP camps visited 
have improved the diets and incomes of participants.  In 
Zam Zam, CHF International introduced demonstration plots 
where IDPs learn practical gardening skills.  OXFAM is 
currently distributing vegetable seeds to 15,000 
households in Saraf Omra, Kebkabiya, and Tawila.  Relief 
International is also distributing vegetable seeds in 
other parts of Saraf Omra and Kebkabiya.  USAID/OFDA may 
consider additional support to garden projects in 
locations with available water supplies, such as in Zam 
Zam camp. 
 
---------------- 
Poultry Projects 
---------------- 
 
¶5.  Several NGOs have distributed chickens in Darfur, and 
 
KHARTOUM 00001400  002 OF 002 
 
 
the poultry projects seem to have had a significant 
impact, increasing IDPs' incomes from egg sales and 
improving diets.  While poultry is important within the 
context of camp settings, due to increased risk of avian 
influenza, USAID recommends that partners cease poultry 
distributions, and reprogram funds to other livelihood 
options until further notice. 
 
----------------- 
Goat Distribution 
----------------- 
 
¶6.  CHF distributed one goat per household to 1,000 
households in Otash camp and to 500 households in Dereig 
camp with the provision that the first offspring would be 
given to another household.  Further distributions of 
goats and other livestock, however, are discouraged in 
Darfur, as these assets increase the vulnerability of 
beneficiaries to attacks. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
CAHW Training, Veterinary Drugs, Kits, and Vaccines 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶7.  FAO and NGOs, in collaboration with the Sudanese 
government veterinary department, have trained 255 CAHWs 
in Darfur, to improve health delivery service to animals. 
The CAHWs are paid approximately USD 100 per month for 
participating in the program and attending to sick 
animals.  Due to the expense, the program is not 
sustainable.  USAID/OFDA may consider expanding support 
for veterinary training and equipment provision, 
especially in the northern areas of El Fasher where 
pastoralism is the primary means of livelihood.  NGO 
partners would need to devise a sustainable cost-recovery 
mechanism to cover recurring expenses allowing a measure 
of sustainability. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Fodder Provision and Pasture Seed Supply 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  Some NGOs collect fodder for distribution to 
vulnerable households during the months prior to the 
rainy season.  This intervention reduces animal losses 
due to starvation but is not sustainable if communities 
do not initiate the process.  FAO and partners collected 
and distributed 10 metric tons of pasture seed to 
pastoral and agro-pastoral communities for broadcasting 
before the rainy season but are not certain where the 
seed will be broadcasted.  One danger is if seed is 
planted by newcomers on land previously owned or worked 
by populations that fled the violence in Darfur and now 
live away from their lands.  The planting of pasture seed 
could also fix nomadic populations on land belonging to 
farmers living as IDPs in other areas. 
 
---------------------- 
Environmental Concerns 
---------------------- 
 
¶9.  The concentration of IDPs in camps has increased 
consumption of fuel wood and water resources.  To address 
dwindling fuel wood resources, and as a protection 
measure, NGOs have trained women to make fuel-efficient 
stoves that require less wood than conventional cooking 
devices and decrease the frequency of fuel-gathering 
trips.  Despite this, utilization of woody biomass 
remains high, yet planting trees to replace depleted 
biomass is inadequate.  Water resources remain in great 
demand throughout the areas visited, particularly in Abu 
Shouk camp where IDPs spend half a day waiting to collect 
water.  The upsurge in brick-making at Abu Shouk and 
other IDP camps in Darfur will further increase the 
demand for water.  USAID/OFDA may consider support for 
environmental projects, such as planting of fast-growing 
trees for fodder and firewood, and training to address 
environmental degradation and depletion of wood and water 
resources. 
 
HUME