06KHARTOUM1429
AU THINKING ABOUT DARFUR-DARFUR DIALOGUE, BUT
Sat Jun 17 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO2346
PP RUEHDU RUEHGI RUEHJO RUEHMA RUEHMR RUEHPA RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #1429/01 1681337
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 171337Z JUN 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3280
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHZO/AFRICAN UNION COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 001429 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR D, AF/SP, AND DRL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV MOPS KPKO UN AU SU
SUBJECT: AU THINKING ABOUT DARFUR-DARFUR DIALOGUE, BUT 
STILL NO CHAIRMAN 
 
 
REF:  A) Khartoum 1428   B) State 98519 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: The AU has not yet identified a 
suitable candidate to lead the Darfur-Darfur Dialogue, AU 
Special Representative Kingibe told CDA Hume, but it has 
started thinking about possible candidates, as well as 
models for discussions.  Kingibe also thanked the United 
States for a recent USD 300,000 DRL grant to support the 
process.  The AU was making some progress on other 
aspects of Darfur Peace Agreement (DPA) implementation as 
well, holding the first meeting of the Ceasefire 
Commission under the DPA and planning for the first 
meeting of the Joint Commission on June 24.  (The United 
States has yet to designate a representative to the Joint 
Commission).  SLA leader Abdul Wahid al-Nur's opposition 
to the DPA was becoming untenable, Kignibe added, noting 
that Fur tribal leaders were starting to exert pressure, 
and that the recent Eritrea-Sudan summit might also have 
an effect.  END SUMMARY. 
 
Some Progress on Darfur-Darfur Dialogue 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Charge d'Affaires Hume met with AU Special 
Representative in Sudan Kingibe and AU Mediator Ibok on 
June 17 to discuss Darfur Peace Agreement (DPA) 
implementation and check the progress of the Darfur- 
Darfur Dialogue and Consultation (DDDC).  Hume mentioned 
that the Department had recently approved a USD 300,000 
DRL grant for the DDDC (Ref B), and asked whether the AU 
had identified a suitable candidate to chair the process. 
Kingibe welcomed the news, noting that Italy had recently 
donated USD 250,000; as the DDDC becomes more inclusive 
and longer lasting, it will also likely become more 
expensive.  The AU had thought about several former 
African presidents as one option, but had yet to make a 
decision.  He asked the Charge if he had any ideas.  Hume 
replied that a former president would need patience, 
because the chairman would have to take a large amount of 
abuse from the parties--and a former president might not 
appreciate that type of treatment.  Ibok added that the 
candidate should understand the neighborhood and the 
culture, and suggested using the Inter-Congolese Dialogue 
as a model for discussions:  "The Chairman stays in his 
office while his people work with the parties in the back 
room."  The DDD chairman will not be chosen at the July 1 
AU Summit in Banjul, Ibok added, but through an 
"administrative process" within the AU. 
 
Government Gives Airtime for DPA, but Charges for it 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Kingibe summarized recent AU efforts in Darfur, 
noting that the Government had given the AU 2 1/2 hours 
of airtime each week on local radio stations to help 
explain the DPA.  The problem, Kingibe explained, was 
that the Government then asked the AU to pay for the 
airtime--and since the AU had not budgeted for the 
expense, it had dropped the program.  He also asked 
rhetorically whether the AU should be accepting space on 
government radio, since the people would then see the 
spots as government propaganda. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Kingibe also recounted his recent visit to 
Darfur, in advance of AU Commission Chairman Konare's 
visit on June 20-22.  Kingibe had met with both Foreign 
Minister Akol and Interior Minister Taha prior to his 
visit, who advised him to "listen to the people;" when he 
arrived, Kingibe discovered that "the people" kept saying 
the AU was wonderful, that there was no need for the UN, 
and that AMIS should be strengthened.  Kingibe laughed at 
this exercise, but was more concerned that the Government 
was trying to speed up implementation of the DPA to take 
control of the peace process.  He also noted that the 
Governor of North Darfur was mobilizing IDPs to oppose 
the DPA, since after Mini Minnawi's signature, the North 
Darfur governorship was the position most likely to be 
"shared" with the rebels. 
 
First CFC Meeting; Joint Commission to Meet June 24 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶5. (SBU) Kingibe also discussed the recent Humanitarian 
Cease Fire Commission (CFC) meeting in El Fashir, noting 
that it was "very delicate."  The JEM representative 
insisted he was there only to discuss CFC issues, not DPA 
 
KHARTOUM 00001429  002 OF 002 
 
 
ones, since the JEM had not signed the DPA (Ref A). 
However, Kingibe said, he had been able to massage the 
issue and coaxed the JEM delegate into participating; 
Hume agreed, noting that the Abuja talks took precedence 
over the N'Djamena ones, and there should be no ceasefire 
violations.  Until the JEM and SLA/Wahid sign on the DPA, 
the AU will have to follow a two track process for the 
HCFA and the DPA, Kingibe added, noting that the first 
meeting of the Joint Commission would likely be on 
Saturday, June 24.  (Note:  The United States has yet to 
designate a representative to the Joint Commission). 
 
Wither Abdul Wahid? 
------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Hume mentioned that he had met earlier in the 
week with several Fur tribal leaders close to SLA 
Commander Abdul Wahid al-Nur, and that he expected to 
meet with other prominent locals during his trip to 
Darfur next week.  (Post will report on the meetings 
septel).  Kingibe laughed, remarking that "they seem to 
be making the rounds."  Nur's position was becoming 
untenable, Kingibe suggested.  In fact, Nur may soon be 
"sacrificed on the altar of realpolitik," Kingibe joked, 
now that his frequent host, Eritrean President Assaias, 
became "chummy chummy" with Sudan President Omar al- 
Beshir during last week's summit in Khartoum. 
 
HUME