06RABAT1184
COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR DR. KROTOSKI
Fri Jun 16 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Rabat
VZCZCXYZ0049
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHRB #1184/01 1671414
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 161414Z JUN 06
FM AMEMBASSY RABAT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4050
INFO RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 2986
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 4253
RUEHCL/AMCONSUL CASABLANCA 1805
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 0997UNCLAS RABAT 001184 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OTRA MO
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR DR. KROTOSKI 
 
REF: SECSTATE 998473 
 
¶1. Embassy Rabat is pleased to grant country clearance for 
Dr. Danuta Krotoski, Health Scientist Administrator, national 
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, NIH to 
travel to Rabat, Morocco, June 17-22, 2006 for the purpose of 
meeting with Health Officials. 
 
¶2. Post understands that the traveler requires no further 
assistance. 
 
¶3.  ICASS Policy: 
 
¶A. Due to ICASS funding reductions, we regret that Post has 
had to curtail services and pass the cost of select services 
through direct charging of non-ICASS contributors visiting 
Post through direct charging.  Therefore we request that each 
visitor, regardless of length of stay, bring/forward fiscal 
data to pay for direct costs of the visit and share copies 
with their control officer and FMO.  Each agency, 
organization, or visiting delegation will be charged for the 
actual costs attributed to their visit.  Direct charge costs 
include, but are not limited to:  American and LES staff 
overtime (e.g., expediter, airport pick-up and drop-off, 
accommodation exchange, representational event support), 
field travel-lodging and M&IE by Embassy employees, vehicle 
rentals, long distance telephone calls, equipment rentals, 
office supplies and all other costs that are directly 
attributable to visitor needs.  Please note that all visitors 
should be prepared to be charged approximately ninetyfive 
dollars (subject to periodic ajustment) for airport pick-ups 
and drop-offs that occur after narmal business hours. 
 
¶B. In accordance with worldwide ICASS policy, TDYers over 
thirty (30) days, are subject to a charge for ICASS support 
services.  If your sponsoring agency is not signed up for 
ICASS services at post, please be prepared to sign an MOU for 
ICASS support services upon arrival.  The agency should 
provide post with written communication, generated by the 
traveler's headquarters, that confirms the agency will pay 
ICASS charges for the TDYer and provides the agency ICASS 
billing code to which TDY support charges should be applied. 
 
¶C. Where travel is urgent, the TDYers should bring this 
documentation with them to ensure there are no interruptions 
in the provision of service.  We regret that due to budget 
restraints, Post will not provide service to a TDYer staying 
in excess of thirty days without provision of this 
documentation.  We thank you in advance for your 
understanding. 
 
¶4. Security Concerns 
 
¶A. Mandatory personal security training 
(ref: 04 state 066580, state 93760 and FSI 
1421): 
 
Effective January 1, 2005, American personnel requesting 
country clearance to perform extended temporary duty (TDY 
defined as more than 30 days) at overseas locations must 
complete appropriate overseas personal security training 
("safe" course). This safe course requirement does not apply 
to career state department Foreign Service employees. It does 
apply to state department civil service employees, employees 
of other USG agencies and contractors. 
 
¶B. Terrorism: 
 
A series of terrorist bombings took place in Casablanca on 
May 16, 2003.  Additional attacks have been thwarted by the 
vigorous efforts of Moroccan law enforcement since then. 
Although U.S. government facilities were not the target of 
the Casablanca attacks (and no Americans were killed or 
injured), the potential for violence against American 
interests and citizens remains high in morocco. 
Establishments which are readily identifiable with the United 
States are potential targets for attacks.  these may include 
facilities where us citizens and other foreigners congregate, 
including clubs, restaurants, places of worship, schools, 
hotels, movie theaters and public areas.  Such targets may 
also include establishments where activities occur that may 
offend religious sensitivities, such as casinos or places 
where alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed. While in 
morocco it is important to be vigilant to one's surroundings, 
and to maintain a low profile.  Travelers should stay abreast 
of recent developments within country and read the latest 
state department consular information sheet covering travel 
to morocco and any current worldwide caution messages about 
travel to the Middle East and North Africa before arrival in 
country. The mission takes all information concerning 
terrorist incidents and terrorism very seriously.  The 
mission investigates all incidents fully in conjunction with 
Moroccan authorities.  All travelers are expected to report 
any suspicious incidents or information to the RSO 
immediately, 24 hours a day, at tel. 037-76-96-39. 
 
¶C. Crime: 
 
The threat level for crime in morocco has been designated 
"high."  Crimes ranging from aggressive panhandling, pick 
pocketing, purse snatching, theft from vehicles, and 
harassment of women occur periodically.  Attempted break-ins 
of mission residences by burglars have occurred, but in 
general crime in morocco tends to be non-violent.  Most 
criminals look for opportunities to steal by stealth rather 
than confrontation but there are exceptions. 
 
Women walking alone in certain areas of cities and rural 
areas are particularly vulnerable to verbal harassment from 
young men. Women are advised to travel with a companion or in 
a group when possible and to ignore any harassment. Some 
women who have responded to verbal harassment have come under 
physical attack.  If physical provocation occurs, visitors 
are urged not to resist in order to avoid injury and to 
report the incident to the regional security officer 
immediately (see telephone number above). 
 
Travelers should be alert for pickpockets and 
purse-snatchers, especially in outdoor shopping areas, 
tourist attractions, and in transportation centers.  Taxis 
and trains in morocco are relatively safe, city buses are not 
considered safe.  Avoid carrying large sums of cash, and 
credit cards should be secured in the safe deposit box at 
your hotel.  In the event you are victimized by crime, or an 
attempted crime, or experience any security-related incident 
during your stay in morocco, please report the incident to 
the RSO as soon as possible. 
 
¶D. Demonstrations/Harassment: 
 
When regional tensions increase many diplomatic missions, 
including ours, from time to time receive threatening phone 
calls, e-mails and harassing letters/faxes. Should you 
receive any of these while at post, contact marine post one 
and/or the RSO immediately. Further, the mission has received 
several white powder letters through the local mail.  Please 
note: mission policy strictly prohibits any unopened mail, 
packages or boxes from being brought into any facility prior 
to screening by the embassy and consulate mailroom staff. 
There are no exceptions to this policy and all personnel are 
expected to abide by it rigidly for the protection of the 
mission and its personnel. 
 
Finally, demonstrations do occur with some frequency in 
morocco during periods of heightened tension.  Occasionally, 
a few of these demonstrations have been anti-American/western 
with a small number of these resulting in some minor 
destruction of personal and public property.  Travelers 
should be cognizant of the current levels of tension in the 
region, always be alert to their surroundings and avoid large 
crowds. Demonstrations and suspicious incidents should be 
immediately reported to the marine security guard (post 1) 
and the RSO. 
 
¶E. electronic devices: 
 
Privately owned laptops, PSC, cellular telephones, cameras 
and similar devices are strictly prohibited in controlled 
access areas (CAA's) of the chancery and consulate. 
Travelers with USG unclassified and classified 
laptop/notebook computers must notify the information 
management officer (IMO) through marine post one or the RSO 
before bringing these machines into the embassy or consulate. 
Questions concerning other types of electronic devices must 
be directed to either the IMO or the RSO. 
 
¶F. Cultural Awareness: 
 
Travelers need to be cognizant of the fact that morocco is an 
Islamic country despite the appearance of some aspects of 
western culture. Generally, women should not travel alone and 
should dress conservatively for all occasions to avoid 
harassment from young men in public or offending Moroccan 
interlocutors during social occasions.  Men should not wear 
ostentatious apparel that draws attention.  The purchase and 
consumption of alcohol is permitted in morocco but Islamic 
conservatives in Moroccan society are fundamentally against 
its sale or use. Travelers should let common sense prevail 
and only buy or consume alcohol in shops, restaurants and 
hotels where it is readily available and permitted. 
 
¶G. Post Specific Security Briefings: 
 
Travelers planning to stay in Morocco 14 days or longer 
should request that their sponsoring office schedule a 
security briefing for them with the RSO. 
****************************************** 
Visit Embassy Rabat's Classified Website; 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/rabat 
****************************************** 
 
Riley