04ANKARA6687
TIP IN TURKEY: MFA REPORTS INTERIM PROGRESS
Thu Dec 02 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 006687 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G. INL, INL/CTR, DRL, EUR/PGI, EUR/SE 
DEPARTMENT FOR VALERIE KWOK USAID E&E/ECA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM PHUM PGOV SMIG PREF KWMN TU
SUBJECT: TIP IN TURKEY: MFA REPORTS INTERIM PROGRESS 
 
 
(U) In response to our September 16 request for information 
about ongoing GOT anti-TIP efforts, the Turkish MFA Consular 
Affairs Directorate provided the following diplomatic note 
dated November 18, 2004: 
 
BEGIN TEXT OF DIPNOTE: 
 
Reply to the Information Request for 
2004 Interim Trafficking in Persons Watch List Report 
 
PREVENTION: 
 
      ¶1. The National Task Force on Combating Trafficking in 
Human Beings, established in October 2002, held its 7th 
meeting on November 3, 2004, under the chairmanship of 
Ambassador Mr. Murat Ersavci, the D.G. of Consular and Social 
Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 
 
The representatives participating in Task Force meetings may 
vary according to the issues discussed.  However, 
representatives from the Ministry of Interior, Ministry of 
Justice, Ministry of Labor and Social Security, Ministry of 
Finance, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Culture and Tourism, 
Ministry of Transport, Human Rights Presidency of the Prime 
Minister's Office, Prime Ministry State Planning 
Organization, Directorate General of the Status of Women, 
Directorate General of Social Services and Protection of 
Children, Social Aid and Solidarity Fund of Prime Ministry, 
Presidency of Telecommunications Board and Human Resources 
Development Foundation attended the last meeting of the Task 
Force. 
 
The National Action Plan, prepared by the Task Force, set out 
specific commitments for competent authorities on the fight 
against TIP and assistance to TIP victims. 
 
-- As a result of the consultations between Istanbul 
Metropolitan Municipality and the Human Resources Development 
Foundation (HRDF) under the guidance of the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs, a shelter in Istanbul was provided for the 
victims of trafficking.  A protocol on the establishment of 
the shelter was signed between Istanbul Metropolitan 
Municipality and HRDF during the NATO Summit, on June 29th, 
2004, with the participation of Minister of Foreign Affairs 
and Deputy Prime Minister Abdullah Gul and United States 
Secretary of State Colin Powell. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
-- The new Penal Code that was adopted by the Turkish Grand 
National Assembly on September 26th, 2004, places a special 
emphasis on human trafficking and migrant smuggling.  In this 
respect, it introduces an important provision (Article 80) 
bringing penalties 8 to 12 years imprisonment and fines 
corresponding to a maximum period of ten thousand days 
imprisonment for human traffickers.  The new article 80 which 
will become effective April 1st, 2005, also introduces safety 
measures for legal entities involved in human trafficking. 
 
-- A Memorandum of Understanding was signed with Belarus in 
July 2004 and became effective as of September 24, 2004. 
 
-- Turkey has initiated the procedure for membership in the 
International Organization for Migration (IOM).  The 
Constitution of the IOM was positively evaluated in the 
Commissions of the Parliament and forwarded to the Turkish 
Grand National Assembly, which is expected to be ratified in 
the last week of November 2004. 
 
-- An agreement has been signed between the Gendarmerie and 
HRDF to collaborate in anti-trafficking issues on June 14, 
¶2004. 
 
-- With the funding of Catholic Relief Services/Bulgaria, 
HRDF conducted a survey in border cities, Haskovo and 
Svelingrad to assess the status of trafficked girls and 
women.  In this connection, a regional meeting was held in 
Istanbul on 16-17 September 2004, with the participation of 
law enforcement agencies and NGOs from Romania, Moldova, 
Bulgaria and Turkey. 
 
-- A regional conference on &Migrants in Transit Countries: 
Sharing Responsibility for Management and Protection8 was 
organized by Council of Europe, under the chairmanship and 
hosting of Turkey, on 30 September)1 October 2004 in 
Istanbul.  Human trafficking was one of the main issues 
discussed in the said conference. 
 
      ¶2.  In the National Action Plan on Combating 
Trafficking in Human Beings, establishment of a hotline for 
the victims is mentioned.  The Ministry has contacted with 
the national Telecom Company and the National 
Telecommunication Board, to this end. 
 
On the other hand, establishment of a three-digit toll free 
hotline for the victims is a complicated procedure while 
servers have to be placed in every city in order to serve 
nationwide. 
 
In this regard, it is assessed that a more convenient and a 
quick way is to establish a hotline starting with &08008 
which will be free of charge for the caller.  We are exerting 
intensified efforts to establish this hotline and the Human 
Resources Development Foundation has applied to the national 
Telecom Company in order to get this line for itself.  The 
switchboard will be located at the said foundation and will 
be available for 24 hours. 
 
However, the charges have to be paid by the HRDF.  Within 
this framework, we are discussing this issue with IOM in 
order to cover the expenses of the hotline in accordance with 
the pilot project for assisting victims of trafficking in 
human beings. 
 
Moreover, until this hotline is operational, the national 
hotline for police (155) has been extended to be available 
for the victims of trafficking in human beings.  To this end, 
Ministry of Interior will train and appoint personnel able to 
speak Russian and English. 
 
      ¶3.  Turkish media is sensitive to criminal and 
humanitarian aspects of trafficking in human beings. 
Trafficking cases and international developments are reported 
widely in the media. 
 
The statements made in the two panels organized by the 
Directorate General of the Status of Woman, in 2002 and 2003, 
were published as a book and distributed countrywide.  The 
book is enclosed herewith for the Embassy's information. 
 
Anti-TIP information is going to be implemented with the 
cooperation of IOM.  In this regard, IOM has prepared a draft 
project, which will be broadcasted in the Turkish National TV 
Channel (TRT).  The Ministry of Foreign Affairs is also in 
contact with TRT in order to support this initiative. 
 
INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION OF TRAFFICKERS 
 
      ¶4.  The special questionnaires, sent to courts 
nationwide, have been processed by General Directorate of 
Judicial Records and Statistics in the Ministry of Justice. 
The 41,000 forms of data on Article 201/b (human trafficking) 
are being processed for 3 months periods.  The data process 
for July-August-September period hasn't been completed yet. 
 
However, according to Article 201/b (human trafficking) of 
the TPC the final processed data regarding the cases that 
were transferred to the criminal courts and concluded within 
the first half of the year 2004, is as follows:  12 lawsuits 
were concluded.  In two of these cases 7 accused persons were 
confined to imprisonment or fined. 
 
      ¶5.  Yalova Criminal Court issued verdict (according to 
Article 201/b of the TPC) for five defendants on February 11, 
2004, four of whom have been confined to imprisonment of 4 
years and 2 months and a fine of 1,325,000,000 TL.  The 
accused persons are prohibited from employment in public 
services for 3 years. 
 
Fethiye Criminal Court issued verdicts (according to article 
021/b of the TPC) for three defendants on May 12, 2004. 
According to the verdict, three defendants have been confined 
to imprisonment of 4 years, 10 months and 10 days and a fine 
of 972,221,000 TL. 
 
      ¶6.  There are no government officials involved in 
trafficking during the first half of the year 2004. 
 
PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS 
 
      ¶7.  The Government of Turkey is not only participating 
but also co-funding the project on &Establishment of the 
Network of and Joint Training for Operational Law Enforcement 
Officers, NGOs and International Organizations in Fighting 
Human Trafficking8 which is implemented by IOM, in 
cooperation with the European Commission (EC), European 
Parliament (EP), selected EU member states, as well as 
candidate countries and third countries bordering the 
enlarged European Union under the European Commission 
Directorate General Justice and Home Affairs, AGIS Program. 
 
Turkey has made a contribution of 10,000 USD to this project. 
 
Turkey has also contributed (5,000 Euro) in the budget of the 
Budapest Process, aimed at preventing irregular migration and 
trafficking in human beings with the participation of more 
than 40 Governments. 
 
      ¶8.  The Turkish missions abroad are being informed on 
the developments regarding TIP issue regularly.  Moreover, 
they are urged to cooperate with especially IOM and other 
predominant international organizations in this matter. 
Furthermore, representatives in the missions participate in 
various seminars and meetings, which are organized by NGOs 
and international organizations.  For instance, Ambassador of 
Turkey in Moldova has delivered a speech at the first round 
of meetings titled &Trafficking As It Is8 organized by the 
IOM office in Moldova, on October 26th, 2004. 
 
On the other hand, Turkish Permanent Delegation to the UN 
Office in Geneva has close contacts with the IOM Headquarters. 
      ¶9.  Since June 2004, 7 victims of trafficking (3 
Ukrainian nationals have stayed on 1-3 November and 
voluntarily returned to their countries of origin.  As of 
today, 2 Moldovan, 1 Iranian and 1 Azeri women are staying at 
the shelter) have been hosted in the shelter designated for 
the victims of trafficking.  Human Resources Development 
Foundation (HRDF) psychotherapist has been seeing the victims 
since June 2004 to assess their situation and also support 
those who need psychological assistance.  The reports of the 
psychotherapist are shared with IOM. 
 
On the other hand, as of April 2004, HRDF took part in the 
assistance of 25 victims of trafficking (9 Moldovan, 6 
Romanian, 3 Azeri, 3 Ukrainian, 2 Russian, 1 Armenian and 1 
Iranian). 
 
Furthermore, assisted voluntary returns of 51 victims of 
trafficking in human beings have been successfully conducted 
in cooperation with IOM and Human Resources Development 
Foundation (HRDF) up to November 2004.  Among them there 
were, 29 Moldovan, 10 Ukrainian, 2 from Azerbaijan, 1 from 
Belarus, 6 Romanian, 1 Russian, 1 Uzbek and 1 from Kazakhstan. 
 
      ¶10.  Up to November 2004, 51 victims have been assisted 
for voluntary return and 7 of the victims have been hosted in 
the shelter.  In total, 58 victims have been assisted. 
 
Twenty-six humanitarian visas have been issued for the 
victims in 2003-2004, 3 of which have been issued as of June 
¶2004. 
 
FURTHER INFORMATION 
 
-- In 2004, 407 police officers in total, took in-service 
training courses and attended seminars on professional 
approach to the trafficked persons and combating human 
trafficking.  Eighty-three gendarmerie personnel participated 
in the seminars which were organized together with IOM and 
HRDF.  Further 40 personnel will attend another seminar on 
combating human trafficking in Adana on 23-26 November 2004. 
One hundred thirty-nine judges and prosecutors participated 
in training programs on TIP and further 25 judges and 
prosecutors will attend another seminar on 2-5 December 2004, 
organized in cooperation with HRDF. 
 
-- The new Turkish Penal Code comprises further provisions on 
protecting child rights as well as trafficking in human 
beings.  An important point in that regard is that the new 
Code (Article 226) considers child pornography as a separate 
offense and foresees specific penalties.  The new Code also 
foresees that persons who use children in manufacturing 
products that include obscene visual, written or oral 
elements shall be subjected to imprisonment of 5 to 10 years 
and a fine. 
 
-- A National Action Plan on the use of the Internet is also 
formulated with the participation of all relevant public 
institutions, along with the NGOs, to cover the years 
2005-2015.  The coordinator for the implementation of the 
Action Plan was assigned to be the Directorate General of 
Social Services and Child Protection Institute.  The main 
targets of the Plan were set as follows: 
 
- To prepare necessary legislation for crimes committed 
through Internet in order to protect children from all kinds 
of sexual abuse, including pedophilia and child trade, 
 
- To harmonize national legislation with the related 
international conventions, 
 
- To put review the existing legislation and when necessary 
to draft new laws, 
 
- To put into practice the provisions of Optional Protocol on 
the sale of children, child prostitution and child 
pornography. 
 
To attain these goals, tasks were assigned; institutions to 
be cooperated with were ascertained. 
-- In the framework of the Memorandum of Understanding signed 
between Turkish and Belarus Interior Ministers and became 
effective as of September 2004, officials from the Belarus 
Ministry of Interior made an official visit to Turkey on 
25-31 October 2004.  Information in TIP cases concerning two 
countries has been exchanged and investigations have been 
conducted in cooperation between competent authorities. 
 
-- Within the initiative of a regional Anti-Trafficking 
Project, the representatives of &People's Harmonious 
Development Society8, an NGO which operates in Georgia and 
an official from Georgian Ministry of Interior paid a study 
visit to Istanbul, Ankara, Trabzon and Rize on July 2004. 
 
-- Moldovan authorities also paid a visit on 8-10 November 
2004 to Ankara and Istanbul in order to enhance and discuss 
the areas of cooperation between Turkey and Moldova in the 
fight against trafficking in human beings. 
 
END TEXT OF DIPNOTE. 
EDELMAN