04ANKARA6535
FORUM FOR THE FUTURE JOINT DEMARCHE:  TURKEY
Tue Nov 23 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 006535 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KDEM TU MO KPAO KMPI
SUBJECT: FORUM FOR THE FUTURE JOINT DEMARCHE:  TURKEY 
 
REF: A. STATE 237054 
 
     ¶B. ANKARA 6293 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Ambassador Edelman and Moroccan Ambassador 
Zagour jointly delivered ref A demarche regarding the 
December 11 Forum for the Future meeting to Turkish MFA 
Deputy U/S for Multilateral Affairs Sensoy on November 22. 
Sensoy welcomed the demarche and said Turkey, which is 
co-sponsoring the Democracy Assistance Dialogue (DAD) with 
Italy and Yemen, will be prepared for the meeting.  End 
Summary. 
 
¶2.  Moroccan Ambassador Zagour emphasized the importance of 
Turkey's attendance in Rabat December 10 and 11.  Zagour is 
aware that DAD dialogue co-sponsors Italy, Turkey and Yemen 
will meet in Rome November 25 and issue a statement of DAD's 
objective and a work plan (ref B).  He requested that the DAD 
co-sponsors forward the statement to the GOM as soon as 
possible so that it can be sent out for comment. 
 
¶3.  Ambassador Edelman noted that the U.S. is co-chairing the 
Rabat meeting in its capacity as current G-8 chair.  He 
emphasized our hope that FM Gul would attend (Note:  The MFA 
told us on November 19 that Gul may have a scheduling 
conflict.  End Note.).  The Ambassador said the U.S. was 
pleased that both ministers Babacan and Unakitan attended the 
Washington meetings hosted by Secretary Snow in September. 
 
¶4.  Sensoy welcomed the demarche and noted the progress in 
the BMENAI over the past year.  Turkey, he said, is pleased 
with the degree of consultation on the initiative and the 
degree to which countries in the region have taken ownership 
of BMENAI.  Turkey has "done its homework" on DAD and will 
welcome ideas on the "blueprint" the three FMs will issue in 
Rome on November 25.  Sensoy said the MFA has forwarded the 
invitation to the Economic Development session to Economy 
Minister Babacan. 
EDELMAN