04ANKARA6318
HUMAN RIGHTS RESOLUTION DEMARCHES
Tue Nov 09 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

091056Z Nov 04UNCLAS ANKARA 006318 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL TU
SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS RESOLUTION DEMARCHES 
 
REF: A. STATE 236869 
 
     ¶B. STATE 237932 
 
¶1. (U) On November 8 we presented reftel A and B demarches to 
individual MFA departments for each country mentioned: 
 
¶A.  We presented Belarus points to Deputy Director General 
for Eastern Europe Solendil, who confirmed the Turkish UN 
delegation had already been instructed to vote positively 
with the U.S. and EU position. 
 
¶B.  We presented Turkmenistan points to Deputy Director 
General for Central Asia and the Caucasus Tezgor, who said 
the MFA has not made a final decision.  We note it should not 
be a surprise to the U.S. delegation if Turkey choses to 
abstain on this vote. 
 
¶C.  We presented Sudan points to Deputy Director General for 
Africa and Eastern Asia Isik, who said Turkey needs 
additional time to consider its position. 
 
¶D.  We also presented the Zimbabwe points to Deputy Director 
Isik and department head Etem confirmed that Turkey is a 
co-sponsor of this resolution. 
 
¶E.  We presented Iran points to Deputy Director General for 
South Asia Evirgen, who indicated the MFA was still 
considering its position to this demarche and a similar one 
from the Canadians.  We note that historically Turkey does 
not vote against Iran in international fora; and 
 
¶F.  We presented Burma points to Deputy Director General for 
Africa and Eastern Asia Isik, whose head of section Etem 
confirmed Turkey was also a co-sponsor on this issue. 
 
¶2.  MFA Iran interlocutor Evirgen and Turkmenistan 
interlocutor Emre both commented that last year Turkey did 
not participate in voting related to Iran and Turkmenistan. 
EDELMAN