04ANKARA2769
LETTER FROM TURKEY MINISTER OF STATE TUZMEN TO
Mon May 17 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 002769 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS TO USTR ZOELLICK 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD TU
SUBJECT: LETTER FROM TURKEY MINISTER OF STATE TUZMEN TO 
AMBASSADOR ROBERT ZOELLICK 
 
 
Embassy Ankara received MFA Diplomatic Note 194783 presenting 
an original letter from Kurzad Tuzmen, Minister of State, to 
Ambassador Robert Zoellick, United States Trade 
Representative.  The letter notes that the GOT's views are 
parallel with our own in the WTO talks on industrial goods, 
but hints at differences on the agriculture talks.  Tuzmen 
also refers to continuing studies on a possible Qualifying 
Industrial Zone in Turkey. 
 
 
BEGIN TEXT: 
 
 
May 5, 2004 
 
 
Dear Mr. Ambassador, 
 
 
I would like to express my great pleasure of meeting you 
during my visit to the United States last month. 
 
 
Throughout our discussions, I observed with great 
satisfaction the similarities in our views on many issues 
including certain items of the Doha Development Agenda.  I am 
particularly delighted to see that the positions of our 
countries regarding market access in non-agricultural 
products are in parallel.  On the other hand, while fully 
sharing your view that an ambitious result in agriculture is 
essential for the Doha package to proceed and succeed, I 
would like to emphasize once again the importance we attach 
to the introduction of some flexibility for the developing 
countries pertaining to the market access in agricultural 
products. 
 
 
I would also like to take this opportunity to inform you that 
we are carrying out the necessary studies to determine the 
appropriate sectors including the hi-tech industries for the 
QIZs in Turkey as we agreed in our meeting. 
 
 
With the conviction that our close cooperation will continue 
in the future, I hereby would like to extend an invitation to 
you to visit Istanbul at your earliest convenience. 
 
 
Expressing my best wishes and highest regards to you, I 
remain, 
 
 
Sincerely Yours, 
Kursad Tuzmen 
Minister of State 
 
 
END TEXT. 
EDELMAN