05ANKARA2579
EXBS: TURKEY ADVISOR MONTHLY REPORTING CABLE
Thu May 05 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

051152Z May 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 002579 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NP/ECC- PVANSON, ACHURCH, TGROEN 
DEPT FOR EUR/ACE- DMARTING, DMCCORMICK 
CBP/INA- PWALKER 
DOC FOR PETERSON-BEARD 
USCG FOR BGOLDEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC KNNP KSTC MNUC PARM TU
SUBJECT: EXBS: TURKEY ADVISOR MONTHLY REPORTING CABLE 
(APRIL 2005) 
 
REF: 2004 STATE 146478 
 
  ¶1.      Summary:  Last month, EXBS Advisor primarily 
focused on the status and direction of the Commodity 
Identification Training (CIT), which was scheduled to take 
place in April, but was eventually postponed to a later date. 
 EXBS Advisor worked closely with MFA, Customs and Turkish 
Atomic Energy Authority (TAEK) on the decision to postpone 
due to schedule conflicts and lack of milestone 
accomplishment.  EXBS Advisor continued to encourage Turkish 
full participation in PSI activities and other 
non-proliferation programs.  Finally, EXBS Advisor concluded 
negotiation of the NP Cooperation Agreement and began 
preparing for upcoming signing of the Agreement. End Summary. 
 
¶2.      Completed Actions for the Reporting Period 
 
¶A.        Site Assessment and Meetings During Recent 
Reporting Period: 
 
1)          April 6- EXBS Advisor participated in a meetings 
with BG Haldun Solmazturk, Department of Disarmament and 
International Security, Turkish General Staff Headquarters to 
hear Turkey's impression of the latest PSI Operational 
Experts Group meeting.   Solmazturk said that he was very 
impressed with the coordination and information exchanged 
during the experts meetings. The meeting cleared up the last 
questions the Turks had about the initiative.  Ankara is now 
fully committed to PSI.  Solmazturk informed EmbOffs that, 
while Turkey did offer assets for the upcoming Spanish PSI 
exercise, the current exercise scenario does not require 
their participation.  Although Turkey now will not be 
actively participating in either the Portuguese or Spanish 
led PSI field exercises this spring, they do intend to send 
observer teams to both and to participate in the table-top 
command post component of the Spanish exercise.  Solmazturk 
stated that Turkey committed in Omaha to hosting a PSI 
exercise in May 2006.  This exercise will be a multi-mission 
exercise focusing on coordinating activities between land, 
sea, air, intelligence and command and control.  Solmazturk 
believes that this would be an excellent way to test the 
passing of information from the various activities, while 
also displaying the need for close coordination between the 
forces involved. 
 
2)          April 18-  EXBS Advisor met with MFA DDG for Arms 
Control and Disarmament Bulent Meric to discuss various 
non-proliferation issues and deliver appropriate talking 
points. Meric presented EXBS Advisor a Turkish translation of 
the latest NP Cooperation Agreement, which was subsequently 
forwarded for approval.  Meric also commented on the 
refocusing of the CIT project and his desire for the EXBS 
Advisor to work closely with members of the Turkish Atomic 
Energy Authority (TAEK) and Turkish Customs to ensure the 
project continues to move forward. Also discussed was 
Turkey's involvement in PSI, including Turkey's significant 
involvement at the Omaha PSI experts working group, its 
proposal to host a major exercise in May 2006, and possible 
ways to mark the upcoming 2nd anniversary. 
 
3)          April 22-  EXBS Advisor met with President of 
Turkish Atomic Energy Authority (TAEK), Okay Cakiroglu, and 
staff to discuss various issues.  EXBS Advisor expressed his 
concern that there was confusion in the direction of the CIT 
project. He provided a detail explanation of the project and 
how it fits into the overall NP program for Turkey.  He also 
reviewed the work accomplished by Turkish Customs and the 
work that needs to be completed by TAEK.  An appropriate 
course of action was agreed on, with follow-on meetings to 
occur in the upcoming weeks.  EXBS Advisor also discussed the 
exchange of HEU for LEU fuel assemblies and the expected 
postponement of the transfer due to a hold up on the 
Bilateral Agreement for Peaceful Use of Nuclear Energy. 
Finally, EXBS Adviser presented Department of Energy proposal 
to begin a process of bilateral cooperation for Threat 
Reduction within this region.  It was decided that both sides 
would begin by developing possible ideas for future 
cooperation, this will be followed up by future discussions 
by DOE representatives. 
 
4)           April 26- EXBS Advisor met with TAEK Department 
Head for Nuclear Safety, Aysen Yucel, and staff to discuss 
the CIT project.  EXBS Advisor reviewed in further details 
the project and milestones that need to be achieved for each 
step.  He reviewed the work already accomplished by the 
Turkish Customs authority and discussed where TAEK fits into 
the project and needs to take the lead at this point. 
Meetings will be conducted more frequently to keep this 
project on course. 
 
5)          April 27-   EXBS Advisor met with Department Head 
for Customs Enforcement  Ender Gurleyik to review EXBS 
program work with the Turkish Customs, including CIT, PIT, 
and Risk Management Workshop.  Gurleyik updated EXBS Advisor 
about recent international cooperation with Azerbaijan and 
the EU; these exchanges include the sharing of information, 
training and best practices concerning operations within 
Customs areas.  EXBS Advisor reviewed areas of possible 
future cooperation including training exchanges and Turkish 
Customs equipment shortfalls.  EXBS Advisor proposed possible 
visits to various border regions over the upcoming months to 
increase understanding of operations, specifically in the 
southern and eastern regions.  Additionally, Gurleyik 
reviewed recent cases and the status of a project to upgrade 
the Habur Gate Border crossing with Iraq, which should begin 
soon, he said. 
 
¶B.        Training Conducted During Reporting Period: None 
 
¶C.        Equipment Delivered During Reporting Period: None 
 
¶D.        Imminent Training or Equipment Status Update: None 
 
¶E.        Significant Developments in Export Controls, 
Nonproliferation, or Related Border Security: 
 
1)         GOT provided final comments and a Turkish language 
version of the NP Cooperation Agreement.  Post provided NP 
with texts and now informally understands that the U.S. will 
agree to this final version and authorized the signing of the 
Agreement.  This agreement will open the path for full 
engagement of all aspects of the EXBS program with Turkey.  A 
signing ceremony for the NP Agreement is being considered for 
the end of May to coincide with the Second Anniversary of 
PSI, followed by ratification by the Turkish Parliament by 
the end of the summer. 
 
¶3.      Future Activities 
 
¶A.         May 19 - 22- EXBS Advisor to visit selected Border 
Crossing between Syria and Turkey. 
 
¶B.         May 31 - Jun 3- EXBS Advisor to attend EXBS 
Advisors conference in Vienna, Austria. 
 
¶C.         Jun 8-9 (tent)- DOE NNSA to conduct CIT Project 
Review. 
 
¶D.         Jun 13-17 (tent)- DOE SLD Team to conduct 
coordination meeting with Turkish Customs. 
 
¶E.         Jun 23-26- EXBS Advisor to visit selected Border 
Crossing between Iran and Turkey 
 
¶4.      Red Flag Issues: None 
 
¶5.      Contact Information for EXBS Adviser ) Kevin Lyon, 
phone (90)(312) 455-5555 ext 2525, fax (90)(312) 468-4775, 
email LyonK@state.gov. 
 
 
EDELMAN