05ANKARA2127
BLUE LANTERN LEVEL 3: PRE-LICENSE END USE CHECK ON
Thu Apr 14 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 002127 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR PM/DTTC - BLUE LANTERN COORDINATOR TIM WATKINS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KOMC ETTC TU
SUBJECT: BLUE LANTERN LEVEL 3: PRE-LICENSE END USE CHECK ON 
LICENSE 05-959223 
 
REF: STATE 65841 
 
¶1. On April 13, per reftel request, Deputy PolMilCouns met 
with representatives of Incekara Holding and Yazici Company 
LTD at the Incekara address listed in reftel in order to 
establish the bona fides of Incekara and its role in license 
application 05-959223 for one WJ-9012A VXI Chassis.  Ozgur 
Incekara, the Chairman of the Board of Incekara, Muammer 
Sahin, Incekara's import representative and Nihan Yazici, 
Assistant to the Yazici General Manager, participated in the 
meeting. Nihan Yazici led the discussion because the Yazici 
company, not Incekara, is the party requiring the license. 
Incekara is acting only as Yazici's contracting agent. 
 
¶2.  According to Nihan Yazici, in 2004 the Yazici company won 
a domestic tender issued by the Turkish General Staff (TGS) 
for the installation and servicing of an electronic warfare 
system.  One of the components for this system is the VXI 
Chassis direction-finding device.  She presented a copy of 
the TGS contract, including information pertaining to the 
order for the VXI Chassis.  Yazici hired Incekara to act as 
the project contracting agent because Yazici, which has 
significant experience working on foreign tenders, is 
unfamiliar with the TGS domestic contracting process while 
Incekara has decades of experience procuring medical supplies 
and equipment for TGS.  The Incekara Chairman confirmed this, 
saying that his company is processing the contract paperwork 
but is not involved in the fulfillment of the terms of the 
contract. 
 
¶3.  Background:  Yazici was established in 1998 and Selcuk 
Yazici, the company's founder, has been working with foreign 
partners in the defense industry for 25 years.  It's primary 
customers are in both civil and defense aviation.  According 
to the company's website (www.yazici.com.tr) the company 
works with the Turkish Ministry of National Defense, the 
Army, Navy and Airforce, and civilian administrations 
including the State Airport Administration, the State Harbors 
and Airports Construction Administrations, and the State 
Meteorological Service. 
EDELMAN