05ANKARA2273
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Apr 22 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

220536Z Apr 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 ANKARA 002273 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, APRIL 21, 2005 
 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
`Moderate' Commander Ozkok Issues `Tough' Messages - Vatan 
Ozkok: Fundamentalism Has Not Ended in Turkey - Hurriyet 
Ozkok: Turkey Neither an Islamic State Nor a Muslim Country 
- Vatan 
Incirlik to Be Opened As Logistics Hub - Hurriyet 
FM Gul: US Requests on Incirlik Are to Be Met - Milliyet 
Ratzinger a `Transitional' Pope - Aksam 
Oskanyan: Ankara Must Establish Diplomatic Ties With Yerevan 
- Vatan 
Kerry, Clinton Sign Letter to Bush on Armenian `Genocide' - 
Hurriyet 
Erdogan to Karzai: We Belong to the Same Civilization - 
Hurriyet 
Assassination Attempt Against Iraqi PM Allawi - Aksam 
Insurgents Kill Turkish Truck Driver in Baghdad - Sabah 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
General Ozkok: No Crisis With US - Radikal 
Ozkok Demands Official Apology from Greece - Yeni Safak 
US Will Be Granted Permission for Incirlik - Zaman 
Kocharian: We Remember the Past With Grief, Not Hatred - 
Cumhuriyet 
Armenians Pressure Bush to Recognize `Genocide' - Cumhuriyet 
Turks, Armenians to Rally At White House April 24 - Zaman 
Armenians Besiege Bush - Yeni Safak 
New Pope Scares EU - Yeni Safak 
Orthodox Christians, Jews, Muslims Uneasy With New Pope - 
Radikal 
New Pope Aims to Unif Christians - Cumhuriyet 
Rice Visit to Moscow Shows Strained Ties - Radikal 
Rice: Russia a Strategic Partner in Fighting Terrorism - 
Cumhuriyet 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
Incirlik Decree to be Signed by Turkish Cabinet:  The 
Turkish governmental decree allowing the use of Incirlik 
Airbase for humanitarian purposes by countries participating 
in operations in Iraq is being extended for a year, papers 
report.  Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul said the decree will 
meet the United States' request to use Incirlik as a 
logistical cargo hub.  Gul emphasized that the new decree 
amounts to the extension of the document that has been in 
force for the last two years, and which is due to expire 
June 23.  `The decree is provides for improving the 
organization of logistical assistance now provided to Iraq 
and Afghanistan.  It has no other dimension,' Gul said.  He 
added that the Turkish General Staff (TGS) will continue 
`technical work' on the details.  Gul said that destination 
and cargo carried by each plane will be verified by the 
Turkish side.  He stressed that `blanket permission' for 
planes using the airbase is `out of the question.'  Under 
the new decree, the maintenance and repair of planes will be 
done at Incirlik.  Once the decree is signed by members of 
the Council of Ministers, it will be submitted to the 
presidency for approval. 
 
General Ozkok on US/Turkey, Iraq, EU, Armenia:  The Chief of 
General Staff (TGS), General Hilmi Ozkok, said on Wednesday 
in an annual speech to the Military Academy in Ankara that 
the outlawed PKK is gaining influence in northern Iraq and 
increasing attacks on Turkey because of the US failure to 
take action against the terrorists.  `The PKK has been 
placed on the list of terrorist organizations by the United 
States and European Union, but that does not carry any 
meaning in practice,' Ozkok said.  He also warned that Iraqi 
Kurdish attempts to take control of the oil-rich city of 
Kirkuk could throw the entire region into unrest.  `Turmoil 
in Kirkuk, a problem area ready to explode, will affect the 
entire region,' Ozkok said.  The TGS Chief denied that there 
is tension in  Turkish-US relations: `In this vast 
geography, Turkey needs the US and the US needs Turkey. 
Turkey and the US have common expectations regarding many 
regional problems.  Both countries are working for the 
establishment of lasting peace, stability and security in 
the Balkans, the Caucasus, the Middle East and Central 
Asia,' Ozkok noted.  He said that there are two important 
pillars of Turkish foreign policy: Turkey-US relations and 
Turkey-EU ties.  Ozkok criticized some members of the 
European Union (EU) for displaying anti-Turkish sentiments: 
`Some circles in the EU do not understand the importance of 
Turkey.  The EU's economic success in the future depends on 
Turkey,' he stressed.  Ozkok said Turkey is waiting for an 
official apology from Greece over the desecration of a 
Turkish flag at the military academy in Athens.  He warned 
that if no apology is forthcoming, a confidence-building 
program between the armies of the two neighbors will be 
reconsidered.  Ozkok also criticized rising Greek military 
expenditures.  On the Cyprus question, Ozkok accused the EU 
of failing to keep its promises to ease the international 
isolation of the Turkish Cypriots.  Ozkok also called on 
Armenia to drop charges that Turks committed genocide 
against Armenians during World War I.  `Turkey wants to 
normalize ties with Armenia, but for this to happen, Armenia 
must abide by international law and fulfill the requirements 
of good neighborly relations,' Ozkok stressed.  He added 
that the 1923 Lausanne Treaty put an end to `baseless' 
genocide claims, both politically and legally.  Ozkok 
rejected the notion that Turkey can be introduced as a model 
for moderate Islam.  `Having failed to change the structure 
of the Turkish state, fundamentalists are now attempting to 
deceive us by giving the impression that they have 
reconciled with the state and the nation,' he emphasized, 
adding that fundamentalists have stepped up efforts to 
infiltrate into key positions in the state structure. 
 
Turkish Leaders on New Pope Ratzinger:  Prime Minister 
Tayyip Erdogan said on Wednesday that he hopes the new pope 
will soften his strong opposition to Turkey's drive to join 
the European Union.  `Ratzinger voiced such views against 
Turkey's EU membership as his personal opinion in the past, 
but his rhetoric may change because of the responsibilities 
of his post,' Erdogan said.  He played down the pope's 
influence on Turkey's EU aspirations, noting that the 
Vatican is not a member of the European bloc.  Foreign 
Minister Abdullah Gul said it would be wrong to characterize 
the newly chosen pope as anti-Turkish.  `The Pope clearly 
believes that Turkey, with its religion and beliefs, will 
play a prominent role in the EU.  There can be times when 
statements may be misunderstood,' told Gul. 
 
 
 
Armenian Attempts to Push US Recognition of `Genocide': 
Senators John Kerry, Hillary Clinton, and Joe Lieberman are 
among the US lawmakers who have signed a letter to President 
Bush urging him to use the expression `Armenian genocide' in 
his April 24 statement on the anniversary of the mass 
killing of Armenians by the Ottoman Turks during World War 
I, Turkish papers report.  The reports say that Armenians 
and Turks living in the US will hold separate rallies at the 
White House on April 24. 
 
Oskanyan Calls for Diplomatic Relations Between Ankara- 
Yerevan:  Armenian Foreign Minister Vartan Oskanyan told 
"Vatan" that Turkey should open its border gate with Armenia 
near the eastern Turkish city of Kars.  Oskanyan noted that 
he cannot visit the birthplace of his mother in Turkey 
because of the closed border.  He also urged Ankara to 
establish diplomatic ties with Yerevan, warning that 
otherwise the European Union would not admit Turkey as a 
member.  Meanwhile, President Robert Kocharyan addressed an 
international conference in Yerevan, saying that the 
recognition of the Armenian `genocide' is important for 
Armenian-Turkish relations, because it will give answers to 
many of the questions existing between the two countries and 
provide an opportunity to look to the future.  `The Armenian 
issue today continues to remain a hostage to geopolitical 
interests,' Kocharyan said.  Some Armenian Turks and Turkish 
academics attended the conference, "Vatan" reports. 
 
Erdogan Visits Afghanistan:  Prime Minister Recep Tayyip 
Erdogan, on a state visit to Afghanistan, met in Kabul on 
Wednesday with President Karzai, former Afghan King Mohammad 
Zakir Shah, and the ISAF command.  Erdogan said at a banquet 
given in his honor that the continued support of the 
international community is necessary to rebuild Afghanistan. 
`Turks and Afghans are children of the same civilization,' 
Erdogan said, noting that Turks will never forget the 
support of the Afghan people during Turkey's struggle for 
independence.  He also pointed to ISAF's success in dealing 
with terrorist activities in the country.  President Karzai 
thanked Erdogan for training for Turkey's efforts to train 
Afghan officers in Turkey, and for Turkey's contribution to 
the ISAF command. 
 
Gul Attends Unofficial NATO Meeting in Lithuania:  Foreign 
Minister Gul traveled to Vilnius, Lithuania late Wednesday 
to attend an unofficial meeting of NATO foreign ministers. 
US Secretary of State Rice will also attend the talks, which 
will focus on NATO's role in the Balkans, Iraq, and 
Afghanistan. 
 
Report Warns of Terrorist Threat to Turkey:  The US 
Insurance company Aon identified the Bosphorus area of 
Istanbul as a risky location with regard to terrorist 
attacks coming from the sea, "Sabah" reports.  The report 
lists a number of Marxist, separatist, and fundamentalist 
groups as potential terror threats for Turkey. 
 
Turkish Truck Driver Killed in Iraq:  An unidentified 
Turkish driver was killed yesterday 300 km north of Baghdad 
in a roadside bomb attack, Turkish papers report.  Reports 
estimate that over 100 Turkish drivers have now been killed 
in Iraq since the start of the US `occupation.' 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: Pope Benedict XVI; General Ozkok's 
Remarks 
 
"The Danger of Vatican Fundamentalism" 
Mehmet Barlas commented in the mass appeal "Sabah" (4/21): 
"There is an interesting time before us.  Turkey has been 
discussing possible ways to overcome bigotry in the Islamic 
world.  In the meantime, Catholics have chosen a 
fundamentalist pope.  Ratzinger is known to be strongly anti- 
secular.  He worries about Turkey's membership in the EU, 
arguing that the Christian identity of the EU will be 
negatively affected.   The new pope is so bigoted that he 
even considers equality between men and women as a concept 
that threatens the family order. . It will be interesting to 
see how the new pope will be treated in predominantly 
Catholic countries.  Maybe the Catholic world thinks he will 
not survive very long." 
"Habemus Papa" (We have a pope) 
Semih Idiz commented in the mass appeal "Milliyet" (4/21): 
"The new pope started a controversy right after his name was 
officially announced.  Ratzinger's views, expressed before 
he was elected as the new pope, were enough to make him a 
controversial figure.  The New York Times used to call him 
`the meddling priest.'  He has made not only anti-Turkish 
remarks, but also expressed opinions that were seriously 
upsetting for Jews and other Christian denominations.  He 
said that being Catholic is the only way to reach heaven and 
God, and he never backed off of these remarks. . How could 
it be that such a controversial figure as Ratzinger could be 
elected pope?  According to some Vatican experts, his age 
means that his term cannot last very long.  In other words, 
Benedict XVI will be a kind of transitional figure.  We will 
have to wait and see." 
 
"Ratzinger" 
Ali Cimen wrote in the Islamist-intellectual "Zaman" (4/21): 
"The election of the new pope is an historic event for 
Germans,  since a German Cardinal has been elected for the 
first time in 950 years.  Ratzinger chose Benedict for his 
name, a preference that gives some clues about the policy he 
intends to follow.  Benedict means forgiveness.  The last 
pope known as Benedict focused on creating a consensus 
between the modern and the traditional, and on building 
bridges between Orthodox Christians and the Vatican.  The 
new Benedict has some real tests before him, including how 
to increase church attendance in Europe and how to deal with 
the Church's ties to Islam.  . John Paul used to focus on 
East-West relations, and made contributions to the demise of 
communism.  Ratzinger's challenge will be the deepening 
economic divide between North and South.  The Vatican now 
has a new pope who can speak loudly when necessary and seems 
prepared to take radical action." 
 
"From Likeable Despot to Unlikeable Despot" 
Halit Kakinc argued in the tabloid "Star" (4/21): "The 
former pope was a despotic figure, but at least he was a 
likeable one.  The new pope is obviously both despotic and 
unlikeable.  Ratzinger is a cardinal with a strong belief in 
`no-concessions' conservatism, including opposition to 
divorce, abortion, gay relationships, interfaith consensus, 
and Turkey's EU membership. . The essence of the issue 
centers around an ongoing debate in the Vatican - whether to 
be a global church or a regional church.  The election of 
Ratzinger indicates that the Vatican's reach will be global. 
It is clear that Turkey, in its EU accession process, will 
have to deal with a more conservative Christian opposition." 
 
"Hilmi Ozkok's Speech" 
Ali Bayramoglu wrote in the Islamist "Yeni Safak" (4/21): 
"Although General Ozkok's speech yesterday may have been 
characterized as a speech to a military audience, the fact 
that the press and TV cameras were allowed in shows that it 
would not be wrong to describe it as an address to the 
Turkish public.  How should it be evaluated?  Anyone 
listening to or reading the text of the speech had the 
opportunity to learn, in detail, the views and policies of 
the Turkish state on foreign policy, the region, relations 
with neighboring countries, and internal matters.  In other 
words, the military leadership has done what the political 
leadership should be doing.  It has filled the vacuum left 
by the political leadership.  The Chief of General Staff, 
especially on the matter of foreign affairs, spoke in a way 
that represented Turkey and filled the void left by the 
political authorities.  On the EU, for example, he said: 
`what is right and what we are seeking is to enter the 
European Union with our heads held high.  It is not only for 
the EU to say `yes' or `no' to us.  I want it to be known 
that Turkey also will have the right to say `yes' or `no.'' 
Besides this, Hilmi Ozkok's speech was different from the 
harsh, defiant, tension-producing military speeches to which 
we have have grown accustomed.  He spoke rationally, at a 
very high analytical level, keeping away from inflammatory 
language while limiting himself to raising questions on the 
most difficult issues.  In this way, the views he expressed 
can be said to represent the views of the Turkish state 
rather than just the military.  The speech also demonstrated 
that the inverted balances in civilian-military relationship 
in Turkey are continuing.  No matter how rational and 
reasonable General Ozkok may have been, it is not a natural 
situation in a democratic country for a Chief of General 
Staff to enter the field of the political leadership.  In 
this sense, Hilmi Ozkok made a speech that went beyond 
security issues.  He reduced a whole range of issues -- from 
the EU to the United States, from the Southeast to cultural 
policy - to the level of security policy.  In his comments 
on the internal situation, General Ozkok replaced the 
language of the state with the language of the military.  He 
pointed out the dangers of Islamist influence in civilian 
structures, and discussed corruption, cultural 
deterioration, unemployment, and government efforts to 
infiltrate the bureaucracy in a way that showed that the 
Turkish Armed Forces are closely following the AKP 
government." 
 
EDELMAN