06ANKARA2327
COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR NANCY WENTZLER AND
Thu Apr 27 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXYZ0017
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHAK #2327/01 1171304
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 271304Z APR 06
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC PRIORITY
INFO RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL PRIORITY 0388UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 002327 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN OTRA TU
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR NANCY WENTZLER AND 
TERESA RUTLEDGE TO TRAVEL TO TURKEY MAY 11-13,2006 
 
REF: TREASURY 061515Z 
 
¶1. Embassy Ankara welcomes and grants country clearance to 
Nancy Wentzler, Deputy Comptroller and Chief Economist and 
Teresa Rutledge, Senior International Advisor for travel to 
Turkey from May 11-13, 2006.  Purpose for the visit is to 
meet with the BDDK, the Central Bank, US Banks and other 
Financial Market participants. 
 
¶2. Point of contact for the visit at Embassy Ankara is Deputy 
ECON Counselor Andy Snow, who can be reached through the 
Embassy switchboard at 90-312-455-5555 extension 2251. 
 
¶3. In Istanbul, Point of Contact is Pol-ECON Chief Stuart 
Smith, who can be reached through the Consulate switchboard 
at 90-212-335-9000 extension 0. No hotel is needed in Ankara, 
they will travel to Istanbul and stay at the Hilton. 
 
¶4. Hotel reservations in Istanbul have been made at the 
Hilton Hotel, Cunhuriyet Caddesi, 34367, Harbiye, Istanbul 
for the nights of May 11-12.  Confirmation numbers are 853613 
and 853612. Telephone 90-212-315-6000, fax 90-212-296-2953, 
www.hilton.com. 
 
¶5.   Visas:  All Americans traveling to Turkey must have a 
valid visa.   Effective April 1, 2004, travelers without a 
visa can obtain a visa valid for one entry/three months at 
port of entry upon payment of USD 20 fee.  This fee is 
payable only in U.S. Dollars cash.  There is no fee for 
official travel if the visa is obtaine outside of Turkey. 
 
¶6.   Health safety: Information on vaccinations and other 
health precautions can be obtained from the Center for 
Disease Control and Prevention Hotline for International 
Travelers (tel: 1-877-394-8747; fax 1-800-CDC-FAXX, 
1-800-232-3299; or via the Internet at http://www.cdc.gov. 
 
 
¶7.   Security Assessment:  In the aftermath of Operation 
Iraqi Freedom (OIF) there continues to be the potential for 
both transnational and indigenous terrorist groups to target 
U.S. interests in Turkey.  After the Gulf War, the 
predecessor to the Turkish Terrorist Group Revolutionary 
People,s Liberation Party/Front (DHKP/C) assassinated four 
Americans in Turkey and carried out numerous bombings of U.S. 
targets (mostly private sector businesses, although two 
rockets were directed toward the Consulate General in 
Istanbul).  Subsequent to the ending of OIF hostilities, 
there have been isolated terrorist bombings attributed to 
DHKP/C and other indigenous terrorist groups in protest of 
OIF.  Other Turkish terrorist groups with anti-Western 
sympathies include Marxist-Leninist Communist Party (MLKP) 
Turkish Communist Party/Marxist Leninist (TKP/ML), Turkish 
Workers and Peasants Revolutionary Army (TIKKO) and Islamic 
Greater Eastern Raiders/Front (IBDA/C). 
 
Al-Qa,ida threats to target U.S. facilities in Turkey have 
been public knowledge for some time.  On November 15, 2003, 
two synagogues in Istanbul were the targets of suicide car 
bombs.  On November 20, the British Consulate General and the 
London-based HSBC bank in Istanbul were damaged by powerful 
explosions, killing dozens and wounding hundreds.  These 
incidents represent a significant change from prior attacks 
in Turkey, which have previously involved small-scale, random 
bombings and small numbers of casualties.  The investigations 
of these incidents in Istanbul remain open but transnational 
terrorist links are suspected.  The potential for violence 
and terrorist actions against U.S. citizens and interests 
continues. 
The Turkish National Police (TNP) is quite responsive in 
their role as protector of U.S. diplomatic and military 
interests in Turkey.  The TNP has provided enhanced coverage 
at each of our facilities in Ankara, Istanbul, Adana and 
Izmir.  The incidence of crime, both violent and the more 
traditional tourist crimes (pick pocketing, purse-snatching, 
etc.), is relatively low throughout Turkey.  Visitors to 
Istanbul should be aware that tourist-type crimes are more 
prevalent there, especially in the traditionalist tourist 
areas, such as Sultanahmet and Istiklal Caddesi.  The 
security office encourages visitors to report any security 
incidents, including surveillance, to the RSO immediately. 
Useful security information about Turkey is available on the 
following websites: 
--Embassy Ankara:  HTTP://WWW.USEMB-ANKARA.ORG.TR  (Click on 
Security Matters) 
--Consulate General Istanbul: 
HTTP://WWW.USCONSULATE-ISTANBUL.ORG.TR 
 
¶8.   For further information regarding travel in Turkey 
consult the Consular Information Sheet.  The Consular 
Information Sheet and public announcements are available on 
the internet at: http://travel.state.gov. 
 
ANKARA 00002327  002 OF 002 
 
 
Other information is available on the following websites: 
 
--The State Department Consular Affairs (ca) website: 
http://www.travel.state.gov/turkey.html 
 
--Turkish Daily News (English language Turkish newspaper): 
http://www.turkishdaily news.com 
 
--Turkish Ministry of Foreign Affairs: 
http://www.mfa.gov.tr 
 
--The Republic of Turkey home page: 
http://www.turkey/index.html 
 
--Weather for Turkey: 
 
Visit Ankara's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/eur/ankara/ 
 
WILSON