07ANKARA1710
TURKEY COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR CHANDARLIS,
Thu Jul 05 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXYZ0024
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHAK #1710/01 1860611
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 050611Z JUL 07
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEAORC/US CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
INFO RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME 6657
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2836UNCLAS ANKARA 001710 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OTRA PARM TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR CHANDARLIS, 
CHRISTIAN, PICKETT (07/06/2007- 07/18/2007) 
 
REF: US CUSTOMS 596 
 
¶1.  Embassy Ankara grants country clearance to CBP delegation 
of Mr. Michael Chandarlis, Mr. Patrick Christian, and Mr. 
Bobby Picket to travel to Ankara to conduct an EXBS Targeting 
and Risk Management Training Course from July 6 to 18, 2007. 
 
¶2. Embassy Control Officer is Kevin Lyon who can be contacted 
via the IVG 295-7210 or Commercial (90)(312)457-7210 or 
through Embassy switchboard at (90) (312) 455-5555 ext 0. 
 
¶3.  Local contact information and lodging arrangements will 
be provided via separate correspondence. 
 
¶4.  Visas:  All Americans entering Turkey must have a valid 
visa.  Travelers without a visa can obtain a visa (valid for 
one entry for three months at ports of entry upon payment of 
a USD 20 fee payable in cash).  There is no fee for official 
travel if the visa is obtained outside of Turkey. 
 
¶5.  Health Safety:  Information on vaccinations and other 
health precautions can be obtained from the Center for 
Disease Control and Prevention.  The hotline for 
international travelers (tel: 1- 877-394-8747), fax: 
1-800-cdc-fax(1-800-232-3299), or via their internet site at: 
HTTP://WWW.CSC.GO. 
 
¶6.  Security Assessment:  In light of ongoing military 
operations in Iraq and continued operations in support of the 
war on terrorism, there remains the potential for both 
transnational and indigenous terrorist groups with 
anti-Western sympathies, to include Kongra Gel (formerly 
PKK), Revolutionary People's Liberation/Front (DHKP/C), 
Marxist-Leninist Communist Party (MLKP) Turkish Communist 
Party/Marxist Leninist (TKP/ML), Turkish Workers and Peasants 
Revolutionary Army (TIKKO) and Islamic Greater Eastern 
Raiders/Front (IBDA/C) continue to operate in Turkey. 
 
Attacks over the last few years, attributed to these groups, 
have occurred in the Aegean and Mediterranean coastal resort 
areas, as well as in Istanbul.  In Istanbul, most of the 
attacks, generally small-scale bombings, have occurred in 
neighborhoods not generally frequented by official Americans 
or tourists.  Also in 2005 and 2006 public buses have been 
set on fire, with the most recent incident resulting in three 
deaths.  Thus far, these attacks on buses also have taken 
place in areas of Istanbul distant from official American or 
tourist destinations. 
 
The Kurdish Freedom Falcons (TAK), a group ostensibly aligned 
with the PKK terrorists, claimed responsibility for many of 
the incidents noted above, and in April 2006 this group 
issued a statement renewing a threat to target Turkey,s 
tourism industry.  The most recent incidents claimed by this 
group occurred in summer 2006 and included explosions in the 
town of Manavgat (Antalya Province), Marmaris, and in the 
city of Antalya.  Both Turkish and foreign citizens were 
injured and killed. 
 
Violent demonstrations have occurred throughout Turkey, the 
most recent in Istanbul and in several cities in Southeastern 
Turkey. Just as with members of Mission Turkey, USG visitors 
are required to obtain RSO Ankara and DCM approval for travel 
to the Southeast 
 
Al-Qa'ida threats to target U.S. facilities in Turkey have 
been public knowledge for some time.  On November 15. 2003, 
two synagogues in Istanbul were the targets of suicide truck 
bombs.  On November 20, 2003, the British Consulate General 
and the London based HSBC Bank in Istanbul were struck by 
powerful explosions, killing dozens and wounding hundreds. 
Though prosecutions of those responsible are still ongoing, 
indications are that the Al-Qa,ida network supported the 
indigenous radical Islamic terrorist group responsible.  The 
August 2005 discovery in Antalya of a potential plot against 
maritime interests and subsequent ;Qe sort of 
diversion, such as an argument or fight, or children asking 
to assist tourists, for example with their bags.  If you 
encounter such activity, secure your wallet or purse and 
quickly leave the area.  Another scam that is becoming more 
prevalent is that of a stranger approaching a visitor and 
striking up a conversation, which is continued inside a 
restaurant or club, at which point one is either drugged and 
robbed or presented with an enormous bill and intimidated 
into paying it.  The security office encourages visitors to 
report any security incidents, including surveillance, to the 
RSO immediately. Useful security information about Turkey is 
available on the following websites. 
 
--Embassy Ankara:  HTTP://WWW.USEMB-ANKARA.ORG.TR  (Click on 
Security Matters) 
 
--Consulate General Istanbul: 
HTTP://WWW.USCONSULATE-ISTANBUL.ORG.TR 
 
¶7.  For further information regarding travel in Turkey, 
consult the Consular information sheet.  The Consular 
information sheet and public announcements are available on 
the internet at:  HTTP://TRAVEL.STATE.GOV 
 
Other information is available on the following websites: 
 
--The State Department Consular Affairs (CA) website: 
HTTP://WWW.TRAVEL.STATE.GOV/TURKEY.HTML 
 
--Turkish Daily News (English Language Turkish newspaper): 
HTTP://WWW.TURKISHDAILYNEWS.COM 
 
--Turkish Ministry of Foreign Affairs: HTTP://WWW.MFA.GOV.TR 
 
--The Republic of Turkey Home Page: 
HTTP://WWW.TURKEY/INDEX.HTML 
 
--Weather for Turkey: 
HTTP://WWW.WUNDERGROUND.COM/GLOBAL/TU.HTML 
 
Visit Ankara's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/eur/ankara/ 
 
WILSON