07PHNOMPENH480
COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR INR/B OFFICER SODERBORG FOR TDY
Wed Mar 28 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXYZ0006
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHPF #0480/01 0870347
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 280347Z MAR 07
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 8251UNCLAS PHNOM PENH 000480 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/MLS, EAP/RSP AND INR/B 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PINR OTRA CB
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR INR/B OFFICER SODERBORG FOR TDY 
TO PHNOM PENH 
 
REF:  SECSTATE 35229 
 
¶1.  Embassy Phnom Penh warmly welcomes and hereby grants country 
clearance to INR/B Biographic Officer Brent Soderborg to Cambodia 
from May 5, 2007 to May 11, 2007 to support mission biographic 
programs and consultations with post officers. 
 
¶2.  Hotel reservations have been made at the Hotel Le Royal, as 
requested.  The room rate is within posted per diem.  The hotel's 
address is #92 Rukhak Vithei Daun Penh, Sangkat Wat Phnom, Khan Daun 
Penh, Phnom Penh, phone number: 855-23-981-888, fax number: 
855-23-981-189. 
 
¶3.  Post's expediter will meet and assist upon arrival at Phnom Penh 
international airport. 
 
¶4.  The control officer for the visit is Janet Deutsch, Political 
Officer arriving at Post on April 27, 2007.  Office phone: (855) 23 
728-118;  Fax Number: (855) 23 728-888.  Please contact Economic 
Officer Curtis Gartenmann at GartenmannCM@state.gov until Janet 
Deutsch's arrival. 
 
¶5.  Visas: All visitors must have a Cambodian visa.  The Mission 
recommends that travelers entering the country on official or 
diplomatic passports obtain a visa prior to traveling to Cambodia. 
If this is not possible, visas may be obtained in the airport.  In 
this case, the traveler should bring a visa-sized photograph with 
him for inclusion with the visa application.  The immigration 
authorities will generally waive the US $20.00 fee for travelers on 
official and diplomatic passports; however, the traveler should be 
prepared to pay the fee.  Regular (tourist) passport holders will be 
required to pay the fee. 
 
¶6.  Airport Departure Tax:  Travelers departing Cambodia for an 
international destination must pay a US $25.00 airport tax before 
clearing passport control.  Airport tax for travel to in-country 
destinations is $6.00. 
 
¶7.  Security:  Street crime remains a concern in Cambodia.  Military 
weapons and explosives remain readily available to criminals despite 
efforts by authorities to collect and destroy such weapons.  Armed 
robberies occur frequently in 
Phnom Penh, and while not specifically targeted, foreign residents 
and visitors are among the victims.  Victims of armed robberies are 
reminded that they should not resist and should surrender their 
valuables as any perceived resistance may be met with physical 
violence to include lethal force. 
 
Pickpockets and beggars are also present in the markets and at the 
tourist sites.  Persons visiting Cambodia should practice sound 
personal security awareness by varying their routes and routines, 
maintaining a low profile, not carrying or displaying large amounts 
of cash, not wearing flashy or expensive jewelry, and not walking 
the streets alone after dark.  In addition, we recommend that 
Americans travel by automobile and not use local moto-taxies or 
cyclos for transportation.  These vehicles are more vulnerable to 
armed robberies and offer no protection against injury when involved 
in traffic accidents.  The Embassy provides an after-hours shuttle 
service for U.S. Embassy employees and TDY visitors until midnight 
at a cost of $1.00 per ride.  Shuttle tickets may be purchased from 
the embassy cashier during normal cashier hours. 
 
The Heart of Darkness nightclub in Phnom Penh has been placed off 
limits to all persons under the authority of the Chief of Mission 
due to a number of safety and security incidents that have occurred 
there.  American citizens are also advised not to visit that 
establishment. 
 
Political and labor related public demonstrations occur on a fairly 
regular basis in the capital city, are generally peaceful and 
conducted without notable incident.  Nonetheless, these gatherings 
have turned violent on occasion and the Embassy continues to advise 
American citizens to avoid political rallies, demonstrations, and 
political party offices where crowds may gather. 
 
Precautions should also be taken not to discuss sensitive or 
classified matters outside secure environments or over unsecured 
and/or cellular telephones, and to securely safeguard classified or 
sensitive materials at the Chancery and not at hotels or 
residences. 
 
¶8.  Currency/Credit Cards:  Cambodia is a U.S. dollar cash economy. 
While the local currency - the Cambodia Riel - is in usage, dollars 
are accepted for all transactions.  Therefore, there is no need to 
exchange currency.  The Embassy Cashier will cash traveler checks 
and personal checks of TDY personnel provided their social security 
number and a photocopy of their passport are presented.  A limited 
number of establishments (including top hotels) accept credit cards. 
A few banks will provide cash against credit cards but they charge a 
hefty fee.  Post recommends that visitors plan on using cash for 
 
transactions outside their hotels. 
 
¶9.  Post looks forward to your visit. 
 
MUSSOMELI