07PHNOMPENH193
CAMBODIA: 4TH QUARTER 2006 REPORT ON TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS
Fri Feb 02 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXRO6147
PP RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM RUEHNH
DE RUEHPF #0193/01 0331015
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 021015Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7964
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 PHNOM PENH 000193 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR G/TIP, EAP/MLS and EAP/RSP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL KWMN KJUS CB
SUBJECT: CAMBODIA: 4TH QUARTER 2006 REPORT ON TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS 
 
REF:  A. 06 PHNOM PENH 1968 
       ¶B. 06 PHNOM PENH 1954 
  ¶C. 06 PHNOM PENH 1235 
 
¶1.  (U)  Summary: During the last quarter of 2006, the Cambodian 
police arrested 16 human traffickers and six pimps.  At least 31 
victims of trafficking were identified during the reporting period, 
and police removed 28 sex workers from brothels.  Police also 
arrested three foreigners, including two Amcits, for crimes against 
children and  commenced a campaign to clear a red-light section of 
Phnom Penh of sexual businesses.  At the direction of the Ministry 
of Justice, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court prioritized trafficking 
cases, by taking the backlogged cases to trials.  The overall 
Cambodian court system sentenced eight traffickers, 15 pimps and 
three foreign pedophiles to prison terms under the trafficking law. 
A November 2006 visit to Sihanoukville and meetings with RGC 
officials and NGOs in Phnom Penh highlighted the continuing 
challenges of combating TIP in Cambodia.  End Summary. 
 
Police Action 
-------------- 
¶2.  (U)  On October 14, the Banteay Meanchey Anti-TIP Unit arrested 
a Thai national for attempted trafficking of three Cambodian women 
to Thailand.  The suspect came into Cambodia days earlier and 
persuaded the women to go to Thailand with him to work.  The women 
returned to their families.  The suspect is in pretrial detention. 
 
 
¶3.  (U)  On October 18, based on an NGO Action Pour Les Enfant 
(APLE) investigation, police of the Phnom Penh Anti-TIP Unit 
arrested an Amcit, Boris Myron Ma, for sexually abusing a 
14-year-old girl in a guesthouse.  Along with Ma, police arrested 
three accomplices and the mother of the victim, who confessed to 
procuring her daughter and two other underage girls for Myron for an 
unspecified amount of money.  The Phnom Penh Municipal Court charged 
Myron with debauchery, the mother with trafficking, and the three 
accomplices with colluding in human trafficking.  All are under 
pretrial detention.  Police referred the girl to a shelter run by 
NGO World Hope International (WHI). 
 
¶4.  (U)  On October 19, police of the Battambang Anti-TIP Unit 
arrested two individuals for sexually abusing a 15-year-old girl. 
One of the suspects is the victim's stepmother, who forced the 
victim to marry the second suspect in order to pay off a USD 300 
debt.  The second suspect physically and sexually abused the victim 
following their marriage. The victim reported the abuse to the 
commune council and requested their assistance, after which police 
arrested the two. 
 
¶5.  (U)  On October 24, the Ministry of Interior's Anti-TIP unit 
raided a Phnom Penh brothel, removed ten voluntary sex workers, ages 
20 to 28, and referred them to an AFESIP shelter.  The police made 
no arrests as a result of the raid.  All except three women left the 
shelter afterward. (AFESIP lacks current information as to their 
whereabouts and which province they are from.  Usually such women 
live in a rented home in Phnom Penh. Voluntary sex workers do not 
want to stay in shelters and they often return to their previous 
jobs.) 
 
¶6.  (U)  On October 26, the Anti-TIP Phnom Penh unit arrested 
another American national, Donald Rene Ramirez, for sexually abusing 
an underage girl.  Police also arrested the mother of his 
14-year-old victim for selling her daughter for sexual abuse.  The 
Phnom Penh court charged Ramirez and the mother with debauchery and 
trafficking, respectively.  Ramirez killed himself later while in 
police custody (see reftel A).  The victim is currently under the 
care of WHI. 
 
¶7.  (U)  On November 2, the Kandal Provincial Police Commissariat 
arrested a 20-year-old Cambodian man for indecent assault against a 
15-year-old girl. 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  On November 11, police arrested a woman for prostituting 
her 16-year-old foster daughter at the Martini Bar in Phnom Penh. 
The suspect had obtained custody of the victim in 2002, and had been 
prostituting her since that time.  The victim escaped and filed a 
complaint with the  police, after which police arrested the 
suspected foster mother.  However, according to NGO Protection of 
Juvenile Justice (PJJ)'s report, after receiving death threats from 
the suspect's unidentified companions, the victim withdrew her 
complaint and police released the suspect.  The victim is with WHI. 
PJJ forwarded the case to court to get the suspect rearrested. 
 
¶9.  (U)  On November 15, police of the Anti-TIP Phnom Penh Unit 
conducted a raid on a cross-border trafficking ring to Malaysia. 
The raid resulted in the rescue of a 17-year-old Vietnamese victim 
and the arrests of three suspects, including the victim's mother. 
The traffickers brought the victim from Vietnam and attempted to 
sell her into the sex industry in Malaysia.  The victim is in the 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000193  002 OF 004 
 
 
care of WHI. 
 
¶10.  (U)  On November 20, police at the Koh Kong-Thailand border 
arrested a 42-year-old man as he attempted to bring two Cambodian 
girls, ages 17 and 12, across the border to seek employment in 
Thailand.  Police referred the suspect to court.  ADHOC assisted the 
victims to file a complaint.  The victims returned to their family. 
ADHOC could not identify, whether the two girls were to be 
trafficked for labor or sexual trafficking. 
 
¶11.  (U)  On November 21, police of Kandal province arrested the 
owner of a business operating as a front for prostitution.  Police 
also removed seven women working as prostitutes at the venue and 
referred them to AFESIP; six women left the shelter after staying 
for a month.  Police conducted the raid based on an AFESIP complaint 
filed in May. 
 
¶12.  (U)  In response to NGO International Justice Mission (IJM)'s 
complaint, the MOI's Anti-TIP Department raided a Phnom Penh 
guesthouse known for offering underage girls for sex on November 22. 
 During the raid, police arrested the owner and removed three girls 
into NGO care. 
 
¶13.  (U)  On November 25, the police of Kampong Chhnang province 
arrested a French national on a debauchery charge.  Police 
identified two Cambodian girls, ages 17 and 18, as victims. 
 
¶14.  (U)  On December 8, the MOI's Anti-TIP Department, with 
financial and technical support from IJM, started the "one hundred 
day" campaign on Street 63 -- a red-light section of Phnom Penh -- 
as part of an overall effort to rid the city of  prostitution and 
sexual exploitation.  Un Sokunthea, Director of the Anti-TIP 
Department, reported that since the start of the campaign, the 
police have successfully shut down nine businesses operating as 
fronts for prostitution.  However, police did not make any arrests. 
The remaining 27 businesses along the street are to enter into a 
contract with the police, promising not to get involved in sexual 
businesses. 
 
¶15.  (U)  On December 12, police of the MOI's Anti-TIP Department 
and IJM raided a Phnom Penh guest house known for offering young 
girls for sexual services.  The operation resulted in the arrest of 
two owners and the rescue of seven women and girls, most of whom are 
from Vietnam, ages 15 and 16.  The suspects are in pretrial 
detention;the victims are with WHI. 
 
¶16.  (U)  On December 12, the Anti-TIP Sihanoukville Unit arrested 
four individuals for operating a brothel business in the province. 
Two of the suspects are the owners, the others are intermediaries. 
Police also removed six adult sex workers from the establishment 
and referred them to the Department of Social Affairs for further 
referral. 
 
¶17.  (U)  On December 14, the MOI's Anti-TIP Department conducted a 
raid on a Phnom Penh brothel and arrested one suspect.  The suspect 
was sent to court and charged with pimping.  Police removed five 
voluntary sex workers, ages between 19 and 25, and referred them to 
an AFESIP shelter.  All have left the shelter after the two-week 
compulsory stay. 
 
Court Cases 
----------- 
 
¶18.  (U)  The Phnom Penh Municipal Court made a positive move during 
the reporting period by taking eight overdue trafficking cases to 
trial.  A court official reported that the Ministry of Justice 
ordered every court to give priority to trafficking cases.  While 
the implementation of this order has yet to be seen in other courts, 
the Phnom Penh court was the first to  take the backlogged 
trafficking cases to trial. 
 
¶19.  (U)  On October 3, the Phnom Penh Court conducted a trafficking 
trial involving two 17-year-old Vietnamese victims.  The judge 
convicted and sentenced the Vietnamese trafficker to 15 years 
imprisonment.  Police arrested the trafficker in March. 
 
¶20.  (U)  On October 4, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court sentenced a 
Vietnamese pimp to five years imprisonment for prostituting four 
Vietnamese women, two of whom were 16 years of age.  Police arrested 
the pimp in July 2005, and he had remained in pretrial detention 
since that time. 
 
¶21.  (U)  On October 9, the Appeal Court heard a trafficking case, 
involving four victims and two suspects.  The court sentenced the 
suspects, including a Thai national, to 15 years each and ordered 
compensation of 3 million riels (USD 750) to each of the four 
victims. 
 
¶22.  (U)  On October 12, the Phnom Penh Court sentenced a Vietnamese 
pimp, arrested in 2004, to ten years imprisonment for prostituting a 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000193  003 OF 004 
 
 
27-year-old Vietnamese woman. 
 
¶23.  (U)  On October 13, the Phnom Penh court sentenced a Cambodian 
woman to two years imprisonment and ordered a fine of five million 
riels (USD 1,250) for debauchery committed in Phnom Penh in 2004. 
The case involved four Cambodian women, identified as victims by the 
court's report. 
 
¶24.  (U)  On October 17, the Sihanoukville Municipal Court tried a 
German national suspected of abusing four underage victims, ages 
between 11 and 18.  The judge convicted and sentenced the suspect to 
ten years imprisonment and ordered compensation of USD 5,000 to the 
four victims.  Police arrested the suspect in April.  (Note: APLE, 
the NGO working closely with police on this case, commended the 
judge on her performance in this case, despite the judge's decision 
in a previous case to release the US pedophile Terry Smith on bail 
in August. End Note.) 
 
¶25.  (U)  On October 18, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court heard a long 
overdue debauchery case against Olaf Achleitner, an Austrian 
national who was arrested and charged with debauchery in November 
¶2002. The accused was sentenced in absentia to ten years for 
sexually abusing four Cambodian boys, including two who were 
underage.  The court report showed that Achleitner was released on 
bail on an unspecified date and his whereabouts are still unknown. 
 
¶26.  (U)  On October 24, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court convicted 
and sentenced two pimps to six years each for prostituting four 
Cambodian women and girls.  Police arrested the pimps in February 
¶2006. 
 
¶27.  (U)  On October 27, the Phnom Penh Court sentenced two 
Vietnamese pimps to six years imprisonment each for running a 
brothel in Phnom Penh.  Police arrested the two men and charged them 
with pimping in 2004.  They have been serving pre-trial detention 
since being charged. 
 
¶28.  (U)  On November 1, the Siem Reap Provincial Court sentenced 
two individuals to five and eleven years respectively, for the 
trafficking of a 17 year-old girl for sexual exploitation.  The 
court also ordered the two men to pay compensation of six million 
riels (about USD 1,500) to the victim. 
 
¶29.  (U)  On the same day but in a separate case,  the Siem Reap 
court sentenced a pimp to two years imprisonment and ordered 
compensation of 5 million riels (about USD 1,250) to ten victims. 
 
¶30.  (U)  On November 3, the Siem Reap Provincial Court sentenced a 
woman to five years in prison and ordered her to pay compensation of 
2 million riels (about USD 500) to her victim, whom she lured and 
sold into a brothel. 
 
¶31.  (U)  Also on November 3, the Siem Reap Provincial Court tried a 
trafficking case involving two suspects and six victims.  The court 
convicted and sentenced the suspects to five and 15 years, 
respectively. 
 
¶32.  (U)  On November 10, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court conducted 
the hearing of a debauchery case involving a Belgium national and a 
13-year-old boy . The judge sentenced the suspect to 18 years 
imprisonment.  The convict was arrested in April 2006 (see reftel 
C). 
 
¶33.  On November 29, the Phnom Penh Municipal court acquitted a 
suspect who was arrested in January 2006 for abducting a 
four-year-old child from her Sihanoukville home.  The victim 
reportedly died of illness.  PJJ, the NGO representing the victim's 
father, suspected the Phnom Penh Court of being biased to the 
defendant and appealed the case to the Appeals Court. 
 
¶34.  (U)  On December 18, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court sentenced a 
Cambodian woman to five years imprisonment for attempted pimping. 
According to the court's report, no victims were identified in this 
case.  In a separate court case, the court convicted a pimp to five 
years for running a brothel. 
 
¶35.  (U)  On December 19, the Kampong Speu Provincial Court tried a 
pimping case involving a former military lieutenant who was arrested 
in July (see reftel B).  The court sentenced the suspected pimp to a 
five-year suspended sentence and ordered a fine of five million 
riels (USD 1,250). 
 
¶36.  (U)  On December 25, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court sentenced a 
French bar owner and his girlfriend to six years each. Police 
arrested both suspects in June for prostituting his workers, and 
charged them with forcing female bar workers to provide sexual 
services.(see reftel C). 
 
¶37.  (U)  On December 26, Siem Reap Provincial Court tried a pimping 
case, sentencing a suspected pimp to a one-year prison term and 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000193  004 OF 004 
 
 
three years' probation.  The case involved seven voluntary sex 
workers, ages between 21 and 26. 
 
Victims Make a Return Home On Their Own 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶38.  (U)  According to an ADHOC report, a family of four -- a 
father, mother, daughter and son -- returned home on October 7 after 
being exploited in Thailand.  A brothel owner in Pataya, Thailand, 
raped the mother and daughter and prostituted them in his brothel. 
Thai police arrested the family after they ran away from the brothel 
and deported them to the Cambodian border.  The family filed a 
complaint with the court with ADHOC's help. 
 
¶39.  (U)  On October 10, a 16-year-old victim of trafficking from 
Kampong Cham province, sold by her neighbor into a brothel in 
Thailand, returned home.  The perpetrator won the victim's trust 
with a job promise and sold her to a brothel.  The brothel owner 
raped and forced her to have sex with clients.  After many failed 
attempts, she eventually managed to make her way out and went to NGO 
ADHOC for help. The victim is now at a WHI shelter. 
 
¶40.  (U)  A 17-year-old girl from Kampong Cham province returned 
home in an unstable condition.  She went to Malaysia in 2005 with 
her neighbor who promised to find her a job.  She reportedly was 
mentally fine before her departure.  On November 8, the victim's 
father received a call from Phnom Penh to pick up his daughter.  NGO 
ADHOC is working on the case, but could not get any information from 
the victim, as she reportedly suffers from psychological problems 
now. 
 
¶41.  (U)  A 35-year-old sex worker in a Stung Treng brothel came to 
an ADHOC office on October 9 for help, after being abused by her 
pimp.  She reported that the pimp forced her to have sex with a 
group of drug addicted clients and forced her to work even when she 
was sick.  At the time of this report, police have made no arrests. 
 
 
¶42.  (U)  On October 10, a 16-year-old girl returned home in 
Battambang after her neighbor convinced the victim's mother that the 
victim could find work in Phnom Penh.   Once in Phnom Penh, the 
neighbor provided the victim to another man for sexual exploitation. 
 After the encounter, they dumped the victim at an identified 
location.  The victim called her mother to pick her up. 
 
¶43.  (U)  On October 30, a 19-year-old victim of trafficking escaped 
from a brothel, where she was detained and forced to provide sexual 
services.  An unknown person promised to help find the victim a job 
but sold her into a brothel.  She managed to escape with the help of 
a client and came to NGO Cambodian Women's Crisis Center (CWCC) for 
help. 
 
¶44.  (U) NGO CWCC reported receiving five victims of labor migration 
to Malaysia, who complained of abusive and exploitive conditions. 
Two of the victims returned to Cambodia with the help of the 
Cambodian embassy in Malaysia; the others either are still in 
Malaysia or returned by themselves. 
 
¶45. (SBU)  During the visit of Sally Neumann, G/TIP program officer, 
to Cambodia from November 20 to 23, NGOs discussed anti-TIP 
successes, problems, and future challenges for combating trafficking 
in Cambodia.  Cross-border trafficking operations reportedly are 
better organized but in-country trafficking remains largely 
unorganized.  NGOs working on pedophile cases report that foreign 
pedophiles appear to be renting houses and staying for longer 
periods in Cambodia.  NGOs remain concerned that some judicial 
authorities support victim compensation payments in lieu of jail 
sentences, and that Cambodia's culture of impunity discourages 
victims from seeking legal redress, so they more readily opt for 
compensation.  The inability of police to execute search warrants at 
night remains an impediment to investigative work, as underage girls 
frequently are only brought to establishments at night.  Cambodia's 
draft anti-TIP law remains under RGC review, and Ministry of Women's 
Affairs officials cited several key problems in the draft 
legislation that weaken associated penalties for TIP crimes. 
 
¶46. (SBU)  In Sihanoukville, NGO sources reported that TIP was a 
growing problem and that police and judicial authorities were not 
always helpful or responsive.  In contrast, anti-TIP police in 
Sihanoukville told Neumann that TIP was not even an issue in the 
area and cited as evidence the fact that there were only two arrests 
during 2006.  Municipal court officials discussed difficulties in 
prosecuting TIP and pedophile cases.  While some anti-TIP progress 
has been made in Phnom Penh, the G/TIP visit underscored that more 
work is required outside the capital with law enforcement and 
judicial officials. 
Mussomeli