08EFTOPHNOMPENH416
UN CT BODY ASSESSES STRONG INTEREST BUT WEAKER
Tue May 20 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHPF #0416/01 1411124
ZNY EEEEE ZZH
P 201124Z MAY 08
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY0000
INFO RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA PRIORITY 2312
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO PRIORITY 3209
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN PRIORITYUNCLAS E F T O PHNOM PENH 000416 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
EAP/MLS, S/CT, S/CRS, IO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PREL CB
SUBJECT: UN CT BODY ASSESSES STRONG INTEREST BUT WEAKER 
CAPACITY IN CAMBODIA 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: The UN Counter Terrorism Committee's 
Counter Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) visited May 
5-9 to assess Cambodia's compliance with UNSCR 1373.  The 
CTC/CTED delegation was composed of representatives of ADB, 
INTERPOL, IOM, UNODC, as well as the UN Secretariat, and was 
led by CTED Executive Director Mike Smith (a former 
Australian Ambassador).  The local Counter-Terrorism Action 
Group (CTAG) met with the CTED delegation May 9.  The meeting 
was chaired by the Deputy Head of the Japanese Embassy, 
representing the G8 presidency, and included representatives 
of Australia, Canada, France, Germany, Japan, the Russian 
Federation, the United Kingdom, and the United States.  In 
remarks in the margins of the meeting, Smith told the DCM 
that he had rarely seen a PM as well-versed in C/T issues as 
Hun Sen and commented that the delegation had had excellent 
access and assistance.  At the same time, Cambodia's limited 
capacity was obvious, Smith concluded.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) At the outset of the May 9 lunch with 
representatives of the local CTAG (which has not met since an 
informal lunch last fall, during the German presidency), CTED 
explained that the purpose of their mission was to identify 
"shortfalls" where Cambodia requires technical assistance, as 
well as the areas of interest in which CTAG members are 
actively involved. For this purpose, CTED encouraged the 
participants to share information on programs undertaken, 
underway or under consideration. CTED presented its view that 
overall counter-terrorism effort by the Cambodian Government 
is relatively good, while at the operational level further 
assistance is required. CTED commended the fact that the 
National Counter-terrorism Committee (NCTC) and the Law on 
Counter Terrorism are in place, and that Cambodia is working 
to sign and comply with its international CT obligations. 
 
¶3. (SBU) CTAG members shared the view that the situation in 
Cambodia has been relatively calm and the potential threat of 
terrorism is low. All agreed, however, that counter-terrorism 
assistance should be continued, as prevention is important. 
The Australian, German, and U.S. reps referred to worrying 
trends towards fundamentalism in the Cham Muslim population. 
The CTED members stated that not only assistance in hardware 
but also in capacity building is essential. The meeting 
agreed on the importance and necessity of providing training 
and following up the situation after the completion of the 
project in order to make a real impact of the project. 
 
¶4. (SBU) CTAG members made the following remarks, amongst 
others. 
 
- Australia stated that it had been actively involved in 
various areas of counter terrorism (CT) assistance, 
particularly in the areas of legislative drafting, law 
enforcement, immigration and border control training, 
aviation security, and maritime security.  Australia had also 
seconded a senior CT advisor to the NCTC for 12 months to 
advise and assist Cambodia to develop a strategic CT 
coordination capability.  The Australian DCM said it also was 
important to note that a wide range of developmental 
activities, including those that strengthened good 
governance, greater transparency and English language 
training, could contribute to better CT outcomes in the long 
term. 
 
- Canada stressed the importance of a holistic approach and 
good coordination of existing projects in the Mekong region 
or in the ASEAN countries. 
 
- France will continue to support Cambodia's anti-terrorism 
effort by focusing on the legal aspects, including providing 
assistance on the drafting and implementation of the Penal 
Code and Penal Procedure Code, as well as capacity building 
at the Royal Academy for Judicial Professions. In this 
regard, CTED encouraged France to ensure consistency of the 
definition of money laundering between the Penal Code and the 
Law on Counter-terrorism. It further stated that it is 
essential to promote not only the understanding of the laws 
but also the implementation on the ground through workshops, 
etc. 
 
- Germany has been closely monitoring recent development of 
Muslim communities in Cambodia, with special attention to the 
influence "repatriates" who are radicalized abroad may have 
on the Cambodian society. 
 
- Japan has provided security facilities and equipment at 
Sihanoukville Port and has dispatched a resident expert, in 
order to help enhance maritime and port security in Cambodia. 
 
Japan's main focus is on counter-terrorism dialogues and a 
wide range of training programs.  The CTED reps commented 
that the port equipment provided by Japan was not being used 
to its maximum effect, as the operators seemed more focused 
on customs issues than detecting illicit goods. 
 
- Russia is currently not an active donor of 
counter-terrorism assistance, which the Russian DCM 
attributed to the absence of a bilateral treaty.  Neglecting 
the fact that requests from the Cambodian side (pulled 
together by the Australian rep in the NCTC) have been 
distributed previously, the Russian DCM stated that Russia 
would welcome any input CTED could provide regarding what the 
Cambodian side saw as key needs. 
 
- The U.K. said given the UK CT assessment of the threat 
posed by Cambodia, currently cooperation with Cambodia on CT 
issues was small. However, they had previously funded a 
large, three-year project on strengthening border security 
implemented by IOM. The IOM rep within CTED confirmed that 
although the program ended in June 2007, it was still 
delivering some results. The UK is currently assisting the 
Secretariat of the NCTC through provision of a small number 
of places on CT issues at JCLEC training courses in Indonesia 
during 2008. The UK commented on the difficulties of 
information sharing within the Cambodian government 
structure, adding that even though NCTC itself appears to be 
a relatively well-organized overarching institution, it has 
not yet established the necessary linkages across government 
needed to promote/ensure a joined-up approach to CT issues, 
which results in a silo mentality. The UK DCM also detailed 
the difficulties encountered in identifying suitable 
candidates for training given the Cambodian attitude to 
training opportunities, and highlighted the need for donors 
to both share information and closely follow-up on 
projects/activities in order to ensure both the Cambodian 
system and donors obtain the maximum benefits including 
through the domino effect of training 
 
- The DCM noted that the US has been supporting a number of 
government institutions including NCTC.  She provided a 
three-page table listing U.S. assistance including technical 
support and training - provided both in Cambodia and abroad. 
She noted the U.S. work with Cambodia on PISCES.  She 
commented that rather than introducing a concept in one 
training session, the U.S. approach has been incremental - 
reinforcing training previously provided and working 
consistently with Cambodian counterparts to keep more 
technically complex programs, like PISCES, operational.  She 
noted information derived from an educational survey which 
shows some worrying trends about Cham Muslims "falling 
between the cracks" of Khmer society due to cultural and 
linguistic differences. 
 
¶5. (U)  Smith concluded the meeting by thanking the local 
CTAG reps for their frankness about the strengths and 
weaknesses of Cambodia's CT structures.  Smith's delegation 
will prepare a report on Cambodia's compliance with UNSCR 
1373 to be shared with Security Council members.  Post would 
appreciate any information which USUN can supply (including a 
copy of the report when it is released to SC members.) 
CAMPBELL