08PHNOMPENH229
AMBASSADOR TO DPM SAR KHENG: CAN SUCCESSFUL
Wed Mar 05 00:00:00 +0100 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXYZ2719
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHPF #0229/01 0651149
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 051149Z MAR 08
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY0000
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVE PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L PHNOM PENH 000229 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR D, EAP, EAP/MLS, G/TIP, AND DRL 
BANGKOK FOR MICHAEL HEATH 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/04/2018 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PREL KWMN CACS CB
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR TO DPM SAR KHENG: CAN SUCCESSFUL 
APPROACH ON TIP EXTEND TO LAND DISPUTES? 
 
REF: A. PHNOM PENH 207 - 2008 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS 
        REPORT FOR CAMBODIA 
     ¶B. PHNOM PENH 179 - CAMBODIAN ANTI-TIP LAW PASSED 
        AND PROMULGATED 
     ¶C. 07 PHNOM PENH 1026 
     ¶D. 07 PHNOM PENH 961 
 
Classified By: Political Officer Janet Deutsch for reasons 1.4 (b, d) 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  On March 3, the Ambassador praised 
Cambodian Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Interior Sar 
Kheng and the RGC for a strong commitment to combating 
trafficking in persons over the past year.  The Ambassador 
noted the many achievements the Cambodian government has made 
including passage of a comprehensive anti-TIP law; the 
establishment of the National Task Force to combat TIP; and 
the removal of Appeals Court Judge Ly Vouch Leng based on 
suspicions of corruption in connection with a trafficking 
case.  The Ambassador recommended that the RGC consider 
extending the transparent approach taken in tackling TIP to 
Cambodia's challenging issues regarding land disputes and 
evictions.  American citizens are being drawn into land 
disputes, and in the past month alone, two land dispute cases 
involving Amcits have been reported to the Embassy.  Land 
disputes have the potential to be destabilizing, and could 
have a chilling effect on investment.  The Ambassador's 
message that the Cambodian government should be more 
transparent in dealing with land disputes and evictions was 
openly received by the Deputy Prime Minister.  End summary. 
 
Ambassador Commends Sar Kheng on TIP 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶2. (SBU) The Ambassador thanked the DPM for his personal 
commitment to the issue of trafficking, which has been a 
driving force behind the many successes achieved over the 
past year.  Specifically, the Ambassador commended passage of 
the comprehensive anti-TIP law (Ref B); the establishment of 
the National Task Force to combat TIP (Ref C); and the 
removal of Appeals Court Judge Ly Vouch Leng based on 
suspicions of corruption in connection with a trafficking 
case (Ref D).  The Ambassador thanked Sar Kheng for his 
ministry's efforts to transparently provide information and 
statistics to the U.S.  The National Task Force has also 
openly and cooperatively offered TIP information to the 
embassy, and has provided periodic TIP activity reports.  The 
DPM plays a leading role in Cambodia's activities to combat 
TIP, serving as chair of the government's "High Level Working 
Group" or "Leading Task Force," which leads the country's 
anti-TIP efforts and functions as an oversight mechanism to 
the National Task Force.  During the meeting, the Ambassador 
informed Sar Kheng that the embassy submitted to G/TIP a 
recommendation that the Cambodian anti-TIP National Task 
Force be considered a best practice for the 2008 TIP Report. 
DPM Sar Kheng received the news with apparent delight.  The 
DPM stated that Cambodia's TIP progress is made possible by 
the "cooperative efforts" of the United States and Cambodia. 
 
Thai PM Visit -- A Chance to Coordinate on TIP 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Exemplifying the Cambodian government's proactive 
anti-TIP efforts, DPM Sar Kheng updated the Ambassador on RGC 
conversations regarding TIP with newly-elected Thai Prime 
Minister Samak Sundaravej during the Thai PM's March 3-4 
visit to Cambodia.  Sar Kheng stated that the Thai PM and the 
RGC discussed the possibility of setting up a "joint 
mechanism" between Cambodia and Thailand for formal 
discussions on TIP issues.  (NOTE: The governments of 
Cambodia and Thailand signed an anti-TIP cooperation MOU in 
2003 calling on both governments to cooperate in 
investigations on domestic and cross-border trafficking, to 
repatriate TIP victims through diplomatic channels, and to 
promote bilateral cooperation in judicial procedures against 
trafficking.  END NOTE.)  Specifically, the DPM stated that 
the RGC would like to continue the dialogue with Thailand 
during future meetings about joint anti-TIP activities, and 
also to look at how economic development of the border 
provinces could help prevent trafficking.  The DPM did not 
provide details on activities but stated that they have had 
"good cooperative efforts fighting TIP" with Thailand. 
 
Ambassador Requests TIP-Like Transparency on Land Issues 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Turning to the sensitive issue of land disputes and 
evictions, the Ambassador expressed his hope that the 
Cambodian government would approach this sensitive area with 
 
the same transparency it has TIP.  The Ambassador noted that 
the embassy continues to receive unsettling complaints on 
land cases, several of which have come to us from American 
citizens who are caught up in disputes.  (NOTE:  Embassy will 
report on these cases septel. END NOTE.) As Americans and 
other international business people are drawn into land 
disputes, it could have a chilling effect on investment.  The 
Ambassador also expressed concern that land disputes and 
evictions could negatively impact Cambodia's stability.  The 
DPM responded that he agreed in principle that forced 
evictions should not take place "at all" and especially not 
without compensation.  He stated that sometimes evictions 
cannot be avoided and that the government has instructions 
for how people are to be moved off land, and has government 
authorities designated to deal with the issue.  However, Sar 
Kheng confided, the authorities on these issues "have not 
always conducted resolutions properly." 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Sar Kheng made reference to two recent Phnom Penh 
land dispute cases in areas known as "Dey Krahorm" and 
"Russei Keo."  In the case of Dey Krahorm, the DPM told the 
Ambassador that this was a case where local authorities were 
about to evict community members but he ordered the 
authorities not to proceed with the eviction.  On last 
month's Russei Keo eviction, the DPM stated that he has not 
yet received a report from his staff on the incident and what 
to do about it.  He stated that he accepts the Ambassador's 
request for transparency and he will forward this request to 
the government. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶6.  (C) DPM Sar Kheng continues to be a vital ally on TIP and 
he deserves our praise for the strides the RGC has made over 
the past several months.  Regarding land disputes and 
evictions, the Minister of Interior does not necessarily hold 
the power to resolve disputes.  However, we believe the 
Ambassador's request provides Sar Kheng with a hook to raise 
the issue with the PM and other DPMs, such as Sok An.  The 
all-of-government approach and strong senior leadership which 
have helped the government address TIP could be a useful 
model for dealing with the complex and troubling range of 
issues relating to land. 
MUSSOMELI