09PHNOMPENH701
CAMBODIAN NATIONAL ASSEMBLY REACTION TO SEPTEMBER 10 TOM
Wed Sep 16 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXYZ0011
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHPF #0701/01 2590644
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 160644Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 1187UNCLAS PHNOM PENH 000701 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/MLS, DRL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PREL CB
SUBJECT:  CAMBODIAN NATIONAL ASSEMBLY REACTION TO SEPTEMBER 10 TOM 
LANTOS HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION HEARING ON HUMAN RIGHTS IN CAMBODIA 
 
¶1. Two Cambodian Parliamentary Commissions:  the Commission on 
Foreign Affairs, International Cooperation, Information and Media; 
and the Commission on Human Rights, Reception of Complaints, 
Investigation and National Assembly-Senate Relations, issued a joint 
statement September 14 in response to the September 10 Tom Lantos 
Human Rights Commission (TLHRC) hearing on "Human Rights and the 
Rule of Law in Cambodia." 
 
¶2. The unofficial translation of the text of the statement follows: 
 
Begin Text: 
 
Statement of the Commission on Foreign Affairs, International 
Cooperation, Information and Media and the Commission on Human 
Rights, Reception of Complaints, Investigation and National 
Assembly-Senate Relations of the National Assembly of the Kingdom of 
Cambodia 
 
The Commission on Foreign Affairs, International Cooperation, 
Information and Media and the Commission on Human Rights, Reception 
of Complaints, Investigation and National Assembly-Senate Relations 
of the National Assembly of the Kingdom of Cambodia totally reject 
the testimony provided by Mu Sochua at a hearing organized by Tom 
Lantos Human Rights Commission of the US Congress. 
 
The Commission on Foreign Affairs, International Cooperation, 
Information and Media and the Commission on Human Rights, Reception 
of Complaints, Investigation and National Assembly-Senate Relations 
of the National Assembly of the Kingdom of Cambodia reiterate that 
the lifting of parliamentary immunity of Mu Sochua and Ho Vann was 
carried out in conformity with Articles 80 and 88 of the 
Constitution and Articles 8-12 of the 2006 Law on the statute of 
parliamentarians. 
 
The Commission on Foreign Affairs, International Cooperation, 
Information and Media and the Commission on Human Rights, Reception 
of Complaints, Investigation and National Assembly-Senate Relations 
of the National Assembly of the Kingdom of Cambodia totally reject 
any unfounded accusations made by Mu Sochua. 
 
The Sam Rainsy Party did not recognize the election results, did not 
attend the opening session of the National Assembly and refused to 
participate in the National Assembly Commissions.  The Sam Rainsy 
Party itself must be responsible for its own action for not 
respecting the will of the people and democracy in Cambodia. 
 
The Commission on Foreign Affairs, International Cooperation, 
Information and Media and the Commission on Human Rights, Reception 
of Complaints, Investigation and National Assembly-Senate Relations 
of the National Assembly of the Kingdom of Cambodia solemnly declare 
that Samdech Akka Moha Ponhea Chakrei Heng Samrin, President of the 
National Assembly, has always enhanced the reputation and honor of 
the National Assembly at national and international levels, and 
promoted debates in the adoption of laws without prejudice. 
 
The manner in which Tom Lantos Human Rights Commission of the US 
Congress deals with the issue in question is not acceptable to the 
Commission on Foreign Affairs, International Cooperation, 
Information and Media and the Commission on Human Rights, Reception 
of Complaints, Investigation and National Assembly-Senate Relations 
of the National Assembly of the Kingdom of Cambodia.  A hearing with 
only a small group from the opposition is not balanced and does not 
respect the principles of democracy and transparency.  Such an 
activity will affect Cambodia-America relation.  The Commission on 
Foreign Affairs, International Cooperation, Information and Media 
and the Commission on Human Rights, Reception of Complaints, 
Investigation and National Assembly-Senate Relations of the National 
Assembly of the Kingdom of Cambodia are convinced that the late H.E. 
Tom Lantos is in disagreement with this abnormal activity. 
 
The Commission on Foreign Affairs, International Cooperation, 
Information and Media and the Commission on Human Rights, Reception 
of Complaints, Investigation and National Assembly-Senate Relations 
of the National Assembly of the Kingdom of Cambodia condemn Mu 
Sochua for making a statement giving false testimony to make 
national and international opinions confused. 
 
The Commission on Foreign Affairs, International Cooperation, 
Information and Media and the Commission on Human Rights, Reception 
of Complaints, Investigation and National Assembly-Senate Relations 
of the National Assembly of the Kingdom of Cambodia support and 
express their most profound gratitude to H.E. Eni F.H. Faleomavaega, 
Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee of the US Congress, for 
making a statement on the true Human Rights situation in Cambodia. 
The professional judgment and skillful diplomatic talent is an 
encouragement for Cambodia to continue the development of the 
country to bring about happiness and peace for all Cambodians. 
 
The Commission on Foreign Affairs, International Cooperation, 
Information and Media and the Commission on Human Rights, Reception 
of Complaints, Investigation and National Assembly-Senate Relations 
 
of the National Assembly of the Kingdom of Cambodia are very proud 
to note that Cambodia, under the leadership of Samdech Akka Moha 
Sena Padei Techo Hun Sen, Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Cambodia, 
is making progress in all fields, especially the areas of human 
rights and democracy. 
 
End Text. 
 
RODLEY