02ANKARA8993
TELLING THE STORY OF AFGHAN RECONSTRUCTION IN
Mon Dec 16 00:00:00 +0100 2002
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 008993 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
STATE FOR EUR/SE; EUR/PPD; EB 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO AF PREL SOCI TU
SUBJECT: TELLING THE STORY OF AFGHAN RECONSTRUCTION IN 
TURKEY 
 
REF: (A) SECSTATE 251091;(B) ANKARA 8699 
 
 
¶1. Post appreciates message of sustained interest in telling 
the story of US efforts in Afghan reconstruction. Turkey has 
a long historical tie to Afghanistan and is proud of its 
current status as a leader in Afghan reconstruction. Our 
responsibility is to demonstrate to the Turkish populace 
that this is a cooperative effort, that the US is going to 
stick with the program, and that we appreciate the role of 
democratic, secular and Muslim Turkey in the effort. 
 
 
¶2. Turks have ties of blood and cultural history with many 
of the ethnic groups in Afghanistan. As Turkey modernized 
under progressive Sultans, the Young Turks, and finally 
under Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, there were close relationships 
with reforming elements in Afghanistan. Many Afghans studied 
in Turkey throughout the 20th century. Turkish schools and 
hospitals operated during most of the 23 years of bloodshed 
in Afghanistan.  The survival of a secular state in a Muslim 
Afghanistan is important to the Turkish state. 
 
 
¶3. Turks are not just observers of Afghan reconstruction. 
They are taking a lead alongside the USA in the effort. They 
follow closely all aspects of recovery: political 
developments, humanitarian needs, security concerns, and 
regional influences.  Turks are the current leaders of the 
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) in Kabul - a 
major commitment of troops and resources.  Within days of 
the fall of the Taliban, Turkish cabinet officers and senior 
military leaders were in Kabul.  Turkish NGOs and GOT 
assistance elements have been working to re-establish 
Turkish hospitals and schools throughout the northern 
provinces and in the capital.  The Ataturk Children's 
Hospital was up and running during the first days of 
liberation. During the past year Afghan military, police, 
diplomatic and health officials have had training programs 
in Turkish counterpart ministries. The Turkish private 
sector has looked for openings and world-class Turkish 
construction companies are on site, even taking a part in 
the building of USG buildings in Afghanistan. 
 
 
¶4. What are the primary misconceptions of U.S. objectives in 
Afghanistan?  More than misconceptions, Turks have serious 
concerns about the impact that the pursuing of U.S. 
objectives will lead.  Turks fully recognize that U.S. 
leadership in Afghan reconstruction is a potent catalyst 
necessary to convince other countries and institutions to 
contribute to the effort.  They view generous U.S. financial 
contributions as a powerful and much-appreciated example. 
But . (a) There is Turkish concern is that their generosity 
will be overshadowed by the U.S. (b) Their greatest fear is 
that the US will lose interest, will redirect its energy and 
funds to a war on Iraq, and leave Turkey "holding the bag" 
or simply leave the Afghans to fall back into chaos.  Turks 
cite American "abandonment" of Afghanistan once the Soviets 
were eliminated.  They also note the US failure to "finish 
off" Saddam in 1992 and their much-repeated complaint that 
America drew Turkey into the Gulf War with promises of 
rebuilding a new Iraq only to leave Turkey with 10's of 
billions of dollars in lost trade with a sanctioned Iraq. 
Within the Turkish society there are Islamist elements who 
do hold serious misconceptions.  There is a vocal minority 
among them who still believe that our initiatives against al- 
Qaeda and Iraq are really efforts to destroy Islam and to 
grab the oil wealth of Islamic peoples. 
 
 
¶5. Which reconstruction story would elicit the most positive 
response in Turkey? (a) Any effective message delivered in 
Turkey on Afghan reconstruction must acknowledge Turkey's 
longstanding and generous efforts in Afghanistan.  Even 
during a serious financial crisis, the Turks have given 
substantially to help the Afghans. For us to focus on US 
assistance without recognizing Turkish donations of training 
on site and in Turkish universities, food, seed, medicine 
and baby food, without referring to the pioneering effort of 
the Turkish-Afghan business Council and a variety of Turkish 
NGOs would detract from the credibility of any American 
message. We must show that we are doing is in a cooperative 
nature along with the Turks.  For Turkish TV, Betacam-sp 
clips that showed Turks and American working together, then 
going on to things that we are doing by ourselves, would be 
effective. (b) We must also stress the fact that we are NOT 
going to withdraw, but that we are pledged to stay and have 
made investments that mean that we will stay. (Statements by 
senior USG officials, visuals of buildings and investments 
that illustrate a continuing commitment - perhaps American 
moving from trailers into permanent structures) will all 
help.  (c) We had one of Turkey's top journalists, one with 
a real interest in Afghanistan (Ferai Tinc of "Hurriyet") 
ready to participate in the recently-cancelled "Afghan Road 
Show" to be led by DEPSECDEF Wolfowitz. If the project is 
revisited with the same leadership, there would be a real 
Turkish interest - we just need to have some recognition 
during the trip for the Turkish reconstruction effort. 
(d) When Operation Enduring Freedom began, there was a long 
delay between the time that food drops to Afghan citizens 
began and footage of those drops became available to post 
and/or Turkish media. Thus the plentiful visuals of our 
bombs falling on Afghans, not our aid reaching them, shaped 
the public image of OEF. Now there is good material 
available on how we are helping the Afghans we need to keep 
up the flow. Betacam-SP quality and Turkish language dubbing 
will greatly increase the likelihood of placement. 
 
 
PEARSON