04ANKARA6801
TIP IN TURKEY: JANDARMA REQUESTS TECH ASSISTANCE,
Tue Dec 07 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 006801 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, INL/CTR, DRL, EUR/PGI, EUR/SE 
DEPARTMENT FOR VALERIE KWOK USAID E&E/ECA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM PHUM PGOV SMIG PREF KWMN TU TIP IN TURKEY
SUBJECT: TIP IN TURKEY: JANDARMA REQUESTS TECH ASSISTANCE, 
TRAINING FROM DEA, OTHERS 
 
REF: A. ANK 6309 
 
     ¶B. ANK 6692 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: A November 23-27 International Office on 
Migration (IOM) TIP workshop in Adana, Turkey highlighted the 
Jandarma's struggling but developing ground-level ability to 
investigate and prosecute trafficking crimes.  According to 
IOM trainers (para 4) and TIP-NGO victim counselors 
(reftels), Jandarma officers are successfully screening, 
identifying, and assisting victims.  Jandarma officers noted, 
however, the immediate need for technical training from law 
enforcement agencies with practical experience in conducting 
TIP investigations, documenting evidence, and prosecuting 
traffickers.  Post requests G/TIP assistance in identifying 
possible training opportunities for Jandarma officers. END 
SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (SBU) During the November 23-27 IOM TIP workshop in Adana, 
Turkey, regional Jandarma commander MGEN Abdulkadir Eryilmaz 
queried AMCONS Adana PO about possible counter-trafficking 
training opportunities for Jandarma officers.  Eryilmaz said 
that, in Turkey, drug trafficking and human trafficking are 
often interrelated, and that Turkish Jandarma could 
particularly benefit from U.S. Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) 
expertise and training in hands-on, technical-level, textbook 
efficient investigations. 
 
¶3. (U) Embassy Ankara and AMCONS Adana request G/TIP's 
assistance in identifying opportunities for including Turkish 
Jandarma forces in counter-trafficking training programs 
available through the DEA, FBI or other law enforcement 
agencies. 
 
¶4. (U) Eryilmaz opened the IOM training session, stressing 
the importance of focused law enforcement efforts on illicit 
trafficking issues. 
 
BEGIN PRESS NOTES: 
 
TURKEY - Training for Law Enforcement Leads to Rescue of 
Victims of Trafficking:  IOM organized training sessions for 
law enforcement officers have led to the rescue of more than 
100 women and girls trafficked to Turkey in 2004. 
 
Speaking at the latest five-day session, held last week in 
Adana, IOM Chief of Mission Marielle Lindstrom stressed the 
role that collaboration plays between the authorities, NGOs, 
and international organizations to rescue victims and assist 
them to return home.  "The positive case studies we heard 
from the officers, where victims have been rescued and 
traffickers apprehended, prove that with proper support and 
training Turkish law enforcement is a serious threat to 
organized crime.  If we can establish a successful mechanism 
to identify, rescue and refer the victims, Turkey will be of 
central importance in stopping trafficking from countries in 
the region." 
 
The workshop was carried out with the support of the Central 
Command of the Gendarma, with presentations from the 
Ministries of Justice and Interior, international 
organizations and the Embassy of Belarus.  International 
experts also addressed the issue of human rights, collection 
of evidence, and the prosecution of traffickers. 
 
"It is important that victims of trafficking are correctly 
identified so that they are not deported as irregular 
immigrants.  Victims must feel safe, respected and protected 
so that law enforcement can work with them to stop 
trafficking," stressed Europol expert Steve Harvey. 
 
The Adana training was funded by the US Government, with 
contributions form the United Nations Population Fund. 
 
END PRESS NOTES. 
EDELMAN