04ANKARA6484
TURKISH STRAITS VOLUNTARY PRINCIPLES - NEWEST
Fri Nov 19 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 006484 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG EPET ETRD EWWT TU
SUBJECT: TURKISH STRAITS VOLUNTARY PRINCIPLES - NEWEST 
VERSION 
 
REF: A. ANKARA 6479 
     ¶B. STATE 178586 
 
¶1.  On November 8, Turkish Ministry of Foreign Affairs Deputy 
Director General for Energy, Hakki Akil passed to Ambassador 
Steven Mann the newest version of the Turkish MFA's proposed 
"Voluntary Principles on the Passage of Oil Tankers through 
the Turkish Straits" (see Ref A).  (This version is dated 
April 30, 2004, as is the version referred to in Ref B; 
however, the U.S. position described in Ref B appears to 
refer to an earlier version.) 
 
¶2.  Voluntary Principles text follows: 
 
Voluntary Principles on the Passage of Oil Tankers through 
the Turkish Straits 
 
The Governments of the Republic of Turkey, (the Black Sea 
Littoral States) (the European Union) and (the United States) 
("Governments"), energy sector companies producing petroleum 
in the various countries of the Caspian region for export to 
world markets ("Companies") and non-governmental 
organizations ("NGOs") together ("Participants"), sharing an 
interest in promoting and protecting and promoting human 
health, safety and security, have engaged in a dialogue to 
produce a set of principles intended to minimize the risks 
associated with the passage of hydrocarbon tankers through 
the Turkish Straits ("the Straits"), without prejudice to the 
legal passage regime for the Straits and without unduly 
hindering flow of petroleum to world markets ("Principles"). 
 
The Participants recognize the importance of cooperative 
action and the constructive role which industry and civil 
society can play together with governments to achieve these 
objectives.  The Participants further recognize the 
importance of continuing this dialogue and keeping under 
review these Principles in order to ensure their continuing 
relevance and efficacy. 
 
--------------------------------- 
 
Recognizing that there are physical limits to the number of 
hydrocarbons tankers that can transit the Straits; 
 
Considering that a secure and uninterrupted flow of energy 
has vital economic and national security significance to both 
energy producing and energy consuming States; 
 
Appreciating that the Companies are committed to operations 
that are commercially viable and consistent with 
internationally recognized standards of corporate governance 
and social responsibility; 
 
Reaffirming the obligation of States under accepted 
principles of international law to protect and preserve the 
marine environment; 
 
Recognizing the EU policy in favour of the transport of 
hydrocarbons by pipelines as an alternative to transport by 
tankers through sensitive maritime seas; 
 
Acknowledging that the protection of the environment in and 
around the Straits and of human health, safety and security 
of the local population is a fundamental value shared by the 
Participants; 
 
Noting that the City of Istanbul has been designated as a 
World Heritage Site of outstanding and universal value by the 
UNESCO World Heritage Convention (UNESCO) and that the 
international community is thereby committed to participate 
cooperate in protecting it as a unique culturale and unique 
heritage for the benefit of both present and future 
generations; 
 
Recalling that the Turkish Straits have previously 
experienced a number of serious shipping accidents resulting 
in the loss of life and environmental pollution and have 
threatened the City of Istanbul World Heritage Site; 
 
Bearing in mind that the Governments should ensure that 
hydrocarbons tankers navigating through the Straits adhere to 
standards of 'quality shipping' as established by applicable 
rules and standards of international law including those 
adopted by the IMO as well as those promoted by the EC 
Commission; 
 
Recognizing that the transport of hydrocarbons by pipelines 
constructed in accordance with the best available technology 
provides a safer and more environmentally friendly mode of 
transportation than by tankers through environmentally 
sensitive waters such as the Straits; 
 
Accordingly, the Participants hereby express their support 
for the following Voluntary Principles for the Passage of Oil 
Tankers through the Turkish Straits: 
 
Pursuit of Turkish Straits By-pass Alternatives 
 
-  The Participants agree that priority should be given to 
maximizing the use of existing and future crude oil export 
transportation systems that by-pass the Straits; 
 
- The Participants further agree to facilitate and support 
the development of new-build crude export oil transportation 
systems that by-pass the Straits and are constructed and 
operated in accordance with the highest international 
technical, safety, environmental, labour and human rights 
standards and practices 
 
Cooperative Government Measures 
 
The Governments agree to consider and discuss the adoption of 
cooperative measures, consistent with international law in 
order to enhance protection of the environment and the safety 
and security of the Straits. 
 
Monitoring and Enforcement Review 
 
The Participants agree to monitor adherence to these 
Principles and to transparently report on compliance. They 
agree to review them periodically and revise them as 
necessary. 
EDELMAN