04ANKARA2694
GOVERNMENT OF TURKEY PROMULGATES POLICY FOR
Wed May 12 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

121558Z May 04UNCLAS ANKARA 002694 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR DS/CR/CIL 
ROME, ATHENS FOR IMMIGRATION ATTACHE 
 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: ASEC EAIR
SUBJECT: GOVERNMENT OF TURKEY PROMULGATES POLICY FOR 
DEPORTATIONS TRANSITING THROUGH TURKEY 
 
 
¶1.  The Government of Turkey (GOT) has recently promulgated 
clear guidelines for the transiting of deportees through 
their airports.  These procedures are in effect immediately 
and apply to all countries that move deportees through 
Turkey (Istanbul's Ataturk Airport in most instances).  BICE 
must revise their current notification practices in order to 
conform to GOT policy. 
 
 
¶2.  Third country nationals who are being deported to their 
country of citizenship may only transit through Turkey in 
accordance with the rules provided below (translation of 
diplomatic note received 5/6/04): 
 
 
¶A.  The requests for transiting nationals of third country 
must be sent to the Ministry of Interior 15 days prior to 
the travel.  The request should include the identity 
information and citizenship of the third country national 
and the identity information of the accompanying escorts, as 
well as the flight details and dates of the travel.  Any 
changes on the flight destination and the date should be 
reported 5 days prior to the travel. 
 
 
¶B.  The sender country can only implement the travel after 
the Ministry of Interior authorizes it. 
 
 
¶C.  The escorts accompanying the third country national 
should make the necessary arrangements with the Istanbul 
Airport Protection Section officials and only then will the 
third country national and the escorts be allowed to transit 
through Istanbul without entering into the country. 
 
 
¶D.  The Embassy of the sender country should confirm that 
the officials of other third country to where the SUBJECT 
will be transiting authorize the transit. 
 
 
¶E.  If the third country national is denied entry into the 
country of citizenship, the sender country is required to 
pay all necessary travel expenses to return the SUBJECT back 
to the sender country.  (end diplomatic note translation) 
 
 
¶3.  Please note that the transit cannot take place until the 
Turkish Ministry of Interior authorizes the request. 
Embassy does not see an issue with BICE planning for a 
deportation once the advance notification is submitted, in 
accordance with GOT procedures.  Embassy will alert BICE 
only if a request is not approved prior to the deportation 
date. 
 
 
¶4.  Embassy Ankara and Consulate General Istanbul are ready 
to assist BICE in coordinating these deportation requests. 
All required information should be sent in the country 
clearance request.  Once received, Embassy will prepare a 
diplomatic note alerting the proper GOT authorities.  With 
the required advance notification we can continue to work 
with airport Protection Section officials (c, above) in 
preparation for ICE agent arrivals.  Embassy will require 
BICE to provide confirmation that the country receiving the 
deportee will accept him/her (d, above) as part of the 
country clearance request.  We advise strict adherence to 
the notification deadlines, as the GOT will hold fast to 
this timeframe.  Edelman