04ANKARA1583
TURKEY'S CANDIDATE TO THE INTERNATIONAL NARCOTICS
Wed Mar 17 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 001583 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON SNAR TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY'S CANDIDATE TO THE INTERNATIONAL NARCOTICS 
CONTROL BOARD 
 
 
REF: A. ANKARA 1385 
     ¶B. USUN NEW YORK 292 
 
 
¶1.  Summary. The GOT is pressing the candidacy of Dr. Sevil 
Atasoy to the International Narcotics Control Board. Post 
requests guidance. End summary. 
 
 
¶2.  On 12 March, Econoff attended a presentation at the MFA, 
at which Dr. Sevil Atasoy, Turkey's nominee to the 
International Narcotics Control Board, was introduced to 
Ankara-based diplomats. Board elections will be held May 4-5. 
 
 
¶3.  Most of the presentation was devoted to Dr. Atasoy's 
qualifications (previously pouched to the Department). 
Additional points made at the presentation were: 
 
 
-- Currently, the Board is composed of one woman, who will be 
retiring, and twelve men. Eighteen candidates are competing 
for five positions, only three of which candidates are women. 
-- Dr. Atasoy is the only forensic scientist among any of the 
current or prospective Board members. 
 
 
¶4.  Post also notes Dr. Atasoy's ties to the U.S., as a 
Hubert H. Humphrey Fellow at Emory University, and as a guest 
scientist at the University of California and with the USDOJ. 
 
 
¶5.  While Post defers to the Department in assessing Dr. 
Atasoy's qualifications, the GOT is clearly pushing her 
candidacy very hard. Accordingly, Post repeats the request 
contained in Reftel A for guidance on how to respond to GOT's 
diplomatic note requesting support for Dr. Atasoy's candidacy. 
EDELMAN