04ANKARA3948
IRAQ/KIRKUK:MFA STATEMENT ON TURKEY'S FACT-FINDING
Thu Jul 15 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

152155Z Jul 04UNCLAS ANKARA 003948 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NEA/I AND EUR/SE; BAGHDAD ALSO FOR MNF-I 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL MARR PINR TU IZ
SUBJECT: IRAQ/KIRKUK:MFA STATEMENT ON TURKEY'S FACT-FINDING 
MISSION 
 
REF: ANKARA 3945 
 
¶1. The MFA Spokesman made the statement in para 2 to the 
press on July 14, addressing the Turkish fact-finding 
delegation that visited Kirkuk July 6-11.  (Comment:  This 
statement is calmer in tone than the points the GOT passed to 
us privately, reftel.  End Comment.) 
 
¶2.  Begin informal Embassy translation of the MFA press 
statement: 
 
MFA Spokesperson Namik Tan,s Response to a Question Related 
to the Visit of a Delegation to Kirkuk with the Company of 
the MFA/Iraq,s Special Deputy Representative 
 
As is known, there have been a number of news reports related 
to speculation about the future of Kirkuk after the war as 
well as efforts aiming at changing the population structure 
of the city, which have created unrest and anxiety among 
Kirkuk residents. 
 
Continuation of peace and security in Kirkuk, where groups 
from various ethnic and religious backgrounds live together, 
influences Iraq,s stability and internal balances as well as 
the stability, peace and welfare of the region. 
 
Information on the situation in Kirkuk and our sensitivity on 
the matter were brought to the attention of PUK leader Jalal 
Talabani during his previous visit to our country. Indicating 
that he was talking on behalf of other groups in the north, 
Mr. Talabani suggested that a Turkish delegation should go to 
Kirkuk for an on-site investigation of the current situation. 
Therefore, a delegation led by the MFA Deputy Iraq Special 
Representative and with the participation of representatives 
from relevant institutions went to Kirkuk in July 6-11, 2004. 
 
Our delegation was in intensive contacts with people from all 
levels of society in Kirkuk, as well as the American and 
British diplomatic representations there. 
 
Our delegation established that there were serious efforts to 
change the demographic structure of Kirkuk which were 
supported by construction activities, and that some elements 
constituting the Iraqi nation were concerned about that 
situation. 
 
Those, who were exposed to forced migration during the 
previous Iraqi regime, have the right to return back to their 
old place of residence, if they want.  However, we believe 
that this should be done by public consent in compliance with 
records and equity and far from discrimination and 
exploitation, in a regular manner, avoiding fait accompli, 
after the establishment of a government based on permanent 
constitution. The mentioned criteria are for Iraq to be 
peaceful both towards its nation and international community. 
 
Turkey will continue monitoring developments in Kirkuk 
carefully and closely in negotiation with other neighboring 
countries, and will continue warning the Iraqi Interim 
Government, international and regional organizations and all 
relevant parties. 
 
end text. 
DEUTSCH