04ANKARA5597
TERRORISM FINANCE COORDINATION OFFICER (TFCO) AT
Wed Sep 29 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 005597 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/ESC/TFS, S/CT, INL/C, IO/PHO, AND EUR/SE 
TREASURY FOR OFAC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN ETTC KVPR PREL TU KTFN
SUBJECT: TERRORISM FINANCE COORDINATION OFFICER (TFCO) AT 
EMBASSY ANKARA 
 
REF: STATE 201391 
 
¶1. (SBU) Embassy Ankara's Terrorism Finance Coordination 
Officer (TFCO) is Robert S. Deutsch, Deputy Chief of Mission. 
 E-mail: DeutschRS@state.gov.  Tel: 90-312-455-5555, ext.2202. 
 
¶2. (SBU) The TFCO Deputy is Thomas H. Goldberger, Economic 
Counselor.  E-mail: GoldbergerTH@state.gov.  Tel: 
90-312-455-5555, ext. 2254.  An additional contact is 
Michelle G. Los Banos, Economic Officer.  E-mail: 
LosBanosMG@state.gov.  Tel: 90-312-455-5555, ext. 2253. 
 
¶3. (SBU) The Embassy DCM/TFCO chairs a Counter Terrorism 
Finance Working Group (CTFWG) in which representatives from 
the Embassy Economic, Regional Affairs and Regional Security 
Sections and DEA and FBI who deal with terrorism finance 
regularly meet.  Post coordinates with Consulates Istanbul 
and Adana.  Given the differing mix of sections and agencies, 
Post believes it most efficient for the CTFWG to meet 
separately, but closely coordinate with the Visas 
Viper/Homeland Security Working Group processes.  The TFCO 
and Deputy TFCO participate in both groups which meet 
monthly.  The TFCO works closely with all other relevant 
agencies and entities in the Mission to ensure a coordinated 
approach to terrorism finance issues.  The Embassy economic 
section cooperates with the Turkish MFA representative who 
handles matters related to terrorism finance to exchange 
information and request action.  The DCM has extensive 
professional experience with financial and sanctions issues 
and the Deputy Economic Counselor recently received training 
in Washington on combating terrorist financing.  The Economic 
section also works closely with the USG's Financial Crimes 
Enforcement Network (FinCEN) and the Office of Overseas 
Prosecutorial Development (OPDAT) at the Department of 
Justice to manage training programs and visits related to 
terrorism finance issues.  Country clearance requests are 
reviewed by the TFCO and relevant sections and agencies at 
Post. 
 
¶4. (SBU) The Ambassador has discussed the issue of terrorism 
finance with the Turkish government at the Ministerial level. 
 It helps Post's efforts if Washington continues to designate 
Turkey as a priority country for receiving programs and 
training to combat terrorism finance.  It would also be 
helpful if senior USG officials raised terrorism finance in 
their meetings with senior GOT officials. 
EDELMAN