04ANKARA6366
TIP IN TURKEY: INTERIM ASSESSMENT FOR SPECIAL
Wed Nov 10 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 006366 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, EUR/PGI, EUR/SE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM PHUM PGOV SMIG PREF KWMN TU TIP IN TURKEY
SUBJECT: TIP IN TURKEY: INTERIM ASSESSMENT FOR SPECIAL 
WATCH LIST COUNTRIES 
 
REF: SECSTATE 228457 
 
Post's responses to reftel: 
 
 
Hotlines and Public Information Campaigns 
----------------------------------------- 
 
The GOT has not demonstrated appreciable progress on 
establishing victim hotlines or a focused public awareness 
campaign. It claims it has run into financing difficulties 
since hotline costs are significantly more than expected. 
 
 
Victim Identification, Referral, and Protection 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
On June 29, 2004, the GOT finalized a protocol with Turkey's 
lead anti-TIP NGO Human Resources Development Foundation 
(HRDF) to establish the first shelter for victims of 
trafficking in Turkey (04 IST 1062).  Secretary Powell, 
Turkish FonMin Abdullah Gul, and members of Turkey's National 
Task Force to Combat Human Trafficking presided over a 
publicized signing ceremony.  Under terms of the agreement, 
the Istanbul Metropolitan Municipality leased and renovated a 
residential housing unit and turned administration of the 
facility over to partner HRDF (04 ANK 4808).  On November 2, 
the shelter successfully managed the repatriation of its 
first victims, three Ukrainian women referred by Jandarma 
officers after an October 31 TIP-raid in Istanbul (04 ANK 
6309). 
 
 
International Cooperation 
------------------------- 
 
In 2004, IOM, HRDF and the GOT combined to assist in the 
voluntary returns of more than 50 victims of trafficking, up 
from less than 5 in 2003 (04 ANK 4808).  The GOT resolved 
long-standing internal opposition to finance, at an annual 
cost of 154,000 Swiss Francs, Turkey's full member status 
with the IOM.  The GOT reported additional participation in 
international anti-TIP law enforcement operations through 
OSCE, the Council of Europe, NATO, Stability Pact TIP Task 
Force, SECI and Europol.  The GOT issued draft protocols to 
source countries proposing bilateral cooperation in anti-TIP 
law enforcement and prosecution but according to MFA reports, 
only Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, and Ukraine responded (04 
ANK 4317). Partner governments and host country NGOs reported 
the GOT's implementation of the protocols remains 
inconsistent (04 ANK, 4544, 04 BAKU, 1235, 04 KIEV 3594), 
though media reports (04 ANK 3675, 04 ANK 4502, 04 ANK 5002) 
documented successful anti-TIP police operations with some 
source countries. 
 
 
Training 
-------- 
 
Assisted by a 10,000 USD grant from the Turkish Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs, IOM continued an aggressive training 
schedule with the cooperation of law enforcement and judicial 
officials from the MOJ, MOI, Security Directorate, Jandarma, 
and other members of Turkey's anti-TIP National Task Force. 
According to MFA statistics, since June 2004, 332 law 
enforcement officers participated in anti-TIP training 
courses organized by the Turkish MOI, MOJ, Stability Pact 
Task Force, International Center for Migration Policy 
Development (ICMPD) and IOM (04 ANK 6072). As with past 
programs, the most recent training event scheduled for 
November 23-26 in Adana, will include victim identification 
and protection components focused on a "training of trainers" 
approach to anti-TIP education. The GOT also incorporated TIP 
sensitivity and screening training in academy curricula for 
new national police and Jandarma recruits (04 ANK 4416, 04 
ANK 4448). 
 
 
Erzurum Case-specific Information 
--------------------------------- 
Following a December 2003 law enforcement operation at a 
brothel in Erzurum, police screened, detained, and later 
deported a Ukrainian woman they determined engaged 
voluntarily but illegally in prostitution.  Before notifying 
the Ukrainian Embassy that the Government would deport the 
woman, however, Erzurum's governor and deputy security 
director identified her in a televised press conference and 
announced (falsely according to her attorney) that she tested 
positive for HIV and Hepatitis C.  The governor urged men 
with whom she had sexual intercourse (1335 in three months) 
to seek immediate medical attention at local clinics.  The 
press conference prompted panic in the city and international 
outcry, including from the United Nations, denouncing the 
Government's discriminatory and abusive violation of the 
woman's human rights.  The Government reportedly provided the 
woman a temporary residence permit, free of charge medical 
care, and temporary shelter.  The Government announced that 
two Erzurum police officers were prosecuted for affiliation 
with an illegal prostitution syndicate, imprisoned for six 
months, fined and banned from further government employment. 
The Ministry of Justice is currently investigating the 
possibility of further police involvement.  The Ministry of 
Interior reportedly sent written orders on multiple occasions 
to each of Turkey's governorates warning against similar 
public actions and human rights abuses in future cases (04 
ANK 4147). 
EDELMAN