04BRUSSELS2972
JULY 12 GAERC DISCUSSIONS: ISRAEL, BURMA, SUDAN,
Tue Jul 13 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Brussels
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 002972 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL EAID MARR IS BM AF USEU BRUSSELS
SUBJECT: JULY 12 GAERC DISCUSSIONS: ISRAEL, BURMA, SUDAN, 
AFGHANISTAN, BALKANS 
 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (U) EU FMs at their July 12 General Affairs and External 
Relations Council (GAERC) meeting discussed several issues, 
but took few concrete decisions other than a 
non-controversial approval of a Joint Action to agree on 
Operation "ALTHEA" as an EU Military Operation following on 
NATO's SFOR in Bosnia-Herzegovina.  GAERC discussions on Iraq 
and the WTO Doha Round negotiations reported separately.  End 
Summary. 
 
ISRAEL/ICJ RULING 
----------------- 
 
¶2. (U) Dutch FM Bot told the press after the GAERC that the 
EU still needed to look carefully at the International Court 
of Justice ruling on Israel's security fence and "achieve a 
common view on its political consequences."  The Dutch 
Presidency also reissued it's statement of July 9 on the ICJ 
case, which notes that "it will now be up to the political 
bodies of the UN to decide how to act upon the Court's 
Advisory Opinion."  Bot stressed, however, that the fence 
issue should not be dealt with in isolation, but in the 
context of the road map. 
 
ASEM/BURMA 
---------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) EU FMs agreed to the Dutch proposal to name former 
FM Hans van den Broek as an envoy to Asia to try and reach an 
agreement on Burmese participation that could salvage the 
planned Asia-Europe Summit (ASEM) in Hanoi in October.  Van 
den Broek should be leaving on an Asian tour (with stops in 
at least Bangkok, Tokyo and Hanoi) in the next ten days.  He 
is then expected to report to the EU's informal ministerial 
(Gymnich) on September 3.  While the Presidency statement 
observes that "efforts are required on both sides", 
Commissioner Patten and others noted that the real need was 
for some improvement in Burma's human rights record, and so 
far there had been "no progress". 
 
SUDAN 
----- 
 
¶4. (U) FM Bot took strong exception to the "impression that 
has been created that the EU is not doing enough" about the 
situation in Sudan.  He argued that the EU was involved in 
mediating the cease-fire talks, had sent observers and was 
the largest donor of assistance.  He noted that the EU was 
still working on three fronts.  First, it continued to 
provide assistance, and earlier on July 12 the Commission had 
announced a further 18 million euros in aid.  Second, it 
would maintain political pressure via high-level visits by 
High Rep Solana and others to the region.  Finally, the EU 
was considering what sanctions it might utilize against the 
government.  On this last point, Bot said the EU would 
cooperate closely with the US, UN  and African Union.  He 
expressed the hope the Sudanese government was "finally 
understanding" the risks it was running. 
 
AFGHANISTAN 
----------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) We are told GAERC discussion of Afghanistan was 
"very brief."  Commissioner Patten and others expressed 
concern about the limited progress to date in political 
stabilization and noted the risk that President Karzai might 
be "tempted" to make political deals with various "warlords." 
 FM Bot said the EU "regretted" the postponement of 
parliamentary elections. 
 
BALKANS/OPERATION ALTHEA 
------------------------ 
 
¶6. (SBU) FMs had a lengthy discussion on the political 
situation in Serbia and Kosovo, but the debate was described 
to us as "not very illuminating."  EU FMs also appointed 
Swedish diplomat Michael Sahlin to serve as EU Special 
Representative in Macedonia (replacing Soren Jessen-Pedersen, 
who is now head of the UN Mission in Kosovo).  After a very 
brief presentation by High Rep Solana, EU FMs without 
discussion approved the Joint Action authorizing a new EU 
military operation (Operation ALTHEA) in Bosnia to follow-on 
NATO's SFOR.  The EU's "aim is to deploy by the end of the 
year a robust force with a Chapter VII mission."  (NOTE: In 
Greek, Althea means "healer."  But we cannot help but be a 
bit surprised that the EU has named its Bosnia operation 
after a mythological figure best known for causing her son's 
death, and then hanging herself.  END NOTE.) 
MINIMIZE CONSIDERED 
MCKINLEY