04CARACAS1860
SIGNATURE APPEALS UPDATE:  MAY 29
Tue Jun 01 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Caracas
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS  CARACAS 001860 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
NSC FOR CBARTON 
USCINCSO ALSO FOR POLAD 
STATE PASS USAID FOR DCHA/OTI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM KDEM VE
SUBJECT: SIGNATURE APPEALS UPDATE:  MAY 29 
 
REF: A. CARACAS 1839 
     ¶B. CARACAS 1837 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (U) The second day of the signature appeals in the 
presidential referendum process began slowly with low 
turnout, picking up by mid-morning.  There were multiple 
reports of violence at appeals centers, including two 
assaults against journalists.  National identity cards 
continued to be controversial, as unclear rules from the 
national Electoral Council (CNE) caused some people to be 
denied entrance to appeals centers.  The GOV launched 
allegations of fraud over  the discovery of allegedly 
falsified identity cards.  Former President Carter arrived 
and began visiting appeals centers.  End summary. 
 
------------- 
Slow Start... 
------------- 
 
¶2. (U) Appeals centers opened May 28 for a second day of 
signature appeals in the recall process against President 
Hugo Chavez.  Observers reported low turnout at the opening, 
but picking up by 10:00 a.m.  Most centers did not have lines 
but maintained a steady stream of participants.  Observers 
reported anecdotally that many centers had received more than 
half of the possible appeals. 
 
------------------ 
But Things Heat Up 
------------------ 
 
¶3. (U) By 1:00 p.m., reports of violence came from several 
states.  Groups of anti- and pro-Chavez supporters surrounded 
appeals centers, occasionally resulting in scrapes.  One 
observer in Zulia reported having seen 15 fights, one of 
which resulted in nine people being hospitalized.  One person 
was lightly wounded when a Plan Republica soldier fired his 
shotgun at the ground to disperse the group.  Two reporters, 
in Caracas and Carabobo, were assaulted by Chavez 
sympathizers.  There were multiple reports of attacks against 
opposition political party offices serving as information 
centers for the opposition.  GOV security forces also 
reportedly raided several information centers.  Private media 
showed images of a center in Caracas that had been closed 
amidst harassment by Chavez supporters, some on motorcycles 
bearing shotguns.  Despite these incidents, observers 
reported calm and normal operations at most appeals centers. 
 
¶4. (U) Plan Republica units, according to some reports, 
impeded entry to appeals centers over technicalities.  There 
were reports and images of Plan Republica forces standing by 
while government sympathizers harassed appeals centers. 
There were also reports of the military closing centers for 
long periods over procedural disputes. 
 
------------------------ 
Identity Cards A Dilemma 
------------------------ 
 
¶5. (U) Controversy over vague and contradictory rules 
regarding national identity cards slowed the process.  The 
ambiguity allowed workers to reject appeals based on the 
perceived authenticity of the cards.  The CNE reportedly sent 
an instruction to appeals centers on May 27 when the 
controversy erupted, but there was confusion over whether the 
instruction held precedent over the appeals norms approved by 
the CNE board.  Three directors put forth personal (and 
varying) interpretations of the rules, as did two 
pro-government politicians.  Contradictions were also present 
between the appeals registers (caudernos), computer database, 
and pre-printed lists of appeals posted outside the centers, 
which caused several people trying to make appeals to be 
turned away. 
 
¶6. (U) At 6:15 p.m., the pro-GOV Comando Ayacucho announced 
 
the opposition had engaged in systematic fraud nationwide, 
falsifying identity cards.  At 3:00 p.m. the secret police 
(DISIP) allegedly captured a man in Caracas with more than 
400 falsified identity cards.  The DISIP said also they had 
evidence of falsified cards in other parts of Caracas. 
Libertador Municipality Mayor Freddy Bernal claimed the 
person was also engaged in falsifying police credentials, 
alleging it was part of the "Plan B" by the opposition to 
rebel against Chavez.  The mayor of Puerto Cabello reported a 
man had been detained by security forces with 179 identity 
cards. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Jimmy Carter Arrives; Gaviria at CNE 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶7. (U) Former President Carter arrived at mid-day.  Carter 
visited four appeals centers later in the day.  He told 
reporters he was observing and would make press comments at a 
later time.  OAS SYG Gaviria met with CNE officials late in 
the day.  More than 100 international observers are present 
throughout Venezuela.  Other international observers invited 
by the CNE have also been seen meeting with GOV and 
opposition officials.  Among them are international 
journalists, human rights advocates, electoral officials, and 
members of the Socialist International. 
SHAPIRO 
 
 
NNNN 
 
      2004CARACA01860 - UNCLASSIFIED