04CARACAS2595
SECRETARY POWELL'S STATEMENT ON THE VENEZUELAN
Thu Aug 12 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Caracas
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS  CARACAS 002595 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
FOR WHA/PDA,WHA/AND,INR/R/MR,PACE/PR/FPCW/WHA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO PGOV OPRC KIRC VE
SUBJECT: SECRETARY POWELL'S STATEMENT ON THE VENEZUELAN 
REFERENDUM RECEIVES WIDE COVERAGE ON LAST DAY OF 
 
CAMPAIGN 
 
 
----------------------------------- 
SUMMARY 
----------------------------------- 
¶1.   On August 12, the last day of campaigning for the 
presidential recall referendum, the printed and 
electronic press are full stories on the various 
aspects of the referendum.   While "El Universal" led 
with the story on the Pope's remarks and prayers to 
Venezuela, it also picked up Secretary of State Colin 
Powell's remarks, as did all the printed and electronic 
press.  Perhaps the next most important theme was the 
need for transparency and most importantly the 
"totally" secret nature of the vote.   Editorials and 
television shows with a host of invitees from both 
sides, gave their parting remarks before the mid-night 
deadline. 
 
----------------------------------- 
SECRETARY POWELL STATEMENT ON VENEZUELA RECEIVES BROAD 
 
SIPDIS 
MEDIA COVERAGE 
----------------------------------- 
¶2.    The statement by Secretary Powell on Venezuela 
was broadcast minutes after it was read in Washington 
by Globovision, a CNN-type program.  "El Universal," a 
major daily also placed it in its website almost 
immediately after it was read with the title, "Powell 
Calls upon Venezuelans to Reject Violence."  By the 
time it reached the printed page, the emphasis was 
changed to the call for "Rejection of Intimidation." 
Other newspapers followed by placing  it on their 
websites as well.   The "El Nacional" article emphazied 
the Secretary of State's call to Venezuelans to reject 
both "inimidation and violence." 
 
¶3.  On Friday morning, all the major dailies both in 
the capital and all the provinces, carried the story. 
"El Universal" lead with the story of the Pope's 
blessing to the Venezuelans, but beneath that headline 
was the note which reads "Colin Powell:  The Secretary 
of State Calls upon Venezuelans to Reject Violence and 
Intimidation and Exercise Their Right to Vote."    Both 
"El Nacional" and "El Universal" dedicated almost one 
whole page to the remarks of the Secretary, the Pope, 
and other international leaders.  The leading dailies 
carried news of the story on the front-page, although 
it was not the leading headline it did receive more 
coverage that than the remarks of the Pope.  The major 
TV news programs also ran the story.  News of the 
Secretary's message was not covered by the pro-Chavez 
 
SIPDIS 
"Vea."  The majority of editorials also emphasised the 
need to vote. 
 
----------------------------------- 
 OTHER REFERENDUM THEMES 
----------------------------------- 
¶4.  Other stories with a referendum angle included news 
on 
a.  the pending arrival of President Carter and OAS 
Secretary General Gaviria; 
 
SIPDIS 
b.  the Wednesday press conference with Center Carter 
and ex-presidents of Argentina and Costa Rica; 
c.  the Center Carter press conference at the CNE; 
d.   doubts about the fingerprinting machine; 
e.   the possible manipulation of data by the CNE; 
f.   the call of the Episcopal Council for all 
Venezuelans to exercise their right to vote and reject 
violence; 
g.   the need for transparency; 
h.   and perhaps most important, the secrecy of the 
vote. 
 
¶5. Both "El Universal" and "El Nacional" printed full 
pages (the former in color) of instructions on how the 
voting process worked.  In the spirit of equality, 
opposition TV shows have invited pro-Chavez 
respresentatives as well.  Another topic which caught 
the headlines was the attack on the Globovision vehicle 
and crew and the  Spanish journalist who was caught up 
in the violence and wounded. 
 
----------------------------------- 
 TOP STORIES IN THE PRESS 
----------------------------------- 
¶6. a. OAS guarantees that the recall vote is secret. 
(El Nacional, El Diario de Caracas, Ultimas Noticias, 
El Globo, El Universal, 2001) 
 
b. Powell calls on Venezuelans to reject violence (The 
Daily Journal, El Universal, El Nacional, Ultimas 
Noticias, El Globo, El Nuevo Pas, Reporte, 2001, The 
Daily Journal) 
 
c. Pope prays for reconciliation in Venezuela. (The 
Daily Journal, El Universal, El Nacional, Ultimas 
Noticias, 2001) 
 
d. Venezuela's political opposition will close the 
recall campaign with a march on Caracas streets. (El 
Nacional, 2001, El Universal) 
 
----------------------------------- 
OTHER REFERENDUM STORIES 
----------------------------------- 
¶7. a. CNE approves of norms to tally up votes and for 
the use of the fingerprint-taking machines. (El 
Universal, 
 
b. Jimmy Carter and Cesar Gaviria arrive in Venezuela 
tomorrow. (El Universal) 
 
c. Venezuelan Government decided to address Cantv's 
American partners to warn them of the risk they will 
run if the telephone company is involved in an 
electoral fraud. (Reporte, Diario Vea) 
 
d. Foreign journalist snatched in downtown Caracas. 
(The Daily Journal, El Universal, El Nacional) 
 
----------------------------------- 
EDITORIALS AND OP-EDS 
----------------------------------- 
¶6. a. Today's top "El Nacional" editorial says that 
"the Venezuelan people should not miss out on this 
opportunity to settle accounts with a leader that ended 
up not being [a leader] such, but an adventurer that 
made us lose five valuable years in the development of 
the country." 
 
b. "El Universal," in an editorial, also called on 
Venezuelans to vote saying: "voting on August 15, more 
than exercising a right is fulfilling a duty, an 
obligation with the future, with future generations, 
with a present committed to rebuilding and putting the 
country on the right course." 
 
c. Political analyst Alberto Garrido wrote in "El 
Universal": "The nature of the revolution will be 
defined on August 15 once and for all.  Chavez has said 
that his revolution 'is a process to destroy the 
system, not to remake it.'  He repeated those words in 
his speech last Sunday.  August 15 must mean, in his 
view, the extinction of the representative democracy." 
 
----------------------------------- 
COMMENT 
----------------------------------- 
¶7. On this the last day of the campaign the media is 
full of referendum related articles and stories. 
Interestingly, except for "Vea," the pro-Chavez daily 
and full-page pro-Chavez "non-ads" paid for the Union 
of Petroleum Workers, there was surprisingly little 
"Si" or "No" advertisement.  The Venezuelan referendum 
has arrived at the homestretch. 
Shapiro 
 
 
NNNN 
      2004CARACA02595 - UNCLASSIFIED