04FRANKFURT5676
Hesse Hosts Large Event for OIF/OEF Military
Thu Jul 01 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Frankfurt
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS FRANKFURT 005676 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MARR PREL PGOV GM
SUBJECT: Hesse Hosts Large Event for OIF/OEF Military 
Families 
 
¶1. SUMMARY:  The state of Hesse recently hosted a day of 
appreciation for 2200 U.S. military and family members -- in 
particular families of those deployed to Iraq and 
Afghanistan -- in the most recent expression of Hesse's 
desire to be a good host for U.S. forces.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  On June 24, the Ambassador attended a large picnic 
hosted by Hesse Minister-President Roland Koch (CDU) for 
families of deployed soldiers stationed in Hesse.  More than 
2,200 soldiers and family members (including approx. 700 
children) enjoyed an afternoon of fun and food at the 
historic Hessenpark.  The state originally targeted families 
of 1st Armored Division soldiers still deployed in Iraq, but 
expanded it to all soldiers and their families (including 
those living in nearby Rheinland-Pfalz and Mannheim 
installations).  German and American sponsors chipped in to 
provide food and activities such as basketball and football 
clinics by German professional teams.  About 60% of the 
estimated EUR 90,000 cost was covered by donations. 
 
¶3. Hesse M-P Koch, who spent almost three hours at the 
event, gave an opening speech (to rousing applause) 
recognizing the sacrifice of U.S. soldiers and their 
families and declaring that the state would always welcome 
them.  The Ambassador thanked the state of Hesse and M-P 
Koch for this latest gesture of support.  Mrs. Deanie 
Dempsey (wife of deployed 1AD Commander Maj. General Martin 
Dempsey) spoke on behalf of families. 
 
¶4.  COMMENT:  Regional newspapers gave very positive 
coverage to the event, the latest expression of Hesse's 
efforts to be seen as a welcoming host for American forces. 
END COMMENT. 
 
BODDE