04MADRID952
FALL 2004 INTERN PROGRAM
Thu Mar 18 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Madrid
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MADRID 000952 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR EUR/EX/PER-MARIE PYLE AND EUR/WE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: APER AMGT ASEC SP
SUBJECT: FALL 2004 INTERN PROGRAM 
 
REF: STATE 45968 
 
¶1. In response to REFTEL, Spain wishes to participate 
in the Fall 2004 Intern Program. 
 
¶2. Pertinent data is outlined below in the order 
requested: 
 
¶A. Number of interns requested: 
 
Embassy Madrid - six - one for the Political Section, 
one for the Management Section, two for Public Affairs 
and two for the Consular Section. 
 
¶B. A 3/3 level of Spanish is required for all except 
for the MGT intern for whom Spanish is preferable but 
not required.  All interns are required to work a full 
time 40 hour/week schedule. 
 
¶C. Other special selection criteria:  It is preferred 
for the Public Affairs Cultural Affairs intern to have 
previous study/living in Spain.  The Consular Section 
interns will be working with the public. 
 
¶D. Sections of assignment: 
 
Embassy Madrid - Political, Management, Public Affairs 
and Consular Sections. 
 
¶E. Name and title post intern contact: 
 
Madrid -Jose Salces, Human Resources Specialist 
Telephone: 011-34-91-587-2328, fax 011-34-91-587-2229 
E-mail address: salcesj@state.gov 
 
¶F. Specific duties/projects: 
 
MADRID: 
 
Political Section - help update the annual human rights 
report and work on other political topics/projects. 
 
Management Section - The intern will be assigned to the 
Information Management (IM) section.  The intern will 
help implement a quality management program by drafting 
a quality service manual and assisting unit managers to 
draft procedures and policies.  The intern will also 
develop and update content for the IM section website. 
 
Public Affairs - The intern assigned to the Media 
Relations Office will be asked to do regular press work 
consisting of press releases, media reaction, reading 
the newspapers and selecting clips and regular office 
duties.  The intern in the Cultural Affairs Office will 
do regular cultural related work: research through 
internet, help on special programs, updating of lists 
and regular office duties. 
 
Consular Section - while working in the Visa Units and 
the American Citizen Services Unit, the interns will 
screen and provide visa information to applicants and 
provide assistance and information to American citizens 
abroad.  Interns will also work on special projects 
such as evaluating and coordinating public information 
disseminated through embassy and State Department web 
sites, printed material and caller information 
services. 
 
¶G. Housing: Madrid cannot repeat cannot provide 
housing.  Estimate of living expenses is as follows: 
meals and incidentals are similar to Washington, D.C. 
Lodging expenses can vary from 450 U.S. dollars/month 
if an adequate room is found in a family home to 2,800 
U.S. dollars/month for a fully furnished apartment in 
the city.  Please note that it is difficult to rent a 
moderately priced apartment in the city for a less than 
a six-month period. 
 
¶H. Visa requirements: none for a stay of less than 
ninety days. If an intern is coming to Spain also to 
study, a student visa should be obtained from the 
Spanish Embassy or Consulates in the U.S. 
 
¶3. Thank you very much for your assistance.  Argyros