04MADRID868
SPAIN COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR USNRC COMMISSIONER
Mon Mar 15 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Madrid
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MADRID 000868 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO USNRC:C.ROSALES-BUSH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KNNP ENRG TRGY OVIP SP
SUBJECT: SPAIN COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR USNRC COMMISSIONER 
MERRIFIED AND DELEGATION 
 
REF: STATE 55129 
 
¶1.  Embassy welcomes and grants country clearance to USNRC 
Commissioner Jeffrey S. Merrified; Mr. John Thoma, the 
Commissioner's Technical Assistant for Materials; Mr. William 
Borchardt, Deputy Director of the Office of Nuclear Reactor 
Regulation; Mr. John Greeves, Director of the Division of 
Waste Management; and Cindy Rosales Bush, International 
Relations Specialist, Office of International Programs, to 
visit various sites in Madrid, Guadalajara and Santander 
March 28-April 2, to conduct a bilateral meeting with the 
Consejo de Seguridad Nuclear (CSN), and give a speech at the 
Nuclear Energy Industry's World Nuclear Fuel Cycle Conference 
¶2004. 
 
¶2.  Control Officer for this visit is Science and Technology 
Officer Laura Lochman who can be reached at, Office PH: 
34-91-587-2385; Cell: 34-649-864978; e-mail: 
lochmanla@state.gov.  The courtesy visit with the Ambassador 
is confirmed for March 29 at 09:00 am. Transportation has 
also been arranged for Commissioner Merrifield and delegation 
as requested reftel. 
 
¶3.  THREAT ASSESSMENT: 
 
In general, Spain is safe.  However, Madrid, Barcelona and 
other large cities in Spain -- including resort/convention 
areas such as Benidorm -- attract a large number of criminals 
and pickpockets and frequent incidents of crime of 
opportunity against the unwary do occur.  Carry only 
essential items including a photocopy of your passport's 
photo page.  Visitors can protect themselves against crime by 
being street-smart, alert and aware of their surroundings. 
In the event you are victimized by crime, or experience any 
security-related incident, please contact the Embassy's 
Regional Security Office at 91-587-2550 or after hours at 
91-587-2355.  Official visitors to the Embassy in Madrid or 
the Consulate General in Barcelona are encouraged to receive 
a security briefing from the RSO office at their earliest 
convenience.  Additional information regarding safety and 
security in Spain is available on the U.S. Department of 
State's website (http://www.state.gov) and the U.S. Embassy's 
website (www.embusa.es). 
 
Travelers are encouraged to review the most recent Worldwide 
Caution issued by the Department of State.  As the Department 
of State continues to develop information on any potential 
security threats to Americans overseas, it shares credible 
threat information through its Consular Information Program 
documents, available on the Internet at 
http://travel/state.gov.  In addition to information on the 
Internet, U.S. travelers can hear recorded information by 
calling the Department of State in Washington, D.C. at 
202-647-5225 from their touch-tone telephone, or receive 
information by automated telefax by dialing 202-647-3000 from 
their fax machine. 
ARGYROS