04SANAA3099
YEMEN BIOSAFETY STATUS - CARTAGENA PROTOCOL ON
Sat Dec 18 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Sanaa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SANAA 003099 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO STATE/OES/ETC FOR H.LEE, 
STATE/EB/TPP/ABT FOR R.SINGH, AND USDA/FAS/BIG FOR 
JPPASSINO. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV ETRD EAGR EAID TBIO YM ENVIRONMENT
SUBJECT: YEMEN BIOSAFETY STATUS - CARTAGENA PROTOCOL ON 
BIOSAFETY, ROUND TWO 
 
REF: SECSTATE 259661 
 
¶1. Ref A asked posts to help identify a small number of 
countries in order to engage them in more detailed bilateral 
discussions over the coming months over issues related to the 
Cartagena Protocol.  Since the conclusion of the February 
2004 First Meeting of Parties (MOP-1) to the Cartagena 
Protocol on Biosafety, the ROYG has not enacted or initiated 
any new laws, regulations or practices regarding US 
agricultural and living modified organisms (LMO) trade. 
 
¶2. A draft law banning LMO products was introduced by the 
Cabinet over a year ago.  After consideration, the Cabinet 
decided to send the draft law to the Yemen Standardization, 
Metrology and Quality Control Organization (YSMQCO), a 
regulatory agency comprised of agricultural, meteorological 
and other scientists.  The YSMQCO recommended banning LMO 
agricultural imports and sent this recommendation to the 
Minister of Industry and Trade, Dr. Khaled Rajeh Sheikh. 
Minister Sheikh froze the draft law until further study could 
be made.  YSMQCO Vice Director General Ahmed Al-Bashah noted 
that the ROYG would like to observe the experiences of other 
Arab countries and coordinate with them on these biosafety 
issues.  (Comment: Post believes Minister Sheikh is sitting 
on the recommendation as he does not want to stifle trade 
relations or bring greater attention to this matter with 
prominent countries who trade LMO products.  End Comment) 
 
¶3. Discussion on LMO issues continues through the ROYG 
interagency Biosafety Committee.  Mr. Al-Bashah cited ongoing 
and sporadic press coverage of the anticipated dangers of 
genetically modified organism (GMO) products.  While GMO 
policy formulation is in its infancy in Yemen, the USDA 
Agricultural Trade Office (ATO) has actively supported the 
ROYG's ongoing efforts on this issue. 
 
¶4. In early December 2004, ATO sponsored the travel of two 
standardization working level officials to Cairo for a LMO 
Middle Eastern forum for discussions with 14 Middle Eastern 
and North African government officials including Yemen 
represented by Al-Bashah.  Al-Bashah said he appreciated 
hearing about his colleagues' work on LMO regulations and 
would use this knowledge as a resource for Yemen's biosafety 
policy making.  He specifically cited the experience of the 
Gulf countries, Egypt, and Jordan as examples. 
 
¶5. Overall, Yemen continues to tread water on LMO issues 
while its decisionmakers await further guidance from 
countries in the region and more input from interlocutors 
such the U.S. 
KRAJESKI