04TELAVIV1408
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Mon Mar 08 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 TEL AVIV 001408 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
Mideast 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
All media reported that Sunday 15 Palestinians were 
killed, including four children under the age of 16, 
and more than 80 Palestinians were wounded during an 
IDF operation in two refugee camps in central Gaza. 
Other than the children, all of the dead were armed men 
(nine Hamas members, one member of Fatah's Al Aqsa 
Martyrs Brigades and one member of the Popular 
Resistance Committees).  Israel Radio quoted IDF Chief 
of Staff Moshe Ya'alon and other IDF sources as saying 
that the troops did not aim at children, and that those 
who died could have been killed by Palestinian fire. 
Leading media reported that the PA denounced a 
"massacre" and urged the UN to send observers.  Israel 
Radio quoted Hamas leader Abdelaziz Rantisi as saying 
on Al Jazeera-TV that the Jews are the enemies of the 
believers and that all they had brought to the region 
was rage and pain. 
 
Yediot cited the IDF's belief that terrorist attacks in 
the Gaza Strip and West Bank will increase.  Leading 
media quoted Ya'alon as saying that there could be a 
link between the rise in the number of Palestinian 
attacks and PM Sharon's announcement of a unilateral 
withdrawal from the Gaza Strip.  (Sunday, all media 
reported on a failed combined bombing and shooting 
attack at the Erez crossing Saturday, which was 
thwarted by IDF soldiers and PA policemen.)  Sunday, 
Maariv led with a story that that Hamas is setting up 
an army in the Strip in order to take it over after 
Israel withdraws.  Sunday, all media reported that one 
or two (Yediot) suicide attacks were thwarted in 
Jerusalem during the weekend.  Yediot and Maariv quoted 
Ya'alon as saying that one of the attacks was funded by 
Iran.  Sunday, Jerusalem Post reported that in a 
further attempt to fight spreading anarchy in the 
Palestinian Authority-controlled areas, the PA has 
decided to resume executions of convicted murderers and 
"collaborators." 
 
Sunday, Hatzofe cited the British daily Financial Times 
as saying that the U.S. Administration and the GOI will 
soon agree on Sharon's disengagement plan. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that Egypt is likely to demand that 
Israel revise security arrangements incorporated in the 
peace agreement between the two countries to allow it 
to beef up deployments in its side of the Gaza Strip 
should Israel withdraw from the "Philadelphi" seam area 
around Rafah, thus providing security on the border and 
preventing the smuggling of arms into the Gaza Strip. 
Israel Radio quoted PA Chairman Yasser Arafat's 
national security adviser Jibril Rajoub as saying that 
in the next few days there will be consultations 
between Egyptian and Palestinian representatives about 
Israel's disengagement plan, and that the Egyptian 
chief of intelligence, Gen. Omar Suleiman, will arrive 
in Ramallah for talks with Arafat.  This morning, 
Israel Radio quoted Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak as 
saying in an interview with the French daily Le Figaro 
that he rejects the idea of an Egyptian security role 
in the Gaza strip, describing it as a trap that would 
lead to conflict with the Palestinians and possibly the 
Israelis.  All media reported that Egyptian Parliament 
Speaker Ahmad Fathi Srour declined the invitation of 
Knesset Speaker Reuven Rivlin to address a special 
Knesset session on March 23 to mark the 25th 
anniversary of the signing of the peace treaty with 
Egypt.  Ha'aretz says that the person most likely to 
represent Egypt at the ceremony is the head of the 
Egyptian Parliament's Foreign Relations Committee. 
 
Maariv reported that UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan 
has presented a proposal to resume negotiations between 
Israel, Syria and Lebanon: in a first stage, the three 
countries would pledge to act against violence from 
within their sovereign territory.  The newspaper says 
that the aim of the proposal is to rein in Hizbullah, 
and that Syrian President Bashar Assad accepts the 
offer, but that Sharon has not yet responded to it. 
 
Israel Radio reported that the IDF has presented to 
Defense Minister Shaul Mofaz a binding ethical code 
that will ban the humiliation of Palestinians and the 
use of force as a punishment measure against them. 
 
Leading media quoted State Comptroller Eliezer Goldberg 
as saying Sunday that his office will check the 
"decision-making processes that preceded the return of 
Elchanan Tenenbaum."  This investigation will start in 
the next few days. 
 
During the weekend, all media named the possible 
accomplice of the Haifa father and son who attempted to 
carry out terrorist attacks against Israeli Arabs as 
Yevgeni Grossman, 22, from Ashdod.  All media reported 
that a group of Kach members and supporters of the 
murderer Baruch Goldstein held celebrations Saturday 
and Sunday to mark the tenth anniversary of his death 
and of his massacre of Muslim worshippers at Hebron's 
Tomb of the Patriarchs.  Some Goldstein supporters were 
interviewed in the mainstream media. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that the United Arab Emirates and the 
family of its president, Sheikh Ziad ibn Sultan are 
funding the repair works of the Dome of the Rock 
compound on the Temple Mount, which are due to begin in 
the coming weeks and to take several months. 
Sunday, Hatzofe quoted Mofaz as saying that the Phalcon 
AWACS deal with India is "the most significant 
breakthrough in Israeli defense exports." 
Ha'aretz and other media reported that two former 
Israelis -- the brothers Daniel and Abner Nicherie -- 
were indicted in a federal court in Los Angeles this 
weekend on charges of defrauding a couple of some USD 
40 million. 
 
Sunday, leading media quoted U.S. officials as saying 
that the Bush administration is close to imposing 
economic sanctions on Syria for its support of 
terrorist groups and for failing to stop guerrillas 
from entering Iraq. 
 
Ha'aretz cited a U.S. Energy Department report, 
according to which Israel refuses to return highly- 
enriched uranium it received from the U.S. years ago. 
The report says that the U.S. has been working since 
1996 to recover enriched uranium it had supplied to 
friendly nations in the framework of the "Atoms for 
Peace" program. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that the joint Israeli-Jordanian 
"Bridging the Rift" project in the Arava will include a 
major scientific center that aims to create a 
comprehensive computer databank of genetic information 
on humans, animals and plants.  The newspaper says that 
Cornell and Stanford universities will also develop the 
center. 
 
Maariv reported that the Judea and Samaria College (in 
the West Bank settlement of Ariel) is developing a 
space exploration module in cooperation with NASA. 
Sunday, Jerusalem Post reported that Ben Gurion 
University Prof. Richard Israelowitz recently received 
the "prestigious" "Distinguished Scientist Award" of 
the U.S. National Institute on Drug Abuse" (NIDA) for 
his research on immigrant drug abuse. 
 
Ha'aretz Washington correspondent reported that for 
Arab Americans, the voting trend is "anyone but Bush." 
 
-------- 
Mideast: 
-------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Military correspondent Amos Harel wrote on page one of 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: "The Palestinian 
groups are trying to send suicide bombers all the time, 
but there is no doubt that the increase in the number 
of losses on their side, like in Sunday's raids, only 
stokes their appetite for revenge." 
 
Military correspondent Alex Fishman wrote on page one 
of mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot: "The 
strategic solution to terror is not something small- 
scale, and is subject to the decision of the political 
echelon: a comprehensive operation in the Gaza Strip 
... or reaching a political arrangement that will 
enable the entry of a foreign force." 
 
Liberal op-ed writer Yael Gewirtz opined in an 
editorial in Yediot Aharonot: "The atmosphere of zero 
trust at home also exacerbates the attitude the U.S. 
Administration has taken towards [Sharon]." 
 
Chief Economic Editor and senior columnist Sever 
Plotker wrote in an editorial in Yediot Aharonot: "With 
the U.S. paralyzed by an election year, a new French 
policy could fill the void in assisting to formulate an 
Israeli-Palestinian interim arrangement and perhaps 
even a comprehensive Israeli-Arab arrangement." 
 
Senior op-ed writer Akiva Eldar commented in Ha'aretz: 
"If there aren't any stunning surprises, U.S. President 
George W. Bush's blessings for the disengagement plan 
will, in the blink of an eye, become the kiss of death 
for Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's government." 
 
Former education minister from Meretz, contributor 
Amnon Rubinstein wrote in Ha'aretz: "Evidence has 
started to mount that the external facade presented by 
Arab media is a deception; and whenever the belt is 
loosened a little, new voices can be heard in the Arab 
world." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
Â¶I.  "Stoking an Appetite For Revenge" 
 
Military correspondent Amos Harel wrote on page one of 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (March 8): "Is the 
army trying to sabotage Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's 
disengagement plan?  This suspicion is likely to arise 
in light of yesterday's operations by the Israel 
Defense Forces in the refugee camps in the Gaza Strip. 
Just as Sharon is talking about unilateral withdrawal 
from Gaza and [Israel's] National Security Council is 
working on plans for such a pullout, the army raids 
camps in the Strip and confronts armed Palestinian 
groups.  The operation ended with 15 Palestinians dead, 
most of them armed men, and no IDF casualties.  As in 
most cases, however, it appears the real reason for the 
operation has to do with inertia, not conspiracy.... 
The operation was carried out Sunday because it is a 
continuation of the IDF's policy in Gaza over the last 
two years.... In other words, unlike in the case of the 
Lebanon pullout in the spring of 2000, the army does 
not plan to allow the political leadership to present a 
withdrawal from Gaza as the result of a military 
failure.  The army can meet the challenge, but the 
country's political leaders have decided to retreat, 
and the army, of course, will obey.... The Palestinian 
groups are trying to send suicide bombers all the time, 
but there is no doubt that the increase in the number 
of losses on their side, like in Sunday's raids, only 
stokes their appetite for revenge." 
 
II.  "In the Mud" 
 
Military correspondent Alex Fishman wrote on page one 
of mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot (March 
8): "No honest military man would say that the IDF 
operation in the el-Bureij and Nuseirat refugee camps, 
or the operation carried out three weeks ago at the 
Sajaiya refugee camp, lead to any kind of solution to 
terror in the Gaza Strip.  These armored operations in 
the refugee camps are, in fact, intended to ensure that 
the IDF and settlers can survive in the Gaza 
Strip-until the government decides where it stands on 
the issue of unilateral disengagement.  Someone has 
thrown a stone into a puddle, and now the army is being 
asked to both contain the shock waves in the swamp and 
to stay clean and fragrant.... The armored operations 
are tactical moves.  The strategic solution to terror 
is not something small-scale, and is subject to the 
decision of the political echelon: a comprehensive 
operation in the Gaza Strip styled after Operation 
Defensive Shield, or reaching a political arrangement 
that will enable the entry of a foreign force -- 
Egyptian, European or any other military force that 
will be willing to take responsibility.  Otherwise, we 
will continue to sink into the mud of the Gaza Strip 
until we are forced to leave with our tail between our 
legs." 
 
III.  "The Trap of the Lack of Trust" 
 
Liberal op-ed writer Yael Gewirtz opined in a editorial 
in Yediot Aharonot (March 7): "Even the proponents of a 
withdrawal from Gaza will find it hard to support a 
prime minister who placed his full weight behind the 
release of [Elchanan] Tenenbaum for concealed reasons, 
and without having shown the necessary leadership when 
it became evident that the entire deal proved to be 
complete chaos.  The atmosphere of zero trust at home 
also exacerbates the attitude the U.S. Administration 
has taken towards him.  While Condoleezza Rice has 
spoken about an event even more important than the fall 
of the Berlin wall, Washington has refused to allow the 
wall preventing Sharon's political visit there from 
coming down before it receives from him assurances 
about the initiative he wants to launch.  That is the 
miserable situation of the Israeli Prime Minister at 
present, the peak of the trap of the lack of trust that 
he has found himself caught in both domestically and 
abroad.  He is suspected to be a person whose real 
motives are concealed and who assumes limited 
responsibility.  Until proven otherwise, he won't be 
getting any additional credit." 
 
IV.  "Discovering France" 
 
Chief Economic Editor and senior columnist Sever 
Plotker wrote in an editorial in Yediot Aharonot (March 
8): "Relations between Israel and France are warming 
up, slowly but surely.... There are many motivations 
behind the change, starting from fear of the rising 
power of Moslem fundamentalism (within the Arab 
minority living in France as well) and the resurgence 
of anti-Semitism, to the re-examination of the 
traditional and fixated pro-Arab positions of most 
French governments.   It is not the motivations that 
are important, however, but the actual results.  The 
turnabout in Israeli-French relations could lead to 
surprising developments.  Senior officials in the 
Israeli administration now wish to mobilize French 
support for the disengagement plan from Gaza and are 
even willing to think in terms of a joint American- 
French policing force in the Gaza Strip after the IDF 
evacuation.   Due to its prestige among the 
Palestinians, France could be, according to certain 
scenarios, the spearhead that will lead to the 
(necessary) replacement of Arafat at the leadership of 
the Palestinian Authority.  With the U.S. paralyzed by 
an election year, a new French policy could fill the 
void in assisting to formulate an Israeli-Palestinian 
interim arrangement and perhaps even a comprehensive 
Israeli-Arab arrangement.  France is discovering the 
advantages of a balanced policy, and Israel is 
discovering France." 
 
Â¶V.  "Disengaging From the Disengagers" 
 
Senior op-ed writer Akiva Eldar commented in Ha'aretz 
(March 8): "If there aren't any stunning surprises, 
U.S. President George W. Bush's blessings for the 
disengagement plan will, in the blink of an eye, become 
the kiss of death for Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's 
government.  This time, he will not have suspenders at 
his disposal in the form of the 'seven days of quiet' 
that served as charm against the dear departed Tenet 
plan, or in the form of the 14 qualifications that 
chained the dying road map.  After the plan earns 
American trust, it will be impossible to treat it like 
the Mitchell plan of blessed memory, which was 
ostensibly adopted but never won the trust of the 
government of Israel.  The government ministers from 
the National Union will not be able to represent a 
government that has voted in favor of evacuating the 
Jewish settlements from Gush Katif in the Gaza 
Strip.... The behavior of the Jewish settlers' lobby is 
reminiscent of a child who acts wild in class and keeps 
misbehaving despite all the punishments.  During a 
period of less than 10 years, they have brought about 
the fall of four prime ministers who dared to try their 
hand at non-brutal solutions." 
 
VI.  "Something's Changing in Arab Media" 
 
Former education minister from Meretz, contributor 
Amnon Rubinstein wrote in Ha'aretz (March 8): "Media 
outlets in the Arab world are a unique phenomenon -- 
hatred and defamation are a staple, anti-Semitic 
propaganda recalls that of Goebbels, and what 
masquerades as fact is in fact a figment of 
psychopathic imagination.... [However,] when a 
dictatorship collapses, it turns out the facade was as 
thick as paper.  As it turned out, for instance, the 
Soviet puppet regimes in Eastern Europe had no 
supporters.  Can a similar process of popular dissent 
be swelling beneath the surface in the Arab world?.... 
In fact, evidence has started to mount that the 
external facade presented by Arab media is a deception; 
and whenever the belt is loosened a little, new voices 
can be heard in the Arab world (and samples of them can 
be found on the MEMRI, Middle East Media Research 
Institute, site [NB: http://www.memri.org/]).... 
Something is afoot there.  When hundreds of Syrian 
intellectuals sign a petition calling for reforms in 
their country, that's hardly a routine occurrence.  In 
terms of Israel's interests, it might not be a dramatic 
change, but it's important to know that the Arab world 
is not the sum of what's written in Cairo, Damascus and 
Ramallah." 
 
KURTZER