04TELAVIV1951
THE SITUATION ON THE GROUND MARCH 31, 2004 --
Wed Mar 31 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEL AVIV 001951 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR BURNS/SATTERFIELD 
NEA/SA/EX FOR AUSTIN-FERGUSON; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; 
DEPT FOR DS/IP/ITA; DRL FOR A/S CRANER; 
NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN; 
USAID FOR DCHA, DCHA/FPP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG PTER ASEC PHUM CASC KPAL IS GZ
SUBJECT: THE SITUATION ON THE GROUND MARCH 31, 2004 -- 
(1300 HOURS LOCAL) -- PALESTINIANS CLASH WITH POLICE AS 
SETTLERS MOVE INTO HOUSES IN EAST JERUSALEM NEIGHBORHOOD 
 
 
THIS IS A JOINT MESSAGE FROM EMBASSY TEL AVIV AND CONGEN 
JERUSALEM. 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: In the pre-dawn hours March 31, settlers 
moved into 11 houses they claim to have purchased in the 
predominantly Arab Silwan section of East Jerusalem, sparking 
clashes between police and Palestinian residents, who 
reportedly threw stones at the settlers.  Police used tear 
gas to disperse crowds of angry Palestinians near the site, 
according to Israeli press reports (see Jerusalem septel). 
Also in the West Bank, a roadside charge exploded March 30 
near an IDF jeep traveling on Route 60 near Al Khader 
village, south of Bethlehem.  No one was injured.  In Gaza, 
two Palestinians were killed March 31 near Khan Yunis when 
IDF soldiers opened fire on them as they were spotted 
approaching the soldiers' outpost.  An 11-year-old child was 
hit in the arm by stray fire March 29 during an exchange of 
fire between Palestinian gunmen and IDF soldiers stationed 
near the Egyptian border.  End Summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Death: Nil. 
 
-- Injury: Nil. 
 
-- Shooting: Palestinian sources claimed an IDF soldier was 
wounded in Bethlehem by Palestinian gunfire March 30, but 
this attack was unconfirmed. 
 
-- Shooting: Palestinians mounted two shooting attacks at IDF 
positions near Bayt Sahour March 30, but caused no injuries. 
 
-- Bomb: A roadside charge exploded March 30 near an IDF jeep 
traveling on Route 60 near Al Khader village, south of 
Bethlehem.  No one was injured. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) ARRESTS: 
 
-- The IDF arrested 11 Palestinians around the West Bank 
March 30. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) DEMONSTRATIONS: 
 
-- The IDF used to tear gas to break up a Land Day 
demonstration in Janin March 30. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) SEPARATION BARRIER: 
 
-- The IDF dispersed anti-barrier demonstrators March 30 near 
the village of Bayt Liqya.  More demonstrations were planned 
for March 31 near Qatanna. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) SETTLEMENT EVACUATION/EXPANSION: 
 
-- The IDF removed a rudimentary structure March 31 at a site 
near Kiryat Arba known as Hazon David.  Later in the day, 
Israeli media reported clashes near the site, as border 
police and IDF units tried to prevent settler activists from 
demonstrating at the site (Details reported Jerusalem septel). 
 
-- In the pre-dawn hours March 31, Jewish settlers moved into 
11 houses they claim to have purchased in the predominantly 
Arab Silwan section of East Jerusalem, sparking clashes 
between police and Palestinian residents, who reportedly 
threw stones at the settlers.  Police used tear gas to 
disperse crowds of angry Palestinians near the site, 
according to Israeli press reports.  (Details reported 
Jerusalem septel). 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶7. (SBU)  ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: The IDF reported that two Palestinians were killed 
March 31 near Neve Dekalim when IDF soldiers opened fire on 
them as they were spotted crawling towards the soldiers' 
outpost. 
 
-- Injuries: UNRWA reported that an 11-year-old child was hit 
in the arm by stray gunfire March 29 during an exchange of 
fire between Palestinian gunmen and IDF soldiers stationed 
near the Egyptian border. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets/Hand Grenades: One mortar was fired at IDF 
soldiers south of Netzarim March 30, and three mortars were 
fired at Neve Dekalim March 31, according to the IDF.  The 
IDF also reported that one anti-tank missile was fired at an 
IDF outpost west of Nissanit, and one Qassam rocket was fired 
at Nahal Oz kibbutz March 30.  No injuries were reported in 
any of these attacks. 
 
-- Shootings: The IDF reported one shooting attack near Nahal 
Oz Crossing March 30, and one near Karni Crossing March 31. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS/CHECKPOINTS: 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was open for Palestinians. 
 
-- Erez Crossing was closed to Palestinian laborers March 31, 
but was open for merchants age 28 years and older.  The 
number of merchants crossing March 31 was not available.  The 
IDF also allowed diplomats in vehicles and internationals on 
foot to cross.  UN agencies, however, refuse to authorize 
their non-diplomatic staff to cross on foot; staff must 
therefore wait to cross until they can join someone crossing 
in a diplomatic vehicle.  The Erez Industrial Zone was open 
March 31, but the number of laborers entering the Zone was 
unavailable. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers March 
31, but open for the import into Gaza of aggregates used in 
construction. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was partially open March 31 for the import 
and export of goods into the Gaza Strip.  Unpacked goods may 
enter, but no Palestinian containers may enter or exit. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open March 31 for Palestinian 
travelers, although Palestinians reported only limited 
numbers were being allowed to cross. 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan and Toufah checkpoints were closed March 31. 
 
 
------ 
Israel 
------ 
 
¶9.  (SBU) ATTACKS 
 
-- The IDF reported that Molotov cocktails were thrown at 
Israeli Border Police officers north of Kafr Kanna village 
the evening of March 30 (see "Political Developments" below). 
 
¶10.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS 
 
-- At the Likud Party Convention March 30, PM Sharon promised 
to hold a referendum among registered Likud party members on 
his plan for unilateral disengagement from the Gaza Strip 
(see Tel Aviv septel). 
 
-- Approximately 15,000 people participated in the main 
demonstration March 30 commemorating the 28th anniversary of 
Land Day in the village of Arraba.  Also on March 30, several 
thousand protesters participated in a march in Kafr Kanna to 
commemorate the death of village residents in the riots that 
occurred there in October 2000, at the start of the current 
Intifada. 
 
-- Israeli media reported March 30 that a commission of 
inquiry into the March 14 double suicide bombing at Ashdod 
port found that security guards at Gaza's Karni Crossing had 
failed to follow proper procedure and thoroughly examine the 
container by which it is believed the bombers reached Ashdod. 
 Guards at Ashdod were absolved of any wrongdoing. 
 
-- Jewish terror suspect Eliron Golan was charged March 30 
with the attempted murder of Israeli Arab MK Issam Makhoul 
and three other people in the Haifa area.  According to press 
reports, Golan was accused of making and setting several 
bombs targeting Israeli Arabs in the Haifa area over several 
years.  Golan was quoted as saying that his intent had not 
been to harm Israeli Arabs in general, but rather to target 
those whom he felt were endangering Israel's security. 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
KURTZER