05ADANA86
SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY FOR APRIL 21, 2005
Tue Apr 26 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ADANA 000086 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU ADANA
SUBJECT: SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY FOR APRIL 21, 2005 
 
 
This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary for April 21, 
Â¶2005. Please note that Turkish press reports often contain 
errors or exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch for 
the accuracy of the reports summarized here. 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
RADIKAL/BOLGE/SAFAK/ZAMAN/EVRENSEL/HURRIYET/S ABAH/ULKEDE OZGUR 
GUNDEM/CUMHURIYET: At the Turkish War Academy Graduation 
Ceremony yesterday the Head of the Turkish General Staff, 
General Hilmi Ozkok, expressed his views concerning PKK; 
reactionary movements; Armenia; Turkish-EU and Tukish-American 
relations; and Turkey's being perceived as a moderate Islamic 
country. Regarding the PKK, General Ozkok said it had become a 
third power in northern Iraq and that he considered the US-Iraqi 
forces' not launching an operation against it meaningful. He 
said the PKK has been trying to influence public opinion about 
discussing Article Three of the Turkish Constitution with the 
goal of harming the unitary structure of Turkey, and that such 
an effort would cause clashes. General Ozkok added that PKK was 
trying to dictate its demands through the European Union under 
the name of cultural rights. General Ozkok said that reactionary 
movements that couldn't change the state's features have been 
trying to give the image that they wish reconciliation with 
people and the state, and have been manipulating the public with 
devices such as the media. 
RADIKAL/ZAMAN/EVRENSEL/HURRIYET/ULKEDE OZGUR GUNDEM/CUMHURIYET: 
Papers report the duration of the decree that allows use of 
Incirlik Airbase for humanitarian operations in Iraq and 
Afghanistan per the United Nations' decision has been extended 
for one year. 
RADIKAL/ZAMAN/ULKEDE OZGUR GUNDEM: Nine DEHAP (Democratic 
Peoples Party) mayors from the southeast, including Diyarbakir 
Mayor Osman Baydemir, met with newspaper and TV-station 
representatives in Ankara yesterday.  Mayor Baydemir said that a 
more dramatic and tragic situation could be faced if the Kurdish 
issue remained unsolved. He added that there was not a 
Turkish-Kurdish fight at the moment and that the Turkish flag 
belonged to everybody living in Turkey. Mayor Baydemir 
reportedly said a "Brotherhood Law" that would disarm the PKK 
and allow members to rejoin the society should be passed. 
BOLGE/EKSPRES/SABAH GUNEY SUPPLEMENT/HURRIYET CUKUROVA: The bomb 
that exploded at Elektrosel company that sells fax materials in 
Resatbey quarter of Adana yesterday night caused material 
damages. The explosion caused panic but no casualties have been 
reported. 
BOLGE: The Vatican's Representative for Catholic Churches in 
Anatolia, Bishop Luigi Padovese, the priest of the Adana 
Catholic Church, Roberto Newinski, and the monk of the Mersin 
Catholic Church, Roberto Ferrari visited Adana Mayor Aytac Durak 
to get his support in solving the issue of access to rental 
property surrounding the Catholic church in Adana. The Bishop 
told Mayor Durak the church could not take advantage of 
properties surrounding it because landlords were demanding high 
rents; this was affecting visitors' ability to visit the church. 
The Bishop reportedly said, "We cannot understand a cultural 
property being surrounded." Mayor Durak stressed the importance 
of legal status. Under the recent legal amendments, some 
criteria have been accepted for cultural properties and places 
of worship, he said, adding his pledge of assistance and belief 
the issue would be resolved in a short time and amicable manner. 
ZAMAN: The 5th Felony Court of Adana gave ten years and five 
months of imprisonment to Tarkan Ince, 35, a policeman in Adana. 
Five flame throwing guns had been found in Tarkan's house. 
Tarkan had been detained by police a year ago on the charges of 
violating the Fire Arms Law and resisting police. Tarkan stated 
that he had found the guns while he was stationed in Sirnak 
province and had brought them along when he was transferred to 
Adana and added that he was not engaged in arms trade. 
EVRENSEL/EKSPRES/SABAH GUNEY SUPPLEMENT/: The Confederation of 
Alevi Associations in Europe launched a signature campaign 
asking for the abolishment of the religion classes mandated by 
the Constitution. The General Secretary of the Alevi/Bektashi 
Federation, Atilla Erden, expressed that compulsory religion 
classes violated articles 2, 4 and 10 of the Constitution and 
the European Human Rights Accord. In order to remove the 
religion classes from the curriculum, the Alevi/Bektashi 
Federation's Adana Chapter undertook an action in front of the 
Provincial National Education Directorate. 
EVRENSEL: Forces from the Gelenler Jandarma Station allegedly 
raided Ozpinar village of Baskale, Van province, on the grounds 
that the villagers possessed smuggled oil. Women and children 
threw stones at soldiers and did not allow them to search their 
houses. 
HURRIYET: Following the April 12 operation in the 
Bestler-Dereler region of Sirnak province, in which 21 PKK 
members were killed, GOT forces have reportedly engaged with PKK 
elements at seven more locations. Five more PKK have reportedly 
been killed during the ensuing clashes, including the PKK 
terrorist in charge of the Besta region, code named Dijvar. One 
Turkish First Lieutenant, two Sergeants, and one village guard 
have reportedly been killed in clashes  so far. Operations that 
commenced in rural Silvan area of Diyarbakir the previous day 
reportedly continue. The GOT forces raiding a house in Batman 
allegedly arrested three persons alleged to have been preparing 
to undertake actions. 
ULKEDE OZGUR GUNDEM: The Yuksekova Public Prosecutor allegedly 
initiated an investigation into 11 persons, including seven 
Nevruz festivity organizers, and allegedly jailed Mesut 
Karabulak and Sefik Soydan on charges of making propaganda in 
favor of an outlawed organization (note: read PKK) by displaying 
the "Democratic Confederalism" flag. 
CUMHURIYET: Bitsy Sheer and Amy Bergman from the American Jewish 
Joint Distribution Committee inspected the status of street 
children in Diyarbakir and made a donation to the 75th 
Anniversary Child and Youth Education Center for the 
rehabilitation of the children. 
 
 
 
 
REID