05ADANA108
SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY FOR MAY 17, 2005
Wed May 18 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ADANA 000108 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU ADANA
SUBJECT: SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY FOR MAY 17, 2005 
 
This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary for May 17, 2005. 
Please note that Turkish press reports often contain errors or 
exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch for the accuracy 
of the reports summarized here. 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
CUMHURIYET / OZGUR GUNDEM / HURRIYET:   Various 
representatives and leaders of NGOs including the Human Rights 
Association (HRA), the Diyarbakir Bar Association, and 
Mazlum-Der (Association for Human Rights and Oppressed People) 
assembled in front of the Mardin Courthouse to protest the 
decision to move the Ugur Kaymaz/Kiziltepe case (see press summ 
11/30) proceedings from Mardin to Eskisehir.  Meanwhile, 
Hurriyet reported earlier that Kemal Donmez, the Mardin Deputy 
Security Director who conducted the operation that resulted in 
the death of Ugur Kaymaz and his father, has been listed among 
the managers and supervisors that were granted promotion. 
 
OZGUR GUNDEM:      Following a brief lull, Turkish security 
forces and village guards started military operations again in 
the Gabar Mountain of Sirnak. Local observers also report a 
45-vehicle convoy heading towards Eruh district of Siirt to 
conduct an operation. 
 
ZAMAN / SABAH (GUNEY) / BOLGE / EKSPRES / RADIKAL / OZGUR 
GUNDEM: Greenpeace has opened a 'Peace Embassy' across the 
street from Incirlik Airbase's main gate, from which they will 
organize activities for three weeks against the proliferation of 
nuclear arms.  According to the Greenpeace Mediterranean Nuclear 
Disarmament Campaign Coordinator, the U.S. Senate is now 
debating redeployment of nuclear bombs from bases in Europe to 
Turkey, an issue to which Greenpeace wants to draw public 
attention. 
 
YENI SAFAK / ZAMAN:     Sanliurfa Environment and Forests 
Director announced that decontamination activities on Ataturk 
Dam have ended and the petroleum that had covered the surface of 
part of the dam's lake has been cleaned (see press summary 
4/18). The rehabilitation of polluted soil amounting to 
200-truckloads will be handled in the next few days. 
 
 
ZAMAN:  Yesterday at 9:15 pm, two PKK/Kongra-gel members 
readying to attack the Governor's Residence in Siirt were 
allegedly given orders to stop by the security officers.  The 
terrorists disobeyed the orders and engaged in a clash with the 
officers. One of terrorists reportedly detonated a bomb he was 
carrying and was killed; the other one was shot dead as he was 
trying to run away. A police officer was wounded during the 
incident. An extensive operation was launched in the area 
following the incident and security measures have been 
intensified. 
 
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS 
 
Â¶1.      BOLGE / SABAH (GUNEY):  Ambassadors to Turkey representing 
Latin American countries were invited to a meeting at Adana's 
Chamber of Industry (ACI) over the weekend.  Umit Ozgumus, 
Chairperson of the ACI, is optimistic about enhancing economic 
and commercial ties with Latin American countries, and said that 
the Ambassadors got to know Adana better after touring the 
city's big firms, such as TEMSA and SASA, as well as the 
Organized Industrial Zone and Yumurtalik Free Trade Zone. 
Meanwhile, Adana's AGID (Entrepreneurial Businessmen 
Association) has invited Indonesian businessmen to exchange 
ideas on promoting economic ties in a series of meetings. 
 
 
REID