05ALGIERS2082
GOA RESPONDS TO MOROCCAN ACCUSATIONS ON
Mon Oct 10 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Algiers
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ALGIERS 002082 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL SMIG AG MO XA
SUBJECT: GOA RESPONDS TO MOROCCAN ACCUSATIONS ON 
CLANDESTINE IMMIGRATION 
 
¶1.  (U) In recent days, Algerian media have devoted much 
coverage to the plight of African migrants attempting to 
enter the Spanish enclaves of Ceuta and Melilla, which are 
located in northern Morocco.  The coverage has focused 
primarily on the allegedly dire humanitarian situation of the 
migrants; Moroccan authorities' use of live ammunition 
against them, killing six; and the forced removal by the 
Moroccan authorities of some 500 migrants to a camp near the 
Algerian border.  In addition, the Algerian media have 
reported Moroccan statements seeking to blame, at least in 
part, Algeria for the human misery. 
 
GOA RESPONDED TO STATEMENTS BY MOROCCAN OFFICIALS 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶2.  (U) According to Algerian media reports, the spokesman of 
the Moroccan Government Nabil bin Abdallah reportedly said 
October 8 that, "Algeria must assume its responsibilities" in 
preventing illegal migrants from entering Morocco.  Around 
the same time, Moroccan Ambassador to the European Union 
Menouar Alem reportedly said, "Algeria is making no serious 
effort to control the thousands of sub-Saharan nationals who 
transit notably the region of Maghnea.  If Europe closes its 
eyes...we will not come to resolve this immigration problem." 
 
 
EFFECTIVE INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION NEEDED 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (U) An unnamed MFA source, quoted by the Algerian press, 
responded October 9 to the Moroccan allegations that Algeria 
has not done its part to stop illegal immigration into 
Morocco.  In what amounted to an official statement, the 
source said, "The dramatic developments that the nationals of 
brotherly sub-Saharan countries in illegal status are 
experiencing, mainly around Ceuta and Melilla, are followed 
with intense concern by the Government of Algeria.  This 
serious situation underscores the necessity of a collective 
and resolute action to cope with this problem in its 
immediacy as in its causes.  In this perspective, the fight 
against illegal immigration should not be limited to police 
actions, even though such actions are necessary, because 
police actions in and of themselves are not sufficient to 
cope with the situation with the sensitivity and complexity 
required.  For this reason, an effective international 
cooperation should be undertaken to prescribe satisfactory 
solutions equally for the countries of origin, the countries 
of transit, and the receiving countries, in the spirit of 
respect for human dignity and moral values shared by the 
international community." 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The plight of these African illegal migrants, with 
the related issuance of a Moroccan statement and Algerian 
riposte, serves to underscore once again the underlying 
tensions between Rabat and Algiers, as well as the need for 
their cooperation in stemming illegal immigration, terrorism, 
and the narcotics trade. 
 
SIEVERS