05ANKARA4691
EXBS: TURKEY ADVISORS MONTHLY REPORT- (JULY 2005)
Thu Aug 11 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 004691 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NP/ECC- PVANSON, ACHURCH, TGROEN, VLE 
DEPT FOR EUR/ACE- DMARTING, DMCCORMICK 
CBP/INA- PWALKER 
DOC FOR PETERSON-BEARD 
USCG FOR BGOLDEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC KNNP KSTC MNUC PARM TU
SUBJECT: EXBS: TURKEY ADVISORS MONTHLY REPORT- (JULY 2005) 
 
REF: 2004 STATE 146478 
 
  ¶1.      Summary:  EXBS Advisor traveled to Washington DC 
for consultations, meeting with stateside program 
coordinators of the projects being conducted in Turkey, 
including the Commodity Identification Training, Second Line 
of Defense and other nonproliferation programs.  EXBS Advisor 
also reviewed Turkey's participation in PSI activities and 
discussed ways to continue the impressive Turkish engagement 
in the recent Operational Experts Group.  Finally, EXBS 
Advisor continued to coordinate opportunities to engage the 
Turkish Atomic Energy Authority (TAEK) in the U.S. 
International Nuclear Threat Reduction Initiative. 
 
¶2.      Completed Actions for the Reporting Period 
 
¶A.        Site Assessment and Meetings During Recent 
Reporting Period 
 
1)          July 1- EXBS Advisor met with MFA Arms Control 
and Disarmament Head of Department Osman Yavulzap to conduct 
monthly update meeting on all current projects in progress in 
Turkey, including Internal Control Program (ICP), Commodity 
Identification Training (CIT), Product Identification Tool 
(PIT) and Second Line of Defense (SLD).  EXBS Advisor also 
discussed the status of the NP Cooperation Agreement, which 
was being forwarded to the Turkish parliament for 
ratification.  Finally, EXBS Advisor discussed Turkey's 
involvement in PSI and the Copenhagen Operational Experts 
Group meeting, to which Turkey sent a significant delegation 
and will be providing a presentation on their May 2006 
exercise. 
 
2)          July 8- EXBS Advisor met with President of 
Turkish Atomic Energy Authority (TAEK) Okay Cakiroglu in 
preparation for upcoming meetings concerning the proposed 
exchange of Turkish held HEU fuel assemblies for new LEU fuel 
assemblies.  (Note: Report of these final discussions held on 
July 12 and ultimate decision by Turkey later that week to 
not go forward with the exchange are outlined septel).  EXBS 
Advisor and Cakiroglu discussed the issues of the bilateral 
Agreement for Peaceful Use of Nuclear Energy and possible 
areas of U.S./Turkey regional nuclear threat reduction 
cooperation. 
 
3)          July 18-20- EXBS Advisor conducted program 
consultations in Washington DC with representatives from 
NP/ECC, NP/PPC, NP/PTR, DOE/INECP and the University of 
Georgia (UGA) Export Control Research personnel.  EXBS 
Advisor provided current updates on all projects underway in 
Turkey, along with planning for future activities. NP/ECC 
outline upcoming changes in the EXBS program, while renewing 
the contract of the current EXBS Advisor for another year. 
EXBS Advisor consulted with UGA representatives to begin 
coordination of in-depth assessment of the Turkish 
nonproliferation program which should occur later this fall. 
This assessment will establish the benchmark for many 
programs and serve as the starting point for areas of future 
engagement.  Following program review, it appears that the 
EXBS program in Turkey is on track and should begin to move 
forward rapidly following the ratification of the NP 
Cooperation Agreement. 
 
¶B.        Training Conducted During Reporting Period: None 
 
¶C.        Equipment Delivered During Reporting Period: None 
 
¶D.        Imminent Training or Equipment Status Update: None 
 
¶E.        Significant Developments in Export Controls, 
Nonproliferation, or Related Border Security: None 
 
 
¶3.      Future Activities 
 
¶A.         Sep 19- 23- DOE NNSA to conduct CIT Refresher 
Course. 
 
¶B.         Oct 11-14- EXBS Advisor to attend Black 
Sea/Caspian Sea Workshop in Baku with Turkish Coast Guard 
delegation. 
 
¶C.         Oct 23- 31- UGA Export Control Assessment visit to 
Turkey 
 
¶4.      Red Flag Issues: None 
 
¶5.      Contact Information for EXBS Adviser ) Kevin Lyon, 
phone (90)(312) 455-5555 ext 2525, fax (90)(312) 468-4775, 
email LyonK@state.gov. 
 
 
MCELDOWNEY