05ANKARA5305
9/11 EVENTS IN ANKARA, ISTANBUL GENERATE POSITIVE
Mon Sep 12 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 005305 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/SE, EUR/PPD, PA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO PTER TU
SUBJECT: 9/11 EVENTS IN ANKARA, ISTANBUL GENERATE POSITIVE 
PRESS PLAY 
 
----------------------------------- 
CHARGE, CG LEAD 9/11 COMMEMORATIONS 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶1. Commemorations organized by Embassy Ankara and Congen 
Istanbul to mark the anniversary of the 9/11 attacks 
generated unusually widespread and positive coverage in the 
Turkish media today.  Embassy Ankara organized a ceremony 
and wreath-laying at a monument to Turkish martyrs in the 
nearby municipality of Kecioren.  Turkish participants 
included local military commanders, the mayor of Kecioren, 
and representatives of Turkish martyrs' organizations.  The 
Charge's comments highlighting the US and Turkey's common 
struggle against terrorism and emphasizing Turkey's 
suffering from PKK violence resulted in numerous front-page 
stories and prominent television coverage.  Headlines noted 
especially the Charge's remark equating Usama bin-Ladin with 
imprisoned PKK terrorist leader Abdullah Ocalan, and her 
reiteration of US determination to cooperate with Turkey 
against the PKK.  In Istanbul, the Consul General and PAO 
laid wreaths at the four sites of the al-Qaida bombings in 
Istanbul in November 2003.  Comprehensive coverage of the 
ceremonies and the CG's remarks appeared repeatedly on 24- 
hour news channel NTV and in "Posta," Turkey's largest- 
circulation daily.  The paper highlighted the CG's 
characterization of terrorism as a threat to free people 
everywhere. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
"BIN-LADIN IS NO DIFFERENT FROM OCALAN" 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  Coverage of the Ankara commemoration ceremony in the 
influential Turkish daily "Milliyet" was typical of the 
overall tone in the media: 
 
"US Embassy Charge d'Affaires Nancy McEldowney made an 
important gesture and delivered a critical message following 
the visit of US generals to discuss the PKK presence in 
northern Iraq.  On the fourth anniversary of the September 
11 attacks in the United States, McEldowney laid a wreath at 
a monument to Turkish martyrs who have fallen in the 
struggle against the PKK.  Beginning her remarks in Turkish, 
McEldowney said "today I want to speak to you from my heart, 
because I am here today as a true friend of Turkey and the 
Turkish people.  September 11 was such a tragedy that it 
still burns in our hearts.  But on this painful day, we are 
not thinking only of ourselves, because many others have 
suffered as well, even more than we have."  McEldowney then 
placed Usama bin-Ladin, who has drowned the world in blood, 
in the same category as the terrorist leader Abdullah 
Ocalan. 
 
Noting that Turkey has suffered for decades at the hands of 
"this murderous gang," McEldowney stressed that "Turkey has 
paid a terrible price in blood and lives to protect the 
republic that it holds dear."  She added that "the Turkish 
people have borne an extraordinary burden in this regard." 
The US diplomat continued: "I stand together with your 
nation, which has felt the pain of the martyrs.  There can 
be no double standard and no distinction in our words or our 
actions.  Whether the bomb goes off in New York or Istanbul, 
whether it is Zarkawi or Murat Karayilan, by standing 
together at this monument today we send a clear message. 
Americans stand together with their Turkish brothers in 
condemning the PKK and its terrorist violence just as we 
condemn al-Qaida."" 
 
The coverage in "Milliyet" and most other papers featured a 
series of photos (including many on the front page) of the 
Charge, accompanied by the head of ODC, with Turkish 
civilian and military officials.  Turkish TV news channels 
NTV and CNN-Turk ran excerpts of the ceremony repeatedly 
last night and this morning, and other popular commercial 
stations featured the event prominently on last night's main 
news programs. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
"CALL FOR A JOINT STRUGGLE AGAINST TERROR" 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶3. Media coverage of the commemoration ceremonies organized 
by ConGen Istanbul was also very positive.  At the 
Consulate's invitation, a television crew from NTV and the 
foreign news editor from "Posta," Turkey's largest 
circulation daily, accompanied the CG and the PAO to the 
four locations of the 2003 bombings.  NTV gave extensive 
coverage to each wreath-laying and to the remarks by Consul 
General Jones.  A half-page article in "Posta" featured 
photos of our commemorative delegation with British 
diplomats who met the CG at the British consulate, and of 
representatives of Istanbul's Jewish community at each of 
the synagogues that was targeted in the attacks. 
 
¶4. "Posta" excerpted heavily from the CG's remarks in a 
detailed account of the wreath-laying ceremonies: 
 
"When I asked the Consul General why she had decided to 
remember the events of 9/11 in this way, and what message 
she wished to send, she answered like this: "Terrorism 
represents a threat to free people everywhere.  It knows no 
boundaries.  The Turkish people understand better than most 
the pain that results from terrorist attacks, the damage 
that is done, and the destructive effects of terrorism on 
society.  Today, on the anniversary of September 11, 
Americans remember the terrorist attacks that took place on 
their soil.  But September 11 doesn't belong only to 
Americans.  We must also remember all Turks who have been 
victims of this extremist violence.  Today we are laying 
wreaths at the sites of the four horrible bombings that took 
place in Istanbul in November 2003.  No one should excuse 
terrorism in the name of ideology.  Our societies must stand 
firm around our shared values of tolerance, respect, and 
understanding, and all of us must stand together against 
terror." 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶5. The Mission's 9/11 commemorations were an effort to 
connect the al-Qaida attacks in the United States with 
Turkey's own troubled history with terrorism, and to 
reaffirm our determination to act jointly in the struggle 
against both al-Qaida and the PKK.  The message - no double 
standard on terrorism - played well and extensively in the 
Turkish media, and marked another step in Mission efforts to 
assure the Turkish public that the US is firmly on Turkey's 
side against the PKK. 
End Comment. 
 
MCELDOWNEY