05ANKARA6536
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue Nov 01 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 ANKARA 006536 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, OCTOBER 31, 2005 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Washington Gives Talat Full Support - Hurriyet 10/30 
Bush Nears the End of the Road - Aksam 10/30 
Libby the `Scapegoat' of the White House - Aksam 10/29 
Ahmadinajad's Israel Remarks `Nothing New' - Milliyet 
MFA: Turkey Disapproves of Ahmadinajad Remark - Milliyet 
10/29 
Ahmadinajad Joins Anti-US Rally in Tehran - Milliyet 10/29 
Syria Wants to `Soften' International Community - Sabah 
10/29 
Prince Charles to Teach Bush about Islam - Sabah 
Aliyev Calls for Support for Northern Cyprus - Hurriyet 
`Revolution' Unlikely in Azerbaijan - Sabah 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Bush Sends Republic Day Message to Sezer - Cumhuriyet 10/29 
Talat Meets with Rice inWashington - Cumhuriyet 10/29 
Democrats Ask for Rove's Head - Yeni Safak 
Bush Suffers from `Second-Term Syndrome' - Zaman 10/30 
Wilson to Replace Edelman in Ankara - Zaman 10/29 
Deutsch: Northern Iraq not Suitable for Military Operation - 
Cumhuriyet 10/30 
Iraq's Non-Existent Weapons Shake Washington - Radikal 10/30 
Pentagon: 26,000 Iraqis Killed in 2004 - Yeni Safak 
Suicide Attack against Shiites Kills 25 in Iraq - Cumhuriyet 
10/30 
Iran Backpedals: Israel Not Our Target - Cumhuriyet 10/30 
Damascus to Launch Hariri Investigation - Radikal 10/30 
Aliyev Promises Democracy in Azerbaijan - Cumhuriyet 
Europe Watches Azerbaijani Elections - Zaman 10/30 
Bomb Attacks Kill 60 in Delhi - Cumhuriyet 
Terrorist Attack in New Delhi - Radikal 10/30 
US Opens Gitmo to UN Human Rights Experts - Radikal 10/30 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
Bush Sends Turkey Republic Day Message:  `The United States 
and Turkey share a strong commitment to freedom and 
democracy. Our two countries have cooperated on the global 
war on terror and stand together to advance freedom and 
peace throughout the region,' President Bush said in a 
message to President Sezer to mark October 29, Turkish 
Republic Day, Saturday papers reported.  `The United States 
also congratulates Turkey on the start of accession talks 
with the European Union.  This milestone is a tremendous 
success for the people of Turkey, Europe, and the United 
States.  Turkey's reform efforts over the last decade on 
human rights, the rule of law, and free market economies 
reflect Mustafa Kemal Ataturk's vision of a progressive and 
free democracy, anchored in Europe, and at peace with its 
neighbors,' President Bush wrote. 
 
Wilson a Realist, not a Neo-Con:  Ross Wilson, former US 
Ambassador to Baku and nominated by President Bush to 
Turkey, is described by those who know him as `hard-working 
and resourceful as well as a cool, professional dipplomat,' 
Monday's "Milliyet" reports from Washington.  `Both Edelman 
and Wilson, having worked in Moscow during the Soviet era, 
played an important part in backing democratic freedoms,' 
said a colleague who had worked with both diplomats. 
American, European, and Azerbaijani sources described Wilson 
as an `intellectual and a pragmatist.'  Wilson holds an MA 
from Columbia University after having graduated from the 
department of International Relations in Minnesota in 1977. 
He entered the Foreign Service in 1979.  During some parts 
of his 25 years of career, which has been on an `upward 
curve,' Wilson has focused on economy and trade issues.  He 
is known as an `economy diplomat' and an expert on Eurasia 
and security issues.  Wilson, who holds a second MA degree 
from the National War Academy, speaks Russian and Czech. 
His wife Margo Squire, a career diplomat with expertise on 
Eurasia, is expected to take an active position at the US 
Embassy in Ankara. 
 
Wilson said that when he went to Moscow in 1980, US -Russia 
ties were tense.  `I was also in Moscow during the Gorbachev 
period from 1987-90.  During my second stay, the Russians 
were talking to us, they were consulting us,' Wilson said. 
Wilson told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee in 2000 
that `serving behind the Iron Curtain for seven years made 
me better realize the value of freedom and liberalism. 
Democracy, the respect for human rights, and a system of law 
are indispensable components of a free nation.'  An 
Azerbaijani source praised Wilson for his `very successful' 
tenure in Baku.  The source said that Wilson had brought `a 
fresh breeze' to the US Embassy there after his predecessor, 
Stanley Escudero, had drawn an enormous reaction for 
supporting the Aliyev family at the expense of the 
Azerbaijani opposition: `Wilson was brilliant, pragmatic and 
cool-headed.  He established the necessary ties with the 
opposition and developed a constructive relationship with 
Haydar Aliyev.  He also established a good dialogue with the 
independent press.  Wilson improved the image of the United 
States.'  A Turkish diplomat expects Wilson to show `a 
special interest' in Turkey's ties with Russia, Armenia, 
Georgia, Ukraine and the Turkic republics.  Wilson, who 
visited Yerevan during his term in Baku, is likely to 
emphasize the US position in favor of Azeri-Armenian 
rapprochement.  An Azerbaijani observer said that Wilson is 
not from the `neo-con' group, but that he is a `moderate 
intellectual in the style of traditional American 
diplomacy.' 
 
Talat in the US:  Turkish Cypriot leader Mehmet Ali Talat, 
in Washington for talks, said that the Turkish Cypriots now 
have a vision for a solution in Cyprus, and that this is why 
US Secretary of State Rice invited him to the United States. 
Talat said that the isolation of northern Cyprus will be 
eliminated over time, though not in the near term, thanks to 
the solution policy his government is pursuing.  Talat said 
he asked the US to continue moves to end the isolation of 
Turkish Cypriots and to encourage other countries and 
international organizations to do the same.  State 
Department Spokesman Sean MacCormack said that such meetings 
`help to reduce economic differences between Turkish and 
Greek Cypriots by easing the isolation of the Turkish 
Cypriots in a way that supports reunification of the 
island.'  Meanwhile, Douglas Silliman, Director of the 
Office of Southeast Europe Affairs at the State Department, 
said that the United States is `doing everything it can' to 
ease the isolation.  No progress has been made, however, on 
the issue of direct flights to northern Cyprus or upgrading 
the status of the US mission in the north.  Silliman noted 
that Talat had not been received as `president,' because the 
United States does not recognize the `TRNC.'  He added that 
the US continues to support a solution process for Cyprus 
within the framework of the UN plan, the next steps in the 
process will depend on the two sides and the UN.  In 
response to a question, Silliman noted that `Mr. Talat 
deserves respect' for his approach.  `We are trying to show 
him the respect he deserves.'  Talat said that the UK has 
succeeded in getting accession talks started between Turkey 
and the EU, but that its role as a guarantor power in Cyprus 
has been `unsuccessful.'  Talat denied claims that the 
United States wants to open a military base in northern 
Cyprus.  Talat flew to New York after wrapping up meetings 
in Washington.  He will meet with UNSYG Annan on Monday and 
with UNDP Administrator Kemal Dervis at breakfast in New 
York on Tuesday.  Meanwhile, a Turkish Cypriot delegation 
led by Fatma Ekenoglu, `Parliament Speaker of the TRNC,' 
left for Washington on Sunday to participate in a panel 
discussion to be held by the Turkish Industrialists' and 
Businessmen's Association (TUSIAD) on November 2. 
 
MFA Disapproves Ahmadinajad's Israel Remarks:  Turkish 
Foreign Ministry (MFA) Spokesman Namik Tan said on Friday 
that Turkey does not approve of Iranian President Mahmoud 
Ahmadinejad's recent statement with regard to Israel.  `We 
follow developments on this issue from the international and 
Iranian media.  Naturally, it is impossible for Turkey to 
approve of such a statement,' Tan stressed, adding that 
`Turkey believes that conflicts in the region can only be 
solved through dialogue and peaceful means on the basis of 
international legitimacy.' 
 
Democracy Seminars for KDP Officials:  Ankara is to continue 
its support for Iraqi Kurdish groups as part of its 
contribution to the restructuring of Iraq, the all-news 
channel NTV reported on Friday.  Ahead of national elections 
in Iraq on December 15, Ankara is staging a series of 
seminars on democracy to a delegation of 30 party 
administrators from the northern Iraqi Kurdistan Democratic 
Party (KDP.)  Cafer Ibrahim Haci, a senior member of the KDP 
delegation, said that they would like to establish similar 
institutions to those in Turkey in Iraq.  The delegation 
said that they see the Turkish democracy as a model for 
their country. 
 
PKK a Threat for Iraq:  :  "Milliyet" reports that Robert 
Deutsch, advisor to the US Secretary of State on Iraq, told 
Turkish journalists on Friday that `The US position against 
the PKK is clear: the PKK is a terrorist organization. 
President Barzani does not take issue with this view.  We 
talked about this issue with Barzani here this week, and 
this isn't the first time.  We have discussed the PKK issue 
with him and with other Iraqi leaders at the highest levels 
of the US Government.  The Government of Iraq describes the 
PKK as a terrorist organization, and Barzani is 
representative of that view.  In the past, the IKDP has 
fought alongside Turkish forces against the PKK.'  Asked 
about the treatment Barzani received in Washington, Deutsch 
said that `the constitution that has gone into effect in 
Iraq officially recognizes the Kurdistan Regional 
Administration and the region's institutions.  It also 
provides for the election of a president by the regional 
parliament.  Mesud Barzani is this elected President.' 
Asked whether US forces would seek to apprehend PKK suspects 
in Iraq, Deutsch said `Turkey has given the names of many 
PKK members to Interpol.  We also have these names, as do 
Iraqi forces and coalition forces in Iraq.  There is an 
existing agreement between Turkey and Iraq for the exchange 
of criminals.  If someone is caught in Iraq, an extradition 
request can be made to the Iraqi authorities.'  According to 
"Cumhuriyet," Deutsch said that the PKK is `a terrorist 
organization and a threat for Iraq.'  He added that the 
mountains in northern Iraq did not lend themselves to the 
launch of a military operation against the terrorist 
organization.  He noted that Turkey was unable to eliminate 
the PKK by sending tens of thousands of troops into northern 
Iraq in 1990s, and added that a quick military operation 
would not be sufficient to combat the PKK.  Deutsch also 
said that Barzani and US officials had agreed on the 
importance of Iraq having positive relations with Turkey. 
 
Turks Press US Officials on Kurdish Flags at Habur:  "Sabah" 
reports today that at a recent trilateral meeting among 
Turkish, Iraqi, and US officials at Habur to discuss routine 
border control issues, the Turkish side pressed the US to 
force the Iraqis to take down Kurdish flags on the Iraqi 
side of the Habur border gate.  When US officials said they 
would not get involved in a dispute over the flag issue, 
several Turkish officials reportedly walked out of the 
meeting.  "Sabah" notes that the Kurdish flags have been in 
place at Habur since the beginning of the US-led invasion of 
Iraq in 2003. 
 
Ozkok Warns Separatists, Fundamentalists:  Chief of the 
Turkish General Staff (TGS) Hilmi Ozkok told reporters at 
the Republic Day reception held at the Presidential Palace 
that some in Turkey were `testing the patience of the 
military.' `These groups are using the Internet to wage a 
campaign against the Turkish military.  Their messages are 
spreading, and this is worrisome.  On Massoud Barzani being 
received at the White House as `President' of the Iraqi 
Kurdish region, Ozkok said: `We used to see him as a tribal 
chief.  Now, Talabani is the president and Barzani holds a 
different position.  We must accept that things have 
changed.  If Talabani comes to Turkey tomorrow he will come 
as a head of state.  How will we behave then?  If we 
recognize Iraq, we will act in accordance with these 
changing circumstances.'  Ozkok also commented on the 
statement by Iran's President Ahmadinajad that Israel should 
be wiped off the map.  `We feel more secure to the extent 
that our neighbors are more democratic.' 
 
Turkish Nationalists Want Greek Orthodox Patriarchate Out: 
Some 200 protesters marched at the Greek Orthodox 
Patriarchate in Istanbul on Friday, kicking off a campaign 
by Turkish nationalist groups to have the patriarchate 
transferred to Greece, weekend papers report.  Ecumenical 
Patriarch Bartholomew I said on Sunday that the nationalist 
actions against the Ecumenical Patriarchate targeted 
Turkey's  European course and Prime Minister Erdogan, who 
wants to take the country into the EU.  `The place of the 
Ecumenical Patriarchate has been here for the past 17 
centuries.  No one has the right to drive the Ecumenical 
Patriarchate from its historic seat.  This is a truth 
confirmed by time and history.  We are on the side of the 
Patriarch and we defend justice and truth,' the 
Autocephalous Orthodox Church of Greece said. 
 
Israel Warns Tourists During Travel to Turkey:  Israel's 
"Yediot Aharonot" daily warned travelers to Turkey on Friday 
that warnings have been received to the effect that 
terrorists will try to place bombs in Israeli tourists' 
luggage before they board airplanes in Turkey.  Security 
officials said that terrorist organizations may try to bribe 
hotel employees in Turkey to give them access to secure 
rooms to put explosives in Israelis' luggage.  Israeli 
tourists recently returning from Turkey underwent thorough 
security checks at the airport.  `In any case, it is 
preferable to stay with your suitcase and not to give it to 
any unknown person,' said officials, `not even to a 
bellboy.'  Several months ago, the Israeli counterterrorism 
office issued a travel warning regarding a portion of the 
Turkish coast in the wake of information about an al-Qaida 
cell planning to blow up an Israeli cruise liner.  The 
warning was lifted after Turkish security forces broke up a 
terrorist cell in Antalya. 
 
Belgium to Hand Over Terror Suspects to Turkey:  Justice 
Minister Cemil Cicek said that Belgium will soon hand over 
Fehriye Erdal, the suspected assassin of prominent Turkish 
businessman Ozdemir Sabancy, and Nuriye Kesbir, a high-level 
PKK militant, to Turkey, "Aksam" reported on Sunday.  Cicek 
said that Turkey's perseverance had produced results, and 
that US pressure had helped change attitudes in Belgium and 
the Netherlands. 
 
Independent MP Joins AKP:  Independent lawmaker Naci Aslan 
joined the ruling AK Party on Saturday, increasing the 
number of AKP seats in parliament to 356.  Aslan had 
recently resigned from the main opposition Republican 
People's Party (CHP).  The following is the current 
distribution of seats in parliament: AKP 356, CHP 154, ANAP 
22, SHP 4, DYP 4, HYP 1, Independent 5, Vacant 4. 
 
Terrorists, Soldier Killed in Fighting in Southeast Turkey: 
One soldier died and three terrorists were killed in 
fighting between security forces and terrorists in the 
eastern province of Bingol, papers report.  One terrorist 
was arrested in Midyat in the southeastern city of Mardin. 
Meanwhile, PKK militants staged an attack against the BOTAS 
(Pipeline Transportation Corp.) pipeline in the town of 
Nusaybin (Mardin province), causing a fire on the pipeline. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  White House; US-Cyprus 
 
"Difficult Days for the President" 
Washington-based Omer Taspinar commented in the liberal- 
intellectual "Radikal" (10/31): "It seems that second terms 
are never easy for US presidents, and Bush is no exception. 
President Bush is dealing with a serious crisis, just as his 
predecessors Nixon, Reagan, and Clinton were forced to do in 
their second terms.  Things started to go wrong for George 
Bush during the first year of his second term.  Washington 
is currently being rocked by one crisis after another, and 
people around town are wondering how tough the next three 
years will be for the current administration.  The White 
House, which had not yet recovered from the Katrina 
hurricane, has experienced another serious political blow. 
The Libby indictment is possibly the administration's worst 
crisis in terms of its timing and symbolic importance. 
People learned about these charges, which relate to the non- 
existent weapons of mass destruction in Iraq, only a day 
later after hearing that the death toll for American 
soldiers in Iraq surpassed the 2,000 mark.  . The other 
crisis in Washington is the withdrawal of the candidacy of 
Harriet Miers for the Supreme Court.  This is being 
interpreted as a sign that President Bush has lost his 
decision-making capability and his political reflexes.  All 
of this means that there are three troublesome years ahead 
for this administration in Washington. . There is, however, 
another aspect of this crisis which might be useful for 
those who engage in conspiracy theories.  Why do you think 
those ill-intentioned neo-cons did not take some uranium 
into Iraq and plant it there?  The answer lays in the fact 
that, regardless of the situation, the rule of law still 
prevails in the United States." 
 
"Talat's Different Style in Washington" 
Yasemin Congar wrote in the mainstream daily "Milliyet" from 
Washington (10/31):  "Last week Washington saw the 
reassuring style of Turkish Cypriot leader Mehmet Ali Talat. 
Evaluating Talat's Washington visit, State Department 
Southeast Europe Director Douglas Silliman said that Talat's 
positive attitude for a solution in Cyprus will open the way 
for a political solution.  Silliman explained Talat's 
approach in the following supportive terms: `We consider the 
lifting of the isolation as a positive element toward a 
solution.  The UN General Secretary also believes that 
lifting the isolation of the Turkish Cypriots is part of 
finding a solution to the Cyprus issue.  Moreover, we 
believe that it will be much easier for the island to merge 
as one state in the future if we can reduce the economic 
inequality between the northern and southern parts of the 
island.'   Within this framework, the US is taking various 
steps.  The US has started a financial assistance program to 
northern Cyprus.  The US has also encouraged business 
relations with northern Cyprus.  It is possible that some US 
companies could invest in the `TRNC' soon.'  From the 
political angle, US officials say that official visits to 
northern Cyprus and meetings with high-level `TRNC 
officials' will continue and increase." 
 
MCELDOWNEY