05ANKARA6695
CHARGE'S RAMADAN OUTREACH TOUCHES ANKARA'S POOREST
Mon Nov 14 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

141438Z Nov 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 006695 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO SOCI EAID PREL TU
SUBJECT:  CHARGE'S RAMADAN OUTREACH TOUCHES ANKARA'S POOREST 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  During the Muslim holy month of Ramadan, 
the Charg carried out an active program to connect with the 
poorer segments of Ankara's population.  In each of her 
events, which included a visit to Ankara's largest mosque, 
an iftar dinner, and calls on charitable organizations, the 
CDA stressed the Embassy's desire to be a good neighbor and 
participate in the spirit of sharing and charity that 
characterizes Ramadan.  The Turkish response was very 
appreciative, and media coverage was both positive and 
extensive. End summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
Low-Profile Approach Emphasizes Ramadan Spirit 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) Given Turkey's unique mix of a fiercely secular 
elite and widespread religious observance among the broader 
population, finding the right approach to acknowledge 
Ramadan is a delicate task.  This year, to show respect and 
appreciation for Muslim traditions without roiling 
secularists, the CDA led a discreet yet energetic Ramadan 
outreach schedule.  Mixing religious and secular events, 
Post reached out to lower-income and disadvantaged Turks, 
using a series of visits and meetings to stress that the 
Mission is a part of the local community and strives to be a 
good neighbor. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Touching Base with the Religious Community 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶3.  (U) In an effort to connect with the religious 
community, the CDA visited Ankara's largest mosque on 
October 5, the first day of Ramadan.  She met with Imam 
Ismail Cosar, who gave a tour and explained the history of 
the mosque.  The two discussed the common threads in all 
religions and how respect of others' traditions is essential 
to reaching greater understanding.  The imam cited several 
verses from the Koran that call for tolerance, sharing, and 
helping one another.  As the CDA was leaving, the imam 
emotionally said that he found the visit very meaningful. 
 
-------------------------- 
Reaching Out to Local NGOs 
-------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (U) On October 6, the CDA and emboffs visited LOSANTE, 
Turkey's only hospital solely dedicated to treating children 
with leukemia.  Dr. Ustun Ezer, president of the Ankara 
Foundation of Children with Leukemia (LOSEV), which runs the 
hospital, gave a tour of the facility and described a 
"children's cancer village" that LOSEV is planning for the 
southeastern city of Diyarbakir.  He explained that since 
many of LOSANTE's patients are from outside Ankara, they do 
not receive the follow-up treatment they need since care is 
not available in their towns.  Dr. Ezer expressed an 
interest in receiving more corporate sponsorship from 
American businesses.  The CDA congratulated Dr. Ezer on his 
vision and promised to pass the word about LOSEV to the 
American business community in Turkey. 
 
¶5.  (U) On October 31, the CDA visited the non-profit 
Anatolia Modern Education Foundation (ANACEV) women's 
literacy center in the economically depressed Yildiz 
neighborhood.  Since its founding eight years ago, the 
center has provided basic literacy, parenting, and 
handicraft classes to 1400 women living in the numerous 
shantytowns that surround Turkey's large cities.  The CDA 
toured the facility and met with women in each class. 
Several of the women were in their 50s and 60s, but 
explained that they were determined to learn how to read and 
write in order to empower their families.  The children 
waved Turkish and American flags as we departed. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
Welcome in Ankara's Poorest Neighborhoods 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (U) With urban poverty a growing problem in Turkey, the 
CDA visited two of Ankara's poorest inner-city 
neighborhoods.  On October 18, the CDA and emboffs attended 
an iftar dinner in the Mamak neighborhood hosted by Mamak 
Mayor Gazi Sahin in one of the tents where free iftar 
dinners are offered nightly during Ramadan.  The mayor said 
that he and his constituents were very touched that the CDA 
wanted to share an iftar dinner with them, and expressed his 
eagerness to establish closer relations with the U.S.  The 
other iftar participants seemed genuinely moved by the 
Embassy's presence. 
 
¶7.  (U) On October 24, the CDA and emboffs visited Ankara's 
oldest and poorest neighborhood, Altindag, where 85% of the 
residents live in substandard housing.  The mayor gave a 
presentation on the poverty alleviation plans underway in 
the neighborhood and took the group on a tour of the Hayir 
Carsisi, a municipal government-run charity store that runs 
solely on donations from businesses and local organizations. 
Just before the Charge's arrival the Embassy delivered 20 
large bags of clothing donated by Embassy staff. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Public Reaction Overwhelmingly Positive 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  (U) Both the press and the public received our outreach 
very positively.  While the Embassy did not request press 
for any of the events, several media outlets picked up on 
them and provided straightforward, positive coverage.  The 
daily newspaper Sabah (circulation 450,000) featured an 
article and photos of the CDA's visit to LOSANTE in its 
October 7 issue.  The Turkish daily newspaper Milliyet 
(circulation 250,000) featured the CDA's visit to Mamak in 
its October 21 issue. Daily newspapers Sabah and Cumhuriyet 
(circulation 45,000) covered the CDA's visit to Altindag. 
All major Turkish newspapers, including Milliyet, Hurriyet, 
Sabah, and Radikal, covered the CDA's visit to ANACEV, as 
did Ankara's major TV networks.  In addition, the public 
warmly welcomed the Embassy's outreach program.  At each 
stop along the way, the CDA and emboffs were applauded for 
their efforts to share in the Ramadan spirit. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Given the dual nature of Turkish society, post 
found this low-key approach to Ramadan outreach extremely 
successful.  Whether the event was in a secular or religious 
context, whether with an imam or government official, the 
Turkish public received the CDA's visits to the less 
fortunate very positively.  Media coverage was 
straightforward, and usefully counteracted the negative 
press U.S. policy often receives in Turkey. 
 
McEldowney