05ANKARA7066
EXBS: TURKEY ADVISORS MONTHLY REPORT- (NOVEMBER
Thu Dec 01 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 007066 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR ISN/ECC- PVANSON, ACHURCH, JHARTSHORN 
DEPT FOR EUR/ACE- DSILLIMAN, SYOUNTCHI 
CBP/INA- JGOUGE, PWARKER 
DOC FOR PETERSON-BEARD 
USCG FOR CWILSON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC KNNP KSTC MNUC PARM PREL TU
SUBJECT: EXBS: TURKEY ADVISORS MONTHLY REPORT- (NOVEMBER 
2005) 
 
REF: 2004 STATE 146478 
 
  ¶1.      Summary:  EXBS Advisor continued to shepard forward 
several of the EXBS projects that are underway in Turkey 
despite the lack of a ratified NP Cooperation Agreement, 
including the Internal Control Program (ICP), Commodity 
Identification Training (CIT), Product Identification Tool 
(PIT) and Second Line of Defense (SLD).  EXBS Advisor also 
reviewed Turkey's participation in PSI activities and 
discussed ways to continue to foster Turkey's engagement in 
this initiative.  Finally, EXBS Advisor continued track the 
ratification of the NP Cooperation Agreement. 
 
¶2.      Completed Actions for the Reporting Period 
 
¶A.        Site Assessment and Meetings During Recent 
Reporting Period 
 
1)          November 1- EXBS Advisor met with Serhan Yigit, 
MFA Arms Control and Disarmament Second Secretary to discuss 
various non-proliferation issues.  Yigit informed EXBS 
Advisor that the planning for the Turkish led PSI exercise is 
moving along quickly.  Yigit reiterated the desire for U.S. 
input into which countries Turkey should invite to 
participate in this exercise.  EXBS Advisor informed Yigit 
that there should be a focus on countries which actively 
participate in Regional PSI activities and have openly 
supported PSI.  EXBS Advisor also re-inforced the ideas 
discussed during the U/S Joseph visit about including 
countries from central Asia.  EXBS Advisor provided a list of 
countries that have EXBS programs as a starting point for 
consideration as invitees to the exercise as observers.  EXBS 
Advisor inquired into the status of the NP Agreement and was 
informed that no change to the status of the Agreement. 
Yigit stated that this lack of action was mainly do to 
Parliament's preoccupation with the EU Accession process. 
 
2)          November 23 - EXBS Advisor met with Guven Begec, 
MFA Arms Control and Disarmament First Secretary to discuss 
various non-proliferation issues and deliver appropriate 
talking points.  Begec informed EXBS Advisor that the NP 
Cooperation Agreement is currently before the Foreign Affairs 
Committee in parliament and hopefully will move to the full 
parliament soon.   EXBS Advisor reiterated the importance of 
getting the Agreement ratified so that work could move 
forward in many areas including the Second Line of Defense 
and other cooperative activities between Turkish and United 
States Customs.  EXBS Advisor proposed a change in the 
selection process for the local contractor for both the 
Internal Control Program and Product Identification Tool, 
this new process will focus on smaller companies that may be 
more interested in working quickly on the project.  Begec 
agreed that this could be a good way to get these projects 
moving quickly but suggested that this proposal be worked out 
with Foreign Trade and Customs for final approval.  Begec 
stated that Turkey had sent a 6-person delegation to the 
Regional Operational Experts Working Group meeting in 
Hamburg, where Turkey did a comprehensive presentation on 
their exercise, Anatolian Deer.  Finally, Begec informed EXBS 
Advisor that TAEK has proposed the end of January for the 
meeting to between the heads of the Turkish, Iraqi and 
Jordanian Atomic Energy Authorities.  The purpose of the 
meeting is to build the cooperation between the three 
countries to improve the nuclear safety program in Iraq. 
 
3)          November 25 -  EXBS Advisor met with Turkish 
Atomic Energy Authority (TAEK) Nuclear Safety Department Head 
Aysun Yucel.  EXBS Advisor and Yucel reviewed the current 
status of the CIT milestones and upcoming events.  Yucel 
stated that preparations between TAEK, Customs and 
Undersecretariat of Foreign Trade have been completed for the 
upcoming DOE End Use/End User workshop in December.  Also the 
CIT Core Technical Group will be prepared to meet following 
the workshop to establish new milestones for the project and 
prepare for upcoming CIT Train the Trainer course.  Finally, 
Yucel confirmed that TAEK has proposed the end of January to 
MFA as the time from for the meeting between the heads of the 
Turkish, Iraqi and Jordanian Atomic Energy Authorities. 
 
4)           November 28 - EXBS Advisor and Pol/Mil Off met 
with Department Head for Customs Enforcement Ender Gurleyik 
to review Customs activities and EXBS program work.  Gurleyik 
informed EXBS Advisor about recent Customs activities 
including recent seizures of drugs and counterfeit items. 
Gurleyik also reviewed recent high level information 
exchanges that occurred with Germany and the British Customs 
Authority, these exchanges include the sharing of 
information, training and best practices concerning 
operations within Customs areas.  Additionally, Gurleyik 
updated EXBS Advisor on the status of improvements to the 
Customs gates throughout Turkey. 
 
5)          November 30- EXBS Advisor accompanied Econ 
Counselor and EconOff during a meeting with Head Turkish 
Ministry of Finance Anti-Money Laundering Authority, Genc 
Osman Yarasli.  The United States policy towards companies 
that support proliferation and the actions that the United 
States is taking towards these entities were discussed. 
 
¶B.        Training Conducted During Reporting Period: None 
 
¶C.        Equipment Delivered During Reporting Period: None 
 
¶D.        Imminent Training or Equipment Status Update: None 
 
¶E.        Significant Developments in Export Controls, 
Nonproliferation, or Related Border Security: None 
 
¶3.      Future Activities 
 
¶A.         December 5- 9 - DOE INECP to present End Use/End 
User workshop to GOT officials. 
 
¶B.         January (tent)- DOE INECP to conduct CIT Train the 
Trainer course in Ankara. 
 
¶C.         February (tent)- DOE SLD to visit Turkey to 
complete SLD Implementation Agreement and begin scheduling of 
installation of new SLD equipment. 
 
¶4.      Red Flag Issues: None 
 
¶5.      Contact Information for EXBS Adviser ) Kevin Lyon, 
phone (90)(312) 455-5555 ext 2525, fax (90)(312) 468-4775, 
email LyonK@state.gov. 
 
 
MCELDOWNEY