05ANKARA3127
THIRD COUNTRY TRANSFER: ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Fri Jun 03 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

031128Z Jun 05UNCLAS ANKARA 003127 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EU/SE AND PM/RSAT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MASS MARR IT TU
SUBJECT: THIRD COUNTRY TRANSFER: ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 
REGARDING GOT REQUEST TO TRAIN ITALIAN AIR FORCE PILOTS 
 
REF: A. 04 ANKARA 6911 
 
     ¶B. 04 ANKARA 7063 
 
¶1. This is an action request.  See Paragraph 5. 
 
¶2. The Embassy received on May 27 a diplomatic note 
responding to a USG request for detailed syllabus information 
on Turkey's proposed Italian F-16 pilot training program for 
consideration in evaluating Turkey's corresponding Third 
Country Transfer request. 
 
¶3. Begin text of MFA note no. ALGY/2005-96: 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Turkey 
presents its compliments to the Embassy of the United States 
of America and with reference to the Latter's Note no. 265 
dated 25 February 2005, regarding F-16 training for Italian 
pilots, has the honor to present herewith the study prepared 
by the Turkish General Staff in response to the request of 
the Office of the Secretary of the Air Force/International 
Affairs-Weapons. 
 
The Ministry would kindly request the assistance of the 
relevant US authorities to expedite the permission procedures 
for the training of Italian pilots with F-16's. 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Turkey 
avails itself of this opportunity to renew to the Embassy of 
the United States of America the assurances of its highest 
consideration. 
 
Ankara, 26 May, 2005 
 
End Text. 
 
¶4. Enclosed with the diplomatic note is a detailed syllabus 
of the training including flight, simulator and academic 
program descriptions, and expendables/range requirements 
summaries.  Post will fax the syllabus information to the 
Office of the Secretary of Defense/International Affairs 
Turkey Desk and to State PM/RSAT. 
 
¶5. Action request: The proposed training was scheduled to 
begin in May 2005 but was postponed pending USG approval of 
the Third Country Transfer request.  Post requests a status 
update of the request and, assuming no further information is 
required, urges that the request be expeditiously processed. 
EDELMAN