05ANKARA7248
DOD PARTICIPATION IN TURKEY'S FY07 INTERNATIONAL
Thu Sep 01 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

012035Z Sep 05UNCLAS ANKARA 007248 
 
SIPDIS 
 
COMMERCE PLEASE PASS TO WILLIAM DERK 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MARR MASS PREL TU
SUBJECT: DOD PARTICIPATION IN TURKEY'S FY07 INTERNATIONAL 
DEFENSE FAIR (IDEF) 
 
REF: SECDEF 012035Z SEP 05 
 
¶1. Per reftel request for recommendations for DOD 
participation in international trade shows, Mission supports 
DOD attendance at the 8th International Defense Industry Fair 
(IDEF) to take place in Ankara, Turkey in September 2007. 
The 7th IDEF, held in Ankara from Sept. 27-30, 2005, was 
attended by some 240 high-level officials from 42 European 
and other countries, and received the participation of 427 
companies from 49 countries.  It provided a forum for 
Lockheed Martin and JSF partner countries to showcase the 
Joint Strike Fighter and for U.S. firms considering or 
participating in tenders for an attack helicopter, a utility 
helicopter and a trainer aircraft to market their products to 
Turkey's decision-makers and visiting foreign dignitaries. 
 
¶2. The superiority of US defense equipment is best 
demonstrated through fairs such as IDEF, where foreign 
government decision-makers and end-users can see and test the 
equipment firsthand.  However, American suppliers are facing 
significant challenges in the Turkish market.  Turkey's 
current strategy is to develop an indigenous defense industry 
with the assistance of foreign defense firms.  Utilizing 
direct commercial sales (DCS) for the acquisition of an 
attack helicopter, utility helicopter and other equipment, 
Turkey is requiring 100% transfer of technical data packages 
and imposing other onerous terms and conditions in its 
requests for proposal that US firms have so far been 
unwilling to meet.  By placing greater emphasis on 
development of an indigenous industry, Turkey risks lowering 
the quality of its defense equipment and the level of its US 
and NATO inter-operability.  Turkey has also been actively 
courting European defense firms, possibly in a move to shore 
up EU member support for Turkey's eventual accession. 
 
¶3. Senior US European Command and Air Force (SAF/IA) 
attendance at the 2007 IDEF would demonstrate continued USG 
commitment to identify mutually-beneficial solutions to 
assist Turkey to modernize its military forces; counter the 
strong European presence at the fair and show support for US 
defense firms; showcase the progress on the Joint Strike 
Fighter program; and add weight to the Mission's arguments 
for Turkey to adopt more reasonable technology transfer and 
contractual requirements so that American companies can 
better compete. 
 
 
WILSON