05BAGHDAD3451
DAILY IRAQI WEBSITE MONITORING
Tue Aug 23 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 003451 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: DAILY IRAQI WEBSITE MONITORING 
 
 
SUMMARY: Discussions on the Constitution was one of the major editori 
daily web-site editorials on August 22-23, 2005. END SUMMARY. 
 
----------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
----------------- 
 
¶A. "Citizenship and Sectarianism; The Difference Between The Sunni an 
Constitution" (Iraqi Press Website in Arabic, 8/22) 
¶B.  "Iraqi Constitution and the Dialogue of the Deaf" (Iraq 4 All New 
¶C.  "Concession Over Self-Determination" (Al-Rafidayn Web Site in Ara 
¶D.  "Iraq, Uniqueness of the Constitutional Battle . . . The Uniquene 
(Soat Al-Iraq (The Voice of Iraq) in Arabic, 8/23) 
 
---------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
---------------------- 
 
¶A. "Citizenship and Sectarianism; The Difference Between The Sunni an 
Constitution" 
(Iraqi Press Website in Arabic - Editorial by Ali Al-Shlah) 
 
http://www.iraqipapers.com/dustoor_6_6_5_ali. htm 
 
"Iraq is ruled by one sect which nobody used to talk about.  Now sect 
familiar topic of conversation, since the government is comprised of 
spectrums! . . . Which group committee members identify with or not, 
qualifications, have become main concerns for Iraqis because it is a 
international Arab issue. This point was taken to such extremes that 
State Rice visited Iraq and demanded that the Prime Minister guarante 
Sunnis in drafting the constitution, nobody claimed that this was eth 
But it seems that this topic only comes up when the government is fac 
necessity of giving non-Sunnis their rights (or not) in the political 
problems with Saddam's regime not because he was Sunni but because he 
People would have turned against him even if he had been Shi'ite. Why 
that every anti-terrorist operation is against Sunnis? . . I wish tha 
protesters on the Constitutional Drafting Committee say that they opp 
because it excluded an Iraqi legal advisor. But, to oppose it because 
didn't have enough Sunnis isn't a good enough reason. The committee i 
sectarian because the leaders of the Sunnis convinced their group to 
Then those very same leaders demanded a big portion of the cake throu 
others with the threat of a boycott, though Sunnis did not elect the 
They are not legitimate. The government responded to their blackmail 
abroad to the extent that I'm afraid that Sunni extremists will boyco 
elections to get more than they could get in a free and fair election 
will continue to assume more power and get away with their grandstand 
constitution won't differentiate between one Iraqi and another and it 
over another. Political leaders should all concentrate on writing a p 
and not sectarianism one." 
 
¶B.  "Iraqi Constitution and the Dialogue of the Deaf" 
(Iraq 4 All News in Arabic - Editorial By Jihad Al-Khazin) 
 
"It might be true that the constitutional committee had completed 90% 
its August 15th deadline, but its also true that the remaining 10% is 
disagreement among the three main groups . . . In fact, the deliberat 
on how deep the differences are among Shiites, Sunnis, and Kurds. The 
the negotiators to give themselves another week for deliberations des 
the United States. They went into the extension with no practical pro 
solution for problems that preventing their agreement in the first pl 
demand a federal region in the south that would enable them to benefi 
resources. The Kurds in the north also want their own federal region 
idea of Islam as the main source of legislation . . . The 15 Sunni Co 
Committee members have threatened to withdraw from the process if Shi 
continue to insist on these concessions . . . The United States has p 
give up their points and reach an agreement. Ambassador Zalmay Khalil 
disappointment over the postponement after acting as the 72nd member 
Maybe he was even the first . . . Federalism is the first step in the 
Shiites and Kurds are already talking about the next step, which is a 
real possibility that the failure of this process could lead to a civ 
could already be on the way, even though no one is talking about it y 
from insane terrorism that could not be described as a resistance mov 
many lives on daily basis. While the United States, which put Iraq in 
is trying to emphasize the positive side of the situation that just d 
 
¶C.  "Concession Over Self-Determination" 
(Al-Rafidayn Web Site in Arabic - Editorial by Venus Fa'iq) 
 
http://www.alrafidayn.com 
 
"News of Kurdish concessions over the right of self-determination did 
shocking impact on my soul . . . Since I did speculate that Kurds wou 
nothing . . . I would have liked to ask Kurdish officials the questio 
have any rights to give up in the first place, and could they give th 
back to their people?. . I don't know what rights Kurds will have aft 
after agreeing that Islam should be the main source of legislation--t 
are enough to suppress the Kurdish people in a civilized manner right 
sight . . . We should point out that the American position changed du 
Americans, whom Kurds thought were keen on Kurdish rights and were th 
ally ever, have turned their back on Kurds in favor of Shiites, the n 
can't think how any attention could be given towards Kurdish demands 
Kirkuk, especially after Al-Sistani's fatwa. I believe Kirkuk will be 
series of concessions and I hope I'm wrong." 
 
(Soat Al-Iraq, The Voice of Iraq in Arabic - Editorial by Ameer Al-Ta 
http://www.sotaliraq.com 
 
"Does the national assembly's decision to postpone the discussion of 
constitution represent a major setback for Iraq that has just been fr 
or is it merely a minor event on the road to democracy? . . . Failure 
constitutional deadline would be considered a drawback for only one r 
time the Iraqi leadership has failed to fulfill a political obligatio 
toppling of the previous regime . . . Despite the prospect of postpon 
tactical drawback for Iraqis, it represents a democratic development 
recently freed from decades of dictatorship. Constitutional committee 
to pressures from different factions including Al-Sistani and the U.S 
. . . The vast majority of Iraqis are content with the manner through 
made, and they're aware that the era where constitutions were imposed 
forever, and that no single group can dictate its will over others, a 
they know it's no longer possible to ignore the will of the people . 
around the drafting of the constitution have included Iraqis particip 
conferences enabling 50,000 to express their opinions; in addition to 
many unions, women's groups, and human rights organizations." 
 
 
Khalilzad