05BAGHDAD2919
MEDIA REACTION: IRAQ, AL-JAFARI'S VISIT TO IRAN,
Tue Jul 12 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 002919 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, 
INR/P 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAQ, AL-JAFARI'S VISIT TO IRAN, 
TERRORISM; BAGHDAD 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: The major themes in the daily newspapers on 
July 12 were Al-Jafari's upcoming visit to Iran, the 
constitutional committee's preparations for drafting the 
constitution, and the latest developments of the security 
situation. END SUMMARY. 
 
----------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
----------------- 
 
¶A. "The Prime Minister's new tour" (Ad-Dustoor, 7/12) 
¶B. "Blair's call and Talabani's suggestions for ending 
terrorism" (Al-Adala, 7/12) 
 
---------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
---------------------- 
 
¶A. "The Prime Minister's new tour" (Ad-Dustoor, 7/12) 
 
Ad-Dustoor (independent) published a front-page editorial 
by Bassem Al-Sheikh about Al-Jafari's expected visit to 
Iran and Syria: 
 
"Al-Jafari will soon depart on a new tour to Iran and 
Syria. It was only recently that the Prime Minister 
returned from his visit to Brussels, Britain, and the 
United States. It appears as though our officials will 
always be destined to travel in order to provide a decent 
life for the Iraqi people. Al-Jafari's current tour is 
primarily aimed at solving all pending issues between Iraq 
and Iran. Most of these lingering issues originated from 
Saddam's policies against the people of Iran and Iraq. Iran 
wants to ratify the agreement that was signed in Algeria 
between the deposed Shah of Iran and Saddam Hussein 
regarding the border issue. This agreement, however, is 
suspicious because it represents a contract that was signed 
by two plotters who only cared about their personal 
interests. 
 
During the last meeting between the Iraqi and Iranian 
Ministers of Defense, Iran demonstrated its willingness to 
offer one billion dollars to support Iraq's reconstruction, 
establish mutual military cooperation, and to help the 
Iraqi people. However, this assistance had a string 
attached that stated Iraq must not allow foreign troops to 
establish military bases on its land. The visit by the 
Iraqi Minister of Defense was made in preparation for Al- 
Jafari's visit, which will discuss the above-mentioned 
issues and focus on obtaining further political support. 
 
I believe Al-Jafari's visit will yield positive results 
because he has strong relationships with Iranian 
politicians and leaders. But will his visit settle the 
issue of the large debts that were accumulated due to the 
Iraqi-Iranian war that was sparked by the deposed dictator? 
Will this visit resolve the numerous border issues that 
have long provided a source for bilateral tension? Will the 
visit solve the issue of prisoners of war and other missing 
persons? Will Al-Jafari's visit lead to an agreement 
regarding the one hundred and eleven Iraqi planes sitting 
on the tarmac in Iran? We believe that these are the most 
important issues that should be discussed during the 
upcoming visit because obtaining political support and 
cooperation on border security have already been discussed 
at length." 
 
¶B. "Blair's call and Talabani's suggestions for ending 
terrorism" (Al-Adala, 7/12) 
 
Al-Adala (affiliated with SCIRI) published a last-page 
column by Hamdi Hassan about terrorism in Iraq: 
 
"The London bombings will not come to pass without a real 
strategic review of the international strategy against 
terrorism. The bombings in London hold the same importance 
as the September 11th attacks. British Prime Minister Tony 
Blair stated that the motives for terrorism must be 
eradicated because such terror is aimed at distorting 
Islam. Blair added that procedures must be implemented to 
reinforce mutual understandings between the world's 
religions and to proceed forward in working to achieve 
peace in the Middle East. 
 
In the wake of the London bombings, this suggestion appears 
aimed at searching for treatments that can restore the 
social, economic, and political balance in Middle Eastern 
countries. Many countries in this region are accused of 
being a primary source for spawning terrorism. Most 
importantly, this suggestion is aimed at looking for the 
motives rather than results. All international efforts must 
be united, in coordination with the Middle Eastern 
countries, to root out terrorism. These terrorists are 
exporting their crimes every day to the Middle East and 
around the world with the objective of disseminating more 
horror through killing and bloodshed. In Iraq, however, the 
situation is more difficult because of the daily presence 
of terrorist operations. Nonetheless, we think that Blair's 
suggestions are worthy and we support the call to establish 
a strategy that will mobilize international efforts to 
implement practical solutions to end terrorism. 
Meanwhile, President Jalal Talabani recently called for 
holding a meeting for all Arab Ministers of Interior to 
declare their united opposition to terrorism. Such a 
meeting is especially pertinent since many of these 
countries are suspected of supporting and financing 
terrorism. In fact, Iraq's Minister of Defense, Sadoun Al- 
Dulaimi, revealed that Iraq has evidence that proves 
certain countries are involved in spreading terror in Iraq. 
Without a doubt, the most hurtful wounds in Iraq are being 
inflicted by Arab terrorism. The Arab countries, their 
media outlets, religious institutions, and social 
organizations all possess the safety valve that can stop 
terrorism in Iraq. This fire of terrorism will be extended 
to burn the Middle East and other countries. For this 
reason, these countries must respond to the suggestions of 
Blair and Talabani. A new strategy must be implemented to 
fight the plague of the current era. Iraq must become the 
first laboratory where those countries accused of 
supporting terrorism can prove their innocence. If such 
countries refuse, we will be forced to reveal secrets for 
the sake of peace and the protection of nations." 
 
SATTERFIELD