05BAGHDAD4320
MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, CONSTITUTION,
Wed Oct 19 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 004320 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, CONSTITUTION, 
REFERENDUM, SADDAM HUSSEIN TRIAL, NATIONAL RECONCILIATION; 
 
BAGHDAD 
 
SUMMARY: Discussion on the Constitution, Referendum, Saddam 
Hussein Trial, and National Reconciliation were the major 
editorial themes of the daily newspapers on October 19, 
¶2005. END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "Dialogue is the Only Path Towards Settlement" (Al- 
Fourat, 10/19) 
¶B. "The Trial" (Al-Adala, 10/19) 
¶C. "Messages from the People" (Al-Bayyan, 10/19) 
¶D. "The Ballot Results Implore Respect for Citizens' 
Opinions" (Al-Ittihad, 10/19) 
¶E. "Due Date" (Al-Sabah, 10/19) 
 
---------------------------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "Dialogue is the Only Path Towards Settlement" 
(Al-Fourat, independent, anti-coalition published this page- 
three editorial by Hamid Al-Dulaimi) 
 
"Dialogue is the only language to generate solutions to the 
many crises in this country, but the desire for dialogue has 
diminished among political groups. Dialogue requires sincere 
and honest intentions in order to be successful, yet some 
groups want to seize time for their own interests--they use 
dialogue only to further their interests and reach their own 
goals. 
 
"Everyone claims to be in support of the political process 
and says they want it to succeed but all signs indicate the 
opposite; conflict prevails as if dialogue were marginalized 
and useless. The truth is that dialogue is a magic 
instrument for dealing with society's problems. 
 
"Both intellectuals and the media are responsible for the 
continuous emphasis on dialogue and the necessity for 
reaching positive outcomes to save Iraqi society from 
conflict and war. Iraqi society is facing a significant and 
dangerous test and it will either return to dialogue, 
forgiveness, and respect for others or it will follow the 
path of sedition of division. There is a fine line between 
both; therefore politicians must be very careful in choosing 
the path forward. Which route will they choose?" 
 
¶B. "The Trial" 
(Al-Adala, affiliated with SCIRI led by Abdul Aziz Al-Hakim, 
published this page-three column by Dr. Ali Khalif) 
 
"The Iraqi Special Tribunal will today convene the trial of 
the dictator, Saddam Hussein, and seven other defendants who 
will face charges, including crimes against humanity. By the 
end of this week, the results of the referendum will be 
announced and all expectations point to an overwhelming 
ratification of the referendum for the new Iraqi 
constitution. 
 
"This synchronism of the trial and referendum process 
illustrate public rejection of oppression, the Ba'ath party, 
and the tyrant who caused Iraqis to suffer for such a long 
time. What we should realize about this tribunal is that it 
does not represent revenge against Saddam, who ruled Iraq 
through sectarianism, or against his policies but rather 
it's a trial of a civilian leader for crimes committed 
against his own people. Iraqis have a right to rush their 
demands to hang Saddam even without a trial and they are 
eager for the moment when they see him in the dock. They 
believe that this is the right judgment for the victims of 
his massacres and the random execution of innocent Iraqis. 
Iraqis believe that he does not deserve a fair and public 
trial, and more precisely that he does not deserve to be 
treated with justice. 
 
"The Iraqi Special Tribunal is the appropriate forum to 
examine the crimes committed in mass graves resulting in the 
martyrs of Al-Anfal and Halabja. Iraqis are trying to 
rebuild the rule of law through a legitimate trial. Some 
have accused this tribunal of being a weak forum-an 
institution unwilling to hang Saddam under pressure from 
those who only want a life-sentence. This is a conspiracy 
theory the former regime has propagated. Iraqis should 
believe that Saddam is of no more use to anyone, he has been 
in prison for two years now, and this is a real trial and 
the judge must hand him an execution sentence." 
 
¶C. "Messages from the People" 
(Al-Bayyan,  affiliated with the Al-Dawa party led by Al- 
Ja'afari published this page-five editorial by Salim Rasoul) 
 
"Many prescient messages have by sent by the Iraqi people to 
the rest of the world: to the Arab world, neighboring 
countries, and even to Iraqi politicians who participated in 
the referendum. One of the messages is: the Iraqi people are 
decisively intent on continuing state and institution 
building. That means the entire world should stand with the 
Iraqi people and support their efforts to rid Iraq of 
terrorism. 
"Another message to Arab and neighboring countries is: the 
Iraqi people want to live in peace and to build their 
country. There are those who believe in dialogue, the 
political process, and who trust their political 
representatives on the ground in Iraq. Therefore, if 
countries want to help the Iraqi people as they claim then 
they should double their efforts to stopping the 
infiltration of terrorists across their borders, and they 
must curtail media support for terrorists in Iraq under the 
pretense of resistance. 
 
"The Iraqi people went out in millions, rejecting terrorism 
and condemning external efforts supporting terrorists. That 
was the clear message from the Iraqi people throughout 
referendum day. 
 
"The message that was sent to Iraqi politicians is: Iraqi 
citizens have indicated their confidence in their leaders 
therefore political parties must respect their constituents' 
opinions and honor the trust that has been placed in them. 
They must understand the importance of securing the people's 
trust-the message is clear and the election is near." 
 
¶D. "The Ballot Results Implore Respect for Citizens' 
Opinions" 
(Al-Ittihad, affiliated with the PUK led by Jalal Al- 
Talabani, published this page-three editorial by Abdul Hadi 
Mahdi) 
 
"As we await the results of the referendum different groups 
have been trying to comfort their constituents with regard 
to their successes in the constitutional process. No one can 
disagree that the referendum process occurred in a 
democratic environment-both sides have admitted this as well 
as international monitors; it's considered a glorious Iraqi 
accomplishment, of which factions should be proud. The draft 
constitution is considered to be a civilized accomplishment, 
a precedence in Iraq and perhaps the region-everyone should 
respect citizens' opinions through the results of the 
referendum. 
 
"It seems that the group that anticipates its political 
failure is already beginning to claim that results were 
forged in such and such a province. It is shameful to accuse 
others of forgery and vote rigging unless there is evidence 
to back it up." 
 
¶E. "Due Date" 
(Al-Sabah, affiliated with the pro-coalition Iraqi Media 
Network, published this front-page editorial by Muhammad 
Abdul Jabbar) 
 
"The referendum date has passed peacefully and more than 60% 
of registered voters were able to vote on the constitution. 
At the time of writing, all clues indicate the constitution 
has passed. 
 
"The success of the referendum process is another indication 
that the political process in Iraq is moving forward 
peacefully-at least on the formal level. In other words, in 
accordance with the timetable of dates established to move 
the political process forward and accomplish set goals. We 
still have one more event on the schedule and that is 
parliamentary elections scheduled for December 15, assuming 
the constitution successfully passes. 
 
"The main objective of the political process is to rebuild 
the Iraqi state which disintegrated on April 9, 2003; a 
state in a comprehensive definition, one that embraces all 
peoples, territories, government structures, and 
consolidates national sovereignty. 
 
"Should the permanent constitution pass successfully, then 
it will be considered the groundwork to build a solid state 
which democratic and constitutional institutions are built 
upon. The constitution includes a lot of articles that are 
essential to erect a democratic Iraqi state. It encompasses 
many issues (some intentionally postponed) in addition to 
guarantees to adjust and amend disputed articles following 
the election of a new legislature which will make the 
existing constitution a provisional one rather than a 
permanent one. 
 
"This means that we have an open text in our hands that 
allows us the ability to amend it. The amendments are 
necessary in order to build national consensus which 
currently exists on a legal basis but will be strengthened 
through a larger national consensus. 
 
"It is very important to understand that those who refused 
to cast votes were not necessarily rejecting the 
constitution or the political process itself nor are they 
boycotters. In the worst case scenario they were absent from 
participating politically, based on their own free will and 
political judgment. 
 
"We have to realize that participation in the referendum and 
the election in general is a right and not a duty. In other 
words, whoever fails to participate in the referendum is 
simply yielding his right for a particular reason. As a 
result, he will lose the right to ask for anything. In the 
recent Egyptian presidential election, Hosni Mubarak was re- 
elected with only 23% of the registered vote and nobody 
bothered to discuss the legitimacy of that election." 
 
SATTERFIELD