05CAIRO5477
EGYPTIAN MEDIA COVERAGE OF DEPUTY SECRETARY
Mon Jul 18 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CAIRO 005477 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PA FOR J. ADAM ERELI; NEA/PD FOR FRANK FINVER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KPAO KMDR OPRC UK IZ IS EG OVIP
SUBJECT:  EGYPTIAN MEDIA COVERAGE OF DEPUTY SECRETARY 
ZOELLICK'S VISIT TO EGYPT, JULY 13-14 
 
 
¶1.  Deputy Secretary Zoellick's visit to Egypt (July 13-14) 
was the occasion for extensive, and mostly positive, 
coverage in pro-government, opposition, and independent 
papers, July 13-16.  His meeting with President Mubarak and 
an Embassy-arranged press round table prompted many 
positive articles noting the Deputy Secretary's support for 
political and economic reforms in Egypt, and 
acknowledgement of Egypt's important role in the region. 
The only negative article appeared in a sensationalist 
magazine, known for its anti-American views, which attacked 
the Deputy Secretary's meeting with civil society leaders 
with the often-heard charge that such meetings constitute 
U.S. interference in Egypt's internal affairs.  End 
summary. 
 
¶2.  Coverage of Deputy Secretary Zoellick's visit to Egypt 
was largely positive and very extensive.  The pro- 
government media said on July 13, in advance of his 
meetings, that he would discuss increasing American 
investments in Egypt and work on concluding a free trade 
agreement.  On July 15, leading pro-government paper Al 
Ahram (circulation: 750,000) bannered "American 
appreciation for political and economic reform in Egypt," 
and "Zoellick says that democratic openness is important 
for the continuation of the political process; priority to 
be given to Egypt in FTA talks with the U.S.; the next 
Iraqi elections will allow its people to ratify a 
constitution."  Similar headlines appeared as a second lead 
in pro-government Al Akhbar (circulation 750,000), on July 
15, and on the front page of independent daily Al Masry Al 
Yom (circulation: 50,000), on the same day.  Pro-government 
Al Gumhouriya's (circulation: 200,000) lead story, on July 
15, was published with red ink headlines reading, 
"Washington supports political reform in Egypt."  The 
leading opposition paper, Al Wafd (circulation: 180,000), 
on July 15, reported that Mr. Zoellick had called for "free 
elections and that all (Egyptian presidential) candidates 
should receive equal coverage in the mass media as a 
condition for the continuation of the political process in 
Egypt." 
 
¶3. There was excellent coverage of the press roundtable 
that the Embassy organized for local and international 
print media with the Deputy Secretary on July 14.  The 
leading pro-government paper, Al Ahram (circulation: 
750,000), carried in its second lead article, on July 16, 
the Deputy Secretary's comment that political life in Egypt 
has witnessed important reforms and that this ought to be 
recognized.  The front page of pro-government Akhbar Al- 
Youm (circulation: 1,000,000), on July 16, highlighted the 
Deputy Secretary's comment that Egypt has a key role to 
play in the Middle East peace process.  Pro-government 
weekly Akhbar al Youm (circulation: 800,000) headlined the 
Deputy Secretary's emphasis "on Egypt's role in the Mideast 
peace process, and (that) the implementation of the Roadmap 
is one of President Bush's priorities."  Independent paper 
Nahdet Masr (circulation: 20,000), on July 16, carried the 
headline, "Zoellick: The new reforms in the NDP are 
serious; there is no substitute for international 
monitoring to ensure honest elections."  The article also 
reported the Deputy Secretary's remarks denying that there 
was any American dialogue with the Muslim Brotherhood.  The 
financial daily Al Alam Al Youm (circulation 35,000), on 
July 16, carried the Deputy Secretary's remarks about the 
additional benefits that will accrue to Egypt from its 
participation in the Qualified Industrial Zones (QIZ) 
Agreement. 
 
¶4. Pro-government Al-Gumhouriya's new Editor-in-chief, 
Mohamed Ali Ibrahim, criticized, on July 15, the opposition 
parties for their assumption that the U.S. was seeking to 
empower them at the expense of the ruling NDP party saying, 
"Some (opposition) newspapers are trying to imply that 
Washington is sending envoys to Egypt to extend bridges to 
the opposition, in preparation for selecting one of its 
candidates to rule Egypt.  This is an odd exaggeration, a 
falsification of truth, and political propaganda that no 
nationalist accepts.  The opposition is mistaken if it 
thinks that American envoys come to Egypt especially to 
support them in the elections." 
 
¶5.  The only harsh criticism came from the sensationalist 
weekly magazine Al Osboa (circulation: 50,000), which is 
well known for its consistently anti-American stance on 
most issues.  On July 17, it facetiously labeled the Deputy 
Secretary as one of the America's "high commissioners," and 
 
SIPDIS 
a "divine messenger."  The article also criticized Mr. 
Zoellick's meeting with representatives of Egyptian civil 
society organizations, calling it an example of "America's 
continued interference in Egypt's internal political 
affairs."  The article claimed the Deputy Secretary had 
"dropped a bomb when he referred to American support for 
Egyptian opposition parties to receive training under a 
State Department program, inasmuch as opposition leaders 
already consider this to be a violation of their sense of 
patriotism."  The report suggested that all of the Deputy 
Secretary's remarks were an indication of "Washington's 
 
SIPDIS 
(bottom-line) message that change in Egypt should be 
implemented only by the current regime." 
 
Corbin