05CAIRO8554
EGYPT PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS - NOV 9 ROUND -
Wed Nov 09 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

091614Z Nov 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CAIRO 008554 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR S/ES-O AND NEA/ELA 
NSC STAFF FOR SINGH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM EG
SUBJECT: EGYPT PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS - NOV 9 ROUND - 
SITREP #2 
 
REF: A. CAIRO 8546 
 
     ¶B. CAIRO 8392 
     ¶C. CAIRO 8274 
     ¶D. CAIRO 8112 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: Voter turnout in the first round of 
Egypt's parliamentary elections picked up as the afternoon 
began.  Most polling stations are the scene of active 
campaigning by the National Democratic Party (NDP), Muslim 
Brotherhood (MB) and other independent candidates.  Reports 
from Embassy observers indicate that voting is taking place 
peacefully in most areas.  However there have also been 
instances of vote-buying, issuance of voter cards on the 
street, campaign materials inside polling stations and at 
least one case of physical abuse against monitors.  End 
summary. 
 
--------------------- 
Ayman Nour's District 
--------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) In Bab Al Sha,ariyya, the district of opposition 
candidate and former presidential candidate Ayman Nour, 
poloff visited two large polling stations where the NDP 
appeared to have the largest share of public support. 
Emotions were running high among voters and poll workers with 
some pushing and shoving and disagreements over access to the 
polling stations.  There were allegations that Nour,s Ghad 
Party is buying votes.  Some voters reported to poloff that 
they were offered money by the Ghad Party but refused to 
accept it.  For its part, the Ghad Party has alleged that the 
GOE has engineered a heavy handed campaign to intimidate 
Ayman Nour's supporters in the district. 
 
-------------------- 
Intimidation in Giza 
-------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) In the Giza countryside, another poloff and 
election monitors were welcomed politely by police and poll 
workers in front of polling stations in Al Saff and Tebbeen. 
Poloff observed an upbeat atmosphere and an independent MB 
campaign worker reported cooperation from the government. 
Poloff saw transparent boxes and ink being used.  As in the 
presidential election, however, the voter lists continue to 
pose problems, with many voters turned away when their names 
could not be found on the lists. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The atmosphere was very different when poloff and 
the monitors arrived at a third polling station in Giza. 
There poloff witnessed monitors being roughed up by thugs at 
the polling station entrance.  One monitor reported having 
had his digital camera taken away and all of the pictures in 
it deleted and his poll monitor authorization letter torn up. 
 Poloff also heard reports that journalists were being turned 
away and/or roughed up at this same polling station. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
High Profile for the Muslim Brotherhood 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) In a town between Giza's urban area and the 
countryside, poloff observed frantic, fierce campaigning, 
with stiff competition between two independent candidates one 
from the MB, with no evidence of NDP activity.   Nasr City, 
northeast of Cairo, saw active campaigning by independents 
including male and female MB members.  Monitors there had 
been questioned by security officials as they entered a Nasr 
City polling station but were admitted.  Journalists, 
including three TV cameras, were observed inside and outside 
the polling station. This polling station was housed inside a 
police station, a violation of stated policy. In nearby 
Heliopolis, there was a vocal MB presence but not many 
voters.  A group of 100 MB supporters had managed to rally 
inside a polling station, chanting, "Islam is the solution, 
the Koran is the basis." 
 
----------- 
Upper Egypt 
----------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) In Minya, four hours south of Cairo, polling 
stations were quieter.  NDP and MB posters were ubiquitous, 
but few party campaign workers were seen near the polls.  In 
those instances where campaign workers were distributing 
flyers, MB workers were the most prominent.  Turnout remained 
light.  Domestic monitors who spoke with emboff generally 
reported few difficulties.  One complained that one poll 
station manager was admitting only NDP voters, but that 
situation appeared exceptional.  Security presence was light. 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
Getting out the Worker Vote for less than $10 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) In one district near Cairo, emboff visited a 
polling station with 2,200 registered voters, two-thirds of 
whom work at nearby factories.  Two of these factories are 
owned by candidates, one of whom is with the NDP and the 
other an independent formerly with the NDP.  That station was 
surrounded by campaign workers, again with MB representatives 
dominant.  Police were cooperative.  Buses delivered workers 
from the factories to the polls.  MB campaigners at the 
station reported that NDP campaign materials were inside the 
polling station but otherwise had no complaints. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Despite the general satisfaction expressed by the 
MB workers at this station, emboff did witness what appeared 
to be NDP vote-buying: a woman came out of the polling 
station, approached an NDP worker, and asked for the money 
she had been promised.  The NDP worker escorted the worker 
away, but emboff was told separately that votes are going for 
50 Egyptian pounds (approximately 9.00 USD). 
 
------------------- 
Food Boxes in Maadi 
------------------- 
 
¶9.  (SBU) In Maadi, a middle to upper class suburb of Cairo, 
and in the vicinity of a nearby cement factory, there was 
active campaigning by NDP and MB workers inside and outside 
of the polling stations.  Trucks and loudspeakers were 
present and large buses and mini-buses transporting voters, 
some of them from the government, were parked a few streets 
from the polling station.  Few inked fingers were observed. 
There were lots of food boxes on the ground and NDP, MB and 
independent candidates were observed distributing candy and 
flowers to voters.  Emboff observed representatives from both 
the NDP and the MB issuing pink voter cards to anyone who 
presented a national ID card, allowing them to vote in 
violation of the voter registration law. 
 
---------------------------------- 
"Battle of the Bands" in the Delta 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶10.  (SBU) In Menoufiyya governorate in the Nile delta 
region, poloff reported strong MB organization, including 
banners, loudspeakers and campaign workers wearing vests and 
headbands decorated with pictures of candidates.  The 
environment was like a "battle of the bands" with 
loudspeakers from the various parties competing for the 
voters' ears.  The independent candidates are also using 
loudspeakers for voter education, explaining the mechanics of 
voting for an "independent" versus a candidate from a 
particular party.  But by 1200 noon, some monitors still had 
not received the entry cards required for admission to 
polling stations.  In addition, there were reports that many 
polling stations did not open at all until late morning. 
 
 
RICCIARDONE