05CAIRO2271
PRISON VISIT: MOHAMED HESHAM S. ELDIN YOUSSEF
Wed Mar 23 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS CAIRO 002271 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR CA/OCS/ACS/NESA WES REISSER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CASC PHUM EG YOUSSEF MOHAMED HESHAM ELDIN
SUBJECT: PRISON VISIT: MOHAMED HESHAM S. ELDIN YOUSSEF 
 
REF: CAIRO 09049 AND PREVIOUS 
 
¶1. Name: Mohamed Hesham S. Eldin Youssef 
 
¶17. ACCESS: FEBRUARY 24, 2005 
 
¶19. MISTREATMENT: NONE REPORTED THIS VISIT. 
 
¶23. Remarks:  Vice Consul and ACS LES visited Mr. 
Youssef at Liman Torah Prison, south of Cairo.  Subject 
appeared to be in normal physical condition. He told us 
he is ambivalent regarding our visits because after we 
leave he is debriefed by Egyptian State Security 
officers. He added, however, that, on balance, the 
visits are useful, because they result in better 
treatment for him and the other American prisoners. 
 
¶24. Continuing with allegations of former mistreatment 
by State Security, he said that in 2001 he had been 
tortured by them and "the Embassy had done nothing." 
Actually he has alleged torture on three occasions 
since 2001. Each time, the Embassy sent a Diplomatic 
Note to appropriate officials requesting an 
investigation into his charges and a subsequent report 
regarding their findings. Comment: To date post has 
never received a response to the requests. End comment. 
 
¶25. He has been tried and convicted of terrorism, and 
added that he has not consulted his Egyptian attorney 
regarding the issue since September, 2002, because he 
feels it would be fruitless. 
 
 
Gray