05DUSHANBE2014
ENGAGING HUMAN RIGHTS DAY DISCUSSION AT TAJIK TECHNOLOGICAL
Tue Dec 13 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Dushanbe
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS DUSHANBE 002014 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
STATE FOR EUR/CACEN, DRL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PREL KPAO RS TI
SUBJECT: ENGAGING HUMAN RIGHTS DAY DISCUSSION AT TAJIK TECHNOLOGICAL 
UNIVERSITY 
 
REF: A. A) DUSHANBE 002004 
 
     ¶B. B) DUSHANBE 002005 
 
¶1.  The Russian Embassy and Tajik Embassy didn't want it to 
happen.  But CdA and EmbOffs held a broad-ranging and energetic 
discussion with students and faculty members of the Tajik 
Technological University for Human Rights Day 2005 (NOTE: Not 
Tajik Technical University as stated in reftels A and B.  END 
NOTE.)  CdA delivered opening remarks, fielded several poignant 
questions, and before turning over the remainder of the nearly 
two-hour roundtable discussion to PolOff, PAS, and USAID. 
 
¶2.  The Tajik Technological Students led off the discussion with 
direct questions about secret CIA prisons in Europe, America's 
hope to improve democracy/human rights in Tajikistan, and a 
soulful criticism on how real Tajiks can care about democracy if 
more pressing and primal concerns, like hunger and heat, make 
democracy seem like a luxury that only other countries can 
afford.  CdA emphasized that democratically elected governments 
are more responsive and accountable, especially on issues that 
hit home like jobs and poverty reduction and said Tajikistan can 
have prosperity and democracy.  On secret prisons, CdA said the 
United States is wrestling with the issue, in the framework of 
established human rights accords and with the full and necessary 
participation of an open press. 
 
¶3.  Later in the discussion, Rector Amir Kataev and Deputy 
Rector Bozorali Azizov tried to steer the conversation away from 
human rights to focus on the politically safe theme of how they 
can increase material funding and cooperation between the 
university and the Embassy.  The students, undeterred by 
official posturing by their university leaders, returned to the 
topic of human rights and democracy with most of their 
questions. 
 
¶4.  COMMENT:  The Tajik Government still considers the very 
words "human rights" taboo.  The reality, however, is that 
students and Tajiks are often very willing to tackle the subject 
with EmbOffs given the right setting.  The Tajik Technological 
students asked heartfelt, engaging, and at times accusatory and 
challenging questions.  But the informal setting and give and 
take resonated with the students who clearly enjoyed a chance to 
parry and match wits with Embassy staff.  Post will continue to 
use any and all opportunity to have such discussions with Tajik 
students of all ages.  END COMMENT. 
ARMBRUSTER 
 
 
NNNN