05JERUSALEM1996
WB/G SITREP: CLASHES IN GAZA CITY BETWEEN PA
Tue May 17 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Jerusalem
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 JERUSALEM 001996 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FRONT OFFICE; NEA/SA/EX FOR AUSTIN-FERGUSON; DEPT 
FOR DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PBTS PHUM KWBG CASC IS
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: CLASHES IN GAZA CITY BETWEEN PA 
SECURITY FORCES: MAY 17, 2005 (1700 HOURS LOCAL) 
 
This is a joint Embassy/ConGen cable. 
 
¶1.   (SBU) Summary:  At least three Palestinians were shot 
and injured the evening of May 16 in Gaza City during an 
altercation that broke out between members of the PA civil 
police and the anti-riot police unit.  The ensuing gun battle 
went on for several hours.  In the West Bank, PA police on 
May 16 discovered the remains of a Palestinian man and woman 
in a water well near Jenin.  The police are investigating, 
but suspect that the dead Palestinians were killed more than 
three years ago on suspicion of collaborating with Israel. 
The IDF on May 16 conducted land-clearing operations near 
Nablus.  The Israeli High Court on May 16 revoked an 
injunction that prohibited work on construction of the 
separation barrier in the vicinity of the Ariel settlement. 
End summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2.   (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Death: Nil. 
 
-- Injury: Nil. 
 
-- Bodies discovered: The PA police on May 16 discovered the 
remains of a Palestinian man and woman in a water well in the 
vicinity of Qabatiya village, south of Jenin.  The police 
suspect that the dead Palestinians were killed more than 
three years ago on suspicion of collaborating with Israel. 
 
-- Shooting: Unknown gunmen on May 16 fired gunshots at an 
Israeli vehicle traveling in the vicinity of 'Azzun village, 
east of Qalqiliya.  There were no injuries reported from this 
incident. 
 
¶3.   (SBU) ARRESTS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Incursions: The IDF on May 16 entered villages in the 
Salfit district in search of wanted militants.  There were no 
arrests reported from these operations. 
 
-- Arrest: Israeli Police on May 16 arrested a Palestinian in 
Samu' village, south of Hebron, for killing his Israeli 
mother-in-law and injuring his wife during a May 15 incident 
in the Israeli city of Beersheva. 
 
¶4.   (SBU) DEMOLITIONS: 
 
-- The IDF on May 16 destroyed three houses and an unknown 
number of shacks in the northern West Bank villages of Zububa 
and Ti'innik northwest of Jenin, for lacking of proper 
building permits. 
 
-- The IDF on May 16 leveled approximately 30 dunams of land 
and uprooted trees around Kafr Qaddum, west of Nablus. 
 
¶5.   (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- The Israeli High Court on May 16 revoked an injunction 
that prohibited work on construction of the separation 
barrier in the vicinity of the Ariel settlement. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶6.   (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injuries/Arrest: UNRWA reported that three Palestinians 
were shot and injured the evening of May 16 in Gaza City 
during an altercation that broke out between members of the 
PA civil police and the anti-riot police unit.  According to 
Palestinian reports, civil police officers detained a member 
of the police anti-riot unit for questioning.  Other members 
of the arrested man's unit then converged upon police 
headquarters in an effort to free their colleague, firing 
their weapons as they arrived.  The ensuing gun battle went 
on for several hours.  While PA sources reported that as many 
as 10 Palestinians were injured by gunfire, UNRWA could 
confirm that only three Palestinians were admitted to 
hospital. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: The IDF reported that Palestinian 
militants fired one mortar shell at Gani Tel settlement May 
¶17. 
 
-- Shootings: The IDF reported that Palestinian militants 
launched two shooting attacks at IDF outposts near Rafiah 
Yam, one on May 16 and the other on May 17. 
 
¶7.   (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS: 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was open May 17, with a major detour at Netzarim 
Junction. 
 
-- Erez Crossing was open for Palestinians May 16, and a 
total of 3,936 laborers and 182 merchants crossed into Israel. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone was closed May 16. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers May 17, 
but was open for the import of aggregates used in 
construction. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was open May 17. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open for arrivals and departures May 
¶17. 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan checkpoint was closed May 17.  Toufah 
checkpoint was open for residents of al-Mowassi, except males 
aged 16-30. 
Pearce