05KUWAIT3037
CFLCC/MOI SIGN BORDER MOU
Wed Jul 06 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kuwait
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

061326Z Jul 05UNCLAS KUWAIT 003037 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELTN KTIA MARR MOPS PBTS PGOV KU IZ
SUBJECT: CFLCC/MOI SIGN BORDER MOU 
 
REF: 03 KUWAIT 5314 AND PREVIOUS 
 
This cable is sensitive but unclassified; please protect 
accordingly.  Not for Internet distribution. 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: On July 4, CFLCC and GOK Ministry of the 
Interior signed a memorandum of understanding that outlines 
the terms of use for the Coalition Crossing point on the 
Kuwait/Iraq border.  This agreement entrusts the U.S. 
military with significant responsibility for control of one 
of the most heavily-used border crossings in Kuwait.  Next 
steps include convening the bilateral working group created 
by the MOU to ensure its orderly implementation.  End summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) On July 4, following 18 months of intermittent 
negotiations, Coalition Forces Land Components Command 
(CFLCC) and the GOK Ministry of the Interior signed a 
memorandum of understanding (text faxed to NEA/ARPI) 
regarding cooperation at the Coalition forces border crossing 
between Kuwait and Iraq.  The agreement acknowledges "the 
trust placed in the United States by Kuwait for day-to-day 
management of the Coalition Forces Crossing."  This crossing 
point is the main artery used by Coalition troops and convoys 
in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF).  The U.S. 
military has manned the crossing since the beginning of OIF 
under informal, ad hoc arrangements with Kuwaiti Customs and 
the Ministry of Interior. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Notwithstanding these agreements, on four separate 
occasions the border crossing was closed with little or no 
warning due to misunderstandings or lack of coordination, 
resulting in serious disruptions in OIF traffic.  The MOU 
acknowledges significant U.S. military responsibilities for 
convoy inspections and contractor identification issues.  The 
agreement will facilitate border traffic and it establishes a 
mechanism for conflict resolution that is designed to 
preclude arbitrary border closings in the future.  Next steps 
include convening the bilateral working group created by the 
MOU to ensure its orderly implementation. 
 
¶4. (U) Americas Department Director Ambassador Khalid 
Al-Babtain hosted the signing ceremony at the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs.  Local press attended the event and followed 
with prominent newspaper coverage.  The Kuwait side was 
represented by Ibrahim Al-Ghanim, Director of Customs, 
Ministry of Finance; LTG Nasser Al-Othman, Undersecretary, 
Ministry of the Interior (MOI); BG Abdullah Al-Muhanna, 
Director of the Border Department, MOI; and COL Ratib 
Al-Anzi, of the Security Committee of the National Assembly, 
among others.  The U.S. side consisted of BG William Johnson, 
Director, CFLCC Movement and Distribution; and U.S. Embassy 
personnel including U.S. Customs Advisor, Econ/C and EconOff. 
 Brigadier General Johnson signed on behalf of the CFLCC and 
Undersecretary Lieutenant General Nasser Ahmed Al-Othman, 
MOI, signed on behalf of the GOK. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Following the signing ceremony, the two sides agreed 
to an early meeting of the bilateral working group created by 
the MOU.  Per the MOU, and in order to reduce the impact of 
OIF re-supply operations on Kuwait's civilian traffic, the 
U.S. military will move the Coalition Crossing Point to a 
location away from Al-Abdaly, the main commercial border 
crossing between Kuwait and Iraq at present.  Plans call for 
Kuwait Immigration, Customs and Border Security to have a 
presence at the new Coalition Crossing Point (provisionally 
called "K Crossing") to the west of Al-Abdaly.  Details for 
that new crossing and proposals for an identity card system 
for U.S. military contractors and employees will be on the 
agenda for the first bilateral working group meeting.  LTG 
Al-Othman proposed that that meeting take place within the 
next week or two and volunteered to arrange for it in 
consultation with Embassy and CFLCC.  BG Johnson seconded the 
call for swift action, noting that the road to K Crossing on 
the Iraqi side of the border could be finished within the 
next six months.  Ideally, he said, the crossing point should 
be ready for operation as soon as the road is completed. 
 
 
********************************************* 
Visit Embassy Kuwait's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/kuwait/ 
 
You can also access this site through the 
State Department's Classified SIPRNET website 
********************************************* 
TUELLER