05MANAMA300
BAHRAINI QUESTIONS ON BMENA ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Wed Mar 02 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Manama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

021331Z Mar 05UNCLAS MANAMA 000300 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/ARPI DBERNS AND NEA/PI SFRANCESKI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID KMPI OTRA BA
SUBJECT: BAHRAINI QUESTIONS ON BMENA ENTREPRENEURSHIP 
CENTERS 
 
REF: A. STATE 32268 
 
     ¶B. MANAMA 179 
     ¶C. 04 MANAMA 1747 
 
¶1.  The visit of MEPI Economic Pillar Manager Sonia 
Franceski, Beyster Institute President Dr. Ray Smilor, 
Beyster Director of Business Development Kenny Pegram, and 
future Bahrain Center for Entrepreneurial Excellence (BCEE) 
American Executive Advisor David Mosby February 26-27 
provided an opportunity to address GOB concerns regarding the 
creation of the BCEE.  Per Ref A request, post discussed the 
two key concerns with appropriate GOB officials. 
 
¶2.  Concern A:  The GOB questioned Beyster's commitment to 
the project as they had perceived that Beyster had postponed 
visiting Bahrain on more then one occasion. 
 
This is no longer an issue.  Beyster and MEPI demonstrated 
that they are committed to the project and David Mosby 
pledged to spend 4-6 weeks over the next three months in 
Bahrain fine-tuning the BCEE business plan.  He will take up 
permanent residence in Bahrain in June.  Mosby will be able 
to have regular interaction with the GOB.  Based on feedback 
received from the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs, the draft USG MOU on U.S. support for the 
BCEE will be reworked by NEA/PI to reflect greater 
specificity as to the USG commitments for the BCEE and 
presented to the GOB for signature. 
 
¶3.  Concern B:  The GOB expressed concern that the 
Entrepreneurship Center would become a MEPI vice G8 
initiative. 
 
The Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
reaffirmed Bahrain's desire to promote the BCEE as a G8 and 
regional initiative.  The GOB would like to use a 
well-defined BCEE business plan to solicit support from other 
G8 countries as well as appropriate regional parties.  This 
concern has begun to be alleviated as the UK Embassy in 
Manama, as G8 Chairman, has approached the Ministry of 
Finance about possible in-kind support.  (Comment: The 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs seemed more concerned about 
receiving public support, recognition, and in-kind support 
from the G8 as opposed to monetary assistance.  Politically, 
it wants to deliver on the promise made at the Morocco Forum 
for the Future meeting to establish a G8/regional training 
center for entrepreneurial excellence.  The Ministry of 
Finance, however, continues to be interested in G8 financial 
support.) 
 
MONROE