05MADRID173
NET-CENTRIC DIPLOMACY TRIP REPORT-
Tue Jan 18 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Madrid
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MADRID 000173 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR RM/IRP DAVID MCKEE AND EDIPLOMACY GERALD 
GALLUCCI FROM FRED HASSANI, TEAM LEAD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AINF OTRA
SUBJECT: NET-CENTRIC DIPLOMACY TRIP REPORT- 
MADRID, DECEMBER 15-17 
 
SUMMARY 
¶1.  A visit to install the NCD pilot system for 
publishing biographic files and telegraphic 
reports to the SIPRNet took place from December 
15-17.  The NCD application was successfully 
installed on a ClassNet workstation and the 
locally engaged contractor was fully trained in 
its use. 
 
Post Support 
¶2.  Outstanding support was provided by Embassy 
Madrid.  Control Officer Stephen Widenhouse pre- 
briefed mission elements, arranged meetings, and 
ensured that the technical infrastructure was in 
place and functioning properly. 
 
Briefings and Training 
¶3.  Formal overview briefings on NCD were done 
for representatives of the Pol and Econ sections. 
A technical briefing on NCD was provided for IMO 
section staff.  The Bio Reports officer was 
briefed on the goals of the program and the next 
steps.  Finally, an overview was provided to the 
Charge. 
 
¶4.  Hands-on NCD training was provided for the 
CITI local contract hire on the use of the 
application and procedures for upgrading the 
client software. 
 
Hardware/Software 
¶5.  The client software was downloaded and 
functioned normally.  The NCD-provided HP 8500 
scanner was installed and worked well.  A 
workspace and 4-drawer safe were provided in the 
CAA and will be available for the duration of the 
project. 
 
Lessons Learned 
¶6.   A great deal of bio information no longer 
makes it into the paper files.  In Madrid, as in 
many other posts visited by NCD, much current 
biographic information exists only in emails sent 
from officer to officer.  Capturing, cataloguing, 
and recording this information can be 
problematical to impossible.  If the senders and 
recipients of the email messages have departed 
post, the information is usually simply lost: 
email is ephemeral.  Providing a way for officers 
to post information directly into the persistent 
biographic database via email would be a big 
plus. 
 
Post Comment 
¶7. Post would like to thank the NCD team for 
choosing Madrid as a pilot post and Fred Hassani 
for his excellent support during his visit. We 
look forward to working with NCD in the next 
phase of this project. 
 
MANZANARES