05MADRID3580
SPAIN ASKS FOR US BACKING FOR REELECTION OF MARINO
Thu Oct 13 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Madrid
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

131329Z Oct 05UNCLAS MADRID 003580 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM SP UNGA
SUBJECT: SPAIN ASKS FOR US BACKING FOR REELECTION OF MARINO 
MENENDEZ TO COMMITTEE AGAINST TORTURE 
 
 
¶1. (U) Embassy Madrid received the following diplomatic note 
from the Spanish Ministry of Foreign Affairs seeking support 
for the Spanish candidate for the committee on torture. 
 
¶2. (U) Begin text of Spanish note: 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation sends regards 
to the Embassy of the United States of America in Madrid, and 
has the honor to communicate that the Government of Spain has 
decided to present as a candidate Mr. Fernando Marino 
Menendez for reelection as a member of the Committee Against 
Torture. The elections will take place during the coming 
meeting of the States Participating in the Convention against 
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhumane, or Degrading Punishments, 
in November of this year. 
 
Professor Marino Menendez, whose resume is attached (NOTE: 
Post has faxed this to EUR/WE), has extensive academic 
experience in International Human Rights Law, to which he has 
added since 2002 his notable contribution to the work of the 
Committee against Torture, of which he is President since 
¶2004. 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs trusts that it will receive 
the valuable support of the authorities of the United States 
of American for this candidature. 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation would like to 
reiterate to the Embassy of the United States of America in 
Madrid its most distinguished consideration. 
 
Madrid, September 20, 2005 
 
(STAMPED RECEIVED OCT 5 2005 BY US EMBASSY MADRID) 
 
End text. 
 
¶3. (U) Post has faxed Fernando M. Marino Menendez's resume to 
EUR/WE. 
AGUIRRE