05MANAMA1919
NEWLY-ELECTED BAHRAIN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE AND
Wed Dec 28 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Manama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MANAMA 001919 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NEA/ARPI 
COMMERCE FOR DAS VINEYARD AND TYLER HOFFMAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD ECON BA OFFICIALS ECTRD BILAT
SUBJECT: NEWLY-ELECTED BAHRAIN CHAMBER OF COMMERCE AND 
INDUSTRY BOARD SEEKS TO PROMOTE FTA 
 
------ 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. In a December 28 meeting with the newly-elected Bahrain 
Chamber of Commerce and Industry Board of Directors, the 
Ambassador exchanged ideas with Board Chairman Dr. Essam 
Abdullah Fakhro on ways to promote trade and investment 
opportunities under the recently ratified U.S. - Bahrain Free 
Trade Agreement (FTA).  He stated that a possible April 2006 
visit by the Crown Prince to the U.S. could be timed 
perfectly to promote the FTA.  A new GOB initiative to spur 
investment by cutting red tape complements BCCI plans to 
promote the FTA.  End Summary. 
 
------------- 
The New Board 
------------- 
 
¶2. The Ambassador called on the newly-elected BCCI Board of 
Directors December 28 to express his formal congratulations 
on their electoral success, and to exchange ideas on how to 
promote the FTA when it takes effect, hopefully in the coming 
months next year.  The new 18-member board is headed by 
Chairman Essam Fakhro, former BCCI Second Vice-Chairman, who 
was elected amid some controversy on November 26.  As head of 
the BCCI's dominant block, the Economic and Development 
Group, Dr. Fakhro was the consensus candidate for the top 
spot, which carries a four-year term.  However, fellow block 
member Adel Al A'ali received more votes in the November 16 
general election.  In a November 29 press conference, Dr. 
Fakhro denied media reports of dissension among board members 
and pledged to work under the slogan "One team, one task." 
Other Board officers include First Vice-Chairman (former 
Treasurer) Ebrahim Mohammed Ali Zainal, Second Vice-Chairman 
Dr. Nezar Sadiq Mohammed Albaharna, Treasurer Jehad Hasan 
Ebrahim Bukamal, Vice-Treasurer Saqer Shaheen Saqer Shaheen, 
Executive Committee Member Sharif Mohammed Sharif Ahmadi and 
Executive Committee Member Adel Hussain Mahdi Almaskati. 
 
------------------------------- 
Expertise and Assistance Sought 
------------------------------- 
 
¶3. Dr. Fakhro told the Ambassador that he had just been 
appointed Chairman of the Economic Development Board's (EDB) 
FTA Committee and looked forward to coordinating with various 
governmental offices and local NGO's, including the Bahrain 
Businessman's Association, Bahrain Businesswomen's 
Association, and the Bahrain Economic Society to develop a 
strategy for maximizing the benefits of the FTA.  He said he 
was also interested in collaborating with U.S. interests such 
as the Embassy and the American Chamber of Commerce (AmCham). 
 
¶4. Dr. Fakhro said he sought specialized expertise on 
promoting the FTA in Bahrain.  He noted BCCI sponsorship of a 
recent Booz-Allen FTA-related workshop, which addressed 
opportunities in the information technology, healthcare, 
education, legal, architectural engineering, and textile 
sectors, and said he would pursue follow-up workshops that 
would address industrial and business services sectors. 
Board member Sameer Nass voiced interest in hearing from 
experts experienced in Jordan's FTA implementation. 
 
¶5.  The Ambassador expressed strong interest in supporting 
the effort to chart a way forward.  The Ambassador 
recommended regular meetings with Embassy and AmCham 
interlocutors and suggested it would be appropriate to 
organize a high-profile, celebratory event marking the 
implementation of the FTA.  (Note: Though the FTA has been 
fully ratified by U.S. and Bahraini legislatures, 
implementation is subject to Bahrain's passage of certain 
intellectual property rights-enforcing legislation.  End 
Note.)  The Ambassador said we should look for opportunities 
to promote the FTA in the U.S., pointing out that a possible 
visit by the Crown Prince to the U.S. in April could be 
well-timed to maximize publicity for the FTA. 
 
¶6. Board members expressed strong interest in USG support for 
trade missions from the U.S. to complement those from 
Bahrain.  The Ambassador suggested an upcoming visit by U.S. 
Department of Commerce Deputy Assistant Secretary Holly 
Vineyard would be an opportunity to appeal for such support. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
New GOB Initiative Complements BCCI Plans 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. The Ambassador applauded a December 25 announcement by 
Minister of Industry and Commerce Hassan Fakhro, to replace 
"red tape with a red carpet" for new investors.  The 
initiative announced by Minister Fakhro is geared toward 
encouraging investment and its first phases are to be 
implemented in January 2006.  Key measures include a steep 
reduction of commercial registration fees, and the slashing 
of advance approval and permit requirements.  The initiative 
will also mean that shares of joint stock companies can be 
traded without prior approval. "The new regime will mean it 
is easier, cheaper, and faster to set up a business in 
Bahrain, encouraging entrepreneurs and investors from within 
the country and from abroad," said Minister Fakhro in 
explaining the initiative.  The Ambassador noted that plans 
to educate the Bahraini business community on the new 
initiative could complement and be coordinated with efforts 
to promote FTA opportunities. 
 
MONROE