05MANILA4750
PHILIPPINES TIGHTENS SECURITY AFTER BALI BOMBINGS
Tue Oct 04 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Manila
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MANILA 004750 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EAP/MTS, INR/EAP, INR/TNC, S/CT, USIP - SOLOMON 
NSC FOR MORROW 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PREL MOPS PINS PGOV KISL ID RP
SUBJECT: PHILIPPINES TIGHTENS SECURITY AFTER BALI BOMBINGS 
AND SEEKS SWIFT PASSAGE OF ANTI-TERRORISM BILL 
 
REF: MANILA 4740 
 
¶1.  (U) This message is Sensitive But Unclassified -- Please 
handle accordingly. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Summary.  In the aftermath of the October 1 
bombings in Bali, Indonesia, Philippine President Gloria 
Macapagal-Arroyo expressed her condolences to the victims' 
families, tightened security measures, and urged swift 
passage of an anti-terrorism bill by Congress.   Faced with 
what has been described by Interior and Local Government 
Secretary Angelo Reyes as "a clear and present danger" of a 
 
SIPDIS 
terrorist attack, the House of Representatives approved an 
anti-terror bill at the Committee level on October 4.  Senate 
President Franklin Drilon has vowed to rush the passage of 
such a bill in order to strengthen GRP counter-terrorism 
efforts.  The news regarding the anti-terrorism bill is 
positive, but the proposal has many hoops to go through 
before possible final approval.  End Summary. 
 
Condolences and Increased Security Concerns 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (U) President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo and senior GRP 
officials are concerned that the Philippines could be the 
next target of a terrorist attack in the wake of October 1 
bombings in Bali, Indonesia, that left at least 22 dead and 
over 120 injured.  While expressing her condolences to the 
victims' families (see text of her statement in para 7), 
Arroyo tightened security measures throughout the Philippines 
and urged swift passage of an anti-terrorism bill.  The 
115,000 strong Philippine National Police is currently on a 
heightened state of alert and security has been tightened in 
malls, markets, train stations, hotels, and locations 
frequented by foreigners.  GRP intelligence units are now 
intensifying their efforts to determine whether any of the 
suspects in the Bali bombings have connections to the 
Philippines.  The bombings received a great deal of coverage 
in the local press, including in editorials and op-eds. 
 
Reacting to a "Clear and Present Danger" 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (U) On October 4, Interior and Local Government Secretary 
Angelo Reyes called terrorism the number one threat to the 
Philippines and warned -- without providing specifics -- that 
there is a "clear and present danger" of an attack.  On the 
same day, the House of Representatives approved an 
anti-terror bill at the Committee level which included the 
following definition of terrorism - "the premeditated, 
threatened, actual use of violence or force against person or 
by any other means of destruction perpetrated or against 
person, property or the environment, with the intention of 
creating, sowing a state of danger, panic, fear, or chaos to 
the general public, group of persons or segment thereof, or 
of coercing or intimidating the government to do or abstain 
from doing an act."  The bill is now up for plenary 
discussions. 
 
¶5.  (U) The House anti-terror bill specifies 11 acts of 
terrorism, with penalties ranging from life imprisonment and 
a fine of 10 million pesos ($178,571) to death.  Senate 
President Franklin Drilon has vowed to rush the passage of a 
bill in order to strengthen counterterrorism efforts of the 
Philippines. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) As mentioned, the Bali bombings have received a 
great deal of press coverage in the Philippines and seem to 
have touched a nerve.  The news regarding the anti-terrorism 
bill is positive, but the proposal has many hoops to go 
through before possible final approval. 
 
Text of President Arroyo's Speech 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (U) The full text of President Arroyo's speech in the 
aftermath of the October 1 bombings in Bali, Indonesia 
follows: 
 
"We sympathize with the victims' families and reaffirm our 
partnership with Indonesia against terror.  The new Bali 
attacks after the London attacks show the resiliency of 
terrorists to strike targets when our guard is down.  We have 
to keep our guard up and pass the anti-terrorism bill to 
interdict terrorists quickly and isolate them from doing 
harm.  Our vigilance at the operational and community level 
is high and sustained.  Our global links are tight and 
working.  We have limited the movements of terrorist cells 
and keep them on the run.  But the price of freedom is 
perpetual vigilance. We must keep alert and help authorities 
in their constant watch over all public places." 
 
JOHNSON