05NDJAMENA1547
NINTH JOINT COMMISSION MEETING: WIDESPREAD
Mon Oct 17 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ndjamena
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

171132Z Oct 05

ACTION AF-00    

INFO  LOG-00   AID-00   EUR-00   UTED-00  H-00     TEDE-00  INR-00   
      IO-00    NEA-00   OIC-00   OIG-00   P-00     D-00     SA-00    
      PRM-00   DRL-00   SAS-00   SWCI-00    /000W
                  ------------------4E3AE3  182102Z /62    
FM AMEMBASSY NDJAMENA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 2467
INFO AFRICAN UNION COLLECTIVE
DARFUR COLLECTIVE
AMEMBASSY LONDON 
AMEMBASSY PARIS 
AMEMBASSY YAOUNDE 
USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 
USLO TRIPOLI 
USMISSION GENEVAUNCLAS  NDJAMENA 001547 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR AF, AF/C, AF/SPG, D, DRL, H, INR, INR/GGI, 
PRM, USAID/OTI AND USAID/W FOR DAFURRMT; LONDON AND PARIS 
FOR AFRICAWATCHERS; GENEVA FOR CAMPBELL, 
ADDIS/NAIROBI/KAMPALA FOR REFCOORDS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PREF KAWC CD SU
SUBJECT: NINTH JOINT COMMISSION MEETING: WIDESPREAD 
DISRESPECT FOR CEASE-FIRE 
 
REF: NDJAMENA 1378 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Summary: The Joint Commission (JC) on the Darfur 
Humanitarian Cease-fire met October 13-14 in N'Djamena.  The 
key agenda item, strengthening the cease-fire, was never 
completely covered, but participants vowed to rejuvenate the 
JC and reaffirmed their commitments to participate regularly. 
 The Cease-fire Commission (CFC) reported on a serious 
deterioration of the security situation, which included 
widespread violence and deliberate and deadly attacks on 
civilians, humanitarian workers, and African Union personnel. 
 The AU urged the parties not to concentrate on disputing 
responsibility for the violations and asked all parties to 
focus on ways to strengthen cease-fire mechanisms on the 
ground.  Nonetheless, SLM/A denied responsibility for the 
attack on AU personnel and said it is issuing its own report. 
 JEM noted that it had not been cited in any of the 
violations.  The Government of Sudan (GOS) disavowed control 
of the jandjaweed and said it would look into the issue of 
releasing the remaining Canadian armored personnel carriers. 
All international partners condemned the parties for 
deterioration of the situation on the ground and implored the 
GOS to release the remaining APCs.  The Justice and Equality 
Movement (JEM) participated for the first time since January. 
 The meeting dynamics followed the regular pattern of 
condemnation and denial, but the spirit of the debate was a 
positive development and all parties committed themselves to 
participate seriously.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  The ninth session of the Joint Commission on the 
Darfur Humanitarian Cease-fire (JC) was held in N'Djamena on 
October 13 and 14.  The meeting saw the return of the Justice 
and Equality Movement (JEM), represented by Ahmed Lissan 
Tugod and Talgedin Niam, to N'Djamena.  JC Chairman Mahamat 
Ali Abdallah Nassour was at times joined by Foreign Minister 
Allam-mi Ahmad and was assisted by the Chad mediation team, 
Baharadine Haroun and Ambassador Mahamat Habib Doutoum. 
Ambassador Baba Gana Kingibe and Boubou Niang represented the 
African Union (AU) and the Cease-fire Commission by 
Ambassador Hassan Ali Gibril and MG Festus Okonkwo.  The 
Government of Sudan (GOS) delegation was headed by General 
Mahamat Mustapha al-Dabi.  Sudan Liberation Movement/Army 
(SLM/A) Chairman Abdelwahid Nur, Adam Shogar, and Ali Traiyo 
spoke for SLM/A.  Ambassadors John Yates and Marc Wall, as 
well as P/E Officer, comprised the U.S. delegation. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
CEASE-FIRE COMMISSION REPORT 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶3.  (U)  AU Cease-fire Commission (CFC) Chairman MG Festus 
Okonkwo and Acting Deputy Head of Mission Ambassador Hassan 
Ali Gibril outlined the escalating number of cease-fire 
violations, which included deliberate attacks on and 
harassment of civilians, humanitarian workers, and AU 
personnel.  They also pointed out cases in which the parties 
denied the AU access to areas under their control to carry 
out investigations.  Mass movements by all parties were 
reported, including high concentrations of armed Arabs with 
thousands of livestock.  There are also unusual jandjaweed 
concentrations near Kabkabiya.  Rumors in the area suggest a 
potential attacks on Kabkabiya, Rokiro, Nertiti, and Golo. 
Attacks occurred in all sectors and the level of insecurity 
is causing the return of internally-displaced persons (IDPs) 
to Tawilla and Zam-Zam camps.  Four AU personnel, which 
included three Nigerian observers and one PA/E contractor, 
died as the result of attacks on October 8.  39 AU personnel 
were kidnapped on October 9.  The CFC also noted that the GOS 
continues to submit requests for convoy movements too late 
for the AU to ensure notification of the parties.  This has 
led to numerous attacks.  SLM/A remains in Graida and Labado 
and have established checkpoints along the Labado-Nyala road 
and are collecting illegal taxes from civilians. 
 
¶4.  (U)  Both Okonkwo and Gibril cited flagrant disrespect 
for the cease-fire as hampering the peace process from moving 
forward.  Gibril's recommendations included: parties should 
cease incursions into AMIS-controlled areas; GOS should 
disarm the jandjaweed and other armed militias; SLM/A and JEM 
 
need to give the CFC their locations; the SLM/A high command 
must caution its field commanders to stop offensive attacks, 
especially those on AMIS patrols; the SLM/A should vacate 
Labado and Graida without delay; and the GOS should allow the 
immediate deployment of the 105 APCs donated by Canada to the 
national contingents in the AMIS II mission.  To date, only 
35 have been released by the GOS.  Okonkwo asked that Chadian 
authorities help recover AMIS vehicles, weapons, and 
ammunition from Sudanese rebel splinter groups on the border. 
 The CFC reported vehicles and aircraft painted in AMIS 
colors with AU insignia are being used by the parties, making 
AU personnel potential targets of attacks. 
 
¶5.  (U)  The AU's envoy, Ambassador Baba Gana Kingibe, 
roundly criticized all parties for their disregard for the 
cease-fire.  He said that the AU Peace and Security Council 
would be re-considering the AMIS mandate on or about October 
20, prior to its expiration.  He expressed his hope that 
AMIS's protection mandate would be clarified and 
strengthened.  He reminded the parties of their obligations 
to protect civilians and noted that the JC and AU Peace and 
Security Council is referring the cease-fire violations to 
the U.N. Security Council.  He told the parties that UNSC 
1591 and 1593 must be respected and bind all parties. 
Kingibe urged the parties to work together to strengthen the 
JC and the cease-fire.  Kingibe asked SLM/A to inform their 
commanders that AMIS has the right to move anywhere it needs 
to investigate violations.  He told the GOS the APCs were 
necessary to increase AMIS's mobility.  He requested that the 
parties refrain from denying responsibility and casting blame 
on others for the violations and instead give positive 
suggestions for improving the functioning of the JC and 
ensuring respect for the N'Djamena Accord and the Abuja 
protocols.  Kingibe also raised the issue of making the Abuja 
process more inclusive, to ensure that all the parties on the 
ground are bound by the agreements.  Most importantly, 
Kingibe insisted that all parties identify their locations. 
He condemned the expansion of the conflict into Chadian 
territory.  All the international partners, including the 
U.S. delegation, joined Kingibe in expressing condolences to 
Nigeria for the loss of its personnel and condemning the 
parties for the escalating violence. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - 
RESPONSE OF THE PARTIES 
- - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶6.  (U)  Abdelwahid presented SLM/A's reaction to the CFC 
report, which began with regretting the loss of life by AU 
forces, and denying that SLM/A commanders were responsible. 
SLM/A is preparing its account of the events and will deliver 
it to the CFC and JC.  Abdelwahid stated that the AU needs a 
clear mandate to protect civilians and the AU protection 
force needs improved logistics and more personnel.  If the AU 
cannot provide enough troops to protect civilians, Abdelwahid 
said that NATO and UN forces should be deployed to Darfur. 
Invited to the table by Abdelwahid, Traiyo claimed that the 
GOS is impersonating AU forces by painting its vehicles with 
AU insignia.  This, according to SLM/A, is causing confusion. 
 SLM/A later raised the issue of the disarmament plan for the 
jandjaweed which was critiqued at the JC in February and 
asked where is the new plan.  SLM/A asked that the JC have an 
opportunity to see it. 
 
¶7.  (U)  Ahmed Lissan Tugod reaffirmed JEM's commitment to 
the cease-fire agreement and noted that JEM was not cited for 
any violations, nor did it participate in the deterioration 
of the situation on the ground.  Both Tugod and Niam took 
every opportunity to thank the GOC for its hospitality.  They 
urged the AU to open its liaison office, which will house the 
JC secretariat, as soon as possible.  Niam later told us that 
he and Tugod would once again be resident in N'Djamena and 
that the GOC has promised a house.  However, Niam said the 
GOC had not made good on its previous promises of a house and 
stipends.  Tugod told P/E officer that JEM wants to keep good 
relations with Chad and dispel accusations that JEM is 
recruiting Chadian mercenaries and military officers. 
 
¶8.  (U)  General al-Dabi stated GOS troops acted in 
self-defense in Sheiria and the GOS is in full control of its 
forces.  However, he said the GOS is not responsible for the 
activities of "uncontrolled" elements.  General al-Dabi 
proposed establishing joint patrols to protect IDP areas 
drawn from GOS, SLM/A, and JEM forces.  The GOS wants the 
positions of the parties to be verified and called for SLM/A 
to withdraw from Labado, Graida, Marla, and Ishma.  He also 
criticized SLM/A tax collection activities. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
STATUS OF THE AU DEPLOYMENT 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶9.  (U) Okonkwo reported that the enhanced AMIS II mission is 
at seventy percent capacity.  As of October 10, the 
5,581-strong AU mission included 696 military observers; 
4,848 protection force members from Nigeria, Rwanda, The 
Gambia, Senegal, Kenya, South Africa, and Chad; and 11 
cease-fire Commission members and 26 international staff. 
Only 35 of the 105 Canadian-donated APCs have been turned 
over to the AU. 
 
- - - - - - - - 
ON THE MARGINS 
- - - - - - - - 
 
¶10.  (SBU)  SLM/A Chairman Abdelwahid Nur met with Chadian 
President Idriss Deby on October 14.  According to 
Abdelwahid, he was warmly welcomed by the Chadians.  (Note: 
SLM/A leaders Abdelwahid, Khamis Abdullah, and Mini Minawi 
continually promise to visit but never show up.  The Chadian 
Government issued an ultimatum in mid-September that Chad 
could close its borders to SLM/A.  Nonetheless, the Chadians 
were surprised to see Abdelwahid.  End Note.)  Abdelwahid 
told P/E officer that his meeting with Deby, the President 
supported the idea of an all-inclusive conference (see 
septel).  Deby also expressed his concerns about Libyan and 
Sudanese Government support for Chadian rebels and other 
elements along the frontier. 
 
- - - - 
COMMENT 
- - - - 
 
¶11.  (SBU)  Despite the usual exhaustive denials of 
responsibility, several attempts were made to provide 
positive suggestions for moving forward.  The agenda item to 
consider the verification commission could have been a 
show-stopper, but a compromise resulted in sidestepping the 
issue.  Nonetheless, all parties and partners seem committed 
to regular participation on the JC, and the meeting ended on 
a more positive note than others. 
 
¶12.  (U) Tripoli Minimize Considered. 
WALL 
 
 
NNNN