05OTTAWA2928
CANADA INTERESTED IN COOPERATING ON DARFUR WOMEN'S
Thu Sep 29 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ottawa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS OTTAWA 002928 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREF PREL EAID SU CA
SUBJECT: CANADA INTERESTED IN COOPERATING ON DARFUR WOMEN'S 
PROJECTS 
 
REF: STATE 172323 
 
¶1. (U) As requested in reftel, poloff met with officials from 
Foreign Affairs Canada (FAC) and the Canadian International 
Development Agency(CIDA) on 23 September to discuss U.S. 
initiatives to counter violence against women in Darfur, and 
to solicit Canada's support for such initiatives.  Canadian 
participants included Sanja Gavric from CIDA's East African 
and the Horn branch; Foreign Affairs Director for Gender 
Mainstreaming in the Human Rights, Humanitarian Affairs and 
International Equality Division Ginette Saucier; FAC Human 
Security Program desk officer Jessica Frasier; and Sudan Task 
Force Deputy Director Shannon Smith. 
 
¶2. (U) Ms. Smith noted that the GoC has recently committed CA 
$260 million (approx. USD 221 million) over two years to 
provide humanitarian aid to Sudan in support of the 
comprehensive peace agreement and the African Union's mission 
(AMIS).  The largest share of the funds CA $80 million is 
being distributed through international organizations, while 
CA $156 million is allocated to the AMIS mission.  A 
"minimum" of CA $14 million over two years has been pledged 
for peace-building projects, some of which may be implemented 
in Darfur. An additional CA$10 million will be allocated for 
to-be-determined small scale projects under the Additional 
Peace Process Support for Sudan (APPSS) program.  Canadian 
Charge d'Affaires in Sudan David Ross was expected to provide 
project recommendations during a visit to Ottawa the week of 
October 3. 
 
¶3. (U) Ms. Fraser said that the Human Security Office is 
currently evaluating several proposals for Darfur that would 
address gender violence.  They include rule of law projects 
with a Sudanese security force training component, a 
reconciliation for peace and coexistence project, a 
children's rights project, peace building workshops and a 
women's dialogue project.  Rapid implementation of at least 
one of these projects is anticipated prior to the planned 
November visit to the region of Canadian Special Envoy for 
the Sudanese Peace Process,  Senator Mobina Jaffer.  The FAC 
representatives expressed interest in learning more about USG 
support and funding for media programming and radio 
broadcasts. 
 
Visit Canada's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/ottawa 
 
WILKINS