05PARIS5816
ADDRESSING THE THREAT OF AVIAN INFLUENZA - FRENCH
Mon Aug 29 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

291649Z Aug 05UNCLAS PARIS 005816 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
FOR G, U/S DOBRIANSKY, OES, OES/IHA, EUR/WE; HHS FOR 
INTERNATIONA/STEIGER/BUDASHEWITZ/GAY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TBIO ECON PREL SOCI FR
SUBJECT: ADDRESSING THE THREAT OF AVIAN INFLUENZA - FRENCH 
ARE FOCUSED 
 
REF: SECSTATE 153802 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Only days following news that the H5N1 virus had 
hit the Urals, French media coverage regarding the 
consequences of a possible influenza pandemic has 
proliferated and the government has reacted.  On August 24, 
President Chirac requested the appointment of an 
interministerial delegate (name not yet released) to 
coordinate the GOF's pandemic prevention measures, although 
the Ministry of Health will continue to serve as the lead 
French agency.  The Prime Minister's Office convened an 
inter-agency meeting to consider the issues on the basis of 
the latest information.  The government's strategic plan to 
address any future pandemic (last published in May) will be 
updated, and the government is stockpiling antiviral 
(Tamiflu) medicine. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) On August 26, ESTH Counselor presented points 
contained reftel to Messieurs Goyer and D'Oriano at the 
Health Office, Department of Development and Technical 
Cooperation, MFA, and separately to Messieurs Linois and 
Brunet, respectively, the new Diplomatic Counselor and Chief 
of the European and International Office, Ministry of Health. 
 All described extensive efforts underway in the French 
government to coordinate preparations for a possible 
influenza pandemic.  They indicated that likely the 
appropriate official to serve as an overall point-of-contact 
for the U.S. government on avian flu will be the 
interministerial delegate whose name has yet to be released. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) With regard to assistance for affected countries, 
French officials mentioned possible enhanced support to 
international organizations involved in health preventive 
undertakings, particularly the World Health Organization. 
They mentioned also a series of upcoming meetings at the 
national and EU levels to discuss preparedness measures and 
funding considerations.  Health officials mentioned that 
prospects for the visit of new French Health Minister Xavier 
Bertrand to attend the upcoming Global Health Security 
meetings in Rome looked positive.  At such time, the Minister 
looked forward to meeting Secretary Leavitt and discussing 
avian flu and other international health issues of concern to 
the U.S. and France.  French officials expressed satisfaction 
with cooperation underway with the U.S. and were aware of the 
August 26 teleconference between HHS and the Pasteur 
Institutes in Paris and Hanoi regarding avian flu 
preparedness.  They spoke highly of not only the scientific 
capabilities of the Pasteur Institute, but also its public 
health role in connection with infectious diseases prevention. 
 
STAPLETON