05PARIS8622
FRANCE REVISES 2005 CENTRAL GOVERNMENT BUDGET
Thu Dec 22 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

221642Z Dec 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PARIS 008622 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PASS FEDERAL RESERVE 
PASS CEA 
STATE FOR EB and EUR/WE 
TREASURY FOR DO/IM 
TREASURY ALSO FOR DO/IMB AND DO/E WDINKELACKER 
USDOC FOR 4212/MAC/EUR/OEURA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN ECON PGOV FR
SUBJECT:  FRANCE REVISES 2005 CENTRAL GOVERNMENT BUDGET 
 
REF:  Paris 7771 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: The GOF revised its 2005 central government 
budget to include additional social expenditures and revised 
receipts including transfers to local authorities.  The 
revised budget includes measures dear to President Chirac: a 
tax on airline tickets to help fund development aid, and tax 
cuts on future capital gains.  The government offset 
additional expenditures, but the 2005 general government 
deficit probably will exceed 3.0% of GDP.  END SUMMARY. 
 
Government Commits Not to Increase Central Government Budget 
Deficit 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
¶2.  Finance Minister Thierry Breton and Budget Minister Jean- 
Francois Cope introduced the revised 2005 central government 
(CG) budget on November 23, 2005.  The 2005 CG budget 
deficit is now set at 44.1 billion euros, an estimate the 
government believes is consistent with a 46.8 billion euro 
cash-basis deficit, which includes 2 billion euro carry- 
overs from 2004.  In fall 2004, when the Parliament passed 
the 2005 appropriations bill, the deficit was set at 44.9 
billion euros. 
 
¶3.  The revised 2005 budget takes into account additional 
spending (about 1 billion euros) for: 
-An increase in already-planned expenditures (490 million 
euros) [particularly government guarantees (200 million 
euros)], compensation for victims of anti-semitic acts (134 
million euros), justice fees and civil compensation (75 
million euros), and government-subsidized loans (35 million 
euros); 
-Additional social spending (300 million euros) including 
government housing programs (155 million euros), allowances 
to the handicapped (78 million euros), allowances for single 
parents (32 million euros), and medical assistance (27 
million euros); and 
-Miscellaneous spending (240 million euros), including 
compensation for the 2003 drought (50 million euros), public 
transportation (31 million euros), and official development 
assistance (27 million euros). 
 
The Government Funds French CNN 
------------------------------- 
¶4.  Proving that the GOF still can find a place for pork- 
barrel projects, or perhaps reflecting its cultural 
diversity priorities, the government gave the green light on 
November 30 for an international French-language TV news 
channel to start broadcasting by the end of next year.  The 
government committed to funding the channel under an 
agreement lasting until 2010.  Thirty million euros were set 
aside for this project in the 2005 CG budget. 
 
Putting a Lid on Total Spending 
------------------------------- 
¶5.  The government emphasized that, for the third year, the 
amount of the CG budget passed by the Parliament will be 
strictly observed.  Additional spending is mostly offset by 
900 million euro cuts in other parts of the CG budget, 
notably the public service debt (730 million euros) thanks 
to lower-than-projected interest rates.  Total cuts (6 
billion euros) offset unexpected expenditures made in 
February, April, September and November, notably emergency 
measures to prevent avian flu (1 billion euros). 
 
¶6.  Minister Breton also highlighted government efforts to 
control the volume of spending in 2005.  He said limiting 
exceptions to the new rule of not carrying over more than 3% 
of spending would result in a significant reduction of the 
"carry-over bubble."  He explained this would reduce the 
need to set aside significant reserves at the beginning of 
each year (7.4 billion in 2005).  The government plans to 
reduce carry-overs from 9.7 billion euros in 2005 to around 
5 billion euros in 2006, a big improvement compared with the 
14.1 billion euros carried over in 2002. 
 
Cuts in Spending Offset Lower-than-Expected Receipts 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
¶7.  As part of the 6 billion euro cut in CG spending, a 3.1 
billion euro cut in CG spending was made in November to 
offset a reduction of approximately 2 billion euros in tax 
receipts.  CG income tax receipts were expected to be lower 
due to sluggish economic growth.  GDP growth is likely to be 
no higher than 1.5% in 2005, much lower than the initial 
government forecast of 2.5% (ref). 
 
¶8.  Government transfers to local authorities (departments) 
will total 510 million euros, including 457 million euros in 
tax on petroleum products, to pay for new local-level social 
responsibilities, notably for granting minimum wages (Revenu 
Minimum d'Insertion - RMI; and Revenu Minimum d'Activite 
RMA).  The government claims the 510 million euro transfer 
will be offset by higher receipts from the exceptional levy 
on distributed profits due to the reform of the tax credit 
(250 million euros) and the revised schedule of corporate 
tax payments (300 million euros). 
Budget Reflects Chirac's commitment to "International 
Solidarity" and . . . 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
¶9.  As part of the revised 2005 CG budget, the government 
approved President Chirac's plan to levy a new tax on 
airline tickets sold in France, in order to raise funds for 
development programs in developing countries, notably the 
fight against AIDS.  The tax, which should go into effect in 
July 2006, will raise around 200 million euros per year by 
taxing tickets by 1 to 40 euros.  Although President Chirac 
has stressed that the tax would not harm the competitiveness 
of the French airline industry, Christian Blanc, center- 
right deputy and former Air France Chairman, has criticized 
the tax as "a very bad idea."  The French air travel 
industry has warned that the tax would result in a drop in 
passenger numbers of one million per year, including a 
600,000 passenger drop in domestic flights, which could 
translate into 3,000 job losses.  Jean-Cyril Spinetta, chief 
executive of Air France-KLM, said it was not the right 
approach, but it would not jeopardize the company's earnings 
targets. 
 
 . . . Increased Individual Shareholding 
---------------------------------------- 
¶10.  To encourage investment in stocks and thereby increase 
corporate investment, the GOF introduced measures to lower 
the capital gains tax.  Shareholders will be partially 
exempted from the 16% tax on capital gains on shares bought 
in 2006 if they hold the shares until 2012.  They will be 
fully exempted if they hold the shares for eight years, or 
until 2014.  Nonetheless, shareholders will still have to 
pay the "social contributions" due on capital gains (11% in 
2005).  CEOs of small and medium-sized companies (SMEs), who 
decide to resign and cash in their shares, would benefit 
from full exemption as soon as January 2006.  The government 
expects the sale of 50,000 to 70,000 companies each year in 
the next five years, and is proposing to extend the scheme 
of tax exemption to gains on the sales of farms and retail 
trade businesses. 
 
Tax Deductions to Improve France's "Attractiveness" . . . 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
¶11.  The revised 2005 budget also includes measures to 
improve France's attractiveness (literally) by creating a 
50% tax deduction on taxable profits for young artists, up 
to 50,000 euros per year, from the sale of works of art. 
The budget also seeks to improve the tax climate for senior 
executives who move to France by exempting transfer bonuses 
and some income from taxes.  In a special effort to boost 
exports, French citizens working more than 120 days abroad 
and who boost French exports will benefit from full 
exemption of income tax, effective January 1, 2006. 
 
. . . and to Help Sectors Affected by Oil Price Increases 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
¶12.  Companies harmed by oil price increases because they 
use trucks and buses will benefit from a reduction in 
certain taxes.  The reduction is increased if companies use 
non-polluting vehicles.  Partial repayment of tax on 
petroleum products to farmers consuming diesel fuel could be 
extended in 2005, on the basis of purchases of diesel made 
after September 1, 2005. 
 
Other Tax schemes 
----------------- 
¶13.  The revised 2005 budget also includes increased funding 
for anti-fraud and anti-tax evasion activities, an increase 
in the general taxes on pollution in various forms, and a 
cut in corporate income taxes by large companies. 
 
¶14.  Deputies examined the revised CG budget from December 1 
to December 8, and proposed 133 amendments.  The deputies 
insisted that the television ("redevance") tax surplus be 
earmarked and dedicated to investment in the audiovisual 
sector for antipiracy initiatives (among others), and not to 
the CG budget.  And it was the deputies who added the 
provisions increasing income tax credits to favor French 
expatriates promoting French exports.  Senators will start 
discussing the revised 2005 budget on December 19. 
 
Budget Deficit Likely to exceed 3% of GDP in 2005 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
¶15.  In discussing the budget, Minister Breton reiterated, 
"The budget deficit will be 3% of GDP."  However, the 
general government (GG) deficit is still heavily dependent 
on the social security deficit.  (The GG budget includes 
central government, social security and local authorities). 
Based on the Social Security Commission's estimates, the 
social security deficit (including health insurance, family 
allowances, work-related accidents and pensions) may 
increase to 15.2 billion euros in 2005 from 12.2 billion in 
¶2004.  Despite transfers from the government, local 
authorities fear they will be unable to balance their 
budgets due to required additional social spending (similar 
to "unfunded mandates" for state governments in the U.S.). 
 
¶16.  Citing "internal Finance Ministry sources" on September 
30, the French newspaper Le Monde reported that the finance 
ministry privately calculated the 2005 GG deficit at 3.3- 
3.4% of GDP.  Le Monde said that current trends for 2006 
pointed to even wider deficits in the 3.5-3.6% range.  In 
its recent semi-annual outlook, the OECD and the European 
Commission both forecast a general government deficit of 
3.2% of GDP in 2005. 
 
Comment 
------- 
¶17.  Although Breton had indicated advance knowledge of the 
contents of a government-commissioned report released 
December 14 on the ballooning general government debt 
(septel), the final 2005 central government budget appears 
to lack any coherent strategy for addressing the debt or the 
deficit.  Although the report only called for a five-year 
plan to seriously control spending growth, there is little 
sign in this budget that the GOF feels compelled to take the 
politically sensitive decisions needed to implement such a 
plan. 
STAPLETON