05PARIS908
PUBLIC AFFAIRS OVERVIEW OF SECSTATE VISIT TO PARIS
Mon Feb 14 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 000908 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/PPD 
 
¶E. O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OPRC OIIP FR
SUBJECT: PUBLIC AFFAIRS OVERVIEW OF SECSTATE VISIT TO PARIS 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Three dominant views emerged in the French 
media from a plethora of reaction to the Secretary's visit 
to Europe.  Coverage of the Secretary's visit to Paris was 
extensive, and its tenor was quite warm, especially when 
contrasted with the Iraq-inspired chill in American-French 
relations.   She was portrayed as genuine and charming, 
placing "Bush in the best possible light" (`Liberation' 
headline).  Following the generally effusive reaction to 
what was heralded as a change in tone from Washington, some 
analytical pieces, appearing after commentators had parsed 
her speech and heard her comments in Brussels in meetings 
with NATO and EU members, stressed that while there was a 
"new tone" in relations, substantial policy differences and 
potential "cold showers" remain, especially regarding Iran, 
the arms embargo on China and democracy in the Middle East. 
(Article in `Depeche du Midi;' Editorial in `Republicain 
Lorrain'; Analysis in `Le Figaro.')  Other commentary 
included introspective calls for Europe to design a 
complementary and active partnership with the United States 
in the pursuit of common goals around the globe. End 
Summary. 
 
THE U.S. AND EUROPE TOGETHER AGAIN 
 
¶2.  French national and regional press made much of the fact 
that the Secretary gave her "much awaited"' speech in Paris 
as a "sign of goodwill" and played "no false note" during 
the visit. (Analysis in `La Croix'; Editorial in 
`Liberation').  The media's take on her speech was 
overwhelmingly positive with headlines and articles entitled 
"Turning the Page" and "Condi Rice Wants to Open a New Era 
with Europe"' (Analysis in `La Croix;' Article in `Le 
Figaro') and commentaries stating: "We are witnessing a new 
chapter in Franco-American relations" and "The warming of 
relations appears to be a priority for the second Bush 
administration" (TF1 Television commentary; Editorial in `Le 
Figaro'). 
 
 
 
HOPEFUL BUT WARY 
 
¶3.  Later analytical pieces advocated a wait-and-see 
attitude.  One commentary opined, "She talks the talk, but 
will she walk the walk?"  It asked whether the United States 
had really "converted to multilateralism and dialogue," or 
if it was just making a "tactical adjustment" of tone to 
curry goodwill among Europeans (Editorial in `Liberation'). 
Once the Secretary spoke in Brussels and "went on the 
offensive," "raising issues of dissension such as Iran, Iraq 
and the embargo against China" (Analysis in `Le Figaro'), 
some commentators returned to earlier opinions that saw 
stark differences in transatlantic reactions regarding these 
problem areas and concluded that the tone may have changed, 
but not the substance of American policy.  They suggested 
Europeans "have a choice between supporting U.S. policy or 
taking their distance, with the risk of a serious 
transatlantic crisis." (Analysis by F. Heisbourg in `La 
Croix').  Another comment regarding the perceived U.S. "re- 
engagement in the Middle East," negatively described "a 
triumphant America seeking to graft its conception of 
culture and democracy wherever it can so as better to 
dominate economically' (Editorial in `Republicain Lorrain'). 
This theme of the U.S. desire to dominate allies and pursue 
its agenda was echoed by others in the national and regional 
press who wrote: "American-style partnership has two 
pillars: the conviction of being right and the knowledge it 
is all-powerful.  The partners have a choice between being 
obedient or pretending to protest" (Editorial in `La 
Croix'). Others chided the Secretary for believing some 
partners are more equal than others.  "The ink wasn't dry on 
the headlines celebrating the Franco-American "reunion" 
after two years of strained relations when the heroine of 
this reconciliation... reminded Europeans that in a 
partnership of equal rights and duties, the American vision 
remained more equal in the treatment of the great 
international issues' (Editorial in `Nord  lair'). 
 
AND NOW NEEDED: EUROPE'S RESPONSE 
 
¶4. Still other reflective pieces in recent days, in the 
prestigious `Le Monde' and `Le Figaro' newspapers, offered a 
third view on the Secretary's message.  Rather than insist 
on America's desire to pressure Europeans into falling in 
line, they focused on the need for Europe to decide its 
policy and pursue action in response to the U.S. challenge 
of building democracy and containing proliferation.  One 
commentator proffered,  "There are no diverging interests of 
a long-lasting nature"; (both sides) share the same goals 
and "can complement each other." Another stated, `It is up 
to Europeans, and perhaps most particularly the French, to 
more clearly enunciate our vision of the promotion of 
democracy, to be faithful to our ideals and more capable in 
the transatlantic framework." 
 
¶5. Conclusion and Comment:  The decision to include a public 
event that reached across the broad spectrum of French 
society in the Secretary's itinerary resulted in tremendous 
media coverage of her speech and overwhelmingly positive 
reaction to the Secretary as a person.  The event  -- and 
its location in France at Sciences Po -- succeeded in 
assuaging many concerns about Secretary Rice's views of 
Europe and her ability to relate to Europeans.  Although 
some remained more reserved in their praise with respect to 
substance and policy and despite some carping about the 
selection process of audience and student questions, the 
Secretary largely won over students, opinion leaders, and 
 
SIPDIS 
officials with her willingness to enter a debate.  In 
discussion with Embassy staff after the speech, while noting 
that the Secretary did not mention the European Union's 
efforts in trying to peacefully negotiate with Iran and 
expressing surprise that she used the recent Franco-American 
pressure on Syria to allow free Lebanese elections as an 
illustration of positive U.S.-French relations, students 
expressed approval that a greater amount of time and 
attention would be devoted to Israeli-Palestinian issues. 
Audience members said they were pleased to discover Dr. 
Rice's ease and comfort in talking about philosophical 
issues and shared values.  Many expressed real excitement at 
seeing the U.S., with the Secretary as its public face, 
trying to reach out and reinvigorate relations through this 
public event.   The Sciences Po event was a public affairs 
success, which left many Europeans hopeful that they had 
rediscovered a partnership they feared lost. 
 
Leach