05PARIS167
PARIS CLUB -- DECEMBER 2004 TOUR D'HORIZON
Mon Jan 10 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 20 PARIS 000167 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EB/IFD 
TREASURY FOR DO/IDD AND OUSED/IMF 
SECDEF FOR USDP/DSAA 
PASS EXIM FOR CLAIMS -- EDELARIVA 
PASS USDA FOR CCC -- ALEUNG/DERICKSON/KCHADWICK 
PASS USAID FOR CLAIMS 
PASS DOD FOR DSCS -- PBERG 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN ECON EAID XM XA XH XB XF FR
SUBJECT: PARIS CLUB -- DECEMBER 2004 TOUR D'HORIZON 
 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED.  NOT FOR INTERNET 
DISTRIBUTION 
 
-------- 
SUMMARY 
-------- 
 
¶1. (U) Following are summaries of country discussions 
during the December 14, 2004 Paris Club session.  The 
Paris Club's President, Jean-Pierre Jouyet, chaired the 
session.  Staff represented the Secretariat since 
Secretary General (SecGen) Emmanuel Moulin suffered an 
 
SIPDIS 
unexpected medical emergency.  Representatives of non- 
Paris Club members Brazil, Israel and Korea attended 
discussions on those countries to which they are 
creditors.  Congo Brazzaville negotiation reported 
septel.  The next session of the Paris Club is scheduled 
for the week of January 10, 2005. 
 
¶2. (U) NOTE: INDIVIDUAL CREDITOR POSITIONS REPORTED IN 
THIS MESSAGE SHOULD BE TREATED AS "PARIS CLUB 
CONFIDENTIAL" AND NOT/NOT DISCUSSED WITH DEBTOR COUNTRY 
 
SIPDIS 
REPRESENTATIVES, NOR WITH NON-PARIS CLUB PARTICIPANTS. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Discussed in this session: 
 
Angola -- IMF Update (Brazil) 
Argentina -- Perspectives for upcoming negotiation 
       (Israel) 
China -- creditor status 
Congo (Brazzaville) -- upcoming negotiation (Brazil) 
Djibouti -- IMF update 
Dominican Republic -- IMF Update, comparability of 
     treatment issues, review of arrears 
Haiti -- IMF update 
Honduras -- IMF update 
Iraq -- IMF update, EDR tables 
Kenya - IMF update 
Kyrgyzstan - debt sustainability analysis (Turkey) 
Nigeria - 2005 debt repayment schedule (Brazil) 
Peru - - buyback, Secretariat report (Brazil) 
Poland -- prepayments (Brazil) 
Russia -- buyback proposal 
Sierra Leone - agreement extension 
Sudan -- IMF update 
 
¶4. (U) ACTION/FOLLOW-UP/UPCOMING ITEMS 
 
Congo (Brazzaville) -- debt relief negotiation -- 
December 2004 session 
 
Methodology -- Possible publication of rules concerning 
buybacks and prepayments 
 
------- 
ANGOLA 
------- 
¶5. (SBU) The Secretariat said that it had not yet been 
able to talk with the Angolan Minister of Finance (as 
agreed upon at the November session), and will try again 
in January.  The IMF reported that after the staff visit 
to Angola in November, although some progress had been 
made, data issues remain.  The GoA is unable or unwilling 
to share information about its offshore oil accounts. 
These are not reported as part of their reserves, but the 
IMF suspects the total roughly equals existing reserves. 
If the GoA shares the information, then the IMF would 
visit in January 2005, which could lead to Article IV 
discussions at the Board in February.  The GoA also held 
bilateral discussions with Hungary and Bulgaria, which 
appear to have involved debt-rescheduling negotiations, 
not merely data reconciliation.  The World Bank reported 
on a memorandum of understanding with the UNDP, and 
commented that a precondition for a donors' conference 
would be the signing (not implementation) of a Staff 
Monitored Program (SMP) with the IMF, and finalization of 
a poverty reduction strategy paper (PRSP).  The objective 
of such a conference would not be to collect pledges, but 
to get Angola to get used to multi-year programming.  The 
GoA needs to have a longer-term vision.  The Bank will 
continue for the next 18 months an interim support 
strategy.  Last week it concluded in Paris negotiation 
about a loan of USD 200 million, with a board date for 
approval of Feb 11. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) The Spanish delegate thanked the IMF for its 
update, and offered to help the Secretariat contact 
Angolan officials. 
 
¶7. (SBU) The Chair noted the continuing desire to engage 
the Angolans, welcomed the Spanish offer of assistance, 
and promised to report results at the next meeting. 
 
---------- 
ARGENTINA 
---------- 
¶8. (SBU) The Chair reported on his informal visit to the 
Argentine authorities (in his capacity as Ambassador, not 
as Paris Club President), in which the Argentineans urged 
creditors to be more flexible and creative.  The IMF 
confirmed, however, that the GoA does not want another 
IMF program; it just wants to repay the IMF as soon as 
possible and be done with it.  This creates the tactical 
problem that the GoA may seek to approach the Paris Club 
without an IMF program.  It is up to the creditor 
countries to decide how to handle that possible scenario, 
but working in tandem has generally been the best 
approach in the past.  As for the private sector, the 
debt exchange has been pushed forward from last month to 
February 25, 2005.  The GoA expects a high rate of 
participation.  Structural reforms are stalled. 
 
¶9. (SBU) The World Bank rep said the Board approved a 
loan on December 7 of USD 200 million for provincial 
services to reactivate the economy.  The Board did so 
only with great reluctance, because of its concerns about 
debt levels and structural reforms.  The rest of the Bank 
programs are on hold.  The rate of net lending flows in 
2005 probably will be just under a half billion USD to 
Argentina; with an IMF program the net flow would be 
slightly positive to the Bank. 
 
¶10. (SBU) The UK rep argued that although conditionality 
is important, an IMF program is just a means to an end 
and perhaps the Paris Club should consider other means, 
citing Nigeria as an example.  In the case of Argentina, 
however, no conditionality would exist absent an IMF 
program; therefore, UK opposed any restructuring outside 
of a Fund program.  Germany answered that in the absence 
of progress on the IMF program, the Paris Club should 
send a strong letter requesting repayment, complaining 
that GOA's two years of increasing arrears amounted to an 
'indirect rescheduling' of its Paris Club debt.  The 
USDEL agreed to send a letter.  Italy agreed to send a 
letter, but arguing that the time is not right, suggested 
that perhaps January would be better.  Japan said it 
would join any consensus.  The Netherlands noted that it 
had been pushing for a letter since August, and fully 
supports sending one because it doubts that the private 
sector deal will ever materialize. 
 
¶11.  (SBU)  The Chair proposed that the Secretariat would 
circulate a draft letter, reminding the GoA about its 
repayment obligations and that if it wants a debt deal it 
needs an IMF program.  The Chair plans to send the letter 
in January. 
 
----- 
CHINA 
----- 
¶12. (SBU)  Spain asked for China's inclusion on the 
agenda, in order for the Club to consider the issue of 
China's relationship with the Paris Club and a possible 
future membership.  Countries agreed that a first step 
would be for the Secretariat to gather publicly available 
individual country data on China's role as a creditor. 
Japan raised the issue of China's Export Bank's loans to 
Angola as an example.  Germany pointed out that China is 
a WTO but not OECD member, the opposite of Russia, and 
said China is a major case and its membership in the Club 
will definitely be a political matter for the Club.  The 
Germany rep said that China had approached the Club very 
informally in 1999 on its principles and procedures.  The 
Chinese had in the last few days approached Germany via 
their Embassy to ask about Germany's opinion of a Chinese 
membership in the Club (UK and Russia later indicated 
they also had been asked the same question fairly 
recently).  He asked the IMF for information on China's 
claims, because to be a Paris Club member a country must 
have "substantial" claims.  The UK noted that China is a 
very active creditor in Africa and Latin America.  The 
USDEL suggested-and the Chair agreed--that China might be 
invited to the Paris Club informational meeting (see 
"Iraq" below) discussion to be set up for non-Paris Club 
creditors of Iraq. 
 
¶13. (SBU) The IMF said that the Chinese had not raised 
Paris Club membership during the Fund's most recent 
mission (which left December 7).  The Chinese are a very 
active creditor, having forgiven $1.3 billion of all debt 
to 31 African HIPC and low-income countries.  He said the 
IMF could include a questionnaire on China's creditor 
information during its Article IV consultations in April 
2005, and pointed out a number of public sources the 
Secretariat could use in gathering data on China's 
 
SIPDIS 
creditor role.  The World Bank also offered to help the 
Secretariat gather data on developing country claims. 
 
SIPDIS 
The Bank pointed out that notwithstanding its growing 
creditor role, China remains the Bank's largest borrower 
at $21 billion (half in IBRD exposure, although the IBRD 
share is declining over time due to early repayments in 
2002, 2003, and 2004).  China is still an active 
borrower, at about $1.2 billion a year. 
 
¶14.  (SBU) The Chair said it would report to members the 
results of its informal findings on China's creditor 
role, so that members could then consider next steps. 
 
------------------- 
CONGO (BRAZZAVILLE) 
------------------- 
¶15.  (SBU) The IMF said the Board approved on December 6 
a three-year PRGF for USD 84 million that is in line with 
the priorities (decrease poverty, increase oil 
transparency) identified in the GoC's PRSP.  2002 arrears 
totaled CFA 258 billion to the Paris Club, while the PRGF 
assumes a payment of CFA 106 billion in the first year. 
The IMF research department just revised downward 
projected oil prices, which brings the IMF assumptions 
very close to where they were in August with WEO 
projections.  The World Bank noted that the Board 
approved a USD 30 million economic recovery credit last 
week; generally the Bank is pleased with the GoC progress 
in repaying arrears. 
 
¶16.  (SBU) The Secretariat distributed the Congolese debt 
reduction proposal, and commented on two technical 
details - additional conditions for rescheduling post- 
ccod debt treated in the 1996 agreed minute, and a 5-year 
reprofiling of post-ccod debt.  Russia said it is not 
comfortable with the request for a 5-year reprofiling. 
Denmark requested the agreed minute include a de minimus 
clause, which Japan supported.  The French suggested a 
clawback clause.  The UK expressed uncertainty about a 
clawback.  Germany supported the Russian position, and 
suggested payment be made in one year.  The USDEL 
questioned whether a clawback clause would be worth the 
effort, since most debtors refuse them and since they are 
complex, but noted flexibility within the range between 1 
to 5 years for a reprofiling. 
 
¶17.  (SBU) The Chair confirmed the Paris Club would open 
the negotiation with the GoC on December 15. 
 
-------- 
DJIBOUTI 
-------- 
¶18. (SBU)  The Chair reminded creditors that only the 
first phase of Djibouti's most recent Agreed Minute was 
ever implemented (from October 1999 to end-August 2000). 
The IMF said that Djibouti's performance under its SMP 
started in April 2004 was `quite weak,' with only limited 
progress on structural reforms.  The authorities had 
hoped the SMP would lay the basis for a PRGF, but agreed 
to ask for an extension of the SMP in order to create a 
longer track record (a minimum of two quarters of 
successful implementation) for the PRGF.  During the IMF 
November mission, the Minister of Finance had lectured 
the Fund on raising the issue of Djibouti's arrears with 
certain Paris Club creditors.  The IMF should not be 
involved; instead, creditors should be discussing their 
disputes regarding arrears directly with the government. 
Furthermore, the Minister said, those countries (Italy, 
Spain) were continuing to give grants to Djibouti, 
implying that they would not be doing so if they had a 
`real' problem with the Government.  Italy and Spain 
countered that the Government had refused to deal with it 
in good faith, and in Italy's case, the issue was not a 
dispute over the debt but rather a dispute over the debt 
treatment given by the Paris Club: the Minister had told 
them it was "unfair" that Djibouti was not a HIPC 
country.  The World Bank representative said progress on 
its overall Country Assistance Strategy was satisfactory, 
with its portfolio strengthened and improved; a new CAS 
will come before the Bank board in January 2005. 
 
¶19. (SBU) The Chair indicated that he would send a firm 
letter to the Government reaffirming Paris Club 
solidarity. 
 
------------------ 
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC 
------------------ 
¶20. (SBU)  The Technical Secretary of the Finance 
Ministry of the GODR met with the Secretariat the week 
before the December session to explain the DR's 
comparability of treatment (CoT) strategy, showing them a 
copy of a letter sent only to DR creditors (Club members 
did not see a copy of the letter).  The latest CoT 
attempt relies on a bond swap, the results of which will 
be known in the coming months.  This means the DR will 
miss the end-December 2004 deadline set in the April 2004 
AM.  The DR asked the Secretariat for more time; while 
the 2004 AM has a suspension clause, members did not 
believe it was a good idea to exercise it after the 
Secretariat posed the question. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
¶21. (SBU) The new two-year IMF SBA program for 2005/06 is 
being presented this week, the IMF rep indicated.  The 
Fund said that it would ask members for financing 
assurances at the January session instead of at the 
December session.  Italy said it has post-ccod arrears on 
ODA debt of $2.3 million; it also expressed concern about 
the CoT situation.  The USDEL approved of the performance 
tripwires established in the upcoming SBA, and on the 
question of post-ccod arrears, acknowledged it was a 
serious problem but did not support annulling the 2004 
AM, instead suggesting that the Club offer financing 
assurances for just one year.  This would meet the 
members' concerns over CoT, permit the IMF program to go 
forward, and motivate the DR to work towards CoT. 
Germany and Spain supported the US idea on one-year 
assurances, and the IMF confirmed that the two-year 
program could go forward with assurances for just the 
first year (the DR would need to return to the Club for 
negotiations before the second year).  Germany added that 
the DR should clear post-ccod and interest arrears before 
the next round of negotiations and that creditors should 
continue to ask for a new DSA.  The IMF said the DR could 
return to the Club in March, and by that time the results 
of the bond offer should be clear. 
 
¶22. (SBU) The Chair closed the DR session by saying it 
would circulate before Christmas a draft letter, which 
would insist on CoT compliance and remind the DR of 
outstanding arrears.  He said the Club could do one year 
financing assurances, and between January and March 
members could consider any pre-conditions for 
negotiations. 
 
----- 
HAITI 
----- 
¶23. (SBU) The IMF is seeking management approval for an 
Emergency Post-Conflict Assistance (EPCA) arrangement. 
There could be a meeting in January after which things 
would move quickly.  SMP performance is satisfactory, but 
some structural commitments are delayed.  The stock of 
arrears to bilateral creditors is USD 28.5 million to 
France, Italy and Spain, with the bulk of it owed to 
France.  In designing the EPCA facility, the IMF had 
assumed that Haiti would remain current on payments to 
those countries that are providing substantial financial 
support over the EPCA period, e.g., the USG and Canada, 
which are together providing USD 250 million, far in 
excess of the USD 2 million of scheduled debt service to 
those two donors.  The IMF is asking creditors if they 
are willing to go along with a debt service payment 
moratorium, or provide aid to cover payments due, as a 
positive signal to Haiti until the time that a new 
program is available.  The World Bank reported on a USD 
12 million budget recovery credit, and a USD 73 million 
package to be presented to the Board on January 6.  The 
Bank strategy is to provide IDA intervention in the short 
term to restore institutional credibility.  The USD 73 
million is about half the IDA financing pledged by the 
Bank, but is contingent on Haiti clearing USD 52 million 
in IDA arrears. 
 
¶24. (SBU) Italy inquired about the French position, and 
although it does not have the resources of the US/Canada, 
it wants to help and so in principle can agree to a 
payment moratorium.  Spain pointed out that the Paris 
Club normally keeps a clear separation between financing 
aid and debt servicing.  New money is no alternative to 
debt treatment.  It expressed surprise about being asked 
for aid today, but will get an answer within a week. 
 
-------- 
HONDURAS 
-------- 
¶25. (SBU)  The Secretariat put Honduras on the December 
agenda, to see whether after the IMF report the Club 
would wish to invite Honduras for Completion Point (CP) 
in spring 2005.  The IMF rep said Honduras was broadly on 
track with its PRGF according to a review done in 
November, and was doing a good job in meeting its HIPC 
trigger conditions.  A team was in Honduras working on a 
DSA for HIPC completion point; a Board meeting is planned 
for March 2005, with a possible CP for end-March 2005. 
He envisaged no need for topping up.  The World Bank 
concurred with the IMF, and said its Board has scheduled 
to discuss Honduras' HIPC CP during the second half of 
March 2005.  The Secretariat said given the March CP, it 
would sometime early next year start collecting the data 
call. 
 
---- 
IRAQ 
---- 
¶26. (SBU) The Chair stated that two issues remain from 
the last negotiation: the calculation of how to achieve 
the 60 percent reduction in the second tranche, and 
comparability of treatment.  The IIG has begun talks with 
non-Paris Club creditors, but there appears to be a need 
for an educational campaign.  In that vein, the Chair has 
received a letter from the Kuwait Fund asking for details 
of the debt deal.  The Chair asked for reaction to the 
idea of the Secretariat organizing an informational 
meeting in Paris. 
 
¶27. (SBU)  The IMF reported that a mission had just left 
Amman on Saturday after meeting with IIG officials to 
assess the 2005 Iraq budget.  Policy discussions will be 
held December 18.  Information is still only slowly 
trickling in, so the IMF is unable to judge EPCA 
performance.  The 2005 budget appears to be in line with 
the EPCA, but questions have arisen about the concrete 
measures on domestic petrol subsidies and domestic debt 
management.  The IMF understands that the IIG has begun 
contacting non-Paris Club creditors among the Gulf States 
and some eastern European countries.  The World Bank rep 
said donor funds of 225 million for 2004 have almost 
completely been allocated. 
 
¶28. (SBU) Russia asked a technical question about the 
calculation of the appropriate market rate after 23 
years, contained in the Secretariat working paper.  The 
USDEL noted that the USG has the same question as Russia 
and, while noting the 1994 working paper that serves as a 
precedent, questioned whether this was a sound 
methodology.  On comparability of treatment, the USDEL 
welcomed the willingness of the Secretariat to engage in 
a pedagogical exercise.  The USDEL mentioned that it 
plans to meet with the IIG in December, and hopefully 
sign its bilateral agreement (note: the bilateral debt 
treatment was signed December 17 in Washington).  The 
Netherlands requested that the working paper use a 
December 31, 2004 date for budgetary purposes, as it has 
already budgeted for debt relief this year.  The 
Secretariat, noting that it had not yet widely 
 
SIPDIS 
distributed the 1994 working paper addressing the 
appropriate market rate, defended the methodology, to 
which the Russian del proffered his support and said he 
would not be able to accept any changes to the working 
paper.  The USDEL noted its need to consult in DC. 
¶29. (SBU) The Chair said it would provide information to 
the Kuwait Fund as requested, and would proceed to 
organize its informational meeting. 
 
----- 
KENYA 
----- 
¶30.  The Secretariat indicated a successful IMF Board 
review would allow for implementation of the second phase 
(Jan 2005-Dec 31, 2005) of the latest agreement.  The IMF 
representative said the first review is scheduled for 
December 20; the staff report will recommend an 
augmentation of the PRGF by 50 million SDR, due in part 
to increased food imports.  The Kenyans were broadly on 
track with their program.  The World Bank said the 
government was making only slow progress on reforms, with 
financial sector reforms `relatively' slow. 
Privatization was also progressing slowly, although the 
government is working on a paper setting out its 
privatization policies.  The Chairman said the government 
was on the right track on governance.  The USDEL asked 
about the relative importance of the five waivers being 
requested for the upcoming first review; the IMF said 
they were not particularly significant, characterizing 
them as `technical and small.'  More importantly, 
authorities were taking offsetting actions.  The IMF 
wanted more, but said Kenya has continued to be affected 
by contentious deliberations on constitutional reform. 
Members approved sending a letter to the GOK on the 
entering into force of the second phase. 
 
--------- 
KYRGYZ REPUBLIC 
--------- 
¶31. (SBU) The Chair said he had received a letter from 
the GOK requesting an extension , to align the Paris 
Club's Houston terms treatment ending December 2004 with 
the end of the IMF program in April 2005.  The Chair 
indicated he proposed to answer positively, unless he 
heard otherwise from creditors.  The IMF rep told 
creditors that a staff mission is currently in Bishkek, 
where the team is evaluating a PRSP.  The IMF did provide 
an extension on November 19 to enable completion of the 
last review.  April was a target extension date with a 
built-in cushion, staff could go to the Board in 
February.  In the absence of a February Paris Club 
session, the IMF might seek financing assurances in 
January.  It would appreciate feedback on a new DSA; in 
its view flow treatments would not suffice, the GoK 
needing a stock treatment to stabilize debt ratios.  The 
World Bank rep discussed its leadership role in 
governance and the energy sector.  The Bank is happy with 
the progress on restructuring the energy sector, but not 
satisfied with the slow pace of government reform.  The 
Board is likely to approve three new projects totaling 
USD 38.5 million, of which 45 percent are grants. 
 
¶32. (SBU) Russia said it would need to consult in Moscow 
regarding the extension request.  In any event, no 
substantial payments are due over the next few months, so 
an extension really might not be necessary.  On the DSA, 
Russia said concessional treatment should be tailored to 
debtor needs; Naples terms may be too generous.  Japan 
expressed no problem joining a consensus, and noted that 
the 2002 agreed minute includes a goodwill clause on the 
stock of previously rescheduled debt, so a concession 
could be based on that clause.  Denmark is OK with an 
extension, and of course could follow the goodwill 
clause.  Germany agreed with Denmark, and inquired when 
will the new DSA be available.  The IMF acknowledged the 
need for a new DSA, but commented that it will not change 
much from the last one. 
 
¶33. (SBU) The Chair urged Russia to provide a reply 
quickly, to which Russia suggested that the Secretariat 
prepare a working paper.  (Note: USG holds no Krygyz 
debt.) 
 
-------- 
NIGERIA 
¶34. (SBU) According to the IMF, staff completed a visit 
on November 15 to look at the 2005 budget framework, 
which overlapped with a World Bank visit.  Article IV 
consultations are scheduled for late February, and the 
IMF would do a new DSA for a Board meeting in April or 
May.  The World Bank rep said Nigeria is on track with 
its legislative reforms; the Bank is thinking of 
increasing aid to USD 700 million. 
 
¶35. (SBU) The Secretariat expects Nigeria will have an 
increased capacity to pay its debt in 2005.  IMF states 
that the DSA shows reserves for Nigeria climbing to USD 
22 billion by the end of the DSA period; this assumes 
Paris Club is paid $1 billion in 2005.  Nigeria has seen 
a steady decrease in its debt to GDP ratio, and IMF 
states that the debt is sustainable.  The Secretariat can 
approach the GoN on an informal basis to urge them to 
regularize the situation and become current.  On the 2005 
payment allocation, Denmark's proposal is one option but 
the Secretariat would not like to reopen the debate. 
 
¶36. (SBU) Concerning lifting of the debt swap moratorium 
and sharing of 2005 payments: there seemed to be general 
consensus with lifting of the moratorium once all 2004 
payments have been received, although some creditors 
wanted to press for higher payments in 2005, perhaps 
requiring that Nigeria not run any new arrears.  On the 
allocation methodology for 2005, there was disagreement, 
with some supporting staying with the 2004 methodology 
and some supporting the German/Danish proposal. 
 
¶37.  (SBU) Creditors (except for Spain, and Brazil which 
still has not settled its dispute with Nigeria) confirmed 
receipt of the final 2004 payment.  Russia said it had 
studied the Danish proposal, and while it is flexible it 
prefers to leave the allocation as is.  On the question 
of contact, Russia supports sending a letter that ties 
lifting the moratorium on debt swaps to increased 2005 
payments.  Germany agreed with the letter, and mentioned 
that in a bilateral meeting with the Finance Minister in 
January, it would press for increased payment.  Germany 
distributed its own table with proposed 2005 allocations, 
and suggested that the issue should only be discussed 
within the Paris Club, not with Nigeria.  Denmark agreed 
on a letter with a link to increased payments, and 
reported that a Nigerian delegation recently had asked 
about lifting the ban on new export credits.  Denmark 
said no, not with arrears and no IMF program.  As for the 
2005 allocation, its proposal is still on the table. 
Spain objected to the draft letter, but said as soon as 
it gets its payment it could support lifting the debt 
swap ban.  Brazil noted its dispute has not yet been 
settled with Nigeria about the size of its debt, and so 
it has not gotten paid.  Belgium indicated a preference 
to link the moratorium end to increased payments.  It 
prefers to continue the 2004 allocation, but suggested 
that a better solution would be for Nigeria to increase 
its payments to amounts scheduled so it runs no arrears. 
The UK agreed to lift the moratorium (once Spain is paid) 
and while admitting that leveling up is important, 
prefers not to reopen the issue.  The Netherlands signed 
an ODA agreement on December 13 with the Nigerian FinMin. 
Responding to the Dutch request for increased payments, 
the Nigerian Finance Minister had said it is a political 
decision and a tough sell (which the Dutch interpret as 
not entirely excluding the possibility).  The Finance 
Minister had asked about a new agreement and the Dutch 
replied that Nigeria still would need a new DSA.  If 
Nigeria increases payments, the Netherlands can lift the 
debt swaps embargo.  They really should clear all 
arrears, if not in one year then at least all maturities 
next year.  On the allocation, the Netherlands cannot 
accept the 2004 schedule, but can accept the Danish 
proposal (and maybe the German table after taking a 
look).  Japan agreed 2005 payments should be higher.  A 
link to the moratorium is not necessary, but could be 
acceptable, but in any event the draft letter is 
acceptable.  Italy agreed to the letter, and is 
sympathetic to the Danish/German proposal.  Switzerland 
agreed with the draft letter, although it prefers greater 
specificity regarding the amount of increase payments, 
and strengthening the link.  The USDEL agreed to greater 
specificity, and agreed that if Nigeria were to meet all 
its maturities in 2005, the Paris Club could avoid the 
allocation problem.  Finland supports the letter. 
 
¶38. (SBU)  The Chair took note of the consensus on 
sending a letter, and the lack of consensus on allocation 
of 2005 payments.  On the latter point, he suggested a 
technical meeting in January to address the issue. 
Secretariat also reminded delegations of the Ngozi lunch 
 
SIPDIS 
with heads of delegations at the January session. 
 
---- 
PERU 
---- 
¶39. (SBU) The Chair reported that Peru has no intention 
to return to the Paris Club, but since it has a peak in 
its repayment schedule, it would like to partially 
buyback some of its short term debt to smooth out those 
peaks.  The IMF said it had approved on June 9 a 
precautionary standby arrangement.  On November 19 the 
Board completed its review, and a second review will 
occur in mid-February 2005.  Peru is just using the IMF 
arrangement to bolster investor confidence to carry it 
through its elections.  It has reduced its public debt 
ratios from 48 percent of GDP in 2003 to 40 percent in 
¶2004.  Debt humps will occur in 2008 through 2012.  The 
Finance Minister wants conduct market operations to 
perform this buyback.  The buyback would save costs on 
debt, improve duration and reduce the overall stock of 
debt.  The IMF supports the buyback proposal.  The World 
Bank said it is granting USD 950 million in new lending; 
it welcomes the buyback proposal. 
 
¶40. (SBU) The Secretariat noted the proposal would indeed 
decrease debt peaks.  The buyback discount rate would 
equal the exchange rate for long term debt, meaning 
payments at slightly higher than par.  The Secretariat 
supports the Peruvian request. 
 
¶41.  (SBU) The USDEL said it could go along with the 
Secretariat proposal, and promised to study the request. 
 
SIPDIS 
Germany said it is positively inclined to the proposal, 
it can go along with a market rate set multilaterally, 
and an exchange of letters would be sufficient to effect 
the operation.  Spain said it supports the proposal in 
principle, and is OK with the methodology.  Japan said it 
would like more time to study the details.  Italy is in 
principle interested, and is OK with the methodology - it 
is an opportunity to chart new ground. 
 
¶42.  The Chair said he would have the Secretariat prepare 
a letter reporting agreement in principle but requesting 
more details.  The issue will be taken up in January. 
Creditors should have preliminary views by then. 
 
------ 
POLAND 
------ 
¶43.  (SBU) The IMF and the World Bank reiterated support 
for Poland's prepayment offer.  The Secretariat 
circulated a working paper on how to calculate the 
discount rate for those countries that chose debt- 
servicing reduction (DSR), noting that debt for nature 
swaps would have to be interrupted to achieve the 50 
percent NPV reduction accorded in the 1991 Agreed Minute. 
Many countries expressed interest in the prepayment 
offer, with a slight majority indicating their intention 
to pursue the DSR option. 
 
¶44.  (SBU) Germany said it has chosen debt reduction so 
is not concerned with the DSR options.  Belgium agreed 
with the working paper methodology, and reiterated its 
opposition to being pressured to participate.  The 
Netherlands said it will participate and had already told 
the Poles; it chose debt reduction so the options are of 
no concern.  Japan said it might have been willing to 
participate, but it chose DSR so it will not participate. 
Italy chose DSR, agrees with the methodology, and has not 
yet decided whether it will participate.  Sweden chose DR 
and is interested.  Canada said one of its agencies, the 
largest creditor, is not interested, but the GOC and EDC 
are interested (DR option).  Denmark chose DSR, is 
checking the math and seeking authorization; a discount 
of 11-12 percent might be acceptable.  The USDEL is quite 
attracted to the offer; it chose DR and indicated it 
still had some internal issues relating to potential 
budgetary impacts of prepayment.  .  Finland chose DR 
option, and is interested.  Austria chose DSR, is still 
checking formulas but probably is mostly not interested. 
Switzerland selected DSR, is ok with methodology, but 
hasn't decided yet whether to participate.  UK has chosen 
the DR option, and is interested.  Norway chose the DSR 
option, and is still thinking.  Spain is not likely to 
participate.  France chose the DSR option, and agrees 
with methodology but is still thinking over its 
participation. 
 
¶45.  (SBU) Although many countries indicated interest, a 
number still needed to think about whether they would 
participate or not.  The Secretariat asked that creditors 
come back to the Secretariat by the end of the year with 
their formal positions so that the Secretariat could 
inform Poland of Paris Club interest. 
 
------ 
RUSSIA 
------ 
¶46. (SBU) The Chair reviewed the Russian offer, and 
before going around the table for reactions, noted the 
USDEL was the lone holdout on whether to set the discount 
bilaterally or multilaterally.  The IMF reported that it 
is still a bit too early to say the Russian government 
has reached a final decision on the Finance Ministry's 
prepayment offer.  Based on 2005 budget assumptions, 
approximately USD 10 billion would be available.  A 
bullet buyback would require borrowing from central bank 
reserves.  The Fund wishes to avoid relaxation of Russian 
fiscal policy, and in fact would prefer further fiscal 
tightening to bolster monetary policy goals.  In short, 
the IMF welcomes the prepayment.  The World Bank concurs. 
 
¶47. (SBU) Germany is pleased its comments to the working 
paper were incorporated, and is prepared to negotiate the 
Russian offer.  It prefers to leave securitization open 
as a consequence of failure (note: Germany securitized 
some of its Russian Paris Club debt in June 2004, to 
Russia's consternation).  The discount rate should be set 
multilaterally and be market based, as per the working 
paper and not per the Russian request.  Austria urged 
agreement on methodology, voluntary participation, and 
freedom to securitize.  Italy agreed to the working paper 
and a multilateral approach.  Netherlands favors the 
multilateral approach, might consider combining discount 
with Aries bonds, but insists on cash.  Australia has not 
yet decided, but if there is a three-year prepayment with 
the first year involving cash and subsequent years 
involving bonds, it would only participate in the first 
year.  Sweden agrees with the working paper, and will 
provide written comments to the working paper.  Japan 
agrees with the working paper and that the freedom to opt 
out should be included.  Canada is not interested in 
participating but does support a multilateral approach. 
Belgium, Denmark, and Spain agree with the working paper 
and stress voluntary participation, as does the UK. 
Finland said it is interested in the Russian proposal and 
supports the multilateral approach.  The USDEL 
acknowledged that it had argued for a strictly bilateral 
approach, to preserve voluntary participation, but would 
join the consensus for a multilateral approach, on the 
condition that Russia first clears all arrears to all 
Paris Club creditors.  The USDEL also noted the existence 
of USG contract prepayment clauses that allow prepayment 
without penalty. 
 
¶48. (SBU) The Chair took note of the consensus on the 
working paper, with emphasis on voluntary participation. 
He will therefore indicate that consensus to the Russians 
and will inform the Russians that the Paris Club will 
meet with them in January.  Germany proposed that as 
Russia is a Paris Club member, a classical negotiation 
format is unnecessary; the Secretariat could work with 
them bilaterally in advance of the next session.  Germany 
also posed a question to the IMF regarding the timing of 
Russian prepayment to the IMF.  The IMF said it 
understood Russia proposed to prepay the Paris Club 
creditors first, and then pay the IMF whatever is left 
over. 
 
------------ 
SIERRA LEONE 
------------ 
¶49. (SBU) The Secretariat prepared a draft letter 
granting Sierra Leone an extension so that its Paris Club 
treatment would coincide with the recently-extended IMF 
program.  The IMF reported that Sierra Leone had its 
fifth review on November 12, when its PRGF was extended 
by three months to June 2005.  Progress was broadly 
satisfactory.  The government completed its PRSP this 
month.  With a one-year implementation period, HIPC 
completion point (CP) could be considered end-2005 at the 
earliest.  The Chairman said that if Sierra Leone fails 
to reach CP, the Club would send another letter. 
 
----- 
SUDAN 
----- 
¶50.  The Chairman opened the discussion by asking what 
conditions the Paris Club would have for dealing with 
Sudan.  The IMF said a March 2005 Board date was set for 
Article IV discussions, and that a 2005 SMP was 
envisaged, using a Rights-Accumulated Policy approach. 
Any timetable will depend on the peace process and a 
resolution of the Darfur problem.  The IMF said funding 
for IMF arrears clearance for Sudan needs to be 
identified.   It also confirmed that financing assurances 
would be needed for a RAP.  Zambia had received a Naples 
treatment under a RAP in 1992, which could be used as a 
precedent for Sudan.  Norway said Darfur and peace 
agreement were requirements, and asked when non-Paris 
Club creditors would be advised of the need for financing 
assurances. 
 
¶51. (SBU) The USDEL also affirmed that no formal 
discussion of arrears clearance should take place before 
Darfur was resolved.  Responding to a question from 
Denmark, the IMF said the RAP could last 1-3 years.  He 
also said IMF HIPC financing could take time (one idea 
has been IMF gold sales).  Answering the UK question 
about getting non-Paris Club creditors involved, the IMF 
said under the IMF's lending into arrears policy, the IMF 
considers that financing assurances from Paris Club 
creditors extend to non-Paris Club creditors.  However, 
that Board decision dates to 1983, a time when Paris Club 
creditors were the largest group of creditors; however, 
now Sudan has large non-Paris Club creditors, so it would 
be desirable for Sudan to seek comparable treatment. 
Either the PC itself could consider contacting major non- 
PC creditors on Sudan's behalf (precedents exist), or the 
IMF could consult via ED's, per Iraq model.  The Chairman 
said Secretariat could contact; the German rep said the 
Club should avoid sending a signal to the outside world; 
the US agreed, reiterating that Darfur would need to be 
resolved before outside creditors were engaged. 
Minimize considered. 
 
LEACH