05SANTIAGO1594
MEDIA REACTION -
Thu Jul 28 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Santiago
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SANTIAGO 001594 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR IIP/G/WHA, INR/R/MR, WHA/BSC, WHA/PDA, INR/IAA 
AMEMBASSY FOR PAO, IO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO CI VE PREL
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION - 
 
 
On July 27, conservative, influential newspaper-of-record 
"El Mercurio" (circ. 116,807) carried an editorial 
"Chavista Agitation."  Quote: 
 
"Hugo Chavez is trying to expand his "Bolivarian 
Revolution" beyond Venezuela's borders...by trying to 
impose his leadership on other Latin American leaders-- 
except Lula da Silva in Brazil and Fidel Castro, whom he 
has called `brothers'--and by supporting indigenous 
communities on the continent that promote armed 
struggle....  The main target of Chavez' international 
attack is the U.S. government, which he defies with his 
oil policy and by proclaiming that his armed forces are 
anti-imperialist and anti-colonialist....  He accompanies 
this belligerence with a massive weapons purchase, the 
creation of a `Territorial Guard' formed of armed 
civilians...plans to expand the military reserves to two 
million...and by announcing the expropriation of over one 
thousand private companies....  To this he adds the 
strengthening of the agrarian reform...and the reform of 
Central Bank laws to permit access to USD six billion of 
international reserves." 
 
KELLY