05SANAA263
STRONG POLITICAL SUPPORT FOR MOKHA PORT DEVELOPMENT
Tue Feb 08 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Sanaa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

081209Z Feb 05UNCLAS SANAA 000263 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PASS TO AID FOR AA/ANE J.KUNDER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID ECON YM ECON COM
SUBJECT: STRONG POLITICAL SUPPORT FOR MOKHA PORT DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
¶1. On February 2, 2005 a joint USAID-DOD JTF/HOA Civil 
Affairs team met the Governor of Taiz, Ahmed Abdullah 
Al-Hajri, to discuss public health and education services and 
quarantine practices in the Port of Mokha, a primary port of 
entry for livestock from the Horn of Africa (HOA).  (Note: 
The governor is the brother of the Yemen Ambassador to the 
U.S., Abdul Wahab Al-Hajri.  The governor,s sister is 
President Saleh,s senior wife. End Note).  Hajri noted that 
he had been in Mokha the previous day to assess public 
reaction to the February 1 USAID-JTF/HOA CA team visit, 
complaining that the opposition had spread rumors about the 
visit, including USG plans "to keep animal disease in Yemen." 
 
¶2. Commenting on the excellent U.S.-Yemen relationship, Hajri 
cautioned that such good-will is only understood at the 
official governmental level and not at the local "grassroots" 
level.  He emphasized that the message must also be shared by 
the local people "who do not understand the value of the 
partnership."  As an example, Hajri pointed to the belief of 
many local residents that the Asian Tsunami was God,s 
punishment for U.S. aggression in Iraq.  He expressed strong 
support for a USG project to improve inspection and 
quarantine of the thousands of animals arriving each month in 
the Mokha Port area, most of which are smuggled past official 
inspections.  (Note: USAID estimates approximately 1 million 
animals arrive annually from HOA in Mokha, the majority are 
believed to be from Somalia, with 80 percent sheep and goats, 
15 percent cattle and 5 percent camels. End Note). 
 
¶3. Comment: USAID and JTF/HOA are working with the Ministry 
of Agriculture to assess options in the Port of Mokha.  These 
may include conducting DoD Veterinary Civil Action Programs 
(VETCAPS) --  DoD veterinarians and other specialists who 
provide assistance to local livestock, vaccinations, vitamin 
"booster" shots, basic health care for diseases or injuries. 
A Medical Civil Action Program  (MEDCAPs) may also be brought 
to provide basic health services.  Another proposal under 
consideration is the creation of a new Yemen Livestock 
Commission that would be a public-private partnership, 
instituting programs to increase quarantine and reduce 
livestock smuggling, and expanding local health services. 
Public diplomacy efforts to reduce misinformation and improve 
public understanding of the benefits of USG,s partnership 
with ROYG will be planned to compliment post's work in Mokha. 
End Comment. 
Krajeski