05TELAVIV3526
WB/G SITREP: THREE QASSAMS FALL ON SDEROT, TWO
Tue Jun 07 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEL AVIV 003526 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FRONT OFFICE; NEA/SA/EX FOR RICHIE; DEPT FOR 
DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN; USAID 
FOR DCHA, DCHA/FPP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG PHUM PREL PTER ASEC CASC GZ IS
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: THREE QASSAMS FALL ON SDEROT, TWO 
KILLED IN GAZA ROCKET ATTACK; TWO PALESTINIANS KILLED, 
SEVEN PALESTINIANS AND ONE IDF SOLDIER WOUNDED IN JENIN  -- 
JUNE 7, 2005 (1600 HOURS LOCAL) 
 
This is a joint ConGen Jerusalem/Embassy Tel Aviv cable. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: Hamas militants fired five Qassam rockets 
into Israel the morning of June 7, three of which landed in 
the town of Sderot.  No injuries were reported, but three 
Israelis were treated for shock.  Also on June 7, Islamic 
Jihad and, according to some reports, Hamas, claimed 
responsibility for an attack on Ganei Tel, in the Gush Katif 
settlement bloc, that killed two workers and wounded at least 
five more.  Preliminary reports say that one of the dead 
workers is Palestinian and the second possibly Chinese; the 
five wounded workers are all Palestinian, according to media 
reports.  In the West Bank, IDF troops surrounded a 
Palestinian house in Qabatiya village, near Jenin, June 7. 
During a fierce confrontation between Palestinian gunmen and 
the IDF, Naser Zakarneh of the Palestinian Authority (PA) 
military intelligence forces and Murawah Kamil, head of 
Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ) military wing in Jenin, were 
killed.  In addition, seven other Palestinians were wounded 
by IDF gunfire.  Palestinian sources in Jenin also reported 
that an IDF soldier was injured in the clashes.  End Summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) ATTACKS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Deaths: According to Palestinian and Israeli reports, IDF 
troops surrounded a Palestinian house in Qabatiya village, 
near Jenin, June 7.  During a fierce confrontation between 
Palestinian gunmen and the IDF, Naser Zakarneh of the 
Palestinian Authority (PA) military intelligence forces and 
Murawah Kamil, head of Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ) 
military wing in Jenin, were killed.  In addition, seven 
other Palestinians were wounded by IDF gunfire.  Palestinian 
sources in Jenin also reported that an IDF soldier was 
injured in the clashes. 
 
-- Injuries: According to Palestinian sources, a Palestinian 
was injured in Tulkarm when IDF soldiers attempted to arrest 
him June 6. 
 
-- Injuries: Palestinian media reported clashes between the 
residents of Marda village, near Salfit, and IDF soldiers 
June 6.  Two Palestinians were reportedly lightly injured. 
The clashes erupted after IDF soldiers reportedly uprooted 
some 800 olive trees for the construction of Ariel 
settlement's separation fence. 
 
-- Arrests: Palestinian media sources reported that the IDF 
arrested one Palestinian at Bet Eba checkpoint, near Nablus, 
June 6.  The Palestinian was reportedly in possession of 
explosives and an IDF uniform. 
 
-- Arrests: According to Palestinian sources, the IDF 
arrested a Palestinian girl bearing a knife near Hebron June 
¶6. 
 
-- Arrests: According to Palestinian media, IDF troops 
entered Jenin and arrested seven Palestinian militants, one 
of them armed, on June 7. 
 
-- Arrests: Palestinian media reported that the IDF entered 
Askar refugee camp, near Nablus, and arrested two Fatah 
activists June 7. 
 
-- Security Incidents:  According to Palestinian sources, 
Palestinian gunmen opened fire on an IDF post in Kiryat Arba, 
near Hebron, June 6.  No injuries were reported. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS 
 
-- Palestinian media reported that both PA President Mahmud 
Abbas (Abu Mazen) and Prime Minister Ahmad Quraya, (Abu 
Ala,a) have criticized the GOI for allowing what they termed 
Israeli extremists to visit the Haram al-Sharif (Temple 
Mount) compound June 6.  Two Israelis were lightly injured 
during clashes with Palestinians that ensued on the compound, 
according to the Israeli police. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths/Injuries: Palestinian and IDF sources reported that 
two laborers were killed and at least five others were 
wounded June 7 when what appears to have been a Qassam rocket 
struck the greenhouse in which they were working in Ganei 
Tel, in the Gush Katif settlement bloc.  All of the wounded 
are reportedly Palestinian; preliminary reports claim that 
one of those killed was Palestinian and the other Chinese, 
although the nationality of the second worker was not 
confirmed as of 1600 hours.  Islamic Jihad took 
responsibility for the attack, according to Israeli media, 
although there are also claims that Hamas may have also been 
involved (see "Mortars/Rockets"). 
 
-- Death: UNRWA and Israeli media reported that IDF soldiers 
shot and killed a man in the al-Zuroub area of the Rafah 
refugee camp overnight June 6-7.  The man's identity remained 
unclear as of 1600 hours, although Palestinian sources claim 
he may have been Egyptian.  Israeli media reported that the 
man was shot after climbing over the border fence with Egypt, 
quoting IDF officials who said they believed the man may have 
been involved in weapons smuggling. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: UNRWA reported that on June 7 Hamas 
militants fired at least six homemade rockets at Neve Dekalim 
and Gadid settlements, one of which hit a house in Neve 
Dekalim.  In  second attack a short time later, militants 
fired an anti-tank rocket at IDF forces stationed along the 
border fence with Egypt.  No injuries were reported in either 
attack.  Islamic Jihad and, according to some reports, Hamas, 
claimed a third mortar/homemade rocket attack on Neve Dekalim 
and Ganei Tel settlements June 7 that resulted in the deaths 
of two laborers and the injury of at least five more (see 
"Deaths/Injuries"). 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: Israeli media and Palestinian sources 
reported that Hamas militants fired five Qassam rockets into 
Israel the morning of June 7, three of which landed in 
Sderot.  No injuries were reported, but three Israelis were 
treated for shock. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets/Explosions: The IDF reported that 
Palestinian militants fired one mortar shell at Nissanit 
settlement overnight June 6-7.  UNRWA reported that militants 
fired three mortar shells at Neve Dekalim and threw homemade 
bombs at IDF outposts along the settlement fence overnight 
June 6-7.  The IDF responded with machine-gun fire towards 
Khan Yunis refugee camp.  Militants also fired an anti-tank 
rocket at a tank stationed along the border fence with Egypt 
in Rafah in the same period, according to UNRWA. The IDF 
responded with machine-gun fire at the al-Zuroub area of the 
camp.  No injuries were reported in any of these attacks. 
 
-- Shootings: The IDF reported that Palestinian militants 
launched a total of four shooting attacks at IDF and Israeli 
settler targets in southern Gaza June 6-7.  No injuries were 
reported. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS: 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was open June 7, with a major detour at Netzarim 
Junction. 
 
-- Erez Crossing was open for internationals and Palestinians 
June 6, and 3,700 laborers and 310 merchants crossed into 
Israel. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone was open June 6, and 622 laborers 
entered the zone. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers June 7, 
but was open for the import of aggregates used in 
construction. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was open June 7. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open for arrivals and departures June 
¶7. 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan checkpoint was closed June 7.  Toufah 
checkpoint was open for residents of al-Mowassi, except males 
aged 16-30. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- UNRWA reported that Hamas organized a demonstration of 
some 3,000 Hamas supporters in Jabaliya the evening of June 6 
in protest over the incidents that took place the same day on 
the Temple Mount/Haram al-Sharif. 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
KURTZER