05TELAVIV3152
WB/G SITREP: FATAH ACTIVISTS CLASH WITH PA
Tue May 24 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEL AVIV 003152 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FRONT OFFICE; NEA/SA/EX FOR RICHIE; DEPT FOR 
DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN; USAID 
FOR DCHA, DCHA/FPP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG PHUM PREL PTER ASEC CASC GZ IS
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: FATAH ACTIVISTS CLASH WITH PA 
SECURITY IN RAMALLAH; MASS DEMONSTRATIONS IN GAZA -- MAY 
24, 2005 (1300 HOURS LOCAL) 
 
 
This is a joint ConGen Jerusalem/Embassy Tel Aviv cable. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: Approximately 300 Fatah activists the 
evening of May 23 attempted to enter the Muqata'a in Ramallah 
in order to visit former Palestinian Authority (PA) Chairman 
Arafat's gravesite.  Clashes erupted as PA security forces 
blocked their entrance into the compound.  The Fatah 
activists responded by throwing stones at PA security, which 
in turn responded with automatic gunfire that resulted in 
serious wounds to one demonstrator.  An IED exploded next to 
an IDF on patrol west of Hebron May 23, and the IDF arrested 
a Palestinian teenager carrying an explosive belt near the 
Bethlehem District Coordination office the same day.  Gaza 
was largely quiet on the security front, although tens of 
thousands of Hamas supporters demonstrated throughout the 
strip to protest the PA court decision to re-run elections in 
Rafah, Bayt Lahiya, and al-Bureij.  End Summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Death: Nil. 
 
-- Clashes/injury: Approximately 300 Fatah activists the 
evening of May 23 attempted to enter the Muqata'a in Ramallah 
in order to visit former Palestinian Authority (PA) Chairman 
Arafat's gravesite.  Clashes erupted as PA security forces 
blocked their entrance into the compound.  The Fatah 
activists responded by throwing stones at PA security, which 
in turn responded with automatic gunfire that resulted in 
serious wounds to one demonstrator. 
 
-- Explosion: A roadside bomb on May 23 exploded next to an 
IDF jeep on patrol near Dura village, west of Hebron.  There 
were no injuries reported from this incident, but the IDF 
jeep was damaged in the attack. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) ARRESTS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Arrest: The IDF on May 23 arrested a Palestinian teenager 
carrying an explosive belt near the Bethlehem District 
Coordination office. 
 
-- East Jerusalem arrests: Israeli police on May 23 arrested 
eight Palestinians from the East Jerusalem neighborhood of 
Isawiya on suspicion of carrying out, as members of the PFLP, 
a series of firebomb and stoning attacks against Israeli 
vehicles. 
 
-- Human shield allegation: According to Palestinian 
witnesses and the Israeli daily Ha'aretz IDF soldiers used a 
Palestinian youth from Dura village, west of Hebron, as a 
human shield during clashes with Palestinians in the village 
last week.  According to the Ha'aretz report, the IDF has 
denied the allegation. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- Fourteen Palestinian prisoners incarcerated in Jericho on 
May 23 suspended their hunger strike following a visit from 
members of the Palestinian Legislative Council (PLC).  The 
PLC has reportedly agreed to convene a session of the council 
to address the prisoners, grievances, namely their continued 
detention without charges or trial. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injuries: UNRWA reported that three students of al-Aqsa 
University were injured May 23 when a dispute between Fatah 
and Hamas supporters broke out over the decision to postpone 
the student council elections at the university. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: The IDF reported that Palestinian 
militants fired one mortar shell at an IDF outpost west of 
Khan Yunis in the early morning hours May 24.  UNRWA reported 
that responsibility for mortars fired May 23 had been jointly 
claimed by PFLP, the al-Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades and the 
Popular Resistance Committees (PRC) 
 
-- Shootings: The IDF reported two exchanges of fire May 23, 
one near Rafiah Yam and the other near Rafah. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS: 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was open May 24, with a major detour at Netzarim 
Junction. 
 
-- Erez Crossing was open May 23, and 4,773 laborers and 254 
merchants crossed into Israel. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone was open May 23, and 615 laborers 
entered Israel. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers May 24, 
but was open for the import of aggregates used in 
construction. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was open May 24. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open for arrivals and departures May 
¶24. 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan checkpoint was closed May 24.  Toufah 
checkpoint was open for residents of al-Mowassi, except males 
aged 16-30. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- UNRWA and Palestinian sources reported that some 50,000 
Hamas supporters demonstrated in Gaza City the evening of May 
23 to protest the court decision to re-run elections in parts 
of Bayt Lahiya, Rafah, and al-Bureij.  Another 10,000 Hamas 
supporters demonstrated in Rafah, 5,000-6,000 demonstrated in 
al-Bureij, and 4,000-5,000 demonstrated in Nuseirat, 
according to UNRWA. 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
KURTZER