05TELAVIV3955
WB/G SITREP: IDF ARRESTS AT LEAST 11 WEST BANK
Thu Jun 23 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEL AVIV 003955 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FRONT OFFICE; NEA/SA/EX FOR RICHIE; DEPT FOR 
DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN; USAID 
FOR DCHA, DCHA/FPP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG PHUM PREL PTER ASEC CASC GZ IS
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: IDF ARRESTS AT LEAST 11 WEST BANK 
MILITANTS, FIVE PALESTINIANS WOUNDED IN GAZA  -- JUNE 23, 
2005 (1300 HOURS LOCAL) 
 
 
This is a joint ConGen Jerusalem/Embassy Tel Aviv cable. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: In the West Bank, the IDF arrested five 
alleged PIJ activists June 22 in and around Jenin, and six 
Palestinians and one foreign peace activist in anti-barrier 
protests in Bili'in, near Ramallah, the same day.  PA 
security forces entered the Amari refugee camp to arrest 
several wanted criminals and exchanged fire with the intended 
arrestees and their family members overnight June 22-23.  As 
of 1200 hours June 23, it was not yet clear whether arrests 
were made in the operation.  In Gaza, four members of the 
Zuroub family were injured in the early morning hours June 23 
when they clashed with militants after attempting to stop the 
militants from launching mortars from the al-Zuroub area of 
the Rafah refugee camp towards a nearby IDF observation post. 
 One Palestinian was injured during an exchange of fire 
between IDF soldiers and Palestinian militants near Neve 
Dekalim overnight June 22-23.  A group claiming to be 
affiliated with Fatah and calling themselves the Black 
Panthers claimed responsibility for placing an IED near Morag 
settlement June 22.  End Summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths:  Nil. 
 
-- Injuries:  Nil. 
 
-- Arrests: The IDF arrested five alleged PIJ activists June 
22 in and around Jenin, according to PA security sources. 
 
-- Arrests: The IDF arrested six Palestinians and one foreign 
peace activist in anti-barrier protests in Bili'in, near 
Ramallah, on June 22, according to Palestinians and Israeli 
newspapers. 
 
-- Incursions: The IDF entered and is operating in Illar 
village near Tulkarm (Area A under the Interim Agreement) on 
June 23, according to PA security sources.  Several 
Palestinian houses were reportedly taken over for use as IDF 
observation posts. 
 
-- Demolitions: The IDF demolished six shacks in the Jordan 
Valley villages of Jiftlik and Marj Na'ajah June 22 for lack 
of building permits, according to Palestinian newspapers. 
 
-- Clashes: PA security forces entered Amari refugee camp to 
arrest several wanted criminals, and exchanged fire with the 
intended arrestees and their family members overnight June 
22-23.  As of 1200 hours, it was not yet clear whether 
arrests were made in the operation. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- PIJ and al-Aqsa militants held by the PA in the Jericho 
prison have begun a hunger strike in an attempt to gain 
release, according to PA security sources. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injuries: UNRWA reported that four members of the Zuroub 
family were injured in the early morning hours June 23 when 
they clashed with militants after attempting to stop the 
militants from launching mortars from the al-Zuroub area of 
the Rafah refugee camp towards a nearby IDF observation post. 
 
-- Injury: UNRWA reported that one Palestinian was injured 
overnight June 22-23 during an exchange of fire between IDF 
soldiers and Palestinian militants near Neve Dekalim. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: The IDF reported that Palestinian 
militants fired one mortar at Kfar Darom and one anti-tank 
missile at an IDF outpost near Netzarim June 22. 
 
-- Shootings: The IDF reported that Palestinian militants 
launched a total of five shooting attacks at IDF outposts 
near Rafah and one at an IDF outpost northwest of Khan Yunis 
June 22-23. 
-- Explosions: IDF soldiers found and safely deactivated one 
IED in the vicinity of Morag June 22.  A group claiming to be 
affiliated with Fatah and calling themselves the Black 
Panthers claimed responsibility for the attack. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS: 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was open June 23, with a major detour at Netzarim 
Junction. 
 
-- Erez Crossing was open June 22, and 3,974 laborers and 420 
merchants entered Israel. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone was open June 22, and 515 
laborers entered. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers June 23, 
but was open for the import of aggregates used in 
construction. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was open June 23. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open for arrivals and departures June 
¶23. 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan checkpoint was closed June 23.  Toufah 
checkpoint was open for residents of al-Mowassi, except males 
aged 16-30. 
 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
CRETZ