05TELAVIV5051
DISENGAGEMENT SITUATION REPORT, AUGUST 15, 2005
Mon Aug 15 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEL AVIV 005051 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG KPAL PREL ECON EAID IS GAZA DISENGAGEMENT
SUBJECT: DISENGAGEMENT SITUATION REPORT, AUGUST 15, 2005 
 
This is a joint message from Embassy Tel Aviv and Consulate 
General Jerusalem. 
This message is sensitive but unclassified.  Please protect 
accordingly. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  The first day of disengagement proceeded 
as planned with minimal violence well within anticipated 
parameters.  The message below outlines the dissemination of 
eviction notices to settlers; the overall security situation 
in Gaza, including the kidnapping of a French journalist by 
Palestinian militants and a bombing attack on an MFO bus on 
the Egyptian side of Rafah; developments in GOI-PA 
coordination on the civil and economic aspects of 
disengagement, including GOI planning for use of the USD 50 
million; internal Israeli political developments; and the 
closure and humanitarian access situation.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) SETTLER EVACUATION STATUS 
 
-- The IDF reported that evacuation orders were delivered 
August 15 to the settlements of Atzmona, Kfar Yam, Pa,at 
Sadeh, Neveh Dekalim, Tel Katifa, Gan Or, Gadid, Kerem 
Atzmona, Ganei Tal, Bedolakh, Morag, Rafiah Yam, Alei Sinai, 
and Nisanit.  According to IDF and Israeli media sources, 
55-65 percent of settlers (approximately 900 of Gaza,s 1,486 
families) have agreed with the SELA disengagement 
administration to leave voluntarily in exchange for 
compensation. 
 
-- IDF Chief of Staff Halutz announced August 15 that 
distribution of the evacuation orders was going "as planned," 
but Israeli media and IDF sources noted that ground troops 
and police refrained from entering the settlements of 
Netzarim, Kfar Darom, Katif, and Dugit.  At other 
settlements, including Morag and Ganei Tal, authorities 
engaged in prolonged verbal altercations with settler leaders 
before they were allowed to enter. 
 
-- Israeli media reported that hundreds of anti-disengagement 
youth activists rioted at Neve Dekalim settlement the night 
of August 14, burning tires and attempting to march down the 
main Gush Katif road towards the security forces stationed at 
the settlement gate.  Activists shattered the windows and 
punctured the tires of military vehicles.  Maj. Uri Singer 
cited IDF estimates of between 3,000 and 5,000 
anti-disengagement youth activists who have infiltrated the 
Gush Katif settlements, as opposed to earlier media reports 
of over 7,000. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) SECURITY SITUATION 
 
-- Deaths/Injuries: According to Israeli media, five IDF 
troops were injured by friendly fire early August 14 in Gaza 
when troops reportedly retaliating against Palestinian 
gunfire inadvertently shelled an armored personnel carrier. 
One soldier was seriously injured. 
 
-- Injuries/explosions: Israeli media and Multinational 
Forces and Observers (MFO) personnel reported that an 
explosive device  (IED) exploded August 15 in close proximity 
to a minibus traveling on an access road to the North Camp 
MFO base near the Egyptian section of Rafah.  The blast 
lightly injured two Canadian soldiers.  This access road is 
reportedly used almost exclusively by MFO personnel. 
International investigators reportedly found a second 
command-detonated IED approximately 30 meters from the site 
of the explosion, indicating that the MFO was being targeted. 
 
-- Kidnapping: Masked and armed men abducted a 
French-Algerian journalist from France,s Channel 3 at 
approximately 1200 midnight August 15 in Gaza City. 
According to UNRWA, no information exists as to who took the 
journalist, where he is and on the abductors, demands. 
 
-- Shootings: Israeli media reported that IDF soldiers and 
armed Palestinians exchanged gunfire near Kfar Darom 
settlement the night of August 14.  No injuries were reported. 
 
-- Mortars: According to the IDF, Palestinian militants fired 
two mortar shells at Kefar Darom settlement and two at Gadid 
settlement the night of August 14.  No injuries were reported. 
 
-- Arrests: Israeli police arrested nine Israeli settlers in 
Sa Nur and Homesh settlements August 14 during 
anti-disengagement clashes, according to Israeli media 
reports. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) PALESTINIAN REACTIONS 
 
-- Gazan private sector contacts cited an atmosphere of calm, 
joy, and celebration in the streets.  Several relatively 
small Hamas, PIJ, and Fatah demonstrations reportedly took 
place August 14-15, including a PIJ march through Gaza City 
that ended at the PLC offices, and a Hamas-sponsored midnight 
prayer of thanks for the withdrawal. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) GOI-PA COORDINATION 
-- PA security sources report that the August 14 meeting 
between PA Interior Minister Nasser Yusif and GOI DefMin 
Shaul Mofaz failed to achieve concrete results, and that 
Mofaz denied PA requests for ammunition to support 
disengagement security. 
 
-- MoD advisor Netzach Mashiach met with USAID and EconCouns 
August 15 to discuss possible uses for the USD 50 million. 
The GOI has agreed to focus spending on technological 
upgrades at the border crossings, and to compile a list of 
scanners and other security technology for use at the 
passages. 
 
-- Brig. Gen. Baruch Spiegel met with World Bank country 
director Nigel Roberts and donor representatives August 15 to 
discuss the status of the GOI-PA passages negotiations.  The 
GOI is ready to agree in principle to increased efficiency at 
Karni and Erez crossings after new scanning technology is 
installed, but will not enter into a formal or written 
agreement with the PA on the specifics of the improvements. 
Spiegel affirmed that the GOI will discuss a door-to-door 
system of cargo transfer only after the GOI-PA technical 
teams have reached agreement on the West Bank-Gaza convoy 
system. 
 
-- The Israeli MFA reported that the protocol for removal of 
rubble from the demolition of settlement houses is nearly 
complete, and will be finalized by the Ministry of Justice 
and the IDF legal advisor.  Issues that must be resolved 
include which elements of the IDF will be responsible for 
demolition and security, who will transport used rubble to 
Egypt for disposal, and the degree to which the EC will be 
involved in both planning and contracting.  World Bank and 
QSE Wolfensohn representatives will meet August 15 with the 
GOI on the protocol. 
 
-- The Israeli Ministry of Environment told ESTHoff August 14 
that the MoE was unaware of any meetings to be held this week 
to review demolition plans, contrary to what MoD sources 
earlier told Ambassador.  According to the MoE, the GOI is 
still planning for "light" demolition of houses with prior 
removal of any asbestos-containing materials. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) GOI POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS 
 
-- The Israeli Cabinet voted 16-4 August 15 in favor of 
evacuating the Gush Katif settlement bloc.  As expected, 
Likud Ministers Danny Naveh, Limor Livnat, Tzachi Hanegbi, 
and Yisrael Katz voted against the evacuation.  The 
dissenting ministers gave no indication during the meeting 
that they would follow Binyamin Netanyahu and resign from the 
government in protest over disengagement.  A Cabinet vote 
authorizing the evacuation of the third group of four 
settlement groups will likely take place within several days. 
 A vote on the remaining group of four settlements in the 
northern West Bank will take place shortly thereafter. 
 
-- IDF Chief of Staff Halutz told the August 15 cabinet 
session that the IDF will decide only August 16 regarding the 
order of the settlements to be evacuated. 
 
--  Likud MK and disengagement foe Gilad Eldan told Poloff 
from Gush Katif August 15 that he and Coalition Whip Gideon 
Sa'ar (Likud) were visiting Gaza settlements to try to calm 
the situation and head off violence between settlers and the 
IDF.  He said that he would be meeting with settler leaders 
and IDF representatives.  Labor MK Danny Yatom and Shinui MK 
Eti Livni visited Kfar Darom, where settler youths reportedly 
punctured one of Yatom's car tires.  Labor MK Amram Mitzna 
also visited several Gaza settlements. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS/HUMANITARIAN ACCESS 
 
-- Erez Crossing and Industrial Zone:  Erez crossing was 
closed August 15 to Palestinians.  It was open to 
internationals, diplomats, and journalists with prior 
coordination with the IDF.  According to COGAT, the IDF 
intends to close Erez during the two days of evacuation of 
the northern Gaza settlements later the week of August 14. 
At other times the terminal will be subject to random 
unannounced closures. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal: According to the UN, Rafah terminal is 
open for Palestinians August 15. 
 
-- Abu Kholi junction: According to Gazan contacts, Abu Kholi 
and Netzarim junctions were open to Palestinians August 15 
despite earlier IDF announcements that they would be closed 
to Palestinians during daylight hours for the duration of the 
evacuation. 
 
-- Karni Terminal: According to Gazan business contacts, 
Karni terminal was open August 15. 
 
-- Kissufim, the main crossing used to enter Gush Katif and 
Kfar Darom settlements, closed for the last time at midnight 
on August 14. 
 
-- The UN continues to draw down its staff in Gaza, citing a 
lack of improvement in the security situation in the wake of 
the August 15 kidnapping of the French-Algerian journalist. 
PA President Abbas has condemned the kidnapping and has 
promised to provide PA security to representatives of 
international donor agencies operating in Gaza, but has yet 
to do so. 
 
-- In response to a request from PA Prime Minister Abu 
Ala,a, Norway agreed to donate USD 47,750 for communications 
and media equipment for the Premises of the PM,s Gaza 
office.  The request was reportedly made in an attempt to 
ensure effective intra-PA communication during the 
disengagement. 
 
-- According to UNRWA and the IDF, the UN has provided eight 
weeks worth of food and humanitarian supplies to Gaza 
refugees, and has pre-positioned enough food, medicine, and 
fuel inside Gaza to last through November.  The UN/DSS 
operations center reported no incidents of blocked 
humanitarian access as of 1530 August 15. 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
KURTZER