05TELAVIV3415
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Fri Jun 03 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 TEL AVIV 003415 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
Mideast 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Leading media (banner in Jerusalem Post) quoted top 
Sharon aide Dov Weisglass as saying at a symposium on 
disengagement at Tel Aviv University Thursday that once 
Israel leaves Gaza, it will turn its sights on 
dismantling the illegal settlement outposts in the West 
Bank.  Weisglass cited one or two "traumas" that have 
prevented Israel from fulfilling its promises to 
President Bush so far.  The media also reported that 
Weisglass played down the rocket attacks from the Gaza 
Strip. 
 
Israel Radio quoted Finance Minister Binyamin Netanyahu 
as saying before a Likud forum Thursday that he would 
vote against disengagement when the cabinet is asked to 
approve it before implementation.  He said that he 
decided to change his mind after senior security 
officials warned that the Palestinians regard 
disengagement as fleeing and not a choice made by 
Israel.  Netanyahu was quoted as saying that he salutes 
former chief of staff Moshe Ya'alon and the heads of 
the security establishment who behaved courageously and 
voiced opposition against disengagement. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that about half the farmers in the 
Katif Bloc (Gush Katif) have reached tentative 
agreements with the government's Disengagement 
Administration to receive alternative agricultural 
lands inside Israel in place of the lands they will 
lose when the Gaza Strip is evacuated. 
 
Israel Radio reported that the two Palestinians from 
Islamic Jihad who were about to carry out a planned 
double suicide bombing in Jerusalem's Ramot 
neighborhood have been arrested.  The radio also 
reported that prior to this, five members of another 
Islamic Jihad cell were arrested in the Hebron area. 
They had allegedly planned to carry out a suicide 
attack, kidnap soldiers and fire a rocket at an IDF 
position. 
 
Ha'aretz writes that Defense Minister Shaul Mofaz is 
interested in transferring three West Bank cities -- 
Qalqilya, Bethlehem, and Ramallah  -- to the PA prior 
to the disengagement. 
 
Israel Radio cited The New York Times as saying, based 
on Israeli military officials, that Syria test-fired 
three Scud missiles, fragments of which landed in 
Turkey.  Syria has reportedly apologized to Turkey. 
Jerusalem Post cited the predicament of the residents 
of Dahaniya in the Gaza Strip, a village known as the 
"den of collaborators," who fear they could be 
slaughtered after Israel's withdrawal from the Strip. 
 
Ha'aretz quoted Vice Premier Shimon Peres as saying 
Thursday at a meeting with Palestinian Finance Minister 
Salam Fayed that some 100,000 Palestinian families in 
the Gaza Strip will receive USD 100 a month from a fund 
aimed at helping Palestinian families in distress.  The 
newspaper quoted the Indian ambassador to Israel as 
saying that his country would contribute USD 15 million 
to the fund.  Ha'aretz quoted U.S. Ambassador to Israel 
Dan Kurtzer as saying at the event that the 
international community will invest money in the PA 
only when it will be certain that the funds will not 
get lost, as has been the case until now.  The Egyptian 
and Jordanian ambassadors also attended the meeting. 
Jerusalem Post (Wednesday) and Ha'aretz also reported 
on the Portland Trust, which was created in the UK two 
years ago and aims to revive the Palestinian economy in 
order to strengthen Israeli-Palestinian stability in 
the post-disengagement era.  Ha'aretz highlighted 
reserve Brig. Gen. Eival Giladi's role in the trust. 
 
Yediot reported that FM Silvan Shalom left for the U.S. 
on Thursday.  He will take part in Sunday's annual 
Salute to Israel Parade in New York and meet with UN 
Secretary-General Kofi Annan, former U.S. president 
 
SIPDIS 
Bill Clinton, and former secretary of state Colin 
Powell.  The newspaper also reported that former 
cabinet ministers Effi Eitam and Uzi Landau will 
demonstrate against the disengagement in Manhattan's 
Central Park Sunday. 
 
Jerusalem Post reported on an announcement released on 
Tuesday by NATO, according to which it is granting 
observer status to the Palestinian Legislative Council. 
The newspaper reported that officials in Jerusalem have 
responded coolly to the announcement. 
 
This morning, Israel Radio and Ha'aretz web site 
reported that nearly all personnel from the Israeli 
embassy in Tashkent have been evacuated due to terror 
warnings. 
 
The Maariv/Teleseker poll found that 50 percent of the 
public support the disengagement -- a 9-percent drop 
from two weeks ago and an all-time low. 
 
-------- 
Mideast: 
-------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized: "If 
the new chief of staff does not broadcast resolve ... 
the settlers will conclude that it is business as usual 
and that their promises of chaos on the day of the 
evacuation have once again succeeded in intimidating 
decision-makers." 
 
Ultra-Orthodox Yated Ne'eman editorialized: "The 
murderous terrorists whom Abu Mazen required to 
demonstrate a 'light pause' and a 'brief quiet' are not 
prepared to continue playing that game." 
 
Former editor-in-chief Moshe Ishon wrote in 
nationalist, Orthodox Hatzofe: "During his talks with 
Abu Mazen, President Bush took away from Sharon's hands 
the American chip upon which Sharon was relying." 
 
Senior Middle East affairs analyst Zvi Bar'el wrote in 
Ha'aretz: "We have already seen that both Israel and 
Egypt generally obey when there is an American 
scolding.... Why not initiate, for example, the award 
of an honorary doctorate by an American university to 
Ali Salem for his contribution to peace between the 
peoples?" 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
Â¶I.  "With Resolve" 
 
Independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized (June 
3): "If there is one thing that all IDF chiefs of staff 
from the start of the occupation began have had in 
common, it is their warm and forgiving attitude toward 
law-breaking settlers.... The new chief of staff is now 
confronted with this long tradition of not enforcing 
the law against the settlers; he must evacuate them 
from Gush Katif within three months of assuming office. 
[Dan] Halutz's one clear advantage over his 
predecessors is the full backing of the prime minister, 
who wants the evacuation to succeed -- or at least that 
is how things appear, based on Ariel Sharon's public 
statements.  But alongside the Prime Minister is a 
cabinet that is unenthusiastic about the disengagement, 
and some of the ministers may even be hoping to advance 
themselves through Sharon's failure.  If the new chief 
of staff does not broadcast resolve, does not help the 
prime minister to transmit that resolve to his 
subordinates and does not make this resolve clearly 
apparent in concrete acts, the settlers will conclude 
that it is business as usual and that their promises of 
chaos on the day of the evacuation have once again 
succeeded in intimidating decision-makers." 
 
II.  "End of the Illusion of Quiet" 
 
Ultra-Orthodox Yated Ne'eman editorialized (June 3): 
"Despite the quiet, some still plan massive murderous 
attacks -- God forbid.  [Israeli] security sources said 
Thursday that the uncovering of [Islamic Jihad's] plan 
is deeply embarrassing for PA chief Abu Mazen, who 
declared only two days ago, 'The era of suicide-bombers 
is over'.... The Palestinians are losing patience.  The 
murderous terrorists whom Abu Mazen required to 
demonstrate a 'light pause' and a 'brief quiet' are not 
prepared to continue playing that game.  They are again 
trying to make good on their desire to spill Jewish 
blood like water, Heaven forbid." 
 
III.  "Sharon Also Failed in the United States" 
 
Former editor-in-chief Moshe Ishon wrote in 
nationalist, Orthodox Hatzofe (June 3): "During his 
talks with Abu Mazen, President Bush took away from 
Sharon's hands the American chip upon which Sharon was 
relying.  In the joint [Bush-Abbas] announcement, 
everyone could see that the letter in which Sharon is 
putting his faith isn't even worth the paper it's 
printed on.  That announcement has unequivocally 
exposed the policy of the U.S., which advocates 
dialogue between the parties, based on the 1949 
ceasefire lines.  It is no secret that the 1949 
ceasefire accords are more problematic to Israel than 
the situation that prevailed on the eve of the June 
1967 Six-Day War.  Immediately following the 
publication of President Bush's announcement ... Israel 
took a few steps in an attempt to modify the White 
House's policy.  Sharon is aware of the difficulty 
involved in this step, but he outwardly endeavors to 
appear as if he can make the White House toe the 
Israeli line." 
 
IV.  "Hi Dina, Regards From Ali" 
 
Senior Middle East affairs analyst Zvi Bar'el wrote in 
Ha'aretz (June 3): "Greetings, Ms. Dina Habib Powell. 
And congratulations on your appointment as America's 
Assistant Secretary of State for Educational and 
Cultural Affairs.... Since you are Egyptian by origin 
... and have so quickly reached such a senior position, 
at age 33, permit me to shake your hand.... The thing 
is, on the day you were called before the Senate 
Foreign Relations Committee to present your views and 
obtain formal approval for your appointment, Ali Salem 
was standing in a different place entirely.  He had 
been waiting for two days at the Taba border crossing 
and was ejected from there with his head hanging down. 
This time not by the Israeli police, but rather by the 
Egyptians.... And there was good reason for this.  Ben- 
Gurion University of the Negev in Beersheva had decided 
to award Ali Salem an honorary doctorate for his 
contribution to literature and drama and his work for 
peace.... Ms. Habib, I am allowing myself to make a 
modest proposal to you.  We have already seen that both 
Israel and Egypt generally obey when there is an 
American scolding.  As it is now Egypt's turn to take 
pride in the appointment of one of its former citizens 
to a high position, why not take advantage?  Why not 
initiate, for example, the award of an honorary 
doctorate by an American university to Ali Salem for 
his contribution to peace between the peoples?" 
 
KURTZER