05TELAVIV4613
WB/G SITREP: GAZA BOY KILLED BY ROCKET THAT FELL
Fri Jul 22 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEL AVIV 004613 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FRONT OFFICE; NEA/SA/EX FOR RICHIE; DEPT FOR 
DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN; USAID 
FOR DCHA, DCHA/FPP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG PHUM PREL PTER ASEC CASC GZ IS
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: GAZA BOY KILLED BY ROCKET THAT FELL 
SHORT; PA SAYS FAMILY MEMBER, NOT SETTLER, KILLED WEST BANK 
YOUTH TWO DAYS AGO. JULY 22, 2005 (1300 HOURS LOCAL) 
 
This is a joint ConGen Jerusalem/Embassy Tel Aviv cable. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: A homemade rocket launched at a Gaza 
settlement failed to hit its intended target on July 21, 
killing instead a Palestinian boy in Khan Yunis and wounding 
his brother.  Only one other incident of rocket fire and only 
one incident of mortar fire were reported from Gaza.  PA 
security forces and Palestinian gunmen exchanged gunfire in 
Gaza City starting at about 0100 on July 21.  No injuries 
were reported.  In the West Bank, PA security forces on July 
21 announced that a family member -- not settlers, as earlier 
reported -- killed a Palestinian youth in Qaryut, near 
Nablus, on July 20.  End summary. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶2. (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths/Rockets: A homemade rocket fired from Khan Yunis 
toward the Neve Dekalim settlement at 1445 on July 21 fell 
short and landed on the house of a Palestinian family, 
killing a Palestinian boy reported as either 12 or 13 years 
old by UNRWA and the Israeli media. 
 
-- Injuries/Rockets: The younger brother of the Palestinian 
boy killed by a Palestinian rocket (see "Deaths/Rockets") was 
wounded in the same attack.  UNRWA reported that the boy was 
ten years old and suffered moderate injuries.  The Israeli 
media, citing PA sources, reported that the boy was seven 
years old and critically wounded. 
 
-- Mortars: The IDF reported only one instance of either 
mortar or rocket fire during the 24 hours ending at 0600 on 
July 22, a mortar shell launched at 1435 on July 21 at IDF 
soldiers located about four kms south of Kissufim crossing. 
No injuries were reported. 
 
-- Rockets: In addition to the rocket that killed a 
Palestinian boy and wounded his brother in Khan Yunis (see 
"Deaths/Rockets" and "Injuries/Rockets"), UNRWA reported one 
homemade rocket fired from Beit Lahia toward the northern 
Gaza settlements at 1045 on July 21.  No injuries were 
reported from the incident. 
 
-- Shootings: UNRWA reported that unknown men fired at a PA 
security service vehicle traveling in Gaza City at 0100 on 
July 21.  Additional PA security vehicles arrived and pursued 
the attackers.  Sporadic exchanges of gunfire were 
subsequently reported in several places in Gaza City.  No 
injuries were reported. 
 
-- Shootings: The IDF reported eight separate incidents of 
gunfire between 1300 on July 21 and 0340 on July 22.  All 
were directed at IDF outposts around the Gaza Strip.  Three 
of the incidents involved fire against IDF outposts near Khan 
Yunis; two others against IDF outposts near Neve Dekalim; and 
single incidents near Morag, Kissufim Crossing, and Rafiah 
Yam.  No injuries were reported in any of the incidents. 
 
-- Explosions: The IDF detonated an explosive device found 
approximately one kilometer south of an IDF outpost south of 
Rafah at 2345 on July 21. 
 
¶3. (SBU) ARRESTS: Nil. 
 
¶4. (SBU) INCURSIONS/DEMOLITIONS: Nil. 
 
¶5. (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS: 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was open. 
 
-- Erez Crossing was closed to Palestinians except those 
holding Jerusalem IDs.  It was open for international 
travelers. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone was closed. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers, but 
open for the import of aggregates used in construction. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was partially open. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open in both directions except for 
Palestinian males between the ages of 16 and 35, who are 
barred from traveling from Gaza to Egypt through the terminal. 
-- Toufah checkpoint was open in both directions for all 
Palestinians except males aged 16 to 30 . 
 
¶6. (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: Israeli media reported that 
IDF sources estimate that about 600 disengagement opponents 
have in recent days sneaked into Gaza settlements despite the 
GOI closure of the settlements.  (Estimates range from 
several dozen to 2,000.)  The new arrivals reportedly plan to 
remain to fight against efforts to remove the settlers. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Death: PA security forces on July 21 announced that a 
family member -- not settlers, as earlier reported -- killed 
a Palestinian youth in Qaryut, near Nablus, on July 20. 
 
-- Injury: Nil. 
 
-- Shooting: Palestinian gunmen on July 21 opened fire on IDF 
soldiers operating in Qabatiya village, south of Jenin. 
There were no reported injuries from this incident.  (See 
&Arrests8). 
 
¶8. (SBU) ARRESTS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Arrests: IDF soldiers operating in Qabatiya village, south 
of Jenin, on July 21 arrested two Fatah activists. 
 
-- Incursion/Arrest: The IDF the evening of July 21 entered 
Jenin refugee camp and arrested one Fatah activist. 
 
-- Security: IDF sappers on July 21 defused a bomb in Tulkarm 
refugee camp.  There were no reported injuries. 
 
-- Security: The Palestinian Authority police on July 21 
handed over to the Israeli DCO one IDF soldier and three 
Israeli women who had entered Bethlehem by mistake. 
 
-- The IDF on July 21 set up an observation tower in the 
vicinity of Route 60 near al-Khadr village, west of Bethlehem. 
 
¶9. (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- According to Palestinian press reports from July 22, 
Palestinian Authority President Mahmud Abbas stated that the 
clashes between Fatah/PA and Hamas had ended except for a few 
isolated incidents. 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
KURTZER