05TELAVIV4418
WB/G SITREP: MORTAR, ROCKET FIRE CONTINUE IN GAZA;
Mon Jul 18 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 TEL AVIV 004418 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FRONT OFFICE; NEA/SA/EX FOR RICHIE; DEPT FOR 
DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/MUSTAFA; 
USAID FOR DCHA, DCHA/FPP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG PHUM PREL PTER ASEC CASC GZ IS
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: MORTAR, ROCKET FIRE CONTINUE IN GAZA; 
IDF SNIPER KILLS HAMAS COMMANDER IN KHAN YUNIS; IDF DETAINS 
ABOUT 30 IN WEST BANK -- JULY 18, 2005 (1600 HOURS LOCAL) 
 
This is a joint ConGen Jerusalem/Embassy Tel Aviv cable. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: Intense mortar and Qassam fire from Gaza 
continued through the weekend of July 16-17, easing up 
somewhat on July 18.  On July 17, the IDF killed the Hamas 
military commander in Khan Yunis in a targeted killing and 
also killed, in a separate incident, a PIJ militant who was 
preparing to fire a mortar shell into Netzarim.  At least 
eight Israeli civilians were wounded, most lightly, by mortar 
fire at Gaza settlements.  Hamas gunmen shot and wounded on 
July 16 the head of the PA National Security Force unit that 
shot at a car carrying Hamas militants last week.  In the 
West Bank, IDF forces detained seven suspected PIJ militants 
in Ramallah on July 18, but subsequently released four of 
them.  Over the weekend of July 16-17 the IDF also detained 
another two dozen or so militants from various factions 
throughout the West Bank.  End Summary. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
(SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: In a targeted attack, IDF sniper fire killed the 
reputed commander of the Hamas military wing in Khan Yunis, 
Said Siam, on the morning of July 17 at about 1000. 
 
-- Deaths: At about 1240 on July 17 near Netzarim, IDF 
soldiers killed a reputed PIJ member who was reportedly 
preparing to fire a mortar shell at the settlement. 
 
-- Injuries/mortars: A prominent settler activist, Yigal 
Kirschenzpat, and a guest in his home were seriously wounded 
by a mortar shell in Neve Dekalim at 1410 on July 17. 
 
-- Injuries/mortars: Two Israeli children were lightly 
injured by a mortar shell that landed in Neve Dekalim at 1540 
on July 17. 
 
-- Injuries/mortars: An Israeli civilian was lightly injured 
by a mortar shell that landed in Neve Dekalim at 1150 on July 
¶17. 
 
-- Injuries/mortars: An Israeli civilian was lightly injured 
by a mortar shell that landed in Nisanit settlement on July 
16 at 1940. 
 
-- Injuries/mortars: Two Israeli civilians were lightly 
injured by a mortar shell that landed in Neve Dekalim at 1610 
on July 15. 
 
-- Injuries/shootings: UNRWA reported that Hamas gunmen shot 
a PA National Security Force commander, Ra'ed Abu Haloub, in 
Jabalia on July 16 at 2000.  The victim was reportedly 
recovering from wounds to his abdomen and legs at an Israeli 
hospital.  Abu Haloub led the NSF unit that confronted, and 
shot at, a car carrying Hamas militants on July 14. 
 
-- Injuries/shootings: UNRWA reported that IDF soldiers at 
the Abu Houli/Gush Katif checkpoint fired machine guns and 
tear gas at Palestinians who tried to cross the closed 
checkpoint on July 16 at 1545.  Four Palestinians were 
wounded by the gunfire. 
 
-- Injuries/air-launched missiles: Two Palestinians received 
shrapnel wounds as a result of IAF strikes on workshops in 
Gaza City early in the morning of July 16, according to 
UNRWA.  Another was wounded by shrapnel when an IAF 
helicopter fired missiles at a metal workshop west of Al 
Qarara at around the same time.  Three others received 
shrapnel wounds when an IAF aircraft fired at a Hamas mortar 
crew in Khan Yunis during the evening of July 15.  (See 
"Air-Launched Missile Strikes.) 
 
-- Mortars: The IDF reported 22 mortar attacks during the 
24-hour period ending at 0600 on July 18.  Of the 35 shells 
fired, seven landed in Israel (Sderot, Nativ Hasara, and six 
kms northeast of Kissufim Crossing).  The rest landed in or 
near Gaza settlements.  The IDF reported 60 mortar attacks 
during the 48-hour period ending at 0600 on July 17. 
Approximately 20 of the 98 shells the IDF counted landed in 
Israel. 
 
-- Rockets: The IDF reported two Qassam rockets fired at 
Sderot at 0620 on July 17.  It reported an additional 18 
Qassams fired into Israel in seven barrages during the 
preceding 48 hours. 
-- Anti-tank missiles: The IDF reported 12 incidents (15 
missiles) of anti-tank missiles fired at Israeli targets in 
Gaza during the 72-hour period ending at 0600 on July 18. 
 
-- Shootings: The IDF and militants exchanged gunfire near 
Neve Dekalim on July 16 at 1830.  No injuries were reported. 
 
-- Explosions: In an apparent work accident, a bomb exploded 
inside a home in Nuseirat camp on July 17 at 0215, according 
to UNRWA.  No injuries were reported, although the house was 
damaged. 
 
(SBU) ARRESTS: Nil. 
 
(SBU) INCURSIONS/DEMOLITIONS: 
 
-- UNRWA reported that an undercover IDF unit encountered PA 
national security force members in a Bedouin village north of 
Beit Lahiya on July 17 at 0030.  An exchange of fire ensued, 
with no injuries reported.  The PA forces withdrew. 
 
-- UNRWA reported that four IDF armored vehicles and three 
jeeps crossed the Green Line east of Gaza City and entered 
about 300 meters into a neighborhood east of Sheja'ya on July 
16 at 0430.  Troops searched homes in the area before 
withdrawing at 0700. 
 
(SBU) AIR-LAUNCHED MISSILE STRIKES: 
 
-- UNRWA reported that an IAF aircraft fired two missiles at 
on open area near Sheikh Zayad city at noon on July 17.  The 
strike apparently targeted Palestinians firing mortar shells. 
 No injuries were reported. 
 
-- UNRWA reported that an IDF drone fired a missile at 
Palestinians attempting to fire Qassam rockets into Israel 
from Beit Hanoun on July 16 at 2050.  No injuries were 
reported. 
 
-- UNRWA reported that IAF helicopters fired missiles July 16 
at 0030 at two targets in Gaza City: a metal workshop in the 
city's Daraj quarter, and a motorcycle repair shop in Beach 
Camp.  Two Palestinian passers-by received shrapnel wounds. 
 
-- UNRWA reported that an IAF aircraft fired two missiles at 
a group from Hamas that was attempting to fire mortar shells 
at Gush Katif from Khan Yunis on July 15 at 1935.  Three 
persons reported received shrapnel wounds. 
 
(SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS: 
 
-- No information was available about Route Four (Salahadeen 
Road), the main north-south traffic artery. 
 
-- Erez Crossing was closed except for internationals. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone was closed. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers but open 
for the import of aggregates used in construction. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was partially open. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open, although Israeli authorities 
refused to allow Palestinians between the ages of 16 and 35 
to cross into Egypt on Saturday.  It was unclear whether this 
restriction was back in place on Monday. 
 
-- The Abu Houli internal crossing and the Coastal Road were 
reportedly closed by the IDF. 
 
(SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- Israeli police used roadblocks in Israel and the West Bank 
to prevent buses of anti-disengagement protesters from 
traveling towards Netivot, in the Negev, from where 
protesters were to try to march into Gaza.  The government 
had earlier rejected a permit for the march. 
 
-- PM Sharon told the Israeli Cabinet Sunday that "no 
restrictions" had been placed on IDF action against attacks 
from Gaza.  DefMin Mofaz said that he wanted to give the PA 
another chance to respond to the Qassam and mortar attacks. 
IDF armored units and infantry troops remained in place on 
the outskirts of Gaza. 
 
-- Hundreds of anti-disengagement demonstrators clashed with 
police and IDF soldiers on the Israeli side of the Kissufim 
crossing on the evening of July 16.  The demonstrators were 
trying to break through into Gaza.  Five protesters, one 
policeman and one soldier were lightly injured. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
(SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Shooting: Palestinians on July 18 fired gunshots at an IDF 
outpost south of Nablus.  There were no reported injuries 
from this incident. 
 
-- Shooting: Palestinians on July 17 fired gunshots at an IDF 
jeep traveling in the Im Sharayet neighborhood of Ramallah. 
There were no reported injuries from this incident. 
 
-- Firebombing: Palestinians on July 17 threw two firebombs 
at an IDF jeep operating in Tulkarm.  There were no reported 
injuries from this incident. 
 
(SBU) ARRESTS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Arrests: According to Israeli sources, IDF soldiers on 
July 18 entered Ramallah and arrested seven Palestinians 
reportedly belonging to the Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ). 
During the arrest operation, Palestinians threw stones at the 
IDF jeeps.  The IDF responded by firing teargas.  There were 
no reported injuries from the incident.  The IDF, which 
withdrew its forces from Ramallah following the operation, 
released four of the seven suspects at the entrance to the 
city, and held the remaining three suspects for questioning. 
 
 
-- Arrest: Israeli security personnel on July 18 arrested a 
Palestinian who attempted to cross the Huwwara checkpoint 
with 200 rounds of ammunition. 
 
-- Arrests: IDF soldiers the evening of July 17 arrested a 
total of six Hamas activists in several localities, including 
Harmala village, south of Bethlehem, and in the Ramallah and 
Hebron areas. 
 
-- Arrests: IDF operations on July 17 in several West Bank 
localities, including Nablus, Hebron, Tubas, and Tulkarm, 
resulted in the arrest of 16 Palestinians associated with 
Fatah, Hamas, and PIJ. 
 
-- Arrests: IDF operations on July 16 resulted in the arrest 
of 26 Palestinians in Hebron, Tulkarm, and other localities 
in the West Bank. 
 
-- Curfew lifted: The IDF on July 17 lifted the curfew 
imposed on Tulkarm following the July 12 suicide bombing in 
Netanya; however, the IDF has maintained security control 
over the city.  The Israeli DCO informed PA security forces 
in Tulkarm that they are forbidden from carrying weapons or 
wearing uniforms. 
 
-- Security: The IDF on July 17 took over the house of a 
senior PIJ member in Attil village, north of Tulkarm.  The 
PIJ leader is reportedly in the custody of the Palestinian 
Authority in Ramallah; however, the IDF is demanding that the 
PA turn him over to Israeli custody. 
 
(SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- Palestinian gunmen in Ramallah on July 16 attempted to 
force local merchants to close their businesses in reaction 
to the July 15 deaths of Palestinian militants killed during 
Israeli operations in Salfit and the Gaza Strip.  PA 
policemen succeeded in bringing the situation under control. 
There were no reported injuries from this incident. 
 
-- The Palestinian Legislative Council (PLC) is scheduled to 
hold a three-day session commencing July 19 to discuss 
proposed amendments to the Palestinian Basic Law. 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
CRETZ