05TELAVIV59
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Wed Jan 05 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 TEL AVIV 000059 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
Mideast 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
The major media led with stories related to the right 
wing's opposition to PM Sharon's disengagement plan. 
Reporting on testimony Shin Bet head Avi Dichter gave 
before the Knesset's Foreign Affairs and Defense 
Committee Tuesday, Maariv bannered: "The Black 
Prophesy" and Yediot: "Nightmare Scenario."  Dichter 
envisaged, among other possibilities, a situation in 
which armed settlers would fake shooting by soldiers 
during the evacuation of a settlement in order to 
create panic, to which settlers would respond by firing 
live shots at IDF soldiers.  Israel Radio reported that 
Sharon and Defense Minister Shaul Mofaz have called for 
punishing people who would harm or threaten members of 
the security forces.  Ha'aretz and Jerusalem Post 
reported that right-wing extremists, who Ha'aretz says 
are close to the outlawed Kach movement, called on 
reserve soldiers Tuesday to help thwart the 
disengagement planned for this summer.  Ha'aretz 
reported that Deputy Defense Minister Zeev Boim asked A- 
G Menachem Mazuz to look into indicting the extremists. 
Ha'aretz reported that the residents of the Katif Bloc 
(Gush Katif) have adopted the color orange as the 
symbol of their fight, comparing the revolution they 
want to generate to the Orange Revolution in Ukraine. 
 
The media also quoted Dichter as saying that abandoning 
the Philadelphi route would turn the Gaza Strip into a 
new South Lebanon. 
 
Leading media quoted senior IDF officers as saying that 
organizers of petitions against the disengagement plan 
being circulated among soldiers should be arrested. 
However, Dichter and some officers were quoted as 
saying that arrests of opponents of disengagement -- 
Dichter was asked about a group planning to attack the 
Temple Mount -- might not meet legal requirements. 
 
All media reported that PLO Chairman Mahmoud Abbas (Abu 
Mazen) branded Israel the "Zionist enemy" Tuesday, 
during an election tour of the Gaza Strip.  Abbas was 
responding to the killing of seven Palestinians in the 
northern Strip Tuesday by fire from an IDF tank. 
Nonetheless, Jerusalem Post quoted senior officials in 
the Prime Minister's Office as saying that Sharon hopes 
to meet Abbas soon after his expected election as 
Palestinian leader on January 9. 
 
Israel Radio reported that a terrorist who infiltrated 
the Erez Crossing this morning was killed and that his 
companion escaped.  Hamas and Islamic Jihad jointly 
claimed responsibility for the action.  Leading media 
reported on continued shelling of Israeli targets in 
the western Negev and the Gaza Strip Tuesday and this 
morning.  (Israel Radio and leading Israeli web sites 
reported that 12 IDF soldiers were wounded this morning 
in a Qassam rocket attack on a northern Gaza Strip 
outpost.)  Leading media reported that Tuesday the army 
closed Ramallah following unconfirmed reports of 
soldiers' abductions. 
 
Israel Radio cited a statement released by "Free People 
of the Galilee," a hitherto unknown group, claiming to 
have kidnapped AmCit Dana Bennet in the summer of 2003. 
The group allegedly wants Israel to release 1,000 
Palestinian prisoners in exchange for information about 
Bennet's fate. 
 
Jerusalem Post cited an announcement by the "cash- 
strapped" Jerusalem Municipality Tuesday that it has 
set up 15 bulletin boards in East Jerusalem at a cost 
of 20,000 shekels (about USD 4,500) to allow candidates 
for the PA election to post ads.  Leading media 
reported that, in a televised ad sponsored by the 
international organization One Voice, which will be 
broadcasted starting today on Palestinian TV and Arabic 
satellite channels, the American actor Richard Gere 
urges Palestinians on behalf of the "entire world" to 
participate in the elections. 
 
Leading media reported that Sharon associates warned 
United Torah Judaism (UTJ) on Tuesday that if UTJ does 
not join the coalition soon, Shinui could rejoin 
instead and a secular national unity government could 
be formed. 
 
Jerusalem Post reported that no date has been set for 
FM Silvan Shalom's planned visit to Jordan.  The 
newspaper quoted Israeli officials as saying that one 
of the obstacles to the visit and to a warming up of 
ties with Amman is Jordan's demand that Israel release 
some two dozen Jordanian prisoners in Israeli jails, 
including four "with blood on their hands." 
 
Yediot, Maariv and Jerusalem Post reported that 
diplomats at the International Atomic Energy Agency 
(IAEA) have told AP that Egypt conducted a series of 
secret nuclear tests -- mostly in the 80s and 90s -- 
 
SIPDIS 
which continued until six months ago.  Yediot quoted a 
spokesman for the Egyptian government as saying that 
Egypt's nuclear program is for civilian purposes only. 
 
Israel Radio reported that the U.S. administration is 
considering imposing new economic measures against 
Syria over its reported assistance to the Iraqi 
opposition.  Jerusalem Post reported that visiting 
Turkish FM Abdullah Gul will take a message from Sharon 
to Syrian President Bashar Assad that Israel will 
negotiate with Syria once it takes concrete steps to 
stop supporting anti-Israel terror.  Yediot reported 
that Assad has recently rejected Israel's request to 
return the remains of Israeli spy Eli Cohen as a 
confidence-building measure. 
 
Ha'aretz and Israel Radio reported that today the State 
Department will publish its first report ever on anti- 
Semitism around the world, which will focus on the rise 
of anti-Semitism in Europe. 
 
Israel Radio reported that Israel has acceded to Sri 
Lanka's request for physical and mental health teams 
following the tsunami disaster.  Jerusalem Post 
reported that Israelis have "come out in full force" 
for a four-day nationwide campaigning at the nation's 
supermarkets to collect food to be sent to the tsunami 
disaster zone in South Asia.  The mobilization was 
organized by Magen David Adom (MDA) with backing by 
MDA's American support organization, American Magen 
David for Israel.  Jerusalem Post reported that the 
Indian military has been using Israeli-made drones 
around the clock to search for victims and survivors of 
the tidal waves that swept their coast last week. 
Jerusalem Post printed a Letter to the Editor by the 
editorial secretary of L'Osservatore Romano saying that 
on December 29, Jerusalem Post distorted a story in the 
Vatican's newspaper, which had only noted Sri Lanka's 
initial refusal to receive an Israeli assistance 
delegation. 
 
Tel Aviv University's Peace Index poll: 
-75 percent of respondents favor the resumption of 
negotiations with the Palestinians; however, only 32 
percent of respondents believe that there are good 
chances of reaching an agreement with an Abbas-headed 
government. 
-"Do you believe that other settlements will be 
evacuated after disengagement is implemented?"  67 
percent: Disengagement is only the first step; 19 
percent: no more settlements will be evacuated; 14 
percent are undecided. 
-"Do left-wing soldiers have the right to refuse 
service in the territories?"  No: 68 percent; yes: 27 
percent; 5 percent are undecided. 
-"Do right-wing soldiers have the right to refuse 
service in the territories?"  No: 76 percent; yes: 18 
percent; 5 percent are undecided. 
-8 percent of Israeli Jews support the right to a 
violent civilian rebellion. 
 
-------- 
Mideast: 
-------- 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Veteran op-ed writer and the late prime minister 
Yitzhak Rabin's assistant Eytan Haber opined in the 
lead editorial of mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot 
Aharonot: "The opponents [of disengagement] believe 
that ... chaos will topple Sharon, and they will be 
saved.... We may be facing a great disaster." 
 
Senior op-ed writer Uzi Benziman opined in independent, 
left-leaning Ha'aretz: "The struggle of the Yesha 
Council [of Jewish Settlements in the Territories] is 
hopeless.  It will not succeed in torpedoing the 
disengagement plan, and if it does, it will be seen as 
responsible for the collapse of law and order and the 
shattering of the state's authority." 
 
Conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized: 
"Sharon is right.  Some of disengagement's opponents 
are playing a very dangerous game." 
 
Settler leader Pinchas Wallerstein wrote in Jerusalem 
Post: "Nonviolent civil protest against immoral actions 
on the part of our government is the democratic right 
of all those privileged enough to live in a democratic 
country." 
 
Conservative columnist Yosef Harif wrote in popular, 
pluralist Maariv: "Abbas is the prisoner of a delusion 
that the U.S., which is interested in expanding its 
influence in Iraq, Syria and other places in the Middle 
East, will press Israel to make significant concessions 
to the Palestinians." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
Â¶I.  "Israel's Tsunami, 2005" 
 
Veteran op-ed writer and the late prime minister 
Yitzhak Rabin's assistant Eytan Haber opined in the 
lead editorial of mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot 
Aharonot (January 5): "The riots on Monday against the 
security forces in Shalhevet, a neighborhood in the 
settlement of Yitzhar, are the first shock waves of the 
Israeli tsunami, which are being detected mainly by 
seismologists.  They will be followed by the deluge. 
One can understand the settlers: for 30 years they were 
deceived, taught that 'Judea will stand forever,' 
luxurious houses were built for them, all their demands 
were met, they were called upon to be the pillar of 
fire before the camp -- and they, in their naivety, 
followed the voices.... The settlers whose world (and 
home) has been ruined, will do everything -- 
everything! -- to demolish Ariel Sharon's rule.  They 
learned from the sad experience of Yitzhak Rabin's 
death, to which they were not even partners, that in 
Israel everything depends on one person: the prime 
minister.  His removal from office also means the 
elimination of the nightmare of 'disengagement'... The 
opponents believe that ... chaos will topple Sharon, 
and they will be saved.  Sharon and others also know 
that the first reactions by him and the security forces 
will be what will determine the nature of the battle in 
future.  Sharon knows that his opponents are lying in 
wait for a moment of weakness.  Therefore, it appears 
that he will make no concessions and compromises 
already from now.  The single gunshot fired on Monday 
in Yitzhar is a bad harbinger.  The coming period may 
bring violence with it, and also -- woe is to the eyes 
that read this -- bloodshed as well.  We may be facing 
a great disaster, and may we be proven wrong.  Israel, 
January 2005, the tsunami is on its way." 
 
II.  "Kiev and Jerusalem" 
 
Senior op-ed writer Uzi Benziman opined in independent, 
left-leaning Ha'aretz (January 5): "The role that the 
settlers' leaders are playing these days is dubious and 
dangerous.  They organize -- with funding deriving from 
the state treasury as well -- a sit-down strike 
opposite the Knesset under the slogan: We will do in 
Jerusalem what the Ukrainians did in Kiev.  That is to 
say, Viktor Yanukovich's election fraud is compared to 
the system Ariel Sharon is using to make the cabinet 
and Knesset decide in favor of the disengagement plan. 
This is a groundless comparison.  The situation is 
actually the other way around: the settlers are the 
minority that has been imposing its will on the 
majority for 37 years.... The struggle of the Yesha 
Council [of Jewish Settlements in the Territories] is 
hopeless.  It will not succeed in torpedoing the 
disengagement plan, and if it does, it will be seen as 
responsible for the collapse of law and order and the 
shattering of the state's authority.  The settlers must 
internalize the fact that they are perceived as a 
minority group that is enforcing its whims on the 
majority.  The Yesha council must realize that it 
cannot coerce the state to keep the Gaza Strip, and if 
it could, the price of the coercion would be too high." 
 
 
 
III.  "A Dangerous Game" 
 
Conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized 
(January 5): "Our democracy is facing a supreme test. 
We can see as well as anyone the tortuous and, in some 
sense, troubling path by which the disengagement plan 
has reached its current stage, but it cannot be argued 
that decisions approved by the cabinet and the Knesset 
are illegal.... Sharon is right.  Some of 
disengagement's opponents are playing a very dangerous 
game.... The irony is that, as the prospect of violent 
resistance grows, the settler leaders and the radicals 
they won't stand up to are driving all of us, the 
people of Israel, into a corner.  They are forcing a 
choice between anarchy and democracy.  And they are 
drowning out legitimate questions about disengagement, 
such as [Shin Bet head Avi] Dichter's warning this week 
that Samaria [the northern West Bank] could become like 
Gaza in the wake of a withdrawal.  Even if democracy 
ultimately wins out, the result of such a terrible 
choice could be that we will all lose." 
 
IV.  "Why We've Chosen Civil Disobedience" 
 
Settler leader Pinchas Wallerstein wrote in Jerusalem 
Post (January 5): "Were anyone to suggest a transfer of 
Arabs from the tiniest of villages for the most 
important of security reasons, there would be an 
immense outcry, shaking the very heavens.  But those 
who consider themselves the guardians of human rights 
seem to exempt Jews in Judea, Samaria and Gaza [i.e. 
the territories] from their patronage.   I've called 
the 'Evacuation and Compensation Law' immoral.  Let me 
explain why.   This draconian law was pushed through 
the Knesset using Stalin-like methods.  It provides for 
refusing compensation to any Jews who protest being 
uprooted from their homes; it calls for three years' 
imprisonment for anyone who remains in his or her home 
once the evacuation call has been made.  This law is 
immoral, first and foremost, because it attempts to 
legalize a crime which should never be repeated: the 
expulsion of Jews from their homes.... It is my opinion 
that thousands of soldiers will not find it within 
themselves to be partners in this endeavor.  The damage 
Sharon and his government will have inflicted on 
Israeli society by placing them in this untenable 
position will require decades to repair.  Nonviolent 
civil protest against immoral actions on the part of 
our government is the democratic right of all those 
privileged enough to live in a democratic country." 
 
Â¶V.  "Still No Partner" 
 
Conservative columnist Yosef Harif wrote in popular, 
pluralist Maariv (January 5): "In a recent discussion 
of Middle East affairs at the National Security Council 
in Washington, it was said that political leaders must 
be strong enough to make compromise possible.  Can 
anyone view Abu Mazen as a strong man?  I am talking 
about a compromise acceptable to Sharon and the Likud, 
not just about to Peres and most of his friends, who 
are prepared for a withdrawal almost to the 1967 lines 
and to the division of Jerusalem.  In the meantime it 
is becoming clear that the Palestinians believe that 
time is on their side and that they therefore won't 
compromise.  Abbas is the prisoner of a delusion that 
the U.S., which is interested in expanding its 
influence in Iraq, Syria and other places in the Middle 
East, will press Israel to make significant concessions 
to the Palestinians.  Washington has promised Abu Mazen 
a visit to the White House after he is elected as the 
Palestinians' leader.  This will be a proper 
opportunity to check his true intentions and to let 
them face reality." 
 
KURTZER