05TELAVIV7096
PERETZ: REMOVE ILLEGAL OUTPOSTS, SPEED UP PEACE
Thu Dec 29 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

291555Z Dec 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEL AVIV 007096 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR IPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KWBG KPAL IS SETTLEMENTS ISRAELI PALESTINIAN AFFAIRS GOI INTERNAL
SUBJECT: PERETZ: REMOVE ILLEGAL OUTPOSTS, SPEED UP PEACE 
PROCESS 
 
REF: TEL AVIV 7059 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: Labor Party Chairman Amir Peretz, who has 
tried to focus the Israeli electorate on economic issues 
(reftel), recently criticized the proliferation of Israeli 
outposts and expansion of settlements in the West Bank as 
damaging to Israel's international reputation and to 
prospects for developing the Negev and the Galilee.  Peretz 
also criticized the roadmap process in favor of immediate 
final status talks with the Palestinians, a stance that may 
soon evolve into a more fleshed-out platform calling for 
possible long-term leasing of West Bank settlements from the 
Palestinians based on a "Hong Kong" model.  End Summary. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Outposts And Settlements "Damaging" 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) In recent media interviews, Labor Party Chairman 
Amir Peretz has begun to stake out positions on the peace 
process and security issues, and has been particularly 
critical of Prime Minister Sharon's policy toward illegal 
outposts.  He told the Jerusalem Post December 26 that, were 
he elected prime minister, he would "immediately adopt the 
recommendations of the Talia Sasson report and dismantle the 
illegal outposts."  Ha'aretz December 28 quoted Peretz as 
saying, "The outposts are damaging Israel's image as a lawful 
state.  While Sharon continues funneling resources to the 
outposts he ignores the periphery towns, the Negev and the 
Galilee."  Peretz said he considers "the fact that Sharon is 
considering reaching a compromise between the rule of law and 
the Yesha council (of the West Bank settlements)" an "unheard 
of scandal," according to a Ha'aretz report.  Peretz 
submitted a bill to the Knesset November 16 that would grant 
compensation to any West Bank settlement where 60 percent of 
the residents agreed to leave voluntarily.  He reportedly 
intends for this bill to preserve the momentum of 
disengagement from the Gaza Strip and four northern West Bank 
settlements. 
 
-------------------------- 
Peretz Critical of Roadmap 
-------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) In other reports, Peretz all but dismissed the 
relevance of the roadmap.  According to Yedioth Ahronoth, 
Peretz told 25 European Union diplomats December 8 that "the 
road map is a formula for utter political stagnation that 
could last for decades.  It is a waste of our time."  Yedioth 
reported that he argued further that "the road map is not 
sacred, and is also a condition for negotiations on the final 
status arrangement.  It can be skipped."  Peretz also spoke 
to Yedioth about Israel's relations with Palestinian 
Authority Chairman Mahmud Abbas.  "I do not accept the 
approach that there is no partner," Peretz said, because it 
"perpetuates the conflict between the Israelis and the 
Palestinians." 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Peretz backpedaled somewhat December 10 from his 
criticism of the roadmap, when he told Yedioth that he is 
opposed to canceling the roadmap agreement, since it was 
signed by the two sides with international backing and 
supervision.  "The map's problem is that it is given to many 
interpretations," Peretz explained, "and can be acceptable 
both to the extreme right and the extreme left.  There is the 
possibility of a Palestinian state in this plan, but also the 
possibility of a deep freeze."  Labor MK and close Peretz 
confidante Yuli Tamir confirmed to Poloff December 29 that 
Peretz does not dismiss the roadmap, but rather believes it 
is open to interpretation and to attempts to stall the peace 
process. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Peretz also found fault with the roadmap in recent 
media reports because it calls for a provisional Palestinian 
state, which he said "will remain hostile towards Israel, 
whereas the Palestinian state in the final status arrangement 
will be of a friendly nature to Israel.  The final status 
arrangement should be accelerated instead of the roadmap." 
In a December 12 interview with Ma'ariv, Peretz again 
stressed this position, stating, "I am in favor of a final 
status arrangement, in favor of quick negotiations 
immediately after the elections."  Tamir said that Peretz 
believes that terrorism can be prevented by empowering those 
Palestinians who want to negotiate with Israel.  She said 
that these Palestinians need to show they can deliver 
something to the people. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Tamir also confirmed that Labor is also discussing 
inclusion of a so-called "Hong Kong" model for inclusion in 
its peace process platform, as reported December 28 in 
Ha'aretz.  This option would provide for the long-term 
leasing by the GOI of settlement blocs from the Palestinians, 
adopting the model of Great Britain and China with regard to 
Hong Kong.  (Comment: We are uncertain of the extent of 
Peretz's  knowledge of Asian history.  Hong Kong (Hong Kong 
island and Kowloon) was ceded in perpetuity to Britain after 
China's defeat in the Opium Wars.  The New Territories were 
leased to Britain by the Qing Dynasty government in 1898 
under duress.  This is hardly a historical model that a 
left-leaning Labor politician should want to emulate to solve 
the settlement question.  End comment.) 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
CRETZ