05TELAVIV1210
WB/G SITREP: MARCH 1, 2005 (1300 HOURS LOCAL) --
Tue Mar 01 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEL AVIV 001210 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR BURNS/SATTERFIELD/DIBBLE; 
NEA/SA/EX FOR RICHIE; DEPT FOR DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR 
DS/IP/NEA; 
NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN; USAID FOR DCHA, DCHA/FPP, PRM FOR 
DEWEY/GREENE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG PHUM PREL PTER ASEC CASC GZ IS
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: MARCH 1, 2005 (1300 HOURS LOCAL) -- 
WEST BANK CLASHES INJURE SIX; GAZA QUIET OVERNIGHT 
 
This is a joint ConGen Jerusalem/Embassy Tel Aviv cable. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: Palestinian landowners and Israeli and 
Palestinian demonstrators clashed with Israeli Border Police 
during a protest against the construction of the separation 
barrier near the village of Bayt Surik, west of Jerusalem. 
One Border Police officer was injured.  In Jerusalem, at 
least three Palestinian youths sustained light injuries in 
clashes with Israeli Border policemen on February 28 in the 
Shu,fat refugee camp following an incident in which border 
policeman reportedly harassed with Palestinian girls passing 
through the checkpoint at the entrance to the camp.  Israeli 
Police on March 1 detained Shaykh Taysir Tammimi, the chief 
justice of the Palestinian religious court, after he 
reportedly attempted to enter Jerusalem without a permit.  As 
of 1600 hours, Palestinian lawyers were attempting to secure 
the release of Shaykh Tammimi from Israeli custody at the 
Russian Compound.  The IDF on February 28 discovered a 
vehicle packed with, according to press reports, some 300 
kilograms of explosives in the West Bank village of Arraba 
southwest of Jenin.  Israeli sappers defused the bomb.  An 
Israeli security official stated that PA security forces 
cooperated with the IDF in tracking the vehicle.  The Gaza 
Strip was largely quiet overnight February 28-March 1.  End 
Summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Attack/Injury: Palestinian gunmen on February 28 wounded 
two Israeli security guards near the Israeli settlement of 
Kiryat Sefer, west of Ramallah.  There were no claims of 
responsibility. 
 
-- Injury: An Israeli Border policeman sustained light 
injuries from rocks thrown by demonstrators during a February 
28 protest against the building of the separation barrier 
near Bayt Surik  (See &Demonstrations/Clashes8). 
 
--Injuries: At least three Palestinian youths on February 28 
sustained light injuries during clashes with Israeli Border 
police at the checkpoint into the Shu,fat refugee camp  (See 
&Clashes8). 
 
-- Injury: Palestinians on March 1 clashed with the IDF in 
Yatta village south of Hebron.  According to witnesses, IDF 
soldiers reportedly beat a Palestinian that had thrown stones 
at the soldiers. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) ARRESTS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Arrest: Israeli Police March 1 detained Shaykh Taysir 
Tammimi, the chief justice of the Palestinian religious 
court, after he reportedly attempted to enter Jerusalem 
without a permit.  As of 1600 hours, Palestinian lawyers were 
attempting to secure the release of Shaykh Tammimi from 
Israeli custody at the Russian Compound. 
 
-- Arrests: The IDF overnight February 28 ) March 1 arrested 
a total of seven Palestinians in the Tulkarm area.  In 
addition, the IDF arrested four Fatah activists from the 
village of Azoun near Qalqiliya. 
 
-- Closure: The IDF tightened its closure around Tulkarm in 
the wake of the February 25 suicide bombing in Tel Aviv. 
 
-- Incursion: The IDF on March 1 entered Tamoun village near 
Jenin to conduct house-to-house searches.  As of 1600 hours, 
there have been no reported arrests. 
 
-- Security Development: The IDF on February 28 discovered a 
vehicle packed with, according to press reports, some 300 
kilograms of explosives in the West Bank village of Arraba 
southwest of Jenin.  Israeli sappers defused the bomb.  An 
Israeli security official stated that PA security forces 
cooperated with the IDF in tracking the vehicle. 
 
-- Shooting Incident: Palestinian gunmen on February 28 fired 
gunshots and a grenade at an IDF vehicle traveling in the old 
city of Nablus.  There were no injuries reported from this 
incident.  An IDF search of the area resulted in no arrests. 
 
-- Demonstrations/Clashes: Palestinian landowners and Israeli 
and Palestinian demonstrators clashed with Israeli Border 
Police February 28 during a protest against the construction 
of the separation barrier near the village of Bayt Surik west 
of Jerusalem. 
 
-- Clashes: Palestinians clashed with Israeli Border 
policemen on February 28 in the Shu,fat refugee camp in 
Jerusalem following an incident in which border policeman 
reportedly harassed with Palestinian girls passing through 
the checkpoint at the entrance to the camp. 
 
-- Deportation: The IDF on February 28 deported Ibrahim Abu 
Aisha, originally from the Dheisheh refugee camp in 
Bethlehem, to the Gaza Strip after he had served 14 months of 
administrative detention.  The Israeli authorities accuse Abu 
Aisha of being a Hamas operative. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- Israeli radio quoted a senior Israeli security official on 
March 1 stating that Israeli-Palestinian security talks would 
resume next week following the return of PA President Abbas 
from the London conference. 
 
-- PA Minister of Youth and Sports Ahmad Sakher Bseiso told 
Voice of Palestine radio on March 1 that he had contacted all 
Palestinian factions, including Hamas and Palestine Islamic 
Jihad, who had reaffirmed their commitment to the cease-fire. 
 Bseiso added that the Palestinian factions have distanced 
themselves from the February 25 suicide bombing in Tel Aviv. 
 
-- Palestinian media sources reported March 1 that the IDF 
had handed over land confiscation orders in Jaba, village 
near Ramallah. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injuries: Nil. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: Nil. 
 
-- Shootings: The IDF reported that Palestinian militants 
launched one shooting attack February 28 at an IDF mobile 
patrol northwest of Khan Yunis.  No injuries were reported. 
 
-- Explosions: The IDF reported that an explosive device was 
found and safely deactivated February 28 one kilometer 
northeast of Netzer Hazani, in the Gush Katif settlement 
bloc.  Israeli media reported that the device weighed some 40 
kilograms and was attached to the settlement perimeter fence. 
 
-- Explosions: UNRWA reported that the IDF set and detonated 
explosive devices February 28 near Sufa Crossing, in what was 
reportedly a search for tunnels in the area. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS: 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was open March 1, with a major detour at Netzarim 
Junction.  Abu Khouli is open only for public transportation; 
no private vehicles are allowed to cross. 
 
-- Erez Crossing was open for internationals and for a 
limited number of Palestinians February 28, and 983 laborers 
and 125 merchants crossed into Israel. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone was open February 28 and 501 
laborers entered the zone. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers March 1, 
but was open for the import of aggregates used in 
construction. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was open for limited imports and exports 
March 1. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open for arrivals and departures March 
¶1. 
-- Tel al-Sultan checkpoint was closed March 1.  Toufah 
checkpoint was open for residents of al-Mowassi, except for 
males between the ages of 16 to 35. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- UNRWA reported that residents of the Jabaliya refugee camp 
demonstrated March 1 in Jabaliya, demanding that UNRWA 
rebuild their homes demolished in the September-October 2004 
IDF operations in the area.  Demonstrators claim that UNRWA 
is unfairly focusing its reconstruction efforts on the 
southern areas. 
 
-- Palestinian sources and UNRWA reported that al-Azhar 
University in Gaza City was closed for three days beginning 
February 28 pending resolution of a dispute between students 
and the newly-appointed head of the university, Dr. Hani 
Nijem.  The dispute reportedly centers around administrative 
issues, including tuition, fees, and diploma qualifications. 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
KURTZER