05TELAVIV4053
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Tue Jun 28 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

280943Z Jun 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 TEL AVIV 004053 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1. Disengagement 
 
¶2. Iran 
 
¶3. U.S. - Israel Relations 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Disengagement issues: Yediot quoted Gush Katif settlers 
as saying that the extremists that are confronting 
soldiers and causing trouble do not represent them and 
that the IDF should have kicked them out when they were 
fewer in number. 
Yediot reported on a dramatic turnaround in the 
Palestinian stance regarding the houses in Gush Katif - 
- the P.A. is now refusing to clear the rubble that 
would remain should Israel follow through with plans to 
demolish these structures. 
Yediot cited P.A.'s National Security Advisor Jibril 
Rajoub as saying that during the disengagement, 5,000 
Palestinian policemen will surround the evacuated 
settlements in order to prevent terror and plunder. 
Yediot reported that Bethlehem would be transferred to 
Palestinian control this weekend. 
 
Jerusalem Post headlined that according to sources in 
Washington, the administration is considering giving 
Israel USD 1 billion in a post-disengagement aid 
package to develop the Negev and the Galilee. 
 
All media covered the silent demonstration that was 
organized by the Yesha Council on Monday.  According to 
the organizers, 40,000 cars took part in the protest 
but according to Yediot only 2,000 cars participated. 
All media reported that the police and other security 
forces are getting ready for the "real" demonstration 
that is expected to take place on Wednesday mobilizing 
the more extreme groups of settlers. Many roads are 
expected to be blocked.  Ha'aretz reported that dozens 
of psychologists will accompany policemen and IDF 
soldiers in the coming month and during the 
disengagement pullout in order to help them cope with 
the situation.  Ha'aretz reported that only settlers 
who will willingly evacuate their houses will be 
eligible for trailers in the temporary neighborhood in 
Niztan. 
 
Maariv published parts of an interview held with IAF 
Commander, Eliezer Shkedi, in which he said that the 
Russian Anti-Aircraft missiles are about to arrive in 
Syria. 
 
All media reported that an IDF soldier was convicted of 
the manslaughter of Tom Hurdnall, a British peace 
activist in 2003. 
 
The media reported that a Syrian soldier opened fire on 
an IDF patrol near the border with Israel in the Golan 
Heights on Monday.  IDF Radio this morning reported 
that Syria denied the shooting. 
Ha'aretz reported that Housing Minister Isaac Herzog 
has told the ministerial committee on settlements that 
construction work in 50 settlements has been suspended. 
Ha'aretz reported that the U.S. administration is 
demanding Israel's prompt signature in an agreement to 
install and operate monitoring systems at the Haifa 
Port. 
 
Jerusalem Post reported that USAID denies allegations 
made by Palestinian Media Watch (PMW), an Israeli group 
that claims that money directed for P.A. university 
campuses helped the Hamas. 
 
----------------- 
¶1. Disengagement: 
----------------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized: 
"Whether refusal comes from ideology or ignorance, our 
society must defend itself not only by punishing the 
perpetrators, but by maintaining the stigma against 
political refusal and bolstering democratic values 
through civic education." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"The Courage to Defend Democracy" 
 
Conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized 
(June 28): "Political refusal is nothing to be proud 
of, and both sides know it.  Disengagement opponents 
who are now blithely urging refusal were the first to 
be appalled at left-wing calls to refuse to serve in 
the territories.... The refuser, more than advancing 
his own cause, is undermining the institutions on which 
we all depend for our lives, our security, and our 
existence.... Whether refusal comes from ideology or 
ignorance, our society must defend itself not only by 
punishing the perpetrators, but by maintaining the 
stigma against political refusal and bolstering 
democratic values through civic education.  Defenders 
of democracy need as much courage, tenacity and 
creativity as those who, deliberately or through 
ignorance, would undermine what we must all hold most 
dear." 
-------- 
¶2. Iran: 
-------- 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Senior Arab affairs commentator Zvi Barel wrote in 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: "The Iranian public 
did not 'betray' Washington in last week's elections. 
It simply remained an Iranian public that first 
considers its government's internal policy, its 
economic situation and its national pride." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"Not a Betrayal" 
 
Senior Arab affairs commentator Zvi Barel wrote in 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (June 28): "The 
Iranian public did not 'betray' Washington in last 
week's elections.  It simply remained an Iranian public 
that first considers its government's internal policy, 
its economic situation and its national pride. It did 
not elect the man who let it down over the past eight 
years or promised new relations with America, but the 
man who promised jobs for 30 percent of the unemployed 
and welfare programs for the poor -- just as any public 
anywhere else in the world does.  Furthermore, the 
reformists did not have an election promise from Bush 
that they could wave around and vow that the United 
States would change its policy toward Iran if the 
president was elected from among them.  In fact, 
Washington, which is now so frightened by the results 
of the election, did not do much at all to bolster the 
reformists over the past eight years, thus allowing 
Russia, China, India and Pakistan to become stronger 
allies and wield a greater influence over Iran.  Is 
Iran more frightening than ever now? Not necessarily. 
Iran is not an insane state, and its citizens, despite 
the oppression, know how to rally the street into 
action when things are bad for them.  They were the 
ones who elected more liberal representatives as a 
result of their disappointment with the representatives 
of the revolution; and they are the ones who changed 
the government now." 
 
--------------------------- 
¶3. U.S. - Israel Relations: 
--------------------------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Aluf Benn wrote in 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: "China is not a 
godforsaken outpost in Samaria, and if the Americans 
are anxious about it, they expect Israel to act 
accordingly and not do whatever it fancies -- or else 
it will be at the receiving end of sanctions and 
threats, until it gets the message and promises good 
behavior." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
"China is Not an Outpost" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Aluf Benn wrote in 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (June 28): "The 
current crisis in the military relations with the 
United States could have been prevented, had the 
military establishment evinced a willingness to change. 
Its conservatism and narrow horizons led to the clash 
with the Pentagon, and Israel will now sign a 
'surrender agreement,' and will also apparently bid 
farewell to some senior people at the Defense 
Ministry.... In the relations between Israel and the 
United States, there is a 'triangle of interests.'  The 
Americans accept Israel's primacy on the Palestinian 
issue, which is perceived as essential for Israel. 
Their policy is coordinated with dictates from 
Jerusalem, and they turn a blind eye to the Jewish 
settlements in the territories and the outposts. 
Beyond the Jordan River and the desert, in relations 
with Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Jordan, they take Israel's 
concerns into consideration and restrain sales of 
weapons to Arab armies. But Asia is an American playing 
field.  China is not a godforsaken outpost in Samaria, 
and if the Americans are anxious about it, they expect 
Israel to act accordingly and not do whatever it 
fancies -- or else it will be at the receiving end of 
sanctions and threats, until it gets the message and 
promises good behavior." 
KURTZER