05TELAVIV355
WB/G SITREP: A TOTAL OF FIVE PALESTINIANS KILLED
Thu Jan 20 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEL AVIV 000355 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR BURNS/SATTERFIELD/DIBBLE; 
NEA/SA/EX FOR RICHIE; DEPT FOR DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR 
DS/IP/NEA; 
NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN; USAID FOR DCHA, DCHA/FPP, PRM FOR 
DEWEY/GREENE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG PHUM PREL PTER ASEC CASC GZ IS
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: A TOTAL OF FIVE PALESTINIANS KILLED 
AND TWO IDF SOLDIERS WOUNDED IN GAZA: JANUARY 20, 2005 
(1200 HOURS LOCAL) 
 
 
ConGen Jerusalem is closed January 20. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: Two IDF soldiers were wounded January 19 
southeast of the Erez Crossing, near Nissanit, when 
Palestinian militants fired an anti-tank missile at a 
bulldozer they were operating.  A total of five Palestinians 
were killed and another six were injured January 19-20 in 
Gaza clashes.  IDF troops discovered an eight-meter-deep 
tunnel shaft in the al-Salaam quarter of Rafah January 19 
during excavations in the area.  Limited talks between the 
IDF and Palestinian security forces in Gaza resumed January 
18, according to a statement issued by PM Sharon's office and 
Israeli media.  Diplomatic talks, however, remain suspended 
until the Palestinians "have taken tangible steps to halt 
terrorist actions and the firing of Qassam rockets and mortar 
shells."  Israeli media also reported that Palestinian 
security forces would deploy in the northern Gaza Strip in 
the coming days in order to prevent Qassam rocket fire into 
Israel.  End Summary. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Palestinian sources reported that IDF soldiers 
killed a Palestinian January 19 six kilometers east of Morag. 
 The IDF said that warning shots had been fired towards the 
man. 
 
-- Deaths: The IDF reported that soldiers shot and killed two 
Palestinians January 19 during an IDF incursion into the area 
between Karni and Nahal Oz Crossings after the militants 
threw hand grenades at troops operating there (see 
"Incursions/Demolitions"). 
 
-- Deaths: UNRWA and Israeli media reported that two 
Palestinians were killed January 19 near Bayt Hanoun during 
an exchange of fire between Palestinian militants and IDF 
soldiers.  The two Palestinians were attempting to plant a 
bomb, according to Israeli media (see 
"Incursions/Demolitions"). 
 
-- Injury: The IDF reported that IDF tank fire injured one 
Palestinian January 20 near an IDF outpost west of Khan Yunis. 
 
-- Injuries: The IDF reported that two IDF soldiers were 
wounded January 19 when Palestinians militants fired an 
anti-tank missile at a bulldozer they were operating 
southeast of the Erez Crossing, near Nissanit (see 
"Mortars/Rockets").  Israeli media reported that three 
soldiers were wounded in the same attack. 
 
-- Injuries: The IDF reported that three Palestinians were 
wounded January 18 when IDF soldiers fired on them as they 
tried to cross Abu Khouli checkpoint on foot. 
 
-- Injury: UNRWA reported that a 12-year-old boy was injured 
January 18 during an exchange of fire between IDF soldiers 
and Palestinian militants in the al-Zoroub neighborhood of 
the Rafah. 
 
-- Injury: The IDF reported that one Palestinian was wounded 
by an IDF operational dog after the man tried to flee a 
search and arrest operation in Rafah (see 
"Incursions/Demolitions"). 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: The IDF reported that Palestinian 
militants fired one Qassam rocket at Dugit settlement January 
19, and one mortar shell and one anti-tank missile at IDF 
soldiers southeast of the Erez Crossing, near Nissanit, the 
same day. 
 
-- Shootings: The IDF reported that Palestinian militants 
launched a total of six shooting attacks in the Gaza Strip 
January 18-19. 
 
-- Explosions: The IDF reported that IDF soldiers discovered 
and safely disposed of two explosive devices January 19 near 
an IDF outpost south of Rafah. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) INCURSIONS/DEMOLITIONS: 
 
-- UNRWA reported that IDF bulldozers excavated areas in the 
al-Salaam quarter of Rafah January 19, while soldiers carried 
out house searches in the area.  The IDF and Israeli media 
reported January 20 that soldiers had discovered an 
eight-meter-deep tunnel shaft in Rafah during the searches. 
 
-- UNRWA reported that IDF undercover units supported by IDF 
armored vehicles entered and searched the area between Karni 
and Nahal Oz Crossings January 19.  Palestinian militants 
fired small arms and threw hand grenades at the soldiers, 
while bulldozers leveled ground in the area (see "Deaths"). 
 
-- UNRWA reported that five IDF tanks and two bulldozers 
excavated an area near Bayt Hanoun January 19, while IDF 
troops carried out house searches in the area.  IDF soldiers 
and militants clashed throughout the day, with militants 
firing small arms and reportedly trying to plant bombs (see 
"Deaths"). 
 
¶4.  (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS: 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was re-opened January 20, with a major detour 
remaining in place at Netzarim Junction.  Only public 
transportation is allowed through Abu Khouli. 
 
-- Erez Crossing was open for internationals, but closed for 
Palestinians January 20. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone remained closed January 20. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing remained closed January 20. 
 
-- Karni Terminal remained closed January 20. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal remained closed January 20. 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan and Toufah checkpoints were closed January 
¶20. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS 
 
-- Limited talks between the IDF and Palestinian security 
forces in Gaza resumed January 18, according to a statement 
issued by PM Sharon's office and Israeli media.  Diplomatic 
talks, however, remain suspended until the Palestinians "have 
taken tangible steps to halt terrorist actions and the firing 
of Qassam rockets and mortar shells." 
 
-- Israeli media reported that Palestinian security forces 
would deploy in the northern Gaza Strip in the coming days in 
order to prevent Qassam rocket fire into Israel. 
 
-- Israeli media reported that the IDF is planning to re-open 
the Rafah Terminal January 21. 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
KURTZER