06ABIDJAN1393
COTE D'IVOIRE: 2006 COUNTRY REPORT ON TERRORISM
Tue Dec 19 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Abidjan
VZCZCXYZ0026
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHAB #1393 3531653
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 191653Z DEC 06
FM AMEMBASSY ABIDJAN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2321
INFO RUEILB/NCTC WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS ABIDJAN 001393 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
S/CT FOR RHONDA SHORE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PTER ASEC PGOV IV
SUBJECT: COTE D'IVOIRE: 2006 COUNTRY REPORT ON TERRORISM 
 
¶1.  General Assessment:  Cote d'Ivoire does not engage in any 
major counterterrorism efforts as terrorist groups are not 
known to be present and thus terrorist activity is not a 
percieved threat in this country.  Cote d'Ivoire has been in 
the throes of a political-military crisis since 2002 which 
has left the country politically and geographically divided. 
Despite the instability in country, violence associated with 
the division has not been associated with any international 
terrorist organizations, and there is little evidence to 
indicate threat of terrorist attacks.  It is likely that Cote 
d'Ivoire will cooperate in extraditing known terrorists 
should such a case arise.  The judicial system would likely 
respond cooperatively in assisting with U.S. counter 
terrorist efforts.  Cote d'Ivoire does not provide political 
or financial support to any known international terrorist 
organization.  While some Lebanese private communities living 
in Cote d'Ivoire are known to be active in donating personal 
income to Hizballah, it is unlikely that the government of 
Cote d'Ivoire (GOCI) supports or subsidizes this, allthough 
it is likely that the GOCI is aware of this.  The GOCI does 
not provide diplomatic support through recognition or 
privileges to any international terrorist organization, and 
Cote d'Ivoire is not a safe haven for terrorist groups.  It 
is unlikely that Cote d'Ivoire's military and technical 
services would or could provide weapons of mass destruction 
or assistance in obtaining or developing such weapons to 
terrorist organization. 
 
¶2.  Safe Haven Assessment:  The safe haven assessment 
examines the extent of knowledge by the GOCI about terrorist 
activities in country and actions taken by the GOCI with 
regard to antiterrorist measures.  As the GOCI is primarily 
engaged in resolving the ongoing political crisis, the focus 
of intelligence in Cote d'Ivoire is directed within the 
region.  As such, both the government-controlled southern 
regions and the rebel-held northern areas are tightly 
observed by their respective ruling political parties, and it 
is probable that the GOCI would be aware of terrorist 
activities were they to exist. 
 
Actions taken by the GOCI with regard to eliminating 
terrorist safe havens, cooperating with U.S. antiterrorism 
efforts and/or preventing the proliferation and trafficking 
in weapons of mass destruction through the territory of the 
country are difficult to evaluate as international terrorism 
and proliferation or trafficking of weapons of mass 
destruction are not considered likely threats in Cote 
d'Ivoire.  It is very likely that Cote d'Ivoire would 
cooperate with U.S. antiterrorism efforts, especially in a 
case concerning the welfare of U.S. Citizens.  Cote d'Ivoire 
is broadly supportive of 
U.S. goals related to weapons of mass destruction. 
 
¶3.  Terrorist Groups/Organizations:  It is important to note 
that there has been little to no activity of known terrorist 
groups in Cote d'Ivoire;  there have been no known kidnapping 
attempts against U.S. citizens during the preceding five 
years, or any known attempts to obtain or develop any weapons 
of mass destruction in Cote d'Ivoire.  However, it is known 
that select private Lebanese communities in West Africa 
including Cote d'Ivoire are major donors to Hizballah and 
associated entities.  Hizballah is present within parts of 
the population as a political movement, but is not considered 
to actively engage in or plan for terrorist activities in 
Cote d'Ivoire.  There is no perceived threat from the 
Hizballah-supporting private populations in Cote d'Ivoire and 
no support from the GOCI, either financially or politically 
for Hizballah.  There have been no provisions of significant 
military or paramilitary training or transfer of weapons by 
GOCI to any known international terrorist group or provision 
of diplomatic recognition or privileges by the GOCI to these 
groups.  Additionally, there has been no provision by the 
GOCI of safe haven from prosecution to these groups, although 
there have been no known cases of attempts by international 
terrorist group to seek safe haven from prosecution in Cote 
d'Ivoire. 
 
¶4.  Foreign Government Cooperation:  In the last five years 
there has not been a public case in which the U.S. has sought 
cooperation in the investigation or prosecution of a specific 
act of international terrorism against U.S. citizens or 
interests. 
Hooks