06ALMATY456
KAZAKHSTAN: RUSSIANS HOST CTAG MEETING
Tue Feb 07 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
US Office Almaty
VZCZCXRO7788
PP RUEHDBU RUEHLN RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHTA #0456/01 0380343
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 070343Z FEB 06
FM AMEMBASSY ALMATY
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3959
INFO RUCNCIS/CIS COLLECTIVE
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 2070
RUEHBUL/AMEMBASSY KABUL 0132UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ALMATY 000456 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/CACEN (J. MUDGE, M. O'MARA), S/CT (D. 
FRANZ) 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PTER RS KZ
SUBJECT: KAZAKHSTAN: RUSSIANS HOST CTAG MEETING 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  During the first CTAG of the Russian G-8 
presidency, representatives of G-8 embassies discussed the 
threats to Kazakhstan posed by international terrorism, 
organized crime, and drug trafficking.  While expressing 
general satisfaction with the GOK's approach to 
counterterrorism issues, participants noted certain 
deficiencies with regard to domestic legislation and 
operational cooperation.  The existence of terrorist groups 
with links to international networks was also noted.  All 
participants concurred that the situation in Afghanistan was 
the most important external factor in regional stability. 
The Russian ambassador stated that the GOR has proposed the 
creation of an anti-narcotics security zone around 
Afghanistan.  End summary. 
 
¶2. (U) In their capacity as president of the G-8 for 2006, 
the Russians hosted a meeting of the Counterterrorism Action 
Group (CTAG) in Almaty on February 1.  The U.S. and UK 
ambassadors and representatives of the Canadian, German, 
French, and Japanese embassies attended.  The Italians were 
unable to participate as their Embassy has moved to Astana. 
 
-------------------- 
Russian Presentation 
-------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Russian Ambassador Vladimir Babichev opened the 
discussion with general remarks regarding the importance of 
the CTAG process and Kazakhstan's counterterrorism record. 
Babichev indicated that the GOR would host a "larger" CTAG 
in Moscow in February to discuss the results of regional 
meetings, and proposed a draft protocol for participants' 
approval (see para. 12).  He stated that representatives of 
the GOK would be invited to future CTAG meetings in 
Kazakhstan. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Babichev cited international terrorism, organized 
crime, and narcotrafficking as threats requiring broad 
international cooperation to address.  He underscored the 
importance of coalitions between "state and society." 
Babichev cited Afghanistan as the prime external factor 
impacting Kazakhstan's security.  Conceding that the threat 
had decreased following international intervention and 
elections, Babichev underscored continuing problems among 
ethnic groups and the slowness of economic development.  He 
asserted that the Karzai government had not yet attained 
"the level of national concord and restoration of the 
country that took place during the government of President 
Nadzhibully."  He noted the continuing threat from extremist 
forces based in Pakistan, including UBL, and called for 
"equal interaction on the basis of transparency" between 
CSTO and NATO to address the threats.  Babichev referred to 
increasing narcotics flows from Afghanistan, noting both 
transit and consumption in Afghanistan.  He said the GOR 
favors the creation of an "anti-narcotics security zone" 
around Afghanistan. 
 
¶5. (SBU) With regard to internal factors, Babichev 
highlighted the stable political situation, including the 
"triumphal results" of the December presidential elections. 
He stated that effective political and economic policies, as 
well as religious and ethnic harmony, had hindered the 
growth of extremism.  Babichev highlighted the GOK's efforts 
to combat terrorism, religious extremism, and drug 
trafficking, as well as legislation such as the 1999 
terrorism law and the banning of Hizb'ut Tahrir. He noted 
the establishment of the interagency antiterrorist center 
and the fact that the UNSC held a meeting of the 
Counterterrorism Committee in Almaty in January 2005. 
Babichev also mentioned the discovery of the al Qaida- 
affiliated "Jamat Mojaheds of Central Asia" terrorist group 
in Kazakhstan.  The GOK has offered to host CARICC as part 
of the UN anti-drug program. 
 
--------- 
Reactions 
--------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Ambassador Ordway, asked to give the first 
reaction, said that the U.S. agreed with the overall 
analysis of the situation in Kazakhstan.  We are satisfied 
with the degree of the GOK's commitment to fighting 
terrorism.  Ordway gave an overview of U.S. CT assistance to 
Kazakhstan and noted that the GOK's awareness and 
cooperation had increased markedly in the wake of the July 
2004 Tashkent bombings.  He proposed that the draft protocol 
 
ALMATY 00000456  002 OF 003 
 
 
reflect the existence of terrorist groups with links to 
international networks.  Ambassador Babichev indicated that 
he supported such an addition. 
 
¶7. (SBU) UK Ambassador Paul Brummell highlighted the ongoing 
London Compact meeting on Afghanistan, where FM Tokayev was 
representing Kazakhstan.  He noted that HMG is taking the 
proposal of an anti-narcotics security zone very seriously, 
and was working with the countries bordering Afghanistan on 
a declaration of good neighborly relations.  The UK welcomes 
the GOK's interest in hosting CARICC.  Brummell noted that 
there was work to be done on implementing the UN CTC's 
recommendations regarding the Kazakhstani legislative 
framework. 
 
¶8. (SBU) French DCM Dominique Gentil and police attache Jean- 
Luc Debout expressed dissatisfaction with the level of 
concrete counterterrorism cooperation from the GOK.  Debout 
noted that France welcomed the GOK's interest in CARICC. 
The GOK believes that existing legislation did not 
adequately address terrorist financing.  He noted the 
existence of political will to take action against terrorism 
at the regional level, however.  He called for more 
operational cooperation rather than just agreements. 
 
¶9. (SBU) German DCM Joachim von Marschall highlighted the 
potential for terrorist activities in the surrounding 
countries surrounding and the existence of terrorist groups 
"sleeping" in Kazakhstan.  He noted that rapid economic 
development in Kazakhstan could bring certain societal 
changes which terrorist or extremist groups oppose, placing 
the country "on the radar screen."  He seconded the 
previously-expressed views that Kazakhstan's CT legislation 
needs work, particularly with reference to implementing 
UNSCR 1373 and 1624.  He called on G-8 countries to offer 
assistance in that regard. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Canadian First Secretary Mark Opgenorth seconded 
the addition proposed by the U.S. to the protocol.  The 
Canadian government shared the analysis that Afghanistan 
presented the greatest threat to regional stability; for 
that reason, he explained, the GOC has focused its CT 
activities to date on Afghanistan.  Opgenorth noted that CT 
assistance funding had recently been increased and might 
become available for Central Asia. 
 
¶11. (SBU) Japanese DCM Kiesi Matsuzaki noted that Japan also 
sees Afghanistan as crucial to the stability of Central 
Asia, and had provided significant assistance.  He commented 
that it might be useful to invite Kazakhstani 
counterterrorism specialists to Japan for consultations. 
 
-------- 
Protocol 
-------- 
 
¶12. (SBU) Text of the protocol to be shared with G-8 
capitals (Russian Embassy unofficial translation): 
 
On the 1st of February 2006 Ambassadors and representatives 
of the embassies of G-8 states held a working meeting of a 
"local" Counterterrorism Action Group (CTAG) on CT 
activities that are carried on in Kazakhstan and also 
exchanged opinions on probable requirements of Kazakhstan in 
gaining corresponding CT assistance. 
 
The discussion showed a wide range for CT cooperation in the 
framework of G-8 CTAG in Central Asia. 
 
During the meeting it was stated that Kazakh authorities 
purposefully and consistently fulfill the complex of 
antiterrorist measures closely coordinating bilaterally and 
multilaterally its efforts with international organizations 
and independent states.  But for all that an opinion that 
Kazakh government confidently ensures economic, social, and 
political stability in the country was expressed.  Thereupon 
it seems that within the next two or three years there is no 
place for terror threat aggravation in Kazakhstan. 
 
[U.S. addition:  Participants noted the activity in 
Kazakhstan of certain terrorist groups with links to 
international networks and agreed that continued domestic 
vigilance was necessary.]  At the same time during the 
meeting it was noticed that primary terrorist hazards for 
Kazakhstan are provoked by the external factors, closely 
related with an unstable situation in Afghanistan. 
 
ALMATY 00000456  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
Taking this into consideration, there is still some need in 
Kazakhstan in receiving information on other states and 
international organizations CT experience, as well as 
methodical assistance (which includes cutting of terrorism 
financing channels as well), and unified technical 
instruments for guarding and control.  Ideological 
confrontation to terrorism and extremist ideology in 
Kazakhstan gained in special importance. 
 
In the mean time it was stated, that Kazakhstan progress in 
CT policy obviously deserves attention and Kazakhstan 
experience could be useful for other countries. 
 
It was underlined, that such strategically important region 
for Europe as Central Asia should not fall out of touch with 
CT Committee of the UN Security Council.  In order to 
strengthen the cooperation between CT Committee and CTAG it 
seems advisable to put Kazakhstan on the list of visits of 
CT Committee for 2006. 
 
Kazakhstan's needs and plans of partners of CTAG shall be 
further examined during an additional meeting of G-8 embassy 
representatives in Kazakhstan in the first half of 2006. 
 
ORDWAY