06ANKARA2848
BLUE LANTERN LEVEL 3: PRE-LICENSE END USE CHECK OF
Thu May 18 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 002848 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/SE AND PM/DTTC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC KOMC TU
SUBJECT: BLUE LANTERN LEVEL 3: PRE-LICENSE END USE CHECK OF 
APPLICATION 05-989885 
 
REF: STATE 52311 
 
¶1. BEGIN SUMMARY: We met with officials from Kucuk Pazarli 
(KP) Kelip ve Makine Sanayi, Ltd., to discuss contract number 
05-989885 per reftel, and confirmed that KP appears to be a 
responsible recipient of USML items.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. During a May 1, 2006 meeting at KP's office in Sinjan, 
Ankara, KP General Coordinator Guner Kocak and co-owner Sefa 
Kucukpazarli were very forthcoming about their contract with 
Raytheon Aircraft.  Kocak chaired the meeting and answered 
all of our questions.  According to Kocak, KP was founded in 
1975 by Sefa Kucukpazarli's older brother, and carries the 
family name.  Kocak also stated that KP in the late 1990's 
had worked with another U.S. company, Boeing, on AEW&C 
aircraft that were purchased by, and are currently being 
delivered to, the Turkish military.  Kocak said that KP also 
has avionics contracts with Airbus (France), Augusta (Italy), 
and the Turkish military.  Kocak stated that KP has three 
separate offices: the main office in Sinjan on Avar Caddesi, 
a die/mould manufacturing facility in Ankara, and another 
smaller facility at a warehouse in Sinjan (purchased in the 
year 2000).  Kocak and Kucukpazarli said that KP found a 
niche in the Turkish defense industry by manufacturing dies, 
moulds, and lightweight sheet metal, primarily for the 
Turkish Aerospace Industries (TAI).  They showed us a 
professional promotional video that provided an excellent 
indication of what the company manufactured. 
 
¶3. Kocak said that KP's main office building, where we met, 
was purchased in 2005.  The facility appeared new, clean, and 
well-organized.  Kocak said that KP began work for the 
Turkish military in 2000 and that their contracts with the 
Turkish military have steadily grown.  Regarding the 
contract, Kocak said that in February 2006 TAI offered KP the 
opportunity to submit bids for work that TAI was doing for 
Ratheyon.  KP did so and won the contract.  Although KP has 
not previously done work for T-6 aircraft, Kocak claimed that 
TAI and Raytheon are thus far pleased with their assistance. 
Kocak and Kucukpazarli were familiar with USML licensing 
requirements from their work on the AEW&C project. 
 
¶4. Based on the site visit, the viewed documentation and the 
meeting with the senior KP officials, we believe that the 
proposed contract meets the appropriate end-use standards. 
 
Visit Ankara's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/eur/ankara/ 
 
WILSON