06BAGHDAD25
TEAM MEETS WITH IRAQIS TO DISCUSS NATIONAL
Tue Jan 03 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS BAGHDAD 000025 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PTER PGOV IZ
SUBJECT: TEAM MEETS WITH IRAQIS TO DISCUSS NATIONAL 
IDENTIFICATION CARD 
 
¶1.  (U) SUMMARY: Post supports the proof-of-concept proposed 
by the GOI and endorsed by a joint DOS-DOD team from 
Washington, who traveled to Baghdad to assess the Iraqis' 
national ID card proposal.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (U) A joint DOS-DOD team traveled to Baghdad to assess 
Iraq's Unified Identification Card Committee's proposal for a 
national ID card.  The team met with representatives from the 
Iraqi Ministry of Planning (MOP), Ministry of Interior (MOI), 
MNF-I and the Embassy to devise a way-ahead for USG 
involvement in the Iraqis' national ID card. 
 
¶3.  (U) To understand the Iraqis' concept of a national ID 
card the team met with MG Yaseen, MOI Director of the 
Department of Citizenship and Travel.  MG Yaseen is head of 
the Iraqis' "Unified Identification Card Committee" (UICC) 
set up jointly by MOI and MOP per the direction of Dr. Barham 
Salih, MOP.  The UICC was set up in October 2005 to craft a 
written proposal for the national ID card before the 15 
December elections.  MG Yaseen outlined the Iraqis' model of 
their national ID card plan and related the history of the 
Committee; he also delineated the Government of Iraq's needs 
for USG technical assistance.  Ideally, the national ID card 
will be issued to all Iraqi citizens in time for their 
October 2007 national census. 
 
¶4.  (U) In early December the committee's written proposal 
and additional memoranda were accepted by the Iraqi Council 
of Ministers.  As the champion of the project, Dr. Salih sent 
a letter to the Ambassador asking for technical assistance 
from the USG on a proof-of-concept for the Iraqi national ID 
card. 
 
¶5.  (U) The team then met with MOI and MOP reps to discuss 
their formal proposal and address funding concerns.  The 
Chief of Staff to MOP assured us the GOI will not be looking 
to the USG for future funding.  The only request is for the 
USG's funding of the proof-of-concept, to which OSD has 
agreed. Salih has formally taken the lead for soliciting 
funding from donor GCC nations for the national ID card.  He 
assured the Council of Ministers that other Gulf nations 
currently implementing their own national identification card 
systems (UAE, Oman, Bahrain and Saudi Arabia) have a vested 
interest in compatibility with the Iraqi national ID card. 
 
¶6.  (U) The proof-of-concept will include scanning of three 
civil registration facility records in Baghdad, setting up a 
database of citizens, choosing volunteers to add their 
biographical/biometric information to the database, vetting 
their data through the Iraqis' criminal Automated Fingerprint 
Identification System (AFIS) and issuing the volunteers a 
prototype national ID card.  The end-to-end test will utilize 
some of the technology currently in theater for DOD's 
Biometric Identification System for Access (BISA) program -- 
used for Coalition base access.  All proof-of-concept details 
will be decided upon by the Iraqi Committee. 
 
¶7.  (U) The proof-of-concept will be implemented during the 
period between elections and solidification of the GOI. 
LITT