06BEIJING8480
MAY 9 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: GUANTANAMO UIGHURS,
Tue May 09 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO8166
OO RUEHCN RUEHDBU RUEHGH RUEHLN RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHBJ #8480/01 1291036
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 091036Z MAY 06
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4662
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUCNCIS/CIS COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 0205
RUEHDO/AMEMBASSY DOHA PRIORITY 0179
RUEHKU/AMEMBASSY KUWAIT PRIORITY 0560
RUEHMK/AMEMBASSY MANAMA PRIORITY 0202
RUEHME/AMEMBASSY MEXICO PRIORITY 0348
RUEHBH/AMEMBASSY NASSAU PRIORITY 0096
RUEHNK/AMEMBASSY NOUAKCHOTT PRIORITY 0078
RUEHTI/AMEMBASSY TIRANA PRIORITY 0074
RUEHROV/AMEMBASSY VATICAN PRIORITY 0060
RHHMUNA/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HI PRIORITY
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA PRIORITY 1031
RUEHUNV/USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA PRIORITY 0911UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 BEIJING 008480 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM PARM PTER KNNP CH IR TW
 
BEIJING 00008480  001.2 OF 004 
 
SUBJECT:  MAY 9 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: GUANTANAMO UIGHURS, 
IRANIAN NUCLEAR ISSUE, VATICAN, U.S.-JAPAN ALLIANCE, 
CHINA-JAPAN MEETINGS, TANG TO NORTH KOREA, SUDAN, SCO, 
HUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL, SOUTH CHINA SEA, EAST TIMOR,  CHING 
CHEONG CASE, FM LI'S TRAVELS 
 
 
 Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  Key points made at the May 9 MFA press briefing 
are as follows: 
 
- China strongly opposes Albania's acceptance of the 
five Uighurs previously held at Guantanamo Bay, who 
Beijing considers East Turkestan terrorist suspects, 
and demands their immediate repatriation. 
 
- China does not support sanctions nor the "wanton use 
or threat of force" to handle the Iranian nuclear 
issue. 
 
- The Vatican did not respond to China's proposal on 
the recent selection of bishops, but subsequently made 
"wanton accusations." 
 
- Beijing hopes Washington will appreciate China's 
efforts to resolve bilateral economic and trade 
disputes. 
 
- The U.S.-Japan alliance should not target any third 
country. 
 
- The recent China-Japan strategic dialogue explored 
the possibility of holding a foreign ministers' 
meeting during an upcoming international event. 
 
- State Councilor Tang Jiaxuan recently visited North 
Korea, the MFA spokesperson confirmed without offering 
any details. 
 
- Beijing has sent peacekeepers to Sudan to help 
achieve a comprehensive peace settlement. 
 
- The Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) foreign 
ministers will meet May 15 in Shanghai.  Tajik FM 
Nazarov will pay an official visit to China May 11-18 
and Russian FM Lavrov will visit May 15-16. 
 
- China's participation in the UN Human Rights Council 
(HRC) will help promote the global human rights cause. 
 
- Beijing hopes to resolve disputes over the South 
China Sea by pursuing joint development. 
 
- The Chinese Government is deeply concerned about the 
security of Chinese people in East Timor. 
 
- The MFA spokesperson declined to offer any specific 
information on the case of detained journalist Ching 
Cheong, reiterating that the case will be handled 
according to the law. 
 
- FM Li Zhaoxing will visit Mexico, the Bahamas, 
Kuwait, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain, 
as well as make a technical stop in Mauritania, May 
17-25.  He will attend the May 23-24 Asia Cooperation 
Dialogue (ACD) meeting in Qatar.  End Summary. 
 
China Demands Repatriation of Uighur Detainees 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶2.  Asked during the regular May 9 MFA press briefing 
about Albania's acceptance of five Uighurs previously 
held in Guantanamo Bay, MFA Spokesperson Liu Jianchao 
expressed China's strong opposition to the arrangement 
made between the U.S. and Albanian Governments.  The 
five individuals accepted by Albania are by no means 
refugees, but rather suspected members of East 
Turkestan terrorist forces, which maintain close links 
to Al Qaeda and the Taliban and have been sanctioned 
 
BEIJING 00008480  002.2 OF 004 
 
SUBJECT:  MAY 9 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: GUANTANAMO UIGHURS, 
IRANIAN NUCLEAR ISSUE, VATICAN, U.S.-JAPAN ALLIANCE, 
CHINA-JAPAN MEETINGS, TANG TO NORTH KOREA, SUDAN, SCO, 
HUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL, SOUTH CHINA SEA, EAST TIMOR,  CHING 
CHEONG CASE, FM LI'S TRAVELS 
 
by the UNSC, Liu asserted.  The arrangement between 
Albania and the United States violates the UN Charter 
and international law.  Beijing has issued strong 
representations to both countries and demands the 
immediate repatriation of the five terrorist suspects. 
Asked whether this issue will damage U.S.-China 
counterterrorism cooperation, Liu remarked that 
enhancing counterterrorism cooperation serves the 
interests of China and other countries.  Beijing hopes 
other nations will make more efforts to strengthen 
cooperation in this area and not "vice versa," he 
concluded. 
 
Beijing Opposes Sanctions or Force against Iran 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶3.  Questioned by the Reuters correspondent about 
China's stance on incorporating in the UNSC draft 
resolution on Iran a clause invoking Chapter VII, Liu 
remarked that the Iranian nuclear issue has reached a 
crucial juncture.  China hopes the relevant parties 
will demonstrate flexibility, restraint and calm, 
refrain from taking actions that could further 
aggravate the situation and create conditions for a 
resumption of talks.  Emphasizing that the best 
solution is one reached through dialogue, Liu asserted 
that China never supports the "wanton use or threat of 
force."  Beijing is "opposed to the use of sanctions 
or threat of force" in handling international affairs, 
he said in response to a follow-up question.  China 
hopes that the parties will solve the matter in a 
peaceful and constructive manner. 
 
Increase in Vatican-Beijing Tensions 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶4.  Asked by a number of correspondents about the 
recent rise in tensions between China and the Vatican 
due to Beijing's recent appointments of Catholic 
bishops, Liu remarked that the Vatican is clear about 
China's position on the issue of appointments of 
Catholic clergy in China.  He stated that the PRC 
Constitution protects the Chinese people's freedom to 
believe or not believe in religion in accordance with 
the law, adding that the Chinese Government respects 
religious customs.  Over the past half-century China 
has "self-appointed" over 170 bishops who have 
contributed to the country's religious affairs.  The 
Chinese Government does not interfere in religious 
affairs, he argued. 
 
¶5.  Although Beijing and the Holy See have encountered 
some disagreements over the appointment of bishops, 
China has adopted a pragmatic approach in order to 
improve relations with the Vatican, Liu maintained. 
China has proposed shelving differences and seeking 
common ground, offering to discuss the selection of 
bishops with the Vatican.  The Holy See did not 
respond to Beijing's proposal, but subsequently made 
"wanton accusations."  These statements did not match 
its expressions of intent to improve relations with 
China.  Beijing hopes the Vatican will stop 
interfering in China's internal affairs, respect the 
will of China's churches and not create new obstacles 
to the development of bilateral ties, Liu remarked. 
China is sincere about bettering relations with the 
Vatican and is prepared to work with the Vatican to 
explore ways to enhance relations.  Beijing wishes the 
Holy See will adopt a correct approach to handling 
Taiwan in order create conditions for the 
normalization of ties. 
 
U.S. Treasury Report 
-------------------- 
 
BEIJING 00008480  003.2 OF 004 
 
SUBJECT:  MAY 9 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: GUANTANAMO UIGHURS, 
IRANIAN NUCLEAR ISSUE, VATICAN, U.S.-JAPAN ALLIANCE, 
CHINA-JAPAN MEETINGS, TANG TO NORTH KOREA, SUDAN, SCO, 
HUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL, SOUTH CHINA SEA, EAST TIMOR,  CHING 
CHEONG CASE, FM LI'S TRAVELS 
 
 
¶6.  Asked by the Bloomberg correspondent how Beijing 
would react to a possible U.S. designation of China as 
a currency manipulator in the upcoming Department of 
Treasury report, Liu stated that the Chinese 
Government has expounded on China's currency policy, 
which was reiterated by President Hu Jintao during his 
recent visit to the United States.  Beijing hopes 
Washington will appreciate China's efforts to resolve 
bilateral economic and trade disputes. 
 
U.S.-Japan Alliance 
------------------- 
 
¶7.  Asked to comment on the announced realignment of 
the U.S.-Japan alliance, Liu asserted that the U.S.- 
Japan alliance is a bilateral arrangement and should 
not exceed the bilateral framework.  The alliance 
should not target any third country and should respect 
the security concerns of the region. 
 
Sino-Japanese Dialogue, Possible FM Meeting 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  Several correspondents asked about the recent 
Sino-Japanese strategic dialogue and the possibility 
that the two foreign ministers will meet during the 
May 23-24 Asia Cooperation Dialogue (ACD) meeting in 
Qatar.  Liu noted that Executive Vice Foreign Minister 
Dai Bingguo and Japanese Vice Foreign Minister Shotaro 
Yachi held the fifth round of the China-Japan 
strategic dialogue May 7-9.  The two officials 
explored the possibility of holding a foreign 
ministers' meeting during an upcoming international 
event, an option that requires further study, Liu 
said.  EVFM Dai expounded on President Hu's remarks to 
the Japanese delegation of China-Japan friendship 
associations, requesting that the countries work 
together to remove obstacles to bilateral ties.  They 
also agreed to hold another meeting on the East China 
Sea Dispute, Liu noted, although he did not offer a 
specific date.  The two countries have major 
differences over the East China Sea issue.  China 
hopes the consultations will narrow differences and 
lead to a resolution. 
 
Tang to North Korea 
------------------- 
 
¶9.  Asked by the Phoenix correspondent about State 
Councilor Tang Jiaxuan's reported visit to North 
Korea, Liu confirmed that the visit occurred recently 
but declined to offer any details. 
 
PRC Peacekeepers to Sudan 
------------------------- 
 
¶10.  Responding to the AFP correspondent's question 
whether China plans to dispatch peacekeepers to Sudan, 
Liu expressed appreciation for the sincerity of the 
relevant parties in Sudan.  China is ready to work 
with the various parties to promote the Darfur peace 
agreement.  Liu said that Beijing has offered 
assistance to Sudan and the African Union and has sent 
peacekeepers to Sudan to help achieve a comprehensive 
peace settlement. 
 
SCO Foreign Ministers' Meeting 
------------------------------ 
 
¶11.  Liu announced that the Shanghai Cooperation 
Organization (SCO) foreign ministers will meet May 15 
in Shanghai and will concentrate on preparations for 
the June SCO Summit.  Asked by the UPI correspondent 
 
BEIJING 00008480  004.2 OF 004 
 
SUBJECT:  MAY 9 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: GUANTANAMO UIGHURS, 
IRANIAN NUCLEAR ISSUE, VATICAN, U.S.-JAPAN ALLIANCE, 
CHINA-JAPAN MEETINGS, TANG TO NORTH KOREA, SUDAN, SCO, 
HUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL, SOUTH CHINA SEA, EAST TIMOR,  CHING 
CHEONG CASE, FM LI'S TRAVELS 
 
whether the Iranian nuclear issue will be raised 
during upcoming SCO meetings, Liu stated that the SCO 
aims to promote regional dialogue, peace, stability 
and security.  SCO members will decide themselves 
whether to discuss the Iranian nuclear issue during 
the June Summit.  Liu reported that Tajik FM Nazarov 
will pay an official visit to China May 11-18 and 
Russian FM Lavrov will visit May 15-16.  Discussions 
between FM Lavrov and FM Li Zhaoxing will focus on 
strengthening the China-Russia strategic partnership 
and on maintaining regional peace and stability.  FM 
Lavrov will also meet with other Chinese leaders. 
 
UN Human Rights Council 
----------------------- 
 
¶12.  Asked whether China will apply for a seat on the 
newly formed UN Human Rights Council (HRC), Liu stated 
that Beijing supports the role of the HRC and believes 
China's participation will help promote the global 
human rights cause. 
 
Nansha Islands 
-------------- 
 
¶13.  Responding to the People's Daily correspondent's 
question about a Vietnamese mobile phone company's 
reported establishment of a mobile station on the 
Nansha (Spratley) Islands, Liu remarked that China 
maintains indisputable sovereignty over the Nansha 
Islands and adjacent waters.  Beijing hopes to resolve 
disputes over the South China Sea by pursuing joint 
development.  Any unilateral action taken on this 
territory is illegal, Liu argued. 
 
East Timor Unrest 
----------------- 
 
¶14.  Asked about the recent riots in Dili, Liu noted 
that some Chinese were injured and Chinese-owned shops 
were destroyed during the riots.  The Chinese 
Government is deeply concerned about the security of 
Chinese people in East Timor and the MFA has issued a 
travel warning to the country.  Chinese Embassy 
officers have visited the victims and urged local 
police to step up protection of Chinese residents. 
 
Detained Journalist Ching Cheong 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶15.  Asked for an update on the case of detained 
Singapore Straits Times journalist Ching Cheong, Liu 
declined to offer any specific information, 
reiterating that the case will be handled according to 
the law. 
 
FM Li's Upcoming Travels 
------------------------ 
 
¶16.  FM Li will visit Mexico, the Bahamas, Kuwait, 
Qatar, the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain, as well 
as make a technical stop in Mauritania, May 17-25, Liu 
reported.  FM Li will attend the second China-Mexico 
standing committee meeting and hold talks with 
President Fox and his Mexican counterpart.  He will 
also participate in the fifth ACD meeting in Qatar. 
RANDT