06BEIJING12531
JUNE 15 MFA PRESS BRIEFING:  IRAN/SCO SUMMIT,
Thu Jun 15 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO9998
OO RUEHCN RUEHDBU RUEHGH RUEHLN RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHBJ #2531/01 1661117
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 151117Z JUN 06
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9144
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUCNCIS/CIS COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHZP/AMEMBASSY PANAMA IMMEDIATE 0119
RHHMUNA/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HI IMMEDIATE
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA IMMEDIATE 1172
RUEHUNV/USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA IMMEDIATE 0982UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 BEIJING 012531 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PARM PHUM ASEC CH IR
SUBJECT: JUNE 15 MFA PRESS BRIEFING:  IRAN/SCO SUMMIT, 
U.S. CITIZEN SECURITY RISK, E.O. 13382 DESIGNATION, 
SIX-PARTY TALKS, JAPAN, UN ARMS REGISTER, ZHAO YAN, 
AFRICA, PANAMA 
 
REF: FBIS 20060615053036 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  Key points made at the June 15 MFA press briefing 
are as follows: 
 
-- Iranian President Ahmadinejad's remarks at the June 
15 Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) Summit 
reflected only Iran's position. 
 
-- Beijing welcomes Iran's willingness to negotiate 
with relevant parties to resolve the nuclear issue and 
hopes Tehran will respond positively to the package it 
has been offered. 
 
-- The Chinese Government attaches great importance to 
and is investigating reports from the U.S. Embassy on 
security risks to U.S. citizens. 
 
-- The U.S. Government's freezing of four Chinese 
companies' assets was "unreasonable and irresponsible" 
and undermined U.S.-China nonproliferation 
cooperation. 
 
-- The Six-Party Talks have been at an impasse for the 
past six months. 
 
-- China hopes Japanese leaders can remove the 
obstacles to bilateral relations and return relations 
to a normal track. 
 
-- While China attaches importance to the UN Register 
on Conventional Arms, Beijing suspended its 
participation in the Register after some countries 
used it to record arm sales to Taiwan. 
 
-- NY Times Researcher Zhao Yan is currently being 
tried, the MFA spokesperson said without elaborating. 
 
-- China's cooperation with Angola helps to promote 
the African nation's economic and social development. 
 
-- The Taiwan issue is the only factor hindering the 
development of China-Panama relations. 
 
-- President Wade of Senegal will visit China June 21- 
¶26.  End Summary. 
 
Ahmadinejad's Remarks at SCO Reflect Iran's Position 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶2.  The June 15 MFA press briefing was dominated by 
correspondents' questions on the Shanghai Cooperation 
Organization (SCO) Summit in Shanghai June 15 and 
particularly Iranian President Ahmadinejad's 
participation in the event.  Asked by the Bloomberg 
correspondent about Ahmadinejad's reported call for 
strengthening SCO cooperation to counter "domineering 
powers"(Ref A), MFA Spokesperson Jiang Yu asserted 
that Ahmadinejad's remarks reflected only Iran's 
position.  She argued that the SCO is an important 
force for maintaining regional as well as world peace 
and stability.  The SCO does not target any third 
party nor support confrontation.  The organization has 
made significant contributions to peace, stability and 
the democratization of international relations, Jiang 
remarked.   Asked whether China would accept Iran's 
reported invitation for SCO leaders to meet in Tehran, 
Jiang asserted that SCO members will study the various 
proposals raised at the Summit, adding that such 
decisions will be based on consensus within the SCO. 
 
¶3.  Questioned about the anticipated discussion of the 
Iran nuclear issue during President Hu Jintao's 
bilateral meeting with Ahmadinejad, Jiang reported 
that President Hu so far has met bilaterally with his 
Kazakh, Tajik and Uzbek counterparts, adding that they 
have signed several agreements.  Beijing advocates a 
peaceful resolution to the Iran nuclear issue and 
welcomes Iran's willingness to negotiate with relevant 
parties to achieve a resolution.  Jiang expressed the 
hope that Tehran will respond positively to the 
 
BEIJING 00012531  002 OF 004 
 
 
package it has been offered and that all the parties 
will make positive efforts.  Asked to confirm whether 
Iran's oil minister accompanied Ahmadinejad to the 
Summit, Jiang said she was unaware of any specific oil 
agreements signed with Iran but that energy 
cooperation is a component of normal China-Iran 
economic relations.  Bilateral trade reached USD 10.1 
billion in 2005 and was comprised mainly of 
transportation, communication and electricity 
projects.  On the topic of new SCO membership, she 
maintained that the SCO currently lacks the legal 
foundation for absorbing new members and current 
members are studying how to better integrate observer 
states into the SCO framework. 
 
¶4.  Responding to the Xinhua reporter's general 
question on the Summit, Jiang Yu noted that Summit 
participants summarized the SCO's achievements and 
planned for its future development.  In his speech, 
President Hu positively assessed the SCO's role in 
consolidating good neighborly relations and promoting 
regional peace and economic development.  He called on 
the SCO to continue promoting economic cooperation, 
peaceful development and cultural exchanges.  Summit 
participants released a joint declaration, a statement 
on international information security, several 
decisions on strengthening the SCO's internal 
structure and a joint press communique.  Officials 
signed security, economic, trade and education 
agreements.  Jiang remarked that the establishment of 
the business committee at the Summit will help 
facilitate direct exchanges between entrepreneurs from 
SCO countries and strengthen regional economic 
cooperation. 
 
China Investigating U.S. Embassy Threat Reports 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶5.  Asked by the Reuters correspondent about the U.S. 
Embassy's warning of a heightened security risk to 
U.S. citizens in China, Jiang asserted that China 
firmly opposes terrorism in any form.  The Chinese 
Government attaches great importance to these reports 
and is making efforts to investigate them.  China will 
adopt strong measures to protect foreign, including 
U.S., institutions and personnel, she stated. 
 
"No Evidence" to Support Designation under E.O. 13382 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶6.  Asked about the U.S. designation of four Chinese 
companies as supporters of weapons proliferation 
activities, Jiang alleged that the U.S. Government did 
not provide any evidence to justify freezing the 
assets of the four companies, and she specifically 
named the China Great Wall Industry Corporation 
(CGWIC).  Arguing that the decision was "unreasonable 
and irresponsible," she asserted that the U.S. move 
undermined U.S.-China nonproliferation cooperation and 
will not help bilateral relations.  China calls on the 
United States to abandon its "wrong practice" of 
sanctions or pressure.  Jiang said Beijing is firmly 
opposed to the proliferation of weapons of mass 
destruction and does not allow any firm or individual 
to support or engage in proliferation activities. 
China will handle violators of its nonproliferation 
policy or export controls according to the law.  China 
will implement its nonproliferation commitments and 
continue international cooperation in this area on the 
basis of equality and mutual respect. 
 
Six-Party Talks are at an Impasse 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  Noting media reports highlighted by the AFP 
correspondent about North Korean plans to launch 
intercontinental ballistic missiles, Jiang remarked 
that the Six-Party Talks have been at an impasse over 
the past six months.  The parties should demonstrate 
flexibility and pragmatism, while increasing trust and 
overcoming difficulties.  Such moves would help the 
parties implement the Joint Statement, resume the Six- 
Party Talks quickly and generate progress during the 
Talks. 
 
BEIJING 00012531  003 OF 004 
 
 
 
Japan Should Remove Obstacles to Bilateral Ties 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶8.  Asked about President Hu's reported June 10 
statement to Japanese Ambassador Miyamoto suggesting 
the possibility of a visit to Japan, Jiang responded 
that President Hu has stressed that the two countries 
should live together in peace and pursue common 
development.  China hopes Japan will remove the 
obstacles and return China-Japan relations to the 
normal track of development.  Jiang expressed the hope 
that Tokyo will recognize Beijing's sincere attitude 
toward improving relations.  President Hu's remarks on 
China-Japan relations have been consistent. 
 
China Stopped UN Arms Registration Due to Taiwan Sales 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶9.  While China attaches importance to the UN Register 
on Conventional Arms, Beijing temporarily suspended 
its participation in the Register after some countries 
used it to record arm sales to Taiwan, Jiang remarked 
when asked about Amnesty International's criticism of 
China's failure to submit data to the Register over 
the past eight years.  She argued that such sales 
contravene the spirit of the UN Register on 
Conventional Arms.  China will resume its 
participation in the program once countries cease 
these practices. 
 
Zhao Yan's Trial, Attack on Three Gorges Activist 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶10.  Asked about the upcoming trial of New York Times 
researcher Zhao Yan, Jiang only remarked that the case 
is currently being tried.  Questioned about the 
reported attack on activist Fu Xiancai after 
criticizing the Three Gorges project in an interview 
with the German press, Jiang stated that the Chinese 
authorities are investigating the incident and will 
handle the case according to the law.  The individual 
was given immediate treatment for his injuries, she 
said. 
 
Premier Wen's Visit to Angola, China-Africa Relations 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶11.  Premier Wen Jiabao will visit Angola as part of 
his June 17-24 tour of seven African countries, Jiang 
noted.  Asked about international criticism of energy 
contracts China and Angola have reportedly signed, she 
said China has increased oil imports in recent years 
in order to meet growing domestic demand.  Most of 
China's imports of Angolan oil are purchased from 
international markets.  China's cooperation with 
Angola helps to promote the African nation's economic 
and social development and is mutually beneficial. 
Emphasizing the role of the China-African Cooperation 
Forum in building mutual trust, Jiang noted that 
African leaders have responded positively to Beijing's 
invitation to attend the China-African Cooperation 
Forum Summit in November.  Since the establishment of 
the Forum, China has forgiven 10.5 billion RMB in debt 
owed by 31 African nations and has offered assistance 
without any "strings attached." 
 
Beijing Willing to Normalize Relations with Panama 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶12.  While Jiang said she had no knowledge of plans 
for a large-scale China-Panama project, asked about by 
the Spanish News Agency correspondent, she stressed 
that the Taiwan issue is the only factor hindering the 
development of China-Panama relations.  In addition to 
the establishment of reciprocal trade offices in 1996, 
the two countries maintain frequent personnel 
exchanges and are expanding trade cooperation. 
"People of vision" in Panama understand that forging 
diplomatic ties with China will benefit their country. 
Beijing is prepared to normalize relations with 
Panama. 
 
Senegal President's Visit 
 
BEIJING 00012531  004 OF 004 
 
 
------------------------- 
 
¶13.  Jiang announced that President Wade of Senegal 
will visit China June 21-26. 
RANDT