06BEIJING4958
MARCH 16 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: U.S.-CHINA TRADE
Thu Mar 16 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO0850
OO RUEHCN
DE RUEHBJ #4958/01 0751157
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 161157Z MAR 06
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0452
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA IMMEDIATE 0359
RUEHLM/AMEMBASSY COLOMBO IMMEDIATE 0794
RUEHMD/AMEMBASSY MADRID IMMEDIATE 0681
RUEHSG/AMEMBASSY SANTIAGO IMMEDIATE 0207
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV IMMEDIATE 1909
RHHMUNA/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HI IMMEDIATE
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA IMMEDIATE 0892
RUEHUNV/USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA IMMEDIATE 0830UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 BEIJING 004958 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL ECON PHUM PARM CH JP IR KN
SUBJECT: MARCH 16 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: U.S.-CHINA TRADE 
FRICTIONS AND ENERGY COOPERATION, TRILATERAL SECURITY 
DIALOGUE, HUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL, IRANIAN AND NORTH  KOREAN 
NUCLEAR ISSUES, REPATRIATION OF ILLEGAL  IMMIGRANTS, 
PHUNTSOG NYIDROL 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  Key points made at the March 16 MFA press briefing 
are as follows: 
 
- China hopes U.S.-China economic and trade frictions 
can be resolved through consultation but will no 
longer adopt administrative measures to control 
exchange rate fluctuation. 
 
- China does not view the United States as an energy 
competitor. 
 
- Beijing hopes the U.S.-Australia-Japan security 
dialogue will contribute to the enhancement of mutual 
trust and regional peace and stability. 
 
- China supports the newly established Human Rights 
Council and hopes it will be a just and objective 
forum. 
 
- There is still potential for a diplomatic resolution 
to the Iranian nuclear issue. 
 
 - The Six-Party Talks are a realistic and effective 
mechanism to bring about a nuclear-free Korean 
Peninsula and regional peace and stability. 
 
- The PRC will repatriate Chinese illegal immigrants 
whose nationality has been verified. 
 
- The number of Latin American soldiers China trains 
is negligible compared to the number receiving U.S. 
training. 
 
- Beijing cannot understand how Japan's most senior 
diplomat can deliver remarks that are "contrary to 
common sense." 
 
- Beijing supports Macau's investigations into illicit 
financial activities. 
 
- China condemns the recent Israeli military 
operations and urges an end to the violence. 
 
- Based on humanitarian considerations, China allowed 
Tibetan nun Phuntsog Nyidrol to travel to the United 
States for medical treatment. 
 
- During State Councilor Tang's Recent Visit to Sri 
Lanka, he discussed an agreement on power plant 
construction. 
 
- Spanish FM Moratinos will visit China March 20-23. 
End Summary. 
 
U.S.-China Currency Discussions 
------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  Referring to the visit by U.S. Senators Schumer 
and Graham to China next week to discuss the RMB 
exchange rate issue, a foreign correspondent asked at 
the regular March 16 MFA press briefing what results 
Beijing expects from the visit.  MFA Spokesperson Qin 
Gang said he was unaware of the Senators' specific 
schedule but expressed the hope that U.S.-China 
economic and trade frictions can be resolved through 
consultation, which will benefit bilateral ties.  He 
repeated remarks by Premier Wen Jiabao following the 
conclusion of the NPC that the current RMB exchange 
rate regime is flexible and operates according to 
market forces.  Administrative measures to control 
exchange rate fluctuation will no longer be adopted. 
The United States, which maintains a free economy, 
should understand this concept very clearly. 
 
U.S.-China Energy Cooperation 
----------------------------- 
 
 
BEIJING 00004958  002 OF 004 
 
SUBJECT: MARCH 16 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: U.S.-CHINA TRADE 
FRICTIONS AND ENERGY COOPERATION, TRILATERAL SECURITY 
DIALOGUE, HUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL, IRANIAN AND NORTH  KOREAN 
NUCLEAR ISSUES, REPATRIATION OF ILLEGAL  IMMIGRANTS, 
PHUNTSOG NYIDROL 
 
¶3.  Asked to respond to the support reportedly 
expressed by U.S. Senator Lugar for increased U.S.- 
China energy cooperation, Qin remarked that Beijing 
does not view the two countries as energy competitors. 
China is prepared to work with the United States and 
other countries in the energy field, including in gas, 
oil and renewable energy resources.  Qin stressed that 
there is great potential for international energy 
cooperation, adding that arrangements for specific 
projects should be conducted through existing 
channels.  Asked about Westinghouse's bid for the 
construction of nuclear power plants in China, Qin 
noted that companies from various countries are 
interested in these projects.  China will make a 
decision based on market considerations. 
 
U.S.-Australia-Japan Security Dialogue 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  Questioned by a number of foreign correspondents 
about speculation that the upcoming U.S.-Australia- 
Japan security dialogue will focus largely on China, 
Qin expressed the hope that the three countries, as 
well as all Asia-Pacific nations, will contribute to 
the enhancement of mutual trust and regional peace and 
stability.  While transparency helps build mutual 
confidence, they key is actions that help promote 
global peace.  Highlighting China's release of defense 
white papers, Qin stated that Beijing maintains a 
completely transparent and defensive military policy 
and hopes that relevant parties can view this matter 
objectively.  The increase in international military 
exchanges corresponds to China's development strategy 
and security conditions. 
 
Human Rights Council 
-------------------- 
 
¶5.  Asked about the establishment of the UN Human 
Rights Council (HRC), Qin noted that China voted for 
the HRC resolution.  The resolution reflected a fair 
distribution of regional seats and resolved the 
problem of insufficient representation for Asian 
countries that existed in the former Commission on 
Human Rights.  The resolution also highlighted that 
the HRC should respect countries' different cultural, 
religious and historical backgrounds, attach equal 
importance to civil, political, economic, social and 
cultural rights and promote dialogue on human rights. 
China hopes the HRC will be a just and objective forum 
and avoid politicization, double standards and a 
repeat of problems that affected the Commission on 
Human Rights. 
 
Iranian Nuclear Issue 
--------------------- 
 
¶6.  Asked whether the referral of Iran to the UNSC 
could lead to a discussion of the DPRK nuclear issue 
within the UNSC, Qin stated that China is closely 
following developments with regard to Iran and still 
believes there is potential for a diplomatic 
resolution.  The relevant parties should continue to 
work for a peaceful solution. 
 
DPRK Nuclear Issue 
------------------ 
 
¶7.  Qin maintained that the Six-Party Talks are a 
realistic and effective mechanism to bring about a 
nuclear-free Korean Peninsula and regional peace and 
stability.  The Six-Party Talks are an ongoing process 
and close communication has continued both during and 
between the Talks, he remarked, adding that the recent 
visit by the DPRK's deputy delegation head to China 
demonstrates progress.  Asked about the meeting 
between DPRK DG for American Affairs Li Gun and VFM Wu 
Dawei, Qin said that the Six-Party Talks and the 
situation on the Korean Peninsula featured largely in 
their discussion. 
 
BEIJING 00004958  003 OF 004 
 
SUBJECT: MARCH 16 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: U.S.-CHINA TRADE 
FRICTIONS AND ENERGY COOPERATION, TRILATERAL SECURITY 
DIALOGUE, HUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL, IRANIAN AND NORTH  KOREAN 
NUCLEAR ISSUES, REPATRIATION OF ILLEGAL  IMMIGRANTS, 
PHUNTSOG NYIDROL 
 
 
Response to DHS Statement on Illegal PRC Immigration 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶8.  The Spanish News Agency correspondent asked about 
reported remarks by Department of Homeland Security 
Secretary Chertoff regarding the large number of 
 
SIPDIS 
illegal Chinese immigrants in the United States.  Qin 
stressed that the Chinese Government opposes all forms 
of illegal immigration and has adopted measures to 
combat the problem.  China adheres to a policy of 
"repatriation after verification" and will accept 
deported PRC citizens whose nationality has been 
verified.  While supporting international cooperation 
in this area, Beijing opposes the politicization of 
illegal immigration under the pretext of political 
asylum.  Such an approach will not lead to a 
resolution of the problem nor contribute to regular 
people-to-people exchanges between countries. 
 
China-Latin America Military Cooperation 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶9.  Asked about U.S. General Craddock's recent 
testimony to the Senate Armed Services Committee 
regarding the increase in China's training of Latin 
American troops, Qin responded that China's 
development of normal state-to-state relations with 
Latin American countries does not target any third 
party or constitute a threat to any country.  The PRC 
military maintains regular exchanges with its Latin 
American counterparts through visits by military 
leaders and training cooperation.  Qin remarked that 
the number of Latin American soldiers China trains is 
negligible compared to the number receiving U.S. 
training. 
 
Japanese FM's Remarks "Contrary to Common Sense" 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶10.  Asked about Japanese FM Aso's recent reported 
criticism of China-DPRK trade and whether Japan made 
formal representations on the matter, Qin asserted 
that the Japanese Government has not made 
representations to the MFA on China's trade with North 
Korea nor would China accept such a demarche.  Beijing 
cannot understand how Japan's most senior diplomat can 
deliver remarks that are "contrary to common sense." 
Questioned about FM Aso's comments on China's East 
China Sea proposal, Qin stressed that China's 
exploration activities are being conducted in an area 
not disputed by Japan.  Bilateral disputes should be 
resolved through negotiation, and China opposes 
unilateral steps by Tokyo that could violate Chinese 
sovereignty.  Qin voiced the hope that the matter will 
be handled properly and that a rise in tensions will 
be avoided. 
 
Banco Delta Asia 
---------------- 
 
¶11.  Asked about the investigations into the 
operations of Banco Delta Asia in Macau, Qin 
highlighted both the Central and Macau Government's 
opposition to illicit financial activities.  Beijing 
supports Macau's investigations into violations of the 
law but believes they should be conducted in 
accordance with the law. 
 
Israeli Military Actions in the West Bank 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶12.  Questioned by the Al-Jazeera correspondent about 
recent Israeli military actions in the West Bank, Qin 
stated that a recent Israeli military operation in 
Palestinian-controlled territory led to Palestinian 
deaths and property loss along with an escalation of 
tensions.  China condemns such actions and urges the 
parties to end the violence and exercise restraint. 
Asked about China's policy on aid to the Palestinians, 
 
BEIJING 00004958  004 OF 004 
 
SUBJECT: MARCH 16 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: U.S.-CHINA TRADE 
FRICTIONS AND ENERGY COOPERATION, TRILATERAL SECURITY 
DIALOGUE, HUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL, IRANIAN AND NORTH  KOREAN 
NUCLEAR ISSUES, REPATRIATION OF ILLEGAL  IMMIGRANTS, 
PHUNTSOG NYIDROL 
 
Qin responded that in the past Beijing provided 
assistance to the Palestinians within China's capacity 
and in accordance with the Palestinians' requests. 
Beijing will continue to provide assistance with no 
strings attached. 
 
Release of Tibetan Nun 
---------------------- 
 
¶13.  Responding to the AFP reporter's question 
regarding the release of Tibetan nun Phuntsog Nyidrol, 
Qin stated that she was diagnosed with certain 
ailments.  Therefore, based on humanitarian 
considerations, China allowed Phuntsog Nyidrol to 
travel to the United States for medical treatment on 
March 15. 
 
Assistance to Developing Countries 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶14.  Asked which developing countries will reeive PRC 
assistance, Qin recalled that in Preident Hu Jintao's 
speech at the September 2005 Millennium Summit meeting 
he pledged assistance to developing nations.  Premier 
Wen recently offered USD 20 billion toward this cause. 
 
 
Councilor Tang's Visit to Sri Lanka 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶15.  Qin reported that during State Councilor Tang 
Jiaxuan's recent trip to Sri Lanka, he met with 
President Rajapaksa and proposed to finalize an 
agreement on large-scale projects, including power 
plant construction.  China will also help repair a 
damaged fishing port and provide assistance for a Sri 
Lankan sporting event.  Beijing and Colombo agreed 
that the next UN Secretary General should come from an 
Asian nation, and that they would strengthen 
coordination on the selection process. 
 
Spanish FM to Visit 
------------------- 
 
¶16.  Qin announced that Spanish FM Moratinos will 
visit China March 20-23 and meet with FM Li Zhaoxing 
and other Chinese leaders.  FM Moratinos will attend 
the opening ceremony of the third China-Spain Forum. 
Commenting on the growth of bilateral exchanges since 
the signing of the strategic partnership in November 
2005, Qin reported that bilateral trade with Spain 
rose 45 percent to USD 10.52 billion last year. 
RANDT