06BEIJING8028
APRIL 27 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: IRANIAN NUCLEAR
Thu Apr 27 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO6568
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHBJ #8028/01 1171143
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 271143Z APR 06
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHUJA/AMEMBASSY ABUJA IMMEDIATE 0099
RUEHLM/AMEMBASSY COLOMBO IMMEDIATE 0798
RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD IMMEDIATE 6334
RUEHPB/AMEMBASSY PORT MORESBY IMMEDIATE 0117
RUEHROV/AMEMBASSY VATICAN IMMEDIATE 0055
RUEHUNV/USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA IMMEDIATE 0905
RHHMUNA/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HI IMMEDIATE
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA IMMEDIATE 1008UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 BEIJING 008028 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM PARM PTER KNNP CH IR TW
 
BEIJING 00008028  001.2 OF 005 
 
SUBJECT: APRIL 27 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: IRANIAN NUCLEAR 
ISSUE, TAIWAN, SUDAN, SCO, NEPAL, SIX-PARTY TALKS, 
YAMASAKI'S VISIT, RELIGIOUS FREEDOM, VATICAN, GAO 
ZHISHENG, SRI LANKA, CHINA-RUSSIA ENERGY COOPERATION, 
CHINA-INDIA BORDER TALKS 
 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  Key points made at the April 27 MFA press briefing 
are as follows: 
 
- China is awaiting IAEA Director General ElBaradei's 
upcoming report on Iran and expects the report to 
provide a comprehensive and objective assessment. 
 
- China firmly opposes Taiwan political figures 
conducting activities in the United States, regardless 
of the activity's "name, form or pretext." 
 
- The Taiwan authorities have "wantonly" engaged in 
"dollar diplomacy" in certain countries, fueling 
corruption and chaos in these places. 
 
- Any move by the international community on Sudan 
should help promote the Abuja peace talks. 
 
- The MFA spokesperson argued that media reports that 
China overlooks human rights abuses while pursuing its 
economic interests in countries such as Sudan are 
unsubstantiated. 
 
- SCO members have agreed to hold a joint military 
exercise but have not yet finalized the specific 
arrangements. 
 
- While supporting a policy of non-interference in 
other countries' internal affairs, Beijing hopes Nepal 
can quickly achieve national reconciliation. 
 
- Chinese officials have repeatedly stressed to the 
U.S. Government that China protects its citizens' 
religious freedoms in accordance with the law. 
 
- Asked about the U.S. Congressional resolution on Gao 
Zhisheng, the MFA spokesperson remarked that Chinese 
authorities will deal with individual cases according 
to the law. 
 
- Beijing's position on developing ties with the Holy 
See remains unchanged. 
 
- China supports the Sri Lankan Government's efforts 
to promote stability, reconciliation and development. 
 
- The Six Party Talks participants should engage in 
dialogue and exhibit mutual respect to enhance common 
understanding. 
 
- China will consider Japanese LDP official Yamasaki's 
recent proposal that the two countries establish a 
joint emergency response mechanism. 
 
- Chinese and Russian officials, along with 
entrepreneurs, should engage in detailed discussions 
on ways to implement the high-level consensus on 
energy cooperation. 
 
- Beijing hopes for a fair and rational resolution to 
the India-China border dispute achieved through equal 
footed negotiations. 
 
- Singaporean Minister Mentor Lee Kwan Yew will visit 
Beijing, Shenyang and Shanghai May 10-17.  Tunisian 
Foreign Minister Abdallah will visit China May 9-13. 
 
- The regular May 2 and 4 MFA press briefings have 
been cancelled due to the May 1-7 holiday.  End 
Summary. 
 
Iran 
---- 
 
¶2.  During the regular April 27 MFA press briefing, 
MFA Spokesperson Qin Gang asserted that the Iranian 
nuclear issue has reached a crucial stage, responding 
to the Reuter correspondent's inquiry.  China is 
 
BEIJING 00008028  002.2 OF 005 
 
SUBJECT: APRIL 27 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: IRANIAN NUCLEAR 
ISSUE, TAIWAN, SUDAN, SCO, NEPAL, SIX-PARTY TALKS, 
YAMASAKI'S VISIT, RELIGIOUS FREEDOM, VATICAN, GAO 
ZHISHENG, SRI LANKA, CHINA-RUSSIA ENERGY COOPERATION, 
CHINA-INDIA BORDER TALKS 
 
awaiting IAEA Director General ElBaradei's report on 
Iran and expects the report to provide a comprehensive 
and objective assessment.  Beijing hopes the relevant 
countries will remain calm and demonstrate flexibility 
in order to avoid an escalation of tensions and to 
create proper conditions for a resumption of 
negotiations.  Qin stressed that a diplomatic 
resolution to the Iranian nuclear issue serves the 
interests of all the parties, as well as international 
and regional peace and stability.  Involvement by the 
international community, including the UNSC, should 
enhance the IAEA's authority and effectiveness, 
thereby promoting a proper solution. 
 
Chen's U.S. Transit and Taiwan's Diplomatic Efforts 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶3.  Asked by the Phoenix correspondent about Chen 
Shui-bian's reported plans to transit through New York 
City en route to Latin America, Qin stressed China's 
firm opposition to Taiwan political figures conducting 
activities in the United States, regardless of the 
activity's "name, form or pretext."  Beijing hopes 
Washington will honor its "One China policy," the 
Three Joint Communiques as well as its commitment to 
oppose Taiwan independence and not permit Chen to 
engage in any activities in the United States.  Asked 
how China differentiates between overseas trips by 
Chen and other Taiwan leaders, such as Ma Ying-jeou, 
Qin responded rhetorically, "What is the real purpose 
of his (Chen's) stopover? Does he really consider it 
unofficial?" The Chinese Government treats Taiwan's 
interactions with the international community on the 
basis of the One-China principle and does not 
challenge Taiwan's nonofficial exchanges with the rest 
of the world.  Beijing has adopted many flexible 
measures to facilitate economic and cultural exchanges 
between Taiwan and the international community. 
However, China opposes all Taiwan separatists' 
activities, regardless of the pretext or name, whose 
true aim is to split China, Qin asserted. 
 
¶4.  Responding to a question on the suspected role of 
Taiwan politicians in sparking the recent riots in 
Honiara, Qin noted media reports that some local 
Chinese businessmen in the Solomon Islands with close 
ties to Taiwan were involved in the election scandal, 
which was a major cause of the riots.  The Taiwan 
authorities have for a long time "wantonly" engaged in 
"dollar diplomacy" in certain countries, fueling 
corruption and chaos and undermining the fundamental 
interests of the local people.  Relevant countries 
should draw lessons from these occurrences, Qin 
concluded. 
 
Sudan Sanctions 
--------------- 
 
¶5.  Asked by the AP correspondent why China abstained 
from the recent UNSC vote on sanctioning individuals 
in Sudan, Qin referred to PRC UN Permanent 
Representative Wang Guangya's explanation of China's 
decision.  China has taken a cautious and responsible 
approach to dealing with Sudan.  Beijing will consider 
the interests of the Sudanese people and the overall 
objectives of peace, stability and national 
reconciliation, as well as the role of the 
international community, in particular the African 
Union.  Qin expressed the hope that any related move 
by the international community should help promote the 
Abuja peace talks. 
 
¶6.  Asked by the AFP correspondent to respond to 
claims cited in the Western press that China overlooks 
human rights abuses in countries such as Sudan where 
Beijing is pursuing its economic interests, Qin, in an 
unusually strong manner, berated the reporter for 
lacking "evidence" that China's regular economic, 
trade and oil cooperation has led to a violation of 
human rights.  China is a responsible country that is 
promoting peace, cooperation and development in the 
 
BEIJING 00008028  003.2 OF 005 
 
SUBJECT: APRIL 27 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: IRANIAN NUCLEAR 
ISSUE, TAIWAN, SUDAN, SCO, NEPAL, SIX-PARTY TALKS, 
YAMASAKI'S VISIT, RELIGIOUS FREEDOM, VATICAN, GAO 
ZHISHENG, SRI LANKA, CHINA-RUSSIA ENERGY COOPERATION, 
CHINA-INDIA BORDER TALKS 
 
international arena.  The PRC's cooperation with other 
nations is based on mutual benefit, he stated, 
remarking that China will not follow in the path of 
"Western colonialists" and will not damage other 
countries' human rights.  Beijing has played a 
constructive role in promoting peace and stability in 
Sudan, raised the Sudanese people's standard of living 
and dispatched peacekeeping forces to the country in 
accordance with UN resolutions.  Remarking that he 
requires more "evidence" to support the claims (that 
China has contributed to human rights abuses), Qin 
stressed that China is a responsible country and that 
the media should also act responsibly. 
 
SCO Defense Ministers' Meeting 
------------------------------ 
 
¶7.  Asked about the decision reached by Shanghai 
Cooperation Organization (SCO) defense ministers 
during an April 26 meeting in Beijing to conduct joint 
military exercises in Russia in 2007, Qin stated that 
member states have agreed to hold the exercises but 
have not yet finalized the specific arrangements.  The 
international community maintains a basic consensus on 
the definition of a terrorist organization and should 
not apply double standards in dealing with this issue. 
The goal of SCO members is to combat forces that 
threaten peace and stability in their nations and the 
region.  During the recent meeting, SCO defense 
ministers agreed to strengthen counterterrorism and 
security cooperation, Qin noted. 
 
Nepal's Political Situation 
--------------------------- 
 
¶8.  Questioned by the Spanish News Agency 
correspondent about the current political situation in 
Nepal and China's view of the Maoist rebels, Qin 
highlighted that while the organization has labeled 
itself Maoist, the PRC Government and Chinese 
organizations maintain no links with the group.  China 
adheres to a policy of non-interference in other 
countries' internal affairs.  Beijing hopes that Nepal 
can quickly achieve national reconciliation, stability 
and harmony and is prepared to work with Nepal to 
continue strengthening bilateral ties. 
 
Human Rights 
------------ 
 
¶9.  Responding to an inquiry about the discussion 
between Presidents Hu Jintao and Bush on human rights 
issues, Qin stated that the Chinese Government has 
repeatedly stressed to President Bush and other U.S. 
officials that China protects its citizens' religious 
freedoms in accordance with the law.  While enjoying 
the freedom of religion, PRC nationals must abide by 
the law, he stated. 
 
Congressional Appeal for Gao Zhisheng 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶10.  Questioned about a U.S. Congressional resolution 
calling for the reopening of human rights attorney Gao 
Zhisheng's law firm, Qin remarked that Chinese 
authorities will deal with individual cases according 
to the law. 
 
Vatican Relations 
----------------- 
 
¶11.  Asked about potential for improved China-Vatican 
relations and a possible visit by the Pope, Qin said 
that Beijing's position on developing ties with the 
Holy See remains unchanged.  China hopes the Vatican 
will create conditions for the improvement of 
relations. 
 
DPRK Financial Sanctions 
------------------------ 
 
 
BEIJING 00008028  004.2 OF 005 
 
SUBJECT: APRIL 27 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: IRANIAN NUCLEAR 
ISSUE, TAIWAN, SUDAN, SCO, NEPAL, SIX-PARTY TALKS, 
YAMASAKI'S VISIT, RELIGIOUS FREEDOM, VATICAN, GAO 
ZHISHENG, SRI LANKA, CHINA-RUSSIA ENERGY COOPERATION, 
CHINA-INDIA BORDER TALKS 
 
¶12.  Asked by the Kyodo correspondent about Vice 
Foreign Minister Wu Dawei's reported criticism of U.S. 
sanctions on North Korea during a recent meeting with 
Japanese Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) official Taku 
Yamasaki, Qin said he was unaware of the specific 
statement.  Qin called on the relevant parties to 
enhance their common understanding by conducting 
dialogue and exhibiting mutual respect.  These steps 
will help create favorable conditions for the 
resumption of the Six-Party Talks, while also 
addressing the parties' concerns. 
 
China-Japan Emergency Mechanism 
------------------------------- 
 
¶13.  Asked about Yamasaki's reported proposal to NPC 
Standing Committee Chairman Wu Bangguo that the two 
countries establish a joint emergency response 
mechanism, Qin replied that China will consider 
Yamasaki's suggestion.  The two countries should 
conduct dialogue to properly resolve each other's 
concerns, Qin remarked. 
 
Violence in Sri Lanka 
--------------------- 
 
¶14.  Asked by the Xinhua correspondent about the 
recent wounding of the Sri Lankan army commander, Qin 
condemned all forms of violence.  China is paying 
close attention to the situation in Sri Lanka and 
supports Colombo's efforts to promote stability, 
reconciliation and development.  China hopes the 
country can promptly restore peace and stability. 
 
China-Russia Energy Cooperation 
------------------------------- 
 
¶15.  Qin asserted that China-Russia energy cooperation 
is mutually beneficial.  During recent high-level 
visits, including President Putin's visit to China, 
the two countries reached a consensus on strengthening 
energy cooperation, and China hopes that both 
countries' government agencies and entrepreneurs will 
hold detailed discussions on ways to implement the 
bilateral consensus.  Qin noted that areas of 
potential cooperation include the petrochemical 
industry, energy security, renewable and clean energy 
and the maintenance of stable global oil prices. 
 
China-India Border Talks 
------------------------ 
 
¶16.  Beijing hopes for a fair and rational resolution 
to the India-China border dispute achieved through 
equal-footed negotiations and based on agreements 
reached by the two nations' leaders.  During Premier 
Wen Jiabao's trip to India last year, China and India 
established guidelines, which have served as the 
foundation for several rounds of border talks.  Deputy 
Foreign Minister Dai Bingguo participated in the last 
round of talks, during which he and his Indian 
counterpart reaffirmed the guidelines and agreed to 
hold the next round as soon as possible.  Qin noted 
that the next round will be held in Beijing but said 
the date has no yet been determined. 
 
Upcoming Visits 
--------------- 
 
¶17.  Qin noted that Singaporean Minister Mentor Lee 
Kwan Yew will visit Beijing, Shenyang and Shanghai May 
10-17.  Tunisian Foreign Minister Abdallah will visit 
China May 9-13. 
 
Consular Affairs Briefing 
------------------------- 
 
¶18.  Qin announced that on April 28 MFA Consular 
Affairs Deputy Director General Wei Wei will brief 
reporters on the Chinese Government's efforts to 
enhance protection of PRC citizens abroad.  He noted 
 
BEIJING 00008028  005.2 OF 005 
 
SUBJECT: APRIL 27 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: IRANIAN NUCLEAR 
ISSUE, TAIWAN, SUDAN, SCO, NEPAL, SIX-PARTY TALKS, 
YAMASAKI'S VISIT, RELIGIOUS FREEDOM, VATICAN, GAO 
ZHISHENG, SRI LANKA, CHINA-RUSSIA ENERGY COOPERATION, 
CHINA-INDIA BORDER TALKS 
 
that the May 2 and 4 MFA press briefings have been 
cancelled due to the May 1-7 Labor Day holiday. 
SEDNEY