06DAMASCUS3481
Damascus Media Reaction: Israeli Operations in Lebanon,
Sun Jul 16 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #3481/01 1971254
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 161254Z JUL 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0360
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6100
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 3946
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2480
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7144
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1134
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4519
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0740
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 6879UNCLAS DAMASCUS 003481 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: Israeli Operations in Lebanon, 
Palestinian Territories (7/14-17) 
¶1.  Summary:  Syrian papers focused on the tense situation in 
Lebanon. All papers reported a statement by Hassan Nasrallah, 
Hizbollah's Secretary General, saying that the resistance is 
 
ready for "an open war" against Israel, announcing that the 
resistance fighters had set fire to an Israeli warship off the 
coast of Beirut. "You want an open war. We are going to open war. 
We are ready for it" Nasrallah said, speaking to Al-Manar TV by 
telephone. Nasrallah warned: "You have chosen war against people 
who have brains, capacities and expertise," adding: "The 
surprises that I have promised you will start now;" "Look to the 
middle of the sea, facing Beirut, the Israeli warship that has 
pounded the infrastructure, people's homes and civilians - look 
at it burning. It will sink and with it scores of Israeli Zionist 
soldiers." "This is just the beginning," he added.  Nasrallah 
also warned of additional attacks in Israel, noting: "We will not 
say that we will bomb Haifa only; we will go beyond and beyond 
Haifa." 
Papers also reported a phone conversation between President Asad 
and President Lahoud focusing on developments in the Israeli 
aggression against Lebanon. President Asad expressed Syria's 
solidarity with the Lebanese people, putting all capabilities at 
the disposal of the Lebanese state to help it. 
Papers also reported the Arab Foreign Ministers' emergency 
meeting in Cairo with the participation of Syrian foreign 
Minister Walid al-Muallim, focusing on the ongoing Israeli 
onslaught against Lebanon and its dangerous consequences, as well 
as the deteriorating situation in the occupied territories. Arab 
Foreign Ministers condemned the Israeli aggression against 
Lebanon and the Palestinian territories, expressed solidarity 
with the Palestinian and Lebanese people and supported their 
struggle against the aggression. They called on the international 
community and the UN Security Council to shoulder their 
responsibility by urging Israel to end its military aggression 
and lift the siege imposed on the Palestinian and Lebanese 
people. On Lebanon, Arab Foreign Ministers stressed the right of 
people to resist the occupation and aggression, and hailed the 
Lebanese people's solidarity and national unity, which is the 
main factor in facing the aggression. The Ministers warned 
against dangerous repercussions of expansion of the Israeli 
aggression against the Palestinian territories and the 
neighboring Arab countries. They also demanded the release of 
Palestinian Ministers and Legislators and the detainees in 
Israeli jails and the exchange of prisoners in the framework of 
the UN or through a third party. The Ministers called on the UN 
Security Council to convene on a high level to discuss the Arab- 
Israeli conflict in a radical and comprehensive way after 
Israel's thwarting of all efforts towards the resumption of the 
comprehensive peace process in the region. 
 
The Secretary General of the Organization of the Islamic 
Conference, Ekmeleddin Ihsan Uglo, has strongly condemned the 
Israeli aggression against Lebanon, stressing that such an act 
violates all human laws. In an urgent message sent to the UN 
Secretary General, Ihsan Uglo expressed deep regret over the 
 
SIPDIS 
dangerous escalation in Lebanese territory. He called on Kofi 
Annan to consider the Israeli raids on Lebanese civilians as a 
factor that would undermine all the efforts that have been made 
to find a solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict and to the 
Palestinian tragedy. He called on Annan to intervene and put an 
end to the current escalation of Israeli killing, which is 
shedding the blood of Lebanese civilians. 
 
Spanish Premier Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero has called on Israel 
to halt immediately its aggressive acts in Lebanon and Gaza. In a 
broadcast interview on Friday, Zapatero said that there is a 
difference between a full counter-offensive against Lebanon and 
legitimate defense, expressing regret over the military 
escalation that is setting us back scores of years. He expressed 
the belief that Israel is wrong in its full response on Gaza and 
Lebanon, which will lead to fuelling up violence in the Middle 
East. Zapatero called for a return to the spirit of the Madrid 
Conference on the Middle East, and called upon the superpowers to 
be firm toward Israel. 
 
Headlines reported that President Asad received a telephone call 
from Italian Prime Minister Romano Prodi which also focused on 
the Israeli aggression against Lebanon. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
coast of Beirut. "You want an open war. We are going to open war. 
We are ready for it" Nasrallah said, speaking to Al-Manar TV by 
telephone. Nasrallah warned: "You have chosen war against people 
who have brains, capacities and expertise," adding: "The 
surprises that I have promised you will start now;" "Look to the 
middle of the sea, facing Beirut, the Israeli warship that has 
pounded the infrastructure, people's homes and civilians - look 
at it burning. It will sink and with it scores of Israeli Zionist 
soldiers." "This is just the beginning," he added.  Nasrallah 
also warned of additional attacks in Israel, noting: "We will not 
say that we will bomb Haifa only; we will go beyond and beyond 
Haifa." 
Papers also reported a phone conversation between President Asad 
and President Lahoud focusing on developments in the Israeli 
aggression against Lebanon. President Asad expressed Syria's 
solidarity with the Lebanese people, putting all capabilities at 
the disposal of the Lebanese state to help it. 
Papers also reported the Arab Foreign Ministers' emergency 
meeting in Cairo with the participation of Syrian foreign 
Minister Walid al-Muallim, focusing on the ongoing Israeli 
onslaught against Lebanon and its dangerous consequences, as well 
as the deteriorating situation in the occupied territories. Arab 
Foreign Ministers condemned the Israeli aggression against 
Lebanon and the Palestinian territories, expressed solidarity 
with the Palestinian and Lebanese people and supported their 
struggle against the aggression. They called on the international 
community and the UN Security Council to shoulder their 
responsibility by urging Israel to end its military aggression 
and lift the siege imposed on the Palestinian and Lebanese 
people. On Lebanon, Arab Foreign Ministers stressed the right of 
people to resist the occupation and aggression, and hailed the 
Lebanese people's solidarity and national unity, which is the 
main factor in facing the aggression. The Ministers warned 
against dangerous repercussions of expansion of the Israeli 
aggression against the Palestinian territories and the 
neighboring Arab countries. They also demanded the release of 
Palestinian Ministers and Legislators and the detainees in 
Israeli jails and the exchange of prisoners in the framework of 
the UN or through a third party. The Ministers called on the UN 
Security Council to convene on a high level to discuss the Arab- 
Israeli conflict in a radical and comprehensive way after 
Israel's thwarting of all efforts towards the resumption of the 
comprehensive peace process in the region. 
 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"A new Qana massacre in Marwahin. Israel's terrorist war-machine 
perpetrates hideous massacres in South Lebanon. Israel shells 
ports and the southern suburbs. The national resistance strikes 
deep in Israel. AL SecGen Mousa announces death of the peace 
process" (Government-owned Tishreen, 7/16) 
 
"President Asad confirms to President Lahoud Syria's solidarity 
with Lebanon and that Syria places its capabilities at Lebanon's 
disposal" (Government-owned Tishreen, 7/16) 
 
"A Syrian official source denies that any Syrian military posts 
have been exposed to any Israeli shelling or attack" (Government- 
owned Tishreen, 7/16) 
 
"The People's Assembly denounces the Israeli aggression, confirms 
full solidarity with Lebanon and the resistance, and calls for 
adoption of deterrent Arab and international measures against 
Israel" (Government-owned Tishreen, 7/16) 
 
"Foreign Minister al-Mouallem warns against any Arab statements 
that might serve Israel in its aggression: We proved to the world 
that Israel is rejecting and evading peace requirements. 
Arab Foreign Ministers call on the international community to 
 
 
 
 
 
 
coast of Beirut. "You want an open war. We are going to open war. 
We are ready for it" Nasrallah said, speaking to Al-Manar TV by 
telephone. Nasrallah warned: "You have chosen war against people 
who have brains, capacities and expertise," adding: "The 
surprises that I have promised you will start now;" "Look to the 
middle of the sea, facing Beirut, the Israeli warship that has 
pounded the infrastructure, people's homes and civilians - look 
at it burning. It will sink and with it scores of Israeli Zionist 
soldiers." "This is just the beginning," he added.  Nasrallah 
also warned of additional attacks in Israel, noting: "We will not 
say that we will bomb Haifa only; we will go beyond and beyond 
Haifa." 
Papers also reported a phone conversation between President Asad 
and President Lahoud focusing on developments in the Israeli 
aggression against Lebanon. President Asad expressed Syria's 
solidarity with the Lebanese people, putting all capabilities at 
the disposal of the Lebanese state to help it. 
Papers also reported the Arab Foreign Ministers' emergency 
meeting in Cairo with the participation of Syrian foreign 
Minister Walid al-Muallim, focusing on the ongoing Israeli 
onslaught against Lebanon and its dangerous consequences, as well 
as the deteriorating situation in the occupied territories. Arab 
Foreign Ministers condemned the Israeli aggression against 
Lebanon and the Palestinian territories, expressed solidarity 
with the Palestinian and Lebanese people and supported their 
struggle against the aggression. They called on the international 
community and the UN Security Council to shoulder their 
responsibility by urging Israel to end its military aggression 
and lift the siege imposed on the Palestinian and Lebanese 
people. On Lebanon, Arab Foreign Ministers stressed the right of 
people to resist the occupation and aggression, and hailed the 
Lebanese people's solidarity and national unity, which is the 
main factor in facing the aggression. The Ministers warned 
against dangerous repercussions of expansion of the Israeli 
aggression against the Palestinian territories and the 
neighboring Arab countries. They also demanded the release of 
Palestinian Ministers and Legislators and the detainees in 
Israeli jails and the exchange of prisoners in the framework of 
the UN or through a third party. The Ministers called on the UN 
Security Council to convene on a high level to discuss the Arab- 
Israeli conflict in a radical and comprehensive way after 
Israel's thwarting of all efforts towards the resumption of the 
comprehensive peace process in the region. 
 
shoulder responsibilities" (Government-owned Tishreen, 7/16) 
 
"The Pentagon plans to strengthen the Israeli strategic fuel 
storage for warplanes" (Government-owned Tishreeen, 7/16) 
 
"Angry reactions to the Israeli aggression on Lebanon; Spanish PM 
Zapatero: Let's stop this madness immediately" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 7/16) 
 
"Germany stresses Syria's important role and warns against the 
dangers of a regional war" (Government-owned Tishreen, 7/16) 
 
"Islamic Scholars Assembly denounces targeting of mosques in 
Iraq. Two American soldiers killed in al-Sader city. Clashes 
continue in Baghdad" (Government-owned Tishreen, 7/16) 
 
"An Open War; Nasrallah: Victory is coming.... An Israeli warship 
is sinking. The Lebanese Resistance repels attacks; Israel 
escalates aggression against civilians and public facilities in 
Beirut, Bekaa, and Southern Lebanon. Nasrallah: We will not be 
the only ones to pay the price. Ha'aretz refutes the Israeli 
army's report: The Israeli warship sustained immense damage" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 7/15) 
 
"President Asad receives a phone call from Italian PM Prodi; 
Talks focus on the Israeli attack against Lebanon" (Government- 
owned Tishreen, 7/15) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
coast of Beirut. "You want an open war. We are going to open war. 
We are ready for it" Nasrallah said, speaking to Al-Manar TV by 
telephone. Nasrallah warned: "You have chosen war against people 
who have brains, capacities and expertise," adding: "The 
surprises that I have promised you will start now;" "Look to the 
middle of the sea, facing Beirut, the Israeli warship that has 
pounded the infrastructure, people's homes and civilians - look 
at it burning. It will sink and with it scores of Israeli Zionist 
soldiers." "This is just the beginning," he added.  Nasrallah 
also warned of additional attacks in Israel, noting: "We will not 
say that we will bomb Haifa only; we will go beyond and beyond 
Haifa." 
Papers also reported a phone conversation between President Asad 
and President Lahoud focusing on developments in the Israeli 
aggression against Lebanon. President Asad expressed Syria's 
solidarity with the Lebanese people, putting all capabilities at 
the disposal of the Lebanese state to help it. 
Papers also reported the Arab Foreign Ministers' emergency 
meeting in Cairo with the participation of Syrian foreign 
Minister Walid al-Muallim, focusing on the ongoing Israeli 
onslaught against Lebanon and its dangerous consequences, as well 
as the deteriorating situation in the occupied territories. Arab 
Foreign Ministers condemned the Israeli aggression against 
Lebanon and the Palestinian territories, expressed solidarity 
with the Palestinian and Lebanese people and supported their 
struggle against the aggression. They called on the international 
community and the UN Security Council to shoulder their 
responsibility by urging Israel to end its military aggression 
and lift the siege imposed on the Palestinian and Lebanese 
people. On Lebanon, Arab Foreign Ministers stressed the right of 
people to resist the occupation and aggression, and hailed the 
Lebanese people's solidarity and national unity, which is the 
main factor in facing the aggression. The Ministers warned 
against dangerous repercussions of expansion of the Israeli 
aggression against the Palestinian territories and the 
neighboring Arab countries. They also demanded the release of 
Palestinian Ministers and Legislators and the detainees in 
Israeli jails and the exchange of prisoners in the framework of 
the UN or through a third party. The Ministers called on the UN 
Security Council to convene on a high level to discuss the Arab- 
Israeli conflict in a radical and comprehensive way after 
Israel's thwarting of all efforts towards the resumption of the 
comprehensive peace process in the region. 
 
"President Asad discusses the situation in Palestine and Lebanon 
in a phone call with Ahmedinejad. Ahmedinejad: We stand by Syria 
and support her in the face of all campaigns of pressure" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 7/14) 
 
"The US vetoes a UNSC resolution denouncing Israeli offenses. 
48 Lebanese martyred by Israeli aggression, 10 from the same 
family; Hizbollah targets military sites, airports and Zionist 
settlements. Extensive denunciation of the Israeli aggression and 
Annan seeks a cool-down" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 7/14) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
---------------------------- 
"From Silence to Conspiracy" 
---------------------------- 
 
Isam Dari, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, 
editorialized (7/15): "This is not the first time in history that 
horrendous massacres have been committed against civilians in our 
region under the political cover of the superpowers which claim 
to be defending human rights, freedom, security, and stability in 
the world.... 
"The pictures of the dismembered bodies of children, who watered 
the Lebanese soil with their chaste blood, did not awaken the 
sentiments and consciences of the free world. On the contrary, 
the US President blessed the criminal killers and announced that 
Israel has the right to defend itself and blamed Syria for the 
continuing Israeli crimes in Gaza and Lebanon.... 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
coast of Beirut. "You want an open war. We are going to open war. 
We are ready for it" Nasrallah said, speaking to Al-Manar TV by 
telephone. Nasrallah warned: "You have chosen war against people 
who have brains, capacities and expertise," adding: "The 
surprises that I have promised you will start now;" "Look to the 
middle of the sea, facing Beirut, the Israeli warship that has 
pounded the infrastructure, people's homes and civilians - look 
at it burning. It will sink and with it scores of Israeli Zionist 
soldiers." "This is just the beginning," he added.  Nasrallah 
also warned of additional attacks in Israel, noting: "We will not 
say that we will bomb Haifa only; we will go beyond and beyond 
Haifa." 
Papers also reported a phone conversation between President Asad 
and President Lahoud focusing on developments in the Israeli 
aggression against Lebanon. President Asad expressed Syria's 
solidarity with the Lebanese people, putting all capabilities at 
the disposal of the Lebanese state to help it. 
Papers also reported the Arab Foreign Ministers' emergency 
meeting in Cairo with the participation of Syrian foreign 
Minister Walid al-Muallim, focusing on the ongoing Israeli 
onslaught against Lebanon and its dangerous consequences, as well 
as the deteriorating situation in the occupied territories. Arab 
Foreign Ministers condemned the Israeli aggression against 
Lebanon and the Palestinian territories, expressed solidarity 
with the Palestinian and Lebanese people and supported their 
struggle against the aggression. They called on the international 
community and the UN Security Council to shoulder their 
responsibility by urging Israel to end its military aggression 
and lift the siege imposed on the Palestinian and Lebanese 
people. On Lebanon, Arab Foreign Ministers stressed the right of 
people to resist the occupation and aggression, and hailed the 
Lebanese people's solidarity and national unity, which is the 
main factor in facing the aggression. The Ministers warned 
against dangerous repercussions of expansion of the Israeli 
aggression against the Palestinian territories and the 
neighboring Arab countries. They also demanded the release of 
Palestinian Ministers and Legislators and the detainees in 
Israeli jails and the exchange of prisoners in the framework of 
the UN or through a third party. The Ministers called on the UN 
Security Council to convene on a high level to discuss the Arab- 
Israeli conflict in a radical and comprehensive way after 
Israel's thwarting of all efforts towards the resumption of the 
comprehensive peace process in the region. 
 
 
"Killers of children, who violated human rights in Abu-Ghraib and 
Hadithah and who provided protection for those who massacred a 
family after raping one of its members, are unable to blame 
killers of children in Palestine. The two are strategic allies in 
evil and aggression and are committing the same deeds...." 
---------------- 
"Self-Restraint" 
----------------- 
Dr. Nadiya Khost, an op-ed writer in government-owned Tishreen 
commented (7/15): "Eighteen Palestinians and 47 Lebanese 
civilians, including entire families, were killed in one day. 
Nonetheless, the Lebanese and the Palestinians were asked to 
exercise self-restraint.... 
"In this bloody carnival, the world's masters and their Israeli 
allies, who are acting on their behalf, exhibit their bloody 
achievements.... This carnival is intended to make us accept the 
systematic massacres in Iraq, Palestine, and in Lebanon today, 
thank the war criminals who have become heads of state, applaud 
the racist Bolton, warn of the tolerant Hasan Nasrallah, believe 
that Arab martyrs are terrorists and that the Israeli Apaches are 
peaceful pigeons and the F-16 war jets are only toys to entertain 
children...." 
---------------------------------------- 
 
"Captive Soldiers and Hostage Positions" 
 
---------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
coast of Beirut. "You want an open war. We are going to open war. 
We are ready for it" Nasrallah said, speaking to Al-Manar TV by 
telephone. Nasrallah warned: "You have chosen war against people 
who have brains, capacities and expertise," adding: "The 
surprises that I have promised you will start now;" "Look to the 
middle of the sea, facing Beirut, the Israeli warship that has 
pounded the infrastructure, people's homes and civilians - look 
at it burning. It will sink and with it scores of Israeli Zionist 
soldiers." "This is just the beginning," he added.  Nasrallah 
also warned of additional attacks in Israel, noting: "We will not 
say that we will bomb Haifa only; we will go beyond and beyond 
Haifa." 
Papers also reported a phone conversation between President Asad 
and President Lahoud focusing on developments in the Israeli 
aggression against Lebanon. President Asad expressed Syria's 
solidarity with the Lebanese people, putting all capabilities at 
the disposal of the Lebanese state to help it. 
Papers also reported the Arab Foreign Ministers' emergency 
meeting in Cairo with the participation of Syrian foreign 
Minister Walid al-Muallim, focusing on the ongoing Israeli 
onslaught against Lebanon and its dangerous consequences, as well 
as the deteriorating situation in the occupied territories. Arab 
Foreign Ministers condemned the Israeli aggression against 
Lebanon and the Palestinian territories, expressed solidarity 
with the Palestinian and Lebanese people and supported their 
struggle against the aggression. They called on the international 
community and the UN Security Council to shoulder their 
responsibility by urging Israel to end its military aggression 
and lift the siege imposed on the Palestinian and Lebanese 
people. On Lebanon, Arab Foreign Ministers stressed the right of 
people to resist the occupation and aggression, and hailed the 
Lebanese people's solidarity and national unity, which is the 
main factor in facing the aggression. The Ministers warned 
against dangerous repercussions of expansion of the Israeli 
aggression against the Palestinian territories and the 
neighboring Arab countries. They also demanded the release of 
Palestinian Ministers and Legislators and the detainees in 
Israeli jails and the exchange of prisoners in the framework of 
the UN or through a third party. The Ministers called on the UN 
Security Council to convene on a high level to discuss the Arab- 
Israeli conflict in a radical and comprehensive way after 
Israel's thwarting of all efforts towards the resumption of the 
comprehensive peace process in the region. 
 
 
Ahmad Hamadeh, an editorialist in government-owned Al-Thawra, 
commented (7/14): "The identical positions by Washington, that 
blatantly and unreservedly supports Israel and promotes its 
aggression against Lebanese and Palestinians, and the UN, which 
is supposed to be just, objective, and in harmony with 
international law, raise more than one question about the role of 
the international organization in achieving world peace and 
security.... 
 
"What prompted this comment was a statement made by UN SecGen 
Kofi Annan on the capture of the two Israeli soldiers by 
Hizbollah. As soon as news agencies and world TV stations 
reported the news, the White House issued a statement condemning 
the operation and demanding their immediate release. Likewise, as 
soon as the White House spokesman finished his remarks, UN SecGen 
Kofi Annan hastened to take the same stand, demanding that the 
Lebanese resistance immediately release the two captured 
soldiers.  The EU followed suit, using almost the same words.... 
 
"The UN has failed to issue a statement demanding the release of 
thousands of Palestinian, Lebanese, and other Arab prisoners held 
in Israeli jails.  Likewise, the United Nations has failed to 
issue a statement demanding a halt to Israel's barbaric attacks 
against innocent civilians in Gaza and southern Lebanon, as if 
the international organization has turned into a mere hostage to 
US stands, wishes, and interests." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
coast of Beirut. "You want an open war. We are going to open war. 
We are ready for it" Nasrallah said, speaking to Al-Manar TV by 
telephone. Nasrallah warned: "You have chosen war against people 
who have brains, capacities and expertise," adding: "The 
surprises that I have promised you will start now;" "Look to the 
middle of the sea, facing Beirut, the Israeli warship that has 
pounded the infrastructure, people's homes and civilians - look 
at it burning. It will sink and with it scores of Israeli Zionist 
soldiers." "This is just the beginning," he added.  Nasrallah 
also warned of additional attacks in Israel, noting: "We will not 
say that we will bomb Haifa only; we will go beyond and beyond 
Haifa." 
Papers also reported a phone conversation between President Asad 
and President Lahoud focusing on developments in the Israeli 
aggression against Lebanon. President Asad expressed Syria's 
solidarity with the Lebanese people, putting all capabilities at 
the disposal of the Lebanese state to help it. 
Papers also reported the Arab Foreign Ministers' emergency 
meeting in Cairo with the participation of Syrian foreign 
Minister Walid al-Muallim, focusing on the ongoing Israeli 
onslaught against Lebanon and its dangerous consequences, as well 
as the deteriorating situation in the occupied territories. Arab 
Foreign Ministers condemned the Israeli aggression against 
Lebanon and the Palestinian territories, expressed solidarity 
with the Palestinian and Lebanese people and supported their 
struggle against the aggression. They called on the international 
community and the UN Security Council to shoulder their 
responsibility by urging Israel to end its military aggression 
and lift the siege imposed on the Palestinian and Lebanese 
people. On Lebanon, Arab Foreign Ministers stressed the right of 
people to resist the occupation and aggression, and hailed the 
Lebanese people's solidarity and national unity, which is the 
main factor in facing the aggression. The Ministers warned 
against dangerous repercussions of expansion of the Israeli 
aggression against the Palestinian territories and the 
neighboring Arab countries. They also demanded the release of 
Palestinian Ministers and Legislators and the detainees in 
Israeli jails and the exchange of prisoners in the framework of 
the UN or through a third party. The Ministers called on the UN 
Security Council to convene on a high level to discuss the Arab- 
Israeli conflict in a radical and comprehensive way after 
Israel's thwarting of all efforts towards the resumption of the 
comprehensive peace process in the region. 
 
"How long will the world continue to turn a blind eye to Israeli 
crimes...?" 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
"Aggression against Gaza, a Desperate Attempt 
to Abort the National Palestinian Plan" 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
Adil Sawahah, in an op-ed in government-owned Al-Thawra, said 
(7/14):  "The governing Israeli elites have never abandoned their 
opposition to any permanent peaceful settlement with 
Palestinians, or with neighboring countries, for that matter.... 
 
The successive Israeli governing elites have always remained 
hostage to the Zionist enterprise, which is based on emptying the 
Palestinian territories, dissipating the Palestinian people's 
energies, and paralyzing them.  This is achieved only through 
incessant pressure on these people to evict and displace them, 
and by robbing them of their nationalist leaders who seek to 
achieve Palestinian national goals and aspirations. 
 
"As appears in Zionist documents and archives, keeping the 
Palestinian people without leaders or elites that seek to realize 
the Palestinian dream, is a strategic objective. 
 
"This has been evident since the signing of the Oslo accords and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
coast of Beirut. "You want an open war. We are going to open war. 
We are ready for it" Nasrallah said, speaking to Al-Manar TV by 
telephone. Nasrallah warned: "You have chosen war against people 
who have brains, capacities and expertise," adding: "The 
surprises that I have promised you will start now;" "Look to the 
middle of the sea, facing Beirut, the Israeli warship that has 
pounded the infrastructure, people's homes and civilians - look 
at it burning. It will sink and with it scores of Israeli Zionist 
soldiers." "This is just the beginning," he added.  Nasrallah 
also warned of additional attacks in Israel, noting: "We will not 
say that we will bomb Haifa only; we will go beyond and beyond 
Haifa." 
Papers also reported a phone conversation between President Asad 
and President Lahoud focusing on developments in the Israeli 
aggression against Lebanon. President Asad expressed Syria's 
solidarity with the Lebanese people, putting all capabilities at 
the disposal of the Lebanese state to help it. 
Papers also reported the Arab Foreign Ministers' emergency 
meeting in Cairo with the participation of Syrian foreign 
Minister Walid al-Muallim, focusing on the ongoing Israeli 
onslaught against Lebanon and its dangerous consequences, as well 
as the deteriorating situation in the occupied territories. Arab 
Foreign Ministers condemned the Israeli aggression against 
Lebanon and the Palestinian territories, expressed solidarity 
with the Palestinian and Lebanese people and supported their 
struggle against the aggression. They called on the international 
community and the UN Security Council to shoulder their 
responsibility by urging Israel to end its military aggression 
and lift the siege imposed on the Palestinian and Lebanese 
people. On Lebanon, Arab Foreign Ministers stressed the right of 
people to resist the occupation and aggression, and hailed the 
Lebanese people's solidarity and national unity, which is the 
main factor in facing the aggression. The Ministers warned 
against dangerous repercussions of expansion of the Israeli 
aggression against the Palestinian territories and the 
neighboring Arab countries. They also demanded the release of 
Palestinian Ministers and Legislators and the detainees in 
Israeli jails and the exchange of prisoners in the framework of 
the UN or through a third party. The Ministers called on the UN 
Security Council to convene on a high level to discuss the Arab- 
Israeli conflict in a radical and comprehensive way after 
Israel's thwarting of all efforts towards the resumption of the 
comprehensive peace process in the region. 
 
the death of the late Palestinian President Yasir Arafat. The 
same is now happening to the Palestinian Government following the 
arrest of some of its members. This explains the Israeli attacks 
on the Palestinian infrastructure. 
 
"The Zionist plan targets the Palestinian Government to prevent 
it from forging ahead toward the achievement of an independent 
state and to eliminate the Palestinian people's national plan." 
 
Seche