06DAKAR1587
CEREMONY MARKS SIGNING OF 2005 TIP GRANTS AND
Wed Jul 05 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Dakar
VZCZCXRO9606
RR RUEHMA RUEHPA
DE RUEHDK #1587 1861752
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 051752Z JUL 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAKAR
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5632
INFO RUEHZK/ECOWAS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS DAKAR 001587 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR G/TIP, INL, AF/W, AF/RSA, AND DRL/PHD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV SG
SUBJECT: CEREMONY MARKS SIGNING OF 2005 TIP GRANTS AND 
RELEASE OF 2006 TIP REPORT FOR SENEGAL 
 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
¶1.  Ambassador Jacobs presided over a ceremony to mark the 
signing of eight grants to GOS offices and NGOs actively 
involved in fighting trafficking in persons (TIP).  The event 
also brought together key member of the anti-TIP community to 
note release of the annual TIP Report, as well as recognize 
the two "TIP Heroes" selected from Senegal in 2005 and 2006. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
AMBASSADOR DISCUSSES TIP REPORT AND RECOGNIZES TIP HEROES 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
¶2.  The Ambassador opened the ceremony by saying GOS efforts 
to fight trafficking were responsible for boosting Senegal 
from Tier Two Watch List to Tier Two in 2005.  She pointed 
out to the overflowing audience, as did the 2006 Report, that 
much remains to be done, especially in the areas of 
prevention, enforcement and victim assistance.  Ambassador 
Jacobs also acknowledged the exceptional work done by 
Minister of Women, Family, and Social Development Aida Mbodj, 
chosen as 2005 "TIP Hero," and Director of Avenir de l'Enfant 
("Future of the Child") Moussa Sow, chosen as 2006 "TIP Hero." 
 
¶3.  Mamadou Lamine Fofona from the Office of the Senegalese 
High Commissioner for Human Rights followed the Ambassador 
with a speech describing trafficking as an important "social 
and economic phenomenon."  He said the GOS wants to 
coordinate inter-ministerial approaches in this domain, put 
in place a national monitoring center and expand regional 
efforts.  Mar Lo, Director of Cabinet at the Ministry of 
Women, said President Wade wants to fully engage Senegal in 
the fight against trafficking -- "without reserve."  He added 
the anti-trafficking law passed in April 2005 is currently 
being integrated into the penal code.  Both speakers praised 
U.S. support for Senegal's attempts to end trafficking in 
persons.  Moussa Sow, visibly moved by his selection as a 
"TIP Hero," had the final word: "Today, children in this 
country suffer and are being used by adults for economic 
gain."  He said those present at the ceremony want to ensure 
a better future for Senegal, ensuring a better future for the 
world. 
 
USD 218,000 IN GRANTS TO THOSE COMBATING TIP 
--------------------------------------------- 
¶4.  The event concluded with signing of contracts 
representing USD 218,000 in funds offered to bolster the work 
of six NGOs and the two offices at the forefront of GOS 
efforts to combat trafficking.  The program was featured on 
national news and in the press.  "Le Populaire", a leading 
independent daily, described the contents of the 2006 Report 
and stressed there is room for progress in ending trafficking 
in Senegal. 
JACOBS