06KABUL572
Justice Sector Support Project Progress Report
Wed Feb 08 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kabul
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 KABUL 000572 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INL/FO AND SA/FO AMB QUINN 
NSC FOR AHARRIMAN/KAMEND 
 
E.O. 12958 N/A 
TAGS: SNAR PREL PGOV PTER KCRM AF
SUBJECT: Justice Sector Support Project Progress Report 
 
¶1. (U) Summary:  In the July 2005 launch, the Chief of Team, 
three embedded advisors (two in the Ministry of Justice, one 
assigned to the Prison Director and one assigned to the 
Minister, and one in the Attorney Generals Office) and three 
legal experts (legal trainer, criminal justice, and criminal 
defense attorney mentor) arrived in Afghanistan.  The fourth 
embedded advisor (Ministry of Interior and Attorney Generals 
Office Coordinator) arrived in early October.  The cable 
highlights JSSPs accomplishments and significant findings to 
date. End Summary 
 
Work with the Afghan Attorney Generals Office (AGO) 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶2. (U) JSSP has completed a comprehensive assessment of the 
AGO organization and operational capacity, including legal 
framework, organizational, resource and personnel constraints 
and limitations, mapping out and constructing a detailed 
organization chart of the AGO to understand the current 
structure and enable further work on structure.  JSSP also 
contributed to the German Police Project Offices Police 
Guidelines for Discovery, Investigation and Coordination with 
the Investigating Prosecutors. 
 
¶3. (U) JSSP is assisting the AGO in creating personnel records 
for all prosecutors in Afghanistan, containing data on their 
heir 
educational backgrounds, skills, and training received. 
 
Provincial Justice Reform Projects 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (U) JSSP spear-headed the Wardak Justice Reform Project, a 
multi-agency development effort bringing together USG and 
Afghan officials, from Kabul and Wardak, to improve and reform 
the criminal justice sector in the Wardak Province.  The 
Project will bring the full spectrum of USG community 
resources (infrastructure projects, public education, 
training, etc.), along with international assistance, across 
all components of the Wardak justice system, resulting in an 
efficient system that functions and will serve as a model for 
other provinces.  Subcommittees, under the guidance of JSSP 
experts and Afghan leaders, are developing and will implement 
a comprehensive strategy for increasing successful 
prosecutions and strengthening the organizational structure of 
the provincial prison.  USAID will fund the building of a 
courthouse and CFC-A will fund the building of a new 
Prosecutors Office.  In three months, the group will have a 
full understanding of the inmate population, along with a plan 
on how to address over-detention and other problems. 
 
¶5. (U) Modeled after the Wardak project, the Ghazni Project 
was only recently initiated (December 2005).  Future 
activities of this kind will launch in February/March. 
 
Corrections 
----------- 
 
¶6. (U) JSSP coordinated the development of the design of the 
National Provincial Prisons-Detention Centers Survey.  JSSP 
experts provided analysis and input on the criminal justice 
system aspects of the survey.  The actual surveying, funded by 
2Q9F?