06KHARTOUM853
SUDANESE GOVERNMENT INCREASINGLY OBSTRUCTING
Sat Apr 08 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO6938
PP RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #0853/01 0980414
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 080414Z APR 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2237
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY 0165UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 000853 
 
SIPDIS 
 
AIDAC 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR D, AF/SPG, PRM, AND ALSO PASS USAID/W 
USAID FOR DCHA SUDAN TEAM, AF/EA, DCHA 
NAIROBI FOR USAID/DCHA/OFDA, USAID/REDSO, AND FAS 
USMISSION UN ROME 
GENEVA FOR NKYLOH 
NAIROBI FOR SFO 
NSC FOR JMELINE 
USUN FOR TMALY 
BRUSSELS FOR PLERNER 
ABUJA PASS C. HUME 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: EAID PREF PGOV MOPS PHUM SOCI SU
SUBJECT:  SUDANESE GOVERNMENT INCREASINGLY OBSTRUCTING 
HUMANITARIAN WORK 
 
REF:  A) Khartoum 0824,   B) Khartoum 0797,  C) Khartoum 
 
0454,   D) Khartoum 0320 
 
------------------- 
Summary and Comment 
------------------- 
 
¶1.  In recent months, the Government of National Unity 
(GNU) has increasingly sought to obstruct humanitarian 
work, slowing the delivery of aid to millions of 
displaced people within Sudan.  A host of events 
illustrate the escalation of harassment and restrictions 
directed toward humanitarian organizations: the GNU's 
denial of permission for U.N. Under Secretary-General for 
Humanitarian Affairs Jan Egeland to visit Darfur or fly 
over Darfur en route to Chad; the failure of the GNU to 
extend the agreement allowing the Norwegian Refugee 
Council (NRC) to coordinate aid provision in Kalma camp 
(reftels); an array of ever-changing bureaucratic 
obstacles related to visas and travel permits; the 
refusal of National Security to accept the application of 
U.N. Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA)- especially on 
freedom of movement - to all U.N. agencies; and the 
passing of the new "NGO law" ceding more control of non- 
governmental organization (NGO) activities to the 
government and requiring GNU approval of fundraising 
plans - meaning that the GNU could bar NGOs from 
accepting USG funds.  These events clearly illustrate a 
stronger push on the part of the GNU to restrict 
international community engagement in Sudan.  End summary 
and comment. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Egeland Refused Entry into Darfur/Khartoum 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  On April 4, the GNU refused U.N. Under Secretary- 
General for Humanitarian Affairs Jan Egeland entry to 
Khartoum and Darfur, despite a long-planned and well 
organized visit agreed upon with the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs, including issuance of a Sudanese visa. (Note: 
Egeland's assistant, a German national was refused a visa 
due to his nationality, the U.N. told us.  End note.) 
The harbinger of the changed attitude began when 
Egeland's U.N. plane was refused landing permission in 
Juba by Civil Aviation (Note:  Civil aviation affairs are 
controlled from Khartoum as per the Comprehensive Peace 
Agreement). The U.N. inquired further and was told that 
the visit was now being denied because: (a) the 
government could not provide security; (b) the Prophet's 
birthday was coming up (Note:  Egeland's visit was 
scheduled on April 4 and 5.  The Prophet's birthday is 
celebrated April 10. End note.); and (c) Egeland's 
Norwegian nationality. 
 
¶3.  Egeland traveled to Juba instead by commercial 
carrier and carried out his visit to Juba, Bor, and 
Rumbek as planned.  In Rumbek Egeland met with GNU Vice 
President and GOSS President Salva Kiir, who was 
attending an all-GOSS meeting.  Having been denied a 
visit to South Darfur, Egeland's team proposed a trip to 
West Darfur.  When contacted about the visit, the West 
Darfur Wali welcomed the idea, but later reneged on the 
invitation, likely after consulting with Khartoum.  The 
coup de grace came when Egeland was denied overflight of 
Darfur en route to Abeche in Chad.  The U.N. alleges that 
the entire situation was carefully orchestrated and 
planned to frustrate them, and is a sign of deteriorating 
GNU - U.N. relations. U.N. officials informed donors that 
the U.N. Secretary General will be calling President 
Bashir directly to complain about the treatment of 
Egeland. 
 
--------------------------------- 
NRC Ordered to Leave South Darfur 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  The GNU has ordered Norwegian Refugee Council (NRC) 
to leave South Darfur entirely.  In a letter to NRC dated 
 
KHARTOUM 00000853  002 OF 002 
 
 
March 30, South Darfur officials stated that NRC's safety 
might be in jeopardy due to lingering animosity towards 
Scandinavian countries linked to the controversy over the 
cartoons depicting the Prophet Mohamed.  NRC runs 
separate programs unrelated to the coordination of Kalma 
camp and will continue to do so until Saturday when they 
will fully withdraw their expatriate staff to Khartoum. 
The full impact of NRC's withdrawal is yet to be seen, 
however, the international community believes the 
withdrawal of NRC from Kalma camp could lead to increased 
humanitarian needs and increased protection and human 
rights concerns. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
GNU Obstruction: Too Many Examples to Cite 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶4.  Visa, permit, and employment obstacles are too 
numerous to cite individually.  Despite an agreement with 
the U.N. to expedite visas within 48 hours for 
humanitarian workers for Darfur (the so-called 
"moratorium"), it is common for expatriates to wait 
months.  Often humanitarian aid workers with visas wait 
in Khartoum for months for a Darfur travel permit, which 
may only be valid for a short window of time.  This in 
combination with the prolonged visa issuance process 
significantly impacts humanitarian aid program 
implementation and monitoring. 
 
¶5.  In Darfur humanitarian agencies continue to suffer 
from GNU involvement in day-to-day operations. 
Government officials have inserted themselves into the 
NGO hiring process.  Frequently government officials also 
insist that NGOs hire a local "trainee" at NGO expense. 
In addition to inserting themselves into NGO personnel 
processes, local authorities also require numerous 
additional permits for travel outside the provincial 
capitals. The requirements for obtaining the permits vary 
by office and location. 
 
¶6.  The GNU refuses to recognize U.N. agencies as being 
covered by the SOFA.  The SOFA agreement allows U.N. 
staff freedom of movement in U.N. areas of operation 
without the permits that would otherwise be required.  In 
one instance a U.N. staff member in South Darfur was 
detained by security forces for several hours for 
traveling without a travel permit.  U.N. agencies can not 
effectively implement and monitor programs if their 
freedom of movement is restricted.  The U.N. Mission in 
Sudan (UNMIS) informed the donors that it is considering 
pulling out of the east completely due to movement 
restrictions. 
 
¶7.  In March the government passed a new NGO law that 
severely restricts the ability of civil society to 
operate independently.  Agencies have yet to receive the 
final signed version of the law and do not know when 
implementation of the law will occur.  Based on 
information post has acquired, Article 7 of the act 
requires NGOs to clear all project proposals, including 
funding sources and amounts, through the government.  The 
legislation allows the Sudanese government to reject USG- 
funded programs, especially those viewed as "political." 
(Note:  The GNU has not yet made clear what its 
interpretation of "political" is.  End note.) Donors, 
including European Commission, France, Switzerland, 
Norway, Canada the United Kingdom, Japan, and the U.S. 
have drafted a joint letter to the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs expressing concerns over the passage of the new 
law.  The letter was sent today (septel). 
 
 
STEINFELD