06KHARTOUM466
MFA Summons UN SRSG Pronk
Thu Feb 23 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO6354
RR RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #0466/01 0541124
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 231124Z FEB 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1590
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE
RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 000466 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O.  12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PINR KPKO UN SU
SUBJECT:  MFA Summons UN SRSG Pronk 
 
 
¶1.  On February 20, the Government of National Unity 
(GNU) summoned Jan Pronk, UN Special Representative of 
the Secretary General (SRSG) in Sudan, to register a 
protest regarding UN statements that the GNU believes are 
biased and exceed the UN mandate.  The GNU complained 
about his recent presentation to the UN Security Council 
on Darfur, which the government interpreted as unfair 
condemnation that did not place enough blame on the 
rebels.  The government also criticized SRSG Pronk's 
statements on CPA implementation, the Merowe Dam, and oil 
wealth sharing, which they characterized as uninformed 
and inappropriate. 
 
¶2.  In a press conference on February 21, SRSG Pronk 
responded to the criticism.  He said he is always 
impartial, citing accusations of partiality from both the 
government and the movements as proof of his neutrality. 
He has always remained within his mandate to help 
implement the CPA.  He is occasionally accused of going 
beyond that mandate, he said, because many people poorly 
understand the CPA.  Addressing the protest on the Merowe 
Dam, SRSG Pronk said that a group calling itself the 
"Group of Victims of the Merowe Dam" asked for a meeting 
with the UN.  This group then met with UN staff members 
as part of the UN's efforts to interface with civil 
society. 
 
¶3.  The following is a translation of the GNU press 
release on the meeting, printed as received: 
 
(BEGIN TEXT) 
 
In the Name of Allah, the Most Merciful, the Most 
Compassionate 
 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
 
Press release 
 
The Acting Foreign Minister, Mr. Ali Ahmed Karti, 
summoned today 20.2.2006, Mr. Jan Pronk, the Special 
Representative of the Secretary General to Sudan.  The 
Minister explained that the summon is intended to protest 
the manner in which Jan Pronk and UNMIS are handling 
issues in Sudan and the statements and reports by Jan 
Pronk and his assistants which impinge upon the 
sovereignty of the Sudan, its destiny-related issues and 
its image before the International Community.  According 
to the Minister, this behaviour and manner of handling 
issues have begun giving the impression to the public 
opinion that the United Nations has the right to decide 
Sudan's orientation and will.  The Minister said this 
behaviour is completely unacceptable. 
 
Sudan rejects Jan Pronk becoming "Paul Premier" of Sudan 
(Note: This is a reference to former Iraq Viceroy Paul 
Bremer.  End Note).  If the United Nations and its 
Mission want to assist Sudan - the purpose for which they 
are here and with the consent of the Sudan - Sudan has no 
objection for positive cooperation.  However, if the 
purpose is to implement another agenda then Sudan has the 
right to reject this behaviour, proceeding from its 
sovereign right and freedom to choose its orientation, 
which is consistent with its national interest. 
 
The Minister has cited a number of instances, which 
reflect how Mr. Jan Pronk and his Mission did not abide 
by the agreed manner of cooperation.  For instance, Mr. 
Jan Pronk has been handling issues in a way, which gives 
the impression that the Mission can exceed the government 
to decide how any issue can be resolved, a thing that had 
impact on the behaviour of citizens and the manner in 
which they deal with the Government.  The Acting Minister 
referred to the issue of those affected by the 
construction of Merowe Dam.  He said the Government 
rejects the manner in which UNMIS handles this dossier 
especially that the Government is concerned with the 
interests of its citizens and that doors are open for the 
citizens to cooperate with the state. 
 
In addition, the Minister referred to the manner in which 
UNMIS talks about the progress of implementation of the 
CPA, which, he described as negative and amounts to 
incitement against the state.  He said the Mission should 
have conducted consultations with the Government on 
aspects of implementation of the agreement and to tackle 
issues away from the media, which do not convey full 
facts to the recipients. 
 
The Acting Minister also referred to Mr. Pronk's 
statements before the Security Council on the situation 
on Darfur, and the AU-UN transition.  He pointed out that 
 
KHARTOUM 00000466  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
such statements were intended to reflect that the 
Government is to blame for deterioration of the security 
situation in Darfur and to give the impression that the 
Government is not willing to tackle the situation in 
Darfur.  Mr. Pronk's statement on AU-UN transition 
suggests that this step might be taken without 
consultation or consent of the Government.  The Acting 
Minister explained that this understanding is 
unacceptable for the Government and that no body can 
impose such option on the Sudan.  He added that it was 
the hostile circles which motivated the AU to adopt such 
option, and that demanding the Government to improve the 
situation in Darfur without asking the same from the 
other party - the rebel movements - is a matter which 
runs counter to justice and logic. 
 
The Acting Minister criticized Mr. Pronk's raising of the 
issue of oil and development in the South before the UN 
Security Council last January in a way, which suggests 
that the Government is deliberately hiding facts and is 
denying the Southern people their rights to oil revenues. 
According to the Minister, this is incorrect.  The 
Minister pointed out that the Government of the South is 
the one responsible for deciding how the money is spent. 
Mr. Pronk should have contacted directly the competent 
authority in the State (the Ministry of Finance) to get 
first hand information instead of raising the issue in 
public without evidence. 
 
The Acting Minister also criticized Mr. Pronk's 
statements on the need to replace the Ceasefire Agreement 
in Darfur with another agreement.  He pointed out that 
the parties to the conflict are still discussing 
solutions for Darfur conflict in Abuja and that giving 
such statements impede efforts to achieve solution and 
that his statement is premature as the parties are still 
conducting talks to achieve solution with their own 
consent and conviction. 
 
The Acting Foreign Minister also explained that the rebel 
movements are the main obstacle in the way of 
implementing the cease-fire agreement.  Adding that it is 
not fair to put all the blame on the government regarding 
the security situation in Darfur, and this is what should 
have been reflected in the reports submitted by Mr. Pronk 
to the UN Security Council on a regular basis. 
 
The Acting Foreign concluded by explaining to Mr. Pronk 
that the Sudan is ready to cooperate with UNMIS so long 
as it is honest in its dealings.  However, if it is 
proven otherwise, Sudan has right to take whatever 
arrangements based on its national sovereignty. 
 
In response to the remarks and criticisms of the Acting 
Foreign Minister, Mr. Pronk explained that he is carrying 
out his duties and is considering himself a friend of the 
Sudan and he is always neutral in his assessment.  He 
also explained that given his experience on political 
issues, he is always keen to be accurate in his 
statements, which are sometimes misquoted.  He also 
explained that his statement about the possible 
transition from AU to the UN was based on the agreement, 
in principle, of AU Peace and Security Council.  At this 
point, the Acting Foreign Minister explained to him that 
the international powers, which has vested interest, are 
pushing the AU in that direction. 
 
At the end of the meeting, it was agreed to continue the 
dialogue between the two parties towards more 
coordination and understanding so as to be able to 
address all issues in a responsible and constructive 
manner. 
 
(End Text) 
HUME