06KIEV406
UKRAINE: INL-Funded TIP Training Seminar
Wed Feb 01 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kyiv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KIEV 000406 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/UMB, G/TIP, INL/AEE, AND EUR/ACE 
JUSTICE FOR OIA, AFMLS, NDDS AND OPDAT (LEHMANN) 
MOSCOW FOR RLA AND DHS 
FRANKFURT FOR DHS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV KCRM SMIG KFRD PREF ELAB KWMN UP
SUBJECT:  UKRAINE: INL-Funded TIP Training Seminar 
Highlights Investigation and Prosecution Techniques 
 
REF: KIEV 168 
 
¶1. Summary:  On January 23-25, Embassy Kiev and the 
Prosecutors' Academy of Ukraine co-sponsored a first ever 
training seminar on trafficking in persons (TIP) that 
brought more than 70 members of the Ukrainian Prosecutor 
General's Office (PGO), both prosecutors and investigators, 
as well as local NGO representatives and international 
experts together to discuss Ukraine's recent legislative 
amendments (reftel) in the fight against TIP, as well as 
best practices in preventing, investigating and prosecuting 
TIP cases.  Officials from the PGO and the Ministry of 
Interior (MOI) actively participated with NGOs in the 
three-day training seminar, which was organized by Post's 
DOJ Resident Legal Advisor (RLA) using INL funds.  End 
Summary. 
 
Anti-TIP Training for Prosecutors Seminar in Kiev 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶2.  Embassy Kiev sponsored a January 23-25 anti-TIP 
training seminar for prosecutors at the Prosecutors' 
Training Academy in Kiev.  This is the first in a series of 
planned TIP-related training events for prosecutors.  The 
goal of this training is to develop a cadre of prosecutors 
who will, in turn, train other prosecutors in investigation 
and prosecution techniques for TIP cases.  The goal is to 
increase the number of successful TIP investigations and 
prosecutions. 
 
Materials and Presentations 
---------------------------- 
 
¶3. The conference assembled an experienced American and 
Ukrainian faculty to teach prosecutors.  Embassy Moscow 
Resident Legal Advisor Terry Kinney, a federal prosecutor 
from Chicago, lectured on lessons learned from the American 
experience with trafficking and discussed American anti-TIP 
legislation including the Trafficking Victims Protection 
Reauthorization Act (TVPRA) of 2003.  Victor Vartanian, 
Special Agent, United States Department of Homeland 
Security, lectured on the use of Interpol in a trafficking 
case and human smuggling issues.  Kinney and Vartanian also 
presented a segment on how to conduct a TIP investigation 
and led a round table discussion of best practices.  As a 
practical exercise, Kinney and Vartanian presented the 
attendees with a factual scenario and then discussed what 
investigation steps should be accomplished. 
 
¶4. The Deputy Chief of the TIP unit at the Ministry of 
Interior and Judge Strekalov of the Supreme Court of 
Ukraine presented the Ukrainian TIP experience.  The judge 
discussed investigation and charging problems in TIP cases 
as well as the recent amendment to the TIP statute.  In 
addition, case study presentations were made by prosecutors 
from around the country. 
 
¶5. At a final session, the attendees were divided into two 
groups and presented a factual scenario.  Each group 
discussed the facts and then chose both a prosecutor and an 
investigator to make an oral presentation analyzing the 
case.  This session received the most favorable ratings of 
all the presentations. 
 
Participation by Attendees 
-------------------------- 
 
¶6. More than 70 individuals attended the three-day seminar 
and actively participated in the class, including 
prosecutors in charge of oversight of cases as well as 
prosecutors who act as investigators.  The course provided 
a hands-on training experience as well as exposure to 
international investigation techniques.  The review of the 
Ukrainian TIP experience (both legislative and practical) 
by research fellows from the Prosecutors' Academy, Judge 
Strekalov and regional prosecutors all in set the stage for 
productive discussions. 
 
Post-Seminar Analysis and Comments 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶7. The Prosecutors' Training Academy has cooperated closely 
with Embassy Kiev to develop and coordinate this initial 
training session.  A full evaluation and analysis is 
planned, and then similar training is planned for locations 
throughout Ukraine.  The creation in 2005 of a Department 
for Combating TIP in the Ministry of Interior has resulted 
in a dramatic increase in the number of TIP cases being 
forwarded to the Prosecutor's Office.  The increasing 
number of cases highlights the need for further training 
and identification of Ukrainian prosecutors who can provide 
this training.  The improvement of prosecutors' skills in 
this new field of law for Ukraine should lead to an 
increased number of successful prosecutions.  To that end, 
Embassy Kiev's RLA is also reviewing TIP training for 
prosecutors to be conducted by the International 
Organization for Migration and the Organization for 
Security and Cooperation in Europe, to ensure they do not 
conflict with the RLA program and to assess whether they 
offer a value-added product.  It is clear that significant 
additional training and anti-TIP work is necessary with the 
Prosecutor's Office. 
 
HERBST 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 1 of 3