06KIGALI613
SAO NOT NECESSARY FOR RWANDANS WISHING TO TRAVEL TO US
Wed Jun 28 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kigali
VZCZCXYZ0021
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHLGB #0613 1790605
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 280605Z JUN 06
FM AMEMBASSY KIGALI
TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2944UNCLAS KIGALI 000613 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/C, CA/VO/L/C, CA/VO/L/A, CA/VO/F/P, L/CA, AF/E, DRL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CVIS PREF RW
SUBJECT: SAO NOT NECESSARY FOR RWANDANS WISHING TO TRAVEL TO US 
 
REF: A. 94 STATE 285528 
     ¶B. 96 STATE 217393 
     ¶C. 98 STATE 160376 
 
 
¶1. SUMMARY.  AmEmbassy Kigali and the government of Rwanda 
concur in a recommendation to end the current requirement 
in ref A that Embassies and Consulates submit SAO 
clearances on all Rwandans born before 1981 who are 
applying outside of Kigali for NIV's, IV's, refugee status 
or other travel documents, regardless of the visa 
classification requested.  As an alternative to the SAO, 
the Rwandan Prosecutor General has provided Post a list of 
Rwandans who are wanted by the GOR for involvement in the 
genocide.  Post proposes that this list be loaded into the 
Consular Consolidated Database (CCD).  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. The purpose of the current SAO process is to prevent 
Rwandans wanted for genocide crimes from receiving visas to 
enter the United States. However, the current SAO process 
has led to extensive delays in the issuance of visas to 
Rwandans living outside Rwanda.  It has also meant 
additional time-consuming work for Embassy Kigali, other US 
Embassies and the GOR.  The clearance process has impeded 
last minute travel for important dignitaries, including, in 
are recent example, the Rwandan Ambassador to Switzerland. 
The elimination of the SAO requirement would improve 
customer service for the end applicant and improve the 
efficiency of the adjudication process for Rwandan 
applicants.  The Rwandan government has suggested the 
removal of this requirement and post fully concurs. 
 
¶3. Post and GOR concur that there is a viable alternative 
to the current SAO process that would still meet the goal 
of preventing Rwandans wanted for genocide crimes from 
receiving permits to enter the US.  The GOR has developed 
and provided to Post a list of suspected genocidaires that 
are living outside Rwanda.  Loading these names directly 
into the CCD would make them available to consular officers 
in real time during interviews, eliminating the need for a 
SAO clearance cable to be sent to Kigali.  Post requests 
Department concurrence to put this change into effect and 
notify all posts of this new procedure. 
 
ARIETTI