06KUWAIT3638
COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR TEMIM NUSRATY AND
Sun Sep 10 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kuwait
VZCZCXYZ0006
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHKU #3638/01 2531224
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 101224Z SEP 06
FM AMEMBASSY KUWAIT
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 6638UNCLAS KUWAIT 003638 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AMGT APER ASEC OTRA KU AF COUNTRY CLEARANCE
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR TEMIM NUSRATY AND 
MARK STAMILIO 
 
REF: STATE 148643 
 
 ¶1. Embassy Kuwait welcomes and hereby grants country 
clearance for Temim Nusraty and Mark Stamilio to travel to 
post o/a September 11-14, 2006. 
 
¶2. All arrangements are being handled by Camp Arifjan. 
 
Embassy point of contact is: 
Captain Norman Pollock 
Unclass E-Mail: norman.pollock@swa.arcent.army.smil.mil. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
¶4. Following is Post's standard guidance for visitors to 
Kuwait:  Kuwait now issues single-entry visas to American 
citizens on arrival, upon presentation of a passport.  There 
is a processing fee of 2 KD for each visa issued.  The fee 
may be paid either in KD or USD (approximately 7 USD).  Post 
strongly advises travelers to carry some documentation on the 
purpose of their visit.  Passengers arriving on other than 
commercial flights should anticipate extra delays, because 
immigration services are not available on the military side 
of the airfield and passports have to be carried to a 
different site at the airport for processing.  Airport visas 
are valid for only 90 days after arrival; anyone staying 
beyond this period must obtain an extension, which should be 
requested 10 days prior to expiration.  Anyone departing 
Kuwait who has overstayed the visa will be charged a fine at 
the airport of KD 10 (US$33.50) per day at the airport.  All 
travelers planning to visit Iraq should make sure that they 
obtain exit/entry stamps for each transit through Kuwait, and 
be aware that they will need to obtain a new Kuwaiti visa 
upon return, even after a daytrip to Baghdad.  Failure to do 
so can result in heavy fines.  If possible, travelers should 
try to obtain a multiple-entry visa before arriving in Kuwait. 
 
¶5. Visitors are reminded that the importation of alcohol, 
pork products, personal firearms, and any 
suggestive/pornographic materials (videotapes, magazines or 
books) is strictly prohibited by Kuwaiti law.  Kuwait is 
still clearing mines and munitions. Visitors must remain on 
major paved roads when traveling in Kuwait. Travel North of 
Jahra toward the Iraqi-Kuwaiti border is not authorized 
without approval from the embassy and an appropriate escort. 
 
¶6. Threat Assessment: Kuwait is a high-threat post and the 
military threatcon is currently Charlie.  We have increased 
security precautions at official U.S. installations in Kuwait 
and recommend that all Americans in Kuwait remain alert to 
their surroundings and review their personal security 
practices. 
 
¶7. Fiscal Data (action request): Each visitor to Embassy 
Kuwait must bring or forward fiscal data to cover costs 
incurred during the visit. Each agency, organization, 
delegation or visiting individual will be charged for all 
costs attributed to their visit. These costs include, but are 
not limited to: LES and American staff overtime, vehicle and 
equipment rental, office and medical supplies, telephone 
calls, expeditor services, airport transportation and other 
mileage driven, and representational events. If fiscal data 
on visitor's travel authorization is to be used for this 
purpose, it must be clearly spelled out and sufficient 
funding must be provided. 
 
¶8. Health Unit: All TDY or PCS personnel that would like to 
be vaccinated against smallpox should get the vaccine in 
M/MED in Washington before coming to post. The smallpox 
vaccine for pre-exposure vaccination is not available at 
post. There are prepositioned doses of smallpox vaccine at 
post to be used only if an actual exposure occurs.  The 
smallpox vaccine is being offered to personnel that are 
coming to work at Embassy Kuwait as a strictly voluntary 
protection in case of a possible biological attack. 
 
¶9. Health Advisory for Kuwait: April through October is the 
hot season in Kuwait. Temperatures reach 120-140F in summer. 
Caution should be taken to prevent dehydration and heat 
exhaustion by 1) drinking plenty of fluids and 2) staying 
indoors, especially during peak temperature hours of 
12:00-15:00. Low humidity coupled with high temperatures 
creates excessive moisture loss from evaporation.  It is 
necessary to drink 2-4 quarts of water daily to prevent 
dehydration. 
 
¶10. CAA Access: Visitors who need unescorted access into 
secure areas of the mission must slug cables to the attention 
of the RSO, and include the level of their clearance.  The 
cable should include Social Security Number, and the name of 
the agency granting the clearance.  Cables should include the 
ASEC tag to ensure distribution to the RSO office and the 
Marine Security guard at post one. 
 
¶11. Computer and Electronics usage: Sensitive military 
 
information has been located recently on business center 
computers at local hotels in Kuwait City.  All U.S. 
Government personnel and contractors must remember that it is 
their responsibility to observe good computer and information 
security practices.  Information processed on computers in 
hotel business centers, through email correspondence or 
document creation, is highly exploitable.  Public computers 
located in hotel business centers, internet cafes, airport 
lunges, etc. should never be used to process store or 
disseminate sensitive information.  Compromise of sensitive 
government or military information can result in serious 
damage to national security.  Compromises of sensitive 
personal data can result in significant personal and 
financial hardship.  Random checks are conducted by Embassy 
personnel on public PC's.  Breaches in COMPUSEC will result 
in the violator receiving security infractions and/or 
security violations.  Inter-agency security standards 
prohibit the introduction or use of non-USG owned computer 
hardware and software at all USG diplomatic facilities. Cell 
phones, palm pilots, radios and other convenience electronics 
are prohibited in all secure areas of the mission. 
 
¶12. Embassy Kuwait's normal workweek is Saturday through 
Wednesday. Office hours are 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. 
switchboard number is (965) 259-1001, IVG: 4950000. The after 
hours number which rings at Marine Guard post one is (965) 
538-2098. 
 
¶13.  The time difference with the East Coast of the United 
States is EDT plus 7 hours (in summer) or EST plus 8 hours 
(in winter). 
 
******************************************** 
For more Embassy Kuwait reporting, see: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/kuwait/index. cfm 
 
Or Visit Embassy Kuwait's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/kuwait/ 
******************************************** 
LeBaron