06MADRID958
INVITATION TO THE SECRETARY FOR IBERO-AMERICAN
Wed Apr 19 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Madrid
VZCZCXYZ0006
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMD #0958 1091439
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 191439Z APR 06
FM AMEMBASSY MADRID
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9471UNCLAS MADRID 000958 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL SMIG SP
SUBJECT: INVITATION TO THE SECRETARY FOR IBERO-AMERICAN 
CONFERENCE ON IMMIGRATION 
 
 
¶1. (U) Post received the following letter to the Secretary 
from Enrique Iglesias, Ibero-American Secretary General, on 
April 17.  This letter, along with enclosed Concept Document, 
have also been sent as e-mail attachments to the Spain desk. 
 
Begin text. 
 
Madrid, April 6th 2006 
 
Dr. Condoleezza Rice 
Secretary of State 
 
SIPDIS 
United States of America 
 
Dear Madam Rice: 
 
The Ibero-American General Secretariat (SEGIB) has the honor 
to warmly invite you to the Ibero-American Conference on 
Migration that will take place in Madrid, Spain, on July 18th 
and 19th, 2006. 
 
This meeting has been organized by SEGIB, with the support of 
the Economic Commission for Latin America (ECLAC), through 
its Latin America and the Caribbean Demographic Center 
(CELADE), the International Organization for Migration (OIM) 
and the Carolina Foundation from Spain, following a mandate 
from the XV Ibero-American Summit of Heads of State and 
Government that took place in Salamanca, Spain, in October 
¶2005. 
 
Government officials, executive heads from international 
organizations, recognized experts, and civil society 
representatives will participate in this Meeting, as you will 
read in the Concept Document attached to this letter. 
 
The main purpose of this Meeting is to create, inside the 
Ibero-American Community, a cooperation framework for the 
treatment of international migration, among countries of 
origin, transit and destination of migratory flows. There 
will be an examination of the best practices in Migration and 
Development, Human Rights and Migration and Good Governance 
in Migration Policy in order to review and articulate these 
best practices in the benefit of the countries of the 
Ibero-American community and the migrants themselves. 
 
I would really appreciate thereof that Your Excellency and 
the Minister in charge of Migration Affairs would honour us 
by representing your country in this Conference in order to 
discuss such matters at high political and technical level. 
You will be receiving very soon additional information on the 
working agenda and other organizational matters. 
 
Hoping that you will kindly agree to participate in this 
event, please accept the assurances of my highest 
consideration and esteem. 
 
Sincerely yours, 
 
Enrique V. Iglesias 
Ibero-American Secretary General 
 
End text. 
 
¶2. (U) COMMENT.  As the Department considers its 
participation in this event, Post notes that Ambassador 
Aguirre, by virtue of his recent service as Director of 
Citizenship and Immigration Services for DHS and his 
expertise in Latin America issues, could be an appropriate 
and effective representative on the Department's behalf. END 
COMMENT 
AGUIRRE