06NAIROBI1956
DONOR CONTRIBUTIONS TO SOMALIA DROUGHT
Fri May 05 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Nairobi
VZCZCXYZ0005
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHNR #1956/01 1250652
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 050652Z MAY 06
FM AMEMBASSY NAIROBI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1495
RUEHDS/AMEMBASSY ADDIS ABABA 8498
RUEHDJ/AMEMBASSY DJIBOUTI 4176
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 1676
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME 4918
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 6944
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 3918
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDCUNCLAS NAIROBI 001956 
 
SIPDIS 
 
AIDAC AFDROUGHT 
 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NGAREY 
STATE PASS TO USAID/W 
USAID/W FOR AA/DCHA, WGARVELINK, LROGERS 
DCHA/OFDA FOR GGOTTLIEB, PMORRIS, CGOTTSCHALK, 
KCHANNELL 
DCHA/FFP FOR JDWORKEN, MANDERSON 
AFR/EA FOR JBORNS 
USUN FOR EMALY 
ADDIS ABABA FOR JAUGSBERGER 
BRUSSELS FOR PLERNER 
ROME FOR FODAG 
GENEVA FOR NKYLOH 
NSC FOR JMELINE, TSHORTLEY 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: EAID SO
SUBJECT:  DONOR CONTRIBUTIONS TO SOMALIA DROUGHT 
EMERGENCY 
 
 
Summary 
 
¶1.  To date, donor governments and agencies, including 
USAID, have contributed over 87.8 million U.S. Dollars 
(USD) towards the United Nations (U.N.) humanitarian 
appeal for the drought emergency in Somalia, in 
addition to more than 60.0 million USD outside the 
appeal.  In Fiscal Year (FY) 2006, USAID has provided 
over 84.1 million USD in food and non-food assistance 
for drought relief in Somalia.  However, U.N. agencies 
report funding shortfalls of 60 to 95 percent.  The 
rainy season has begun in Somalia and many donors are 
waiting to see how the rains progress before allocating 
further funding.  Regardless of the rains, humanitarian 
assistance will be required in Somalia through 2006 to 
mitigate the effects of and recover from the current 
drought, as well as to build resiliency to future 
climatic shocks.  End summary. 
 
U.N. Appeal for Somalia 
 
¶2.  On March 21, the U.N. released the revised 
Consolidated Appeal (CAP) for Somalia.  The revised CAP 
seeks nearly 327 million USD, up from the original 
appeal of 176 million USD requested in November 2005. 
The increase reflects additional food and non-food 
requirements to address the needs of 2.1 million food 
insecure and drought-affected people in southern and 
central Somalia, as well as the estimated 400,000 
internally displaced persons throughout the country. 
 
¶3.  On April 7, the U.N. launched a Regional 
Humanitarian Appeal for the Greater Horn of Africa in 
Nairobi requesting nearly 426 million USD, which 
includes the Somalia-specific appeal. 
 
Contributions to U.N. Appeal 
 
¶4.  Of the 327 million USD requested by the Somalia 
CAP, approximately 13 million USD, or 15 percent, is 
covered by carryover contributions.  In addition, the 
U.N. Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF) allocated 
10 million USD to the regional CAP, of which 2.4 
million USD is earmarked for Somalia-specific programs. 
 
¶5.  According to the U.N. Coordination for Humanitarian 
Assistance (OCHA) Financial Tracking System, as of May 
3, the U.N. has received 87.8 million USD in funding, 
including carryover and CERF contributions, covering 
approximately 27 percent of the total requirements for 
Somalia.  The USG is the largest donor to the Somalia 
CAP with approximately 45.8 million USD in 
contributions to food and non-food sectors. 
 
¶6.  Other major donors include Norway (8.9 million 
USD), the United Kingdom (5.5 million USD), Sweden (4.4 
million USD), Ireland (1.6 million USD), Netherlands 
(1.4 million USD), and Italy (1.3 million USD).  Eight 
other donors contributed an additional 3.4 million USD. 
 
¶7.  Approximately 79 percent of contributions (69.7 
million USD) is earmarked for food assistance through 
the U.N. World Food Program (WFP), covering 40 percent 
of food requirements between January and December 2006. 
USAID's Office of Food for Peace (USAID/FFP) is the 
largest contributor of food assistance to Somalia.  In 
FY 2006 to date, USAID/FFP provided 48,350 metric tons 
(MT) of emergency food aid to WFP, valued at 
approximately 33.3 million USD. 
 
 
¶8.  Non-food sectors have received substantially less 
financial support than the food sector.  Total 
contributions to non-food sectors to date amount to 
18.0 million USD.  Donors have contributed (in 
millions) 2.0 USD for coordination and support 
services, covering 19 percent of requirements; 2.4 USD 
for protection, human rights, and rule of law (14 
percent covered); 2.7 for security (10 percent 
covered); and 2.6 USD for health (9 percent covered). 
The agriculture sector received 926,230 USD and the 
water and sanitation received 735,186 USD, covering 5 
and 6 percent of requirements, respectively. 
 
¶9.  In FY 2006 to date, USAID's Office of U.S. Foreign 
Disaster Assistance (USAID/OFDA) provided 700,000 USD 
to the U.N. Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) for 
nutritional surveillance and 1.2 million USD to the 
U.N. Children's Fund (UNICEF) for emergency water and 
sanitation interventions throughout Somalia. 
 
¶10.  In addition to the 87.8 million USD in 
contributions, the U.N. has received pledges from 
donors for 11.2 million USD for programming in 
agriculture, security, water and sanitation, and food 
assistance. 
 
Other Contributions 
 
¶11.  In addition to contributions towards the Somalia 
CAP, donors provide funding to non-governmental 
organizations (NGOs) and international organizations 
(IOs).  In FY 2006 to date, USAID/OFDA has provided 
nearly 900,000 USD to three implementing partners to 
carry out nutrition, water and sanitation, and food 
security programming in drought-affected regions in 
southern and central Somalia.  USAID/OFDA is currently 
reviewing proposals from NGOs for additional 
interventions in the most affected regions.  USAID/FFP 
has provided 54,000 MT of food assistance, valued at 
more than 48.1 million USD, to CARE for distribution in 
southern and central Somalia. 
 
¶12.  According to the OCHA Financial Tracking System, 
donors have pledged more than 14.1 million USD to NGOs 
and IOs operating in Somalia.  [Note:  Donations to 
NGOs and IOs are input into the OCHA Financial Tracking 
System on a voluntary basis by donors.  Not all 
contributions are captured by the system.]  The largest 
recipient of pledges is the International Committee of 
the Red Cross (ICRC) with a total of 8.9 million USD, 
including 6.8 million USD from the United Kingdom, 1.1 
million USD from Australia, and 929,204 USD from 
Norway. 
 
¶13.  Another major donor in the current response is the 
Humanitarian Aid Department of the European Commission 
(ECHO).  ECHO has 5.0 million USD for drought-specific 
emergency interventions and an additional 45.4 million 
USD for longer-term drought recovery and mitigation 
programming in Somalia. 
 
Donor Intentions 
 
¶14.  Donors responded quickly to early warnings on 
drought and the U.N. Appeal for Somalia.  In recent 
discussions with USAID, donors stated that they are 
waiting to see how the current rainy season progresses 
before allocating additional funds to drought 
 
programming in Somalia.  If the rains are good, then 
funding will be directed towards recovery; however, if 
the rains end early and the harvest fails, additional 
emergency assistance will be required to avert famine 
conditions.  Regardless of the performance of the rainy 
season, the humanitarian community agrees that 
assistance will be needed in Somalia at least through 
¶2006. 
 
Local Somali Initiatives 
 
¶15.  Not all contributions to the drought response have 
come from foreign actors.  According to USAID/REDSO 
partner Warn-torn Societies Project (WSP) 
International, civil society in Somalia has responded 
to the drought by mobilizing resources in Mogadishu and 
among the Somali diaspora.  Civil society groups have 
raised more than 230,000 USD and local civic leaders 
have contributed 500 MT of food.  In addition, 
Mogadishu businessmen donated eight water trucks and 
the Mogadishu drought committee rented seven more for 
water trucking operations in southern districts.  USAID 
has also received reports of local Muslim aid societies 
providing assistance to drought-affected communities in 
Somalia. 
 
¶16.  The general public has also been mobilized.  WSP 
International reports that on February 17, the Somali 
Institute of Management and Administration Development 
(SIMAD), a local non-profit educational institute, 
organized a one-time fundraising event in collaboration 
with major radio and telecommunications companies. 
During the four-hour radio program, listeners pledged 
more than 70,000 USD in cash, plus donations in gold, 
food, and clothing. 
 
Conclusions 
 
¶17.  Rains have begun to fall in southern and central 
Somalia; however, it is too soon to determine the full 
impact of the current rainy season on the drought- 
affected communities there.  However, regardless of the 
performance of the rains, humanitarian assistance and 
donor commitment will be required at least through the 
end of 2006 to aid the recovery process. 
 
¶18.  Donors have already provided significant financial 
support for immediate drought relief.  While many 
donors are currently taking a cautious "wait and see" 
stance before allocating further assistance, most agree 
that continued support is needed to mitigate the impact 
of the current drought, as well as to build resilience 
within the most vulnerable populations through long- 
term development assistance. 
 
BELLAMY