06PARIS4714
FRANCE: BLUE LANTERN LEVEL 3: PRE-LICENSE END-USE CHECK ON
Mon Jul 10 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS PARIS 004714 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR PM/DTCC - BLUE LANTERN COORDINATOR 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: ETTC KOMC FR
SUBJECT:  FRANCE: BLUE LANTERN LEVEL 3: PRE-LICENSE END-USE CHECK ON 
APPLICATION 05-999048 
 
REF: STATE 81335 
 
¶1. Per reftel, Post Blue Lantern Action Officer contacted French 
Guiana firm Amazonie Loisirs as well as French authorities to verify 
the bona fides of the end-user. 
 
¶2.  Although we were not able to conduct the requested site visit, 
company owner Pierre Mendez responded to our list of questions by 
letter on July 10.  Following is an unofficial translation of his 
letter: 
 
We confirm that we did order from Outdoors sports headquarters of 
Dayton, Ohio, the merchandise listed in your letter. 
 
The final end users will be residents of Overseas French Department 
of Guiana for the purposes of sporting and recreational shooting. 
 
Amazonie Loisirs was established in 1992.  Pierre Mendez (father) is 
the owner and Patrice Mendez (son) is the director. 
 
Our clients are residents on the French soil of Guiana and must 
present us with the required gun permits. 
 
Our company employs a security system which meets the standards 
required under French law for authorized gun dealers.  We also 
employ an additional surveillance alarm system linked to a private 
security company. 
 
All our sales are itemized in a register with the identity of the 
purchaser. 
 
The applicable laws in force in the territory (of French Guiana) are 
the same as on French national soil. 
 
End unofficial translation. 
 
¶3. The French Prefect for French Guiana was able to confirm that 
Amazonie is registered "armurerie", i.e. a licensed gun dealer, 
authorized to import and resell weapons in the 5th, 6th, and 7th 
categories of French law, specifically hunting rifles and shooting 
rifles.  French Customs also independently confirmed that Amazonie 
has the appropriate authorizations to import and resell these 
weapons. 
 
Stapleton