06PARIS2324
LUNAR AND MARTIAN SPECTRUM COORDINATION -- FIRST
Mon Apr 10 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

100918Z Apr 06UNCLAS PARIS 002324 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/CIP, EUR/WE, AND EUR/ERA 
USDOC FOR NTIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECPS TSPA FR
SUBJECT:  LUNAR AND MARTIAN SPECTRUM COORDINATION -- FIRST 
TECHNICAL PREPARATORY MEETING 
 
 
¶1. Summary: The first technical preparatory meeting for 
intergovernmental coordination on a Spectrum Use Plan for 
Lunar and Martian Space Exploration was held March 20-23 in 
Paris.  The meeting was hosted by the European Space Agency 
(ESA) and jointly chaired by ESA and NASA.  All six of the 
space agencies with Lunar and/or Martian programs -- ESA, 
JAXA (Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency), Roskosmos 
(Russian Space Agency), CNSA (China National Space 
Administration), ISRO (Indian Space Research Organization) 
and NASA along with a representative from the European 
Commission -- were in attendance.  The United States was 
represented by State (EB/CIP), NASA and Commerce (NTIA). 
All six agencies made one or more presentations on their 
exploration programs and their associated radio spectrum use 
plans to support those programs.  There was unanimous 
agreement to develop a spectrum use plan to harmonize the 
spectrum requirements of the six space agencies and to 
pursue enabling interoperability among the space programs. 
End Summary. 
 
¶2. The U.S. team gave two presentations at the meeting.  The 
first was its Space Communication and Navigation 
Architecture through the 2030 time frame and the second was 
the Proposed Frequency Plan for Architecture Elements Used 
for Exploration.  ESA followed with three presentations on 
its "Aurora" program for robotic missions to the Moon and 
Mars (no human missions have been approved yet), its 
spectrum requirements for the program and a "way forward" 
document on Lunar and Martian spectrum coordination.  JAXA 
and ISRO presented their documents on Lunar and planetary 
missions and the spectrum requirements for those missions. 
Roskosmos made two presentations on its robotic and human 
space missions plus a presentation on a commercial Lunar 
program.  CNSA was the last to present and, while its 
presentation was extensive, it was general in nature with no 
mention of the human space missions that have been covered 
in the press and few details on its spectrum requirements. 
In private conversations, the lone CNSA representative 
indicated that their delegation will be larger at the next 
meeting and he clearly understands that we are looking for 
more detailed information. 
 
¶3. Separate spreadsheets were prepared that combined the 
mission requirements of the six agencies and the spectrum 
requirements to support the missions.  These documents were 
reviewed and refined by the participants.  Each agency is to 
submit additions and refinements to these documents prior to 
the second technical preparatory meeting.   A list of ten 
action items was adopted based on the discussions, including 
a suggestion by Japan that we identify the active and 
passive sensing frequencies that may be used by missions in 
the vicinity of the Moon and Mars. 
 
¶4. A major issue for the U.S. team was to generate interest 
in interoperability and cross support among the space 
agencies for the Lunar and Martian programs.  For these 
meetings, interoperability is defined as the ability for 
spacecraft and other mission resources to interact and 
support each other's operation to the extent agreed to by 
the mission sponsors.  This capability is enabled through 
agreement to operate in the same communication RF bands for 
similar functions, but it is only fully implemented when, at 
a later time, mission sponsors may agree on compatible 
communications protocols and operational concepts. 
Interoperability would help to control costs and help ensure 
the success of the space missions.  All of the space 
agencies agreed that they are in favor of enabling 
interoperability with China going along with the agreement 
without comment.  In preparation for the second meeting, 
each agency is to have discussions in their respective space 
agency to determine how interoperability can be achieved. 
Specifically they are to look at a general set of frequency 
bands and their proposed use and provide a list of earth 
stations which could be made available for cross-supporting 
another agency's missions pursuant to appropriate 
agreements. 
 
¶5. The U.S. Team was very pleased with the results of the 
meeting.  All of the objectives for the first meeting were 
met or exceeded.  There was little discussion about the 
intergovernmental meeting.  The final products of these 
meetings and how they will be formalized are still open 
issues.  It was tentatively agreed that the second technical 
preparatory meeting would be hosted by JAXA May 22-23 in the 
greater Tokyo area. 
 
Stapleton