06RABAT1652
STAFFDEL BIXBY'S MEETING WITH PRIME MINISTER JETTOU
Wed Sep 06 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Rabat
VZCZCXRO2769
RR RUEHLMC
DE RUEHRB #1652/01 2491738
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 061738Z SEP 06
FM AMEMBASSY RABAT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4606
INFO RUEHLMC/MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORPORATION WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 RABAT 001652 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV ECON EAID MO
SUBJECT: STAFFDEL BIXBY'S MEETING WITH PRIME MINISTER JETTOU 
 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified - entire text.  Not for internet 
distribution. 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: Prime Minister Driss Jettou told Staffdel 
Bixby in an August 30 meeting that Morocco deeply appreciates 
the United States' decision to enlist in aiding its economic 
development through the Millennium Challenge Account," and 
that it is essential that "America help Morocco succeed." 
Failure, he argued, would be a "catastrophe" that would 
embolden America's enemies.  Jettou reviewed Morocco's 
ongoing political and economic reform efforts and expressed 
appreciation for the work MCC has devoted to preparing the 
Moroccan proposal for submission to its Board of Directors. 
Though the work has taken time, he said, "we recognize that 
the proposal is much improved, and have benefited from the 
process."  He stressed that Morocco's experience has shown 
that development projects must be targeted at vulnerable 
populations; simply aiding growth is not enough, as it often 
does not "reach the poorest."  Staffdel leader Melanie Bixby 
expressed appreciation for the Government of Morocco's 
assistance in organizing the delegation's oversight visit, 
and noted that while it would be following up on some 
specific points, it was very impressed with the work that has 
gone into preparing the Moroccan proposal.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) The Wednesday, August 30 meeting came at the close 
of Staffdel's five day oversight visit to review MCC 
activities in Morocco.  In addition to a formal presentation 
of the proposal by the Moroccan team leaders, the delegation 
met with Ambassador, other Embassy officials, and MCC 
officials, as well as with representatives of 
non-governmental organizations and donors.  Outside Rabat, 
the delegation visited a range of projects that reflect the 
planned components of Morocco's proposal, including a 
facility for artisanal fishermen on the coast south of Safi, 
artisanal and micro-credit projects in Marrakech, and 
agricultural projects in rural provinces outside Marrakech. 
 
¶3. (SBU) In opening the meeting, Jettou, who was accompanied 
by Moroccan MCA Team leader Mohamed Chafiki, stressed the 
strong relationship between the United States and Morocco, 
from Morocco's early recognition of the U.S. to its current 
support for America's efforts against terrorism.  He 
expressed appreciation for America's enlistment in supporting 
Morocco's development initiatives through MCA, and briefly 
reviewed the range of political and economic reforms that the 
Moroccan government has pursued in recent years.  Those 
reforms, he emphasized, aim at enhancing citizens' rights and 
economic well-being, as well as ensuring their participation, 
something that MCC's own emphasis on consultation of 
concerned populations has contributed to.  He noted it is 
Morocco's experience that simply raising economic growth or 
creating infrastructure is not sufficient to reduce poverty. 
Five years of five percent growth, he said, has not been 
enough to reach vulnerable populations.  Instead, projects 
must be specifically targeted at the poorest segments of the 
population, something that he believes the MCC proposal 
succeeds in doing. 
 
¶4. (SBU) In closing, Jettou argued emotionally that the 
United States must "be at Morocco's side and help ensure that 
it succeeds."  "We made the right choice," he said, in 
allying with you, and it is "essential that those who are 
with the United States succeed and be seen to succeed."  The 
alternative, he argued, would be a "catastrophe." 
 
¶5. (SBU) Staffdel members outlined their responsibilities for 
oversight of MCC activities to ensure both that Congress' 
wishes are respected and that taxpayer money is well spent. 
They noted that while they may have specific follow-up 
questions, they had been impressed with the overall proposal 
and particularly appreciated the way in which it focused on 
specific economic activities for impoverished populations, 
rather than large infrastructure projects, which enable money 
to be spent quickly but may have a less direct impact on 
poorer communities unless deliberate efforts are made to link 
them in.  Jettou noted that it has taken time to get 
Morocco's proposal ready for the MCC Board, but that Morocco 
recognizes that the proposal has been significantly improved 
through the process. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Ambassador noted that Staffdel's presence was a 
signal of the importance that the U.S. and the Congress in 
particular attach to Morocco.  He expressed appreciation for 
the Prime Minister's own contribution to the elaboration of 
the project, and added that while the infrastructure 
investments the GOM has made in the past may not yet have 
paid off in improved income for the poorest Moroccans, they 
have established a base on which other such projects can 
build. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Comment: Jettou made clear his deep commitment to 
 
RABAT 00001652  002 OF 002 
 
 
the MCC project, and his hope that it be finalized in the 
near future.  When informed this would not be possible by the 
end of the year, he was clearly somewhat disappointed, but 
hoped that next spring would be possible.  End Comment. 
 
¶8. (U) This cable was cleared by Staffdel Bixby. 
****************************************** 
Visit Embassy Rabat's Classified Website; 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/rabat 
****************************************** 
 
RILEY