06TELAVIV1236
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Thu Mar 30 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 TEL AVIV 001236 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
USCINCCENT MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
Mideast 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Leading media reported that President Bush called 
Acting PM Ehud Olmert to congratulate him over Kadima's 
election victory and to invite him to the White House 
after he forms his new government.  Maariv and the 
leading news web site Ynet reported that Olmert 
promised the President that he would assemble a broad- 
based coalition as soon as possible.  Maariv also wrote 
that Olmert promised Bush that like Sharon, he would 
make efforts at progress in the peace process.  Maariv 
and Israel Radio also reported that Egyptian President 
Hosni Mubarak congratulated Olmert and invited him to 
visit Egypt. 
 
All newspapers led with matters related to Olmert's 
efforts to form a government coalition, the most 
prominent topic being the finance portfolio, claimed 
both by Kadima and the Labor Party.  Ha'aretz quoted 
Olmert associates as saying that if there was no 
choice, the Defense Ministry could go to the Labor 
Party.  Olmert was quoted as saying in an interview 
with Maariv that he would not rule out asking the Likud 
to join his coalition.  Ha'aretz reported that on 
Wednesday, the right-wing parties Likud and Yisrael 
Beiteinu, which seek to put together a government 
without Kadima, contacted Labor Party Chairman Amir 
Peretz, offering him the post of prime minister if he 
forms a coalition with the right.  The media speculated 
on the possible cost of a "social" government.  All 
media reported on growing calls on Binyamin Netanyahu 
and Yossi Beilin to resign the leadership of their 
respective parties (Likud and Meretz) in the wake of 
the poor results their parties achieved in the 
elections. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that many US Jews were please by the 
Israeli election's results. 
 
Israel Radio and Ynet reported that the UN Security 
Council unanimously decided to give Iran 30 days to 
suspend its nuclear enrichment activity.  The radio 
said that Russia and China toned down the language of 
the resolution.  Israel Radio also reported that 
President Bush reiterated his concern about Iran's 
nuclear program. 
 
All media (emphasis in Ha'aretz) quoted Palestinian PM 
Ismail Haniyeh as saying on Wednesday after the 
swearing-in ceremony for his cabinet in Gaza that the 
Hamas government is prepared to give negotiations 
between PA Chairman [President] Mahmoud Abbas and 
Israel a chance.  Ha'aretz quoted Haniyeh as saying: 
"If what Abu Mazen presents to the people as a result 
of negotiations serves its interest, then we too will 
redefine our position."  Leading media reported that in 
Khartoum on Wednesday, Abbas called on the new Israeli 
leadership "to work to stop the wars and threats and to 
choose the option of peace."  Abbas was further quoted 
as saying: "We are prepared to resume immediate 
negotiations with Israel but the new government must 
abandon the intention to impose solutions in a 
unilateral manner."  Ha'aretz reported that sources in 
the Israeli defense establishment told the newspaper 
last night that the question of relations with the PA 
will be discussed today at Defense Minister Shaul 
Mofaz's weekly situation assessment with senior IDF and 
Shin Bet officials.  Ha'aretz quoted the sources as 
saying that officers have not been given any new 
directives regarding coordinating security with their 
colleagues in the PA. The sources were quoted as saying 
that the officers understand that they cannot liaise 
with officials or security people affiliated with 
Hamas, but that meetings are otherwise permitted for 
now.  Ha'aretz quoted State Department Spokesman Sean 
McCormack as saying on Wednesday that US diplomats were 
instructed to clarify beforehand whether Palestinian 
officials were affiliated with Hamas, since US law 
forbids any exchange with members of a terrorist 
organization.  Yediot reported on the US decision 
without citing McCormack. 
 
Ha'aretz cited the belief expressed by senior GOI 
sources in Jerusalem Wednesday that Assistant Secretary 
of State for Near Eastern Affairs David Welch and 
Deputy US National Security Advisor Elliott Abrams will 
today demand, during their meetings with Israel's 
political and military leadership, that that the 
passages for goods into the Gaza Strip remain open. 
The Jerusalem Post and Israel Radio reported that soon 
after Hamas formally took power on Wednesday, Canada 
announced it was suspending aid to the PA.  The radio 
reported that Canada would continue humanitarian aid 
through UN agencies. 
 
All media reported that on Wednesday, a would-be 
suicide bomber was apprehended at an IDF checkpoint in 
the Jordan Valley.  He was allegedly on his way to 
carry out an attack in central Israel. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that the US did not comment 
on the election of Rafi Eitan, leader of the Gil 
Pensioners' Party, to the Knesset.  Eitan is considered 
an "unindicted co-conspirator" in the Jonathan Pollard 
spy case and might be taken in for questioning if he 
enters the US. 
 
Maariv reported that an interview with the Israeli 
Ambassador to the US on Instapundit, the most popular 
"blog" in the US, has become a hit. 
 
All media reported that Daylight Saving Time begins at 
2:00 a.m. on Friday, when clocks will be moved forward 
to 3:00 a.m.  Until the US begins Daylight Saving Time 
at 2:00 a.m., April 2, Israel will be eight hours ahead 
of the Eastern US rather than the current seven. 
 
 
 
-------- 
Mideast: 
-------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized: "The 
statements voiced [in Israel] in the past 24 hours, 
according to which withdrawing from the West Bank is 
not an urgent matter and may not occur during the 
government's first year, are very disturbing." 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Aluf Benn wrote in Ha'aretz: 
"If Olmert wants American recognition, withdrawal to 
the separation fence will only be the opening 
position." 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post 
editorialized: "Further withdrawals would be 
irresponsible without first reaching an effective 
agreement with the international community providing 
tangible diplomatic benefits for Israel." 
 
Liberal op-ed writer Ofer Shelach commented in mass- 
circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot: "[Olmert] will 
have to exhaust every avenue of talks with a 
Palestinian partner." 
 
Contributor Yakov Shaus wrote in conservative Russian- 
language daily Vesty: "Under the current political 
situation it doesn't look as though a durable 
government capable of surviving through the next 
elections is being created." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
Â¶I.  "Kadima's Historic Role" 
 
Independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized (March 
30): "On election eve, Ehud Olmert promised to bring 
into his government only partners that would declare 
support for a unilateral disengagement from the West 
Bank.  That must be the basic condition for forming the 
government, and it is, in effect, the raison d'etre of 
any government led by Kadima -- a party with one clear 
mission, in whose hands the Israeli public has 
entrusted the historic task of leaving the West Bank. 
The statements voiced in the past 24 hours, according 
to which withdrawing from the West Bank is not an 
urgent matter and may not occur during the government's 
first year, are very disturbing.  If this measure is 
not carried out soon, it may never be done at all." 
 
II.  "Olmert's Troubles Ahead" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Aluf Benn wrote in Ha'aretz 
(March 30): "All of Olmert's predecessors since the 
outbreak of the first Intifada have ended their terms 
to the left of the positions on which they were 
elected.... It's hard to believe that Olmert will 
manage to break this tradition, or will even try to do 
so -- certainly not after the election results 
strengthened the left wing of his future coalition. 
The conclusion is that if Olmert wants American 
recognition, withdrawal to the separation fence will 
only be the opening position.  That means that even the 
sacred settlement blocs, the stronghold of Israeli 
consensus, will have to shrink.... The [resulting] map 
[was] accepted by the Palestinian partners to the 
Geneva initiative, and it will allow the Americans to 
argue that it will form the basis of a viable 
Palestinian state in the future.  These decisions 
remain in the distance.  First, Olmert will have to 
establish a coalition and waste a few months ostensibly 
'searching for a partner' on the Palestinian side 
before turning to implementation of a unilateral 
withdrawal in the West Bank.  But his policy is leading 
him to the point where he will have to retract his pre- 
elections statement that /Ariel is Israel.'  And then 
people will be able to argue that Olmert, too, is not 
fulfilling his promises." 
 
III.  "Olmert's Obligations" 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post 
editorialized (March 30): "Olmert bravely jettisoned 
much of the ambiguity he had inherited from Sharon as 
to his future path.  Rather than continuing to claim, 
as Sharon had done, that he had 'no plans' for further 
withdrawals, Olmert promised to establish our 
'permanent borders' by 'converging' tens of thousands 
of Judea and Samaria [i.e. West Bank] settlers behind a 
completed security fence.... Now that the election is 
behind us, it is very important that Olmert resolve the 
conflict between conciliatory statements and potential 
heavy-handed action by reiterating his promise to 
consult, and by implementing that promise in a sincere 
and serious way.  The public much preferred the balance 
struck between sensitivity, persuasion and force 
employed during the evacuation of the Gaza settlements 
to that displayed at Amona.  Nor is sensitivity enough. 
Kadima has pledged not only that it would preserve as 
wide an internal consensus as possible, but that 
international support for its plan would be sought as 
well.  The latter is not a luxury but a necessity; 
though called 'unilateral,' further withdrawals would 
be irresponsible without first reaching an effective 
agreement with the international community providing 
tangible diplomatic benefits for Israel.... The 
internal and external aspects are directly related: the 
more the government is able to deliver significant 
international benefits, the more understanding and 
support it will receive here at home." 
 
IV.  "Stalled Unilateralism" 
 
Liberal op-ed writer Ofer Shelach commented in mass- 
circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot (March 30): 
"Olmert's election promise of a year to a year and a 
half of attempts to engage in negotiations is turning 
into a buoy for him and his future government.  He'll 
have to exhaust every avenue of talks with a 
Palestinian partner: Even with an Abu-Mazen with 
plucked feathers and -- saying it aloud or not -- with 
the Hamas government.  With all the boasting about 
drying up the Palestinian Authority and [applying] 
international pressure in order to topple it, Ismail 
Haniyeh's status looks no less stable this morning than 
Ehud Olmert's.  This is a blow to the futile dream, 
according to which Israel can determine its borders and 
its future by itself, and act as if the Palestinians do 
not exist.  This is also a blow to the flight from 
reality that made most Israelis ignore the ... 
withdrawal from Gaza and its consequences." 
 
Â¶V.  "The Diminishing, Still to Be Formed Coalition " 
 
Contributor Yakov Shaus wrote in conservative Russian- 
language Vesty (March 30):"Following the Oslo 
agreements, the differences between the right and the 
left [in Israel] started disappearing.... Will Prime 
Minister Olmert be able to create a national consensus? 
If the Labor Party and Meretz-Yahad join the coalition, 
[Israel] will quickly lean to the left ... start talks 
with Hamas thus, as always, leading to a situation in 
which terrorists would be getting more than 
[originally] expected and [the number of] terror 
attacks increase.  [Then], the opposition [to Olmert's 
government] supported by ultra-Orthodox would press for 
early elections. Olmert might try to avoid leaning on 
the left wing, but he ... already warned that 
supporting the unilateral disengagement policy would be 
a condition for joining the coalition.... Even in case 
Lieberman as a pragmatic politician [joins the 
coalition] ... he won't abandon his intention to become 
the national camp's leader, and therefore . [after some 
time] ... with the support of the right wing and ultra- 
Orthodox parties would bring down the government.. 
Nobody in Kadima could ... compete with Sharon, but 
Olmert is not seen as a national leader: everybody 
understands that he got the party as a gift for his 
loyalty to Sharon.... Under the current political 
situation it doesn't look as though a durable 
government capable of surviving through the next 
elections is being created." 
 
JONES