06TELAVIV2759
AMCIT EVACUATION FROM THE GAZA STRIP
Wed Jul 12 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TEL AVIV 002759 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR CA/OCS/ACS/NESA, NEA/IPA 
 
E.O.  12958: N/A 
TAGS: CASC GZ KPAL PREL IS ISRAEL RELATIONS COUNTERTERRORISM
SUBJECT: AMCIT EVACUATION FROM THE GAZA STRIP 
 
REF: JERUSALEM 02871 
 
¶1.  Summary: On July 8, in a joint effort between 
Embassies Tel Aviv and Amman and the Consulate General 
Jerusalem, 68 American citizens were removed by bus 
from the Erez border crossing to the Allenby Bridge. 
From there they crossed into Jordan, where other buses 
brought them to Amman. End summary. 
 
¶2. Responding to requests for logistical and liaison 
help from ConGen, on July 7 representatives from 
Embassy Tel Aviv's Regional Security Office and 
Consular Section met with Lt. Colonel Uri Singer, Head 
of the Foreign Relations and International 
Organizations Department at the Erez crossing, in an 
attempt to create a protocol that would allow Amcits to 
leave the Gaza Strip.  At the time, the number of 
people requesting evacuation was numbered at around 
¶150.  Lt. Col. Singer confirmed that a July 8 
evacuation would be possible, pending Shin Bet vetting 
of the proposed evacuees, but requested clarified lines 
of communication between USG entities and the GOI, and 
a different format for the submission of Amcits' names. 
 
¶3. Working late into the night July 8, the Embassy 
formatted the Amcits' vital data and forwarded it to 
the GOI for security vetting.  Clearance was granted 
for around 100, of whom only 68 were eventually 
evacuated, due to the Amcits' own lack of proper 
preparation, documentation or timely presentation on 
the Gaza side of the Erez crossing. 
 
¶4. Two buses and one van traveled across green-line 
Israel from Erez to Allenby Bridge.  RSO and CONS Tel 
Aviv escorted this convoy, in accordance with an 
agreement with the Israeli Security Agency (Shin Bet) 
requiring that the evacuees be under RSO Tel Aviv 
control.  Also present was the Embassy's Nurse 
Practitioner to handle any health-related issues, 
especially those that might result in an evacuee's 
request to be allowed to stay in Israel or the West 
Bank to seek medical treatment. 
 
¶5. Prior to departure en route Allenby Bridge, RSO Tel 
Aviv was advised that approximately seven special cases 
would require attention.  There were AmCits without 
Palestinian passports and an East Jerusalem ID card 
holder without the proper documentation to travel.  RSO 
Tel Aviv personnel at Allenby Bridge worked with the 
GOI authorities, ensuring that the GOI procedures were 
met. 
 
¶6. As requests for help have continued to pour in to 
ConGen ACS, Embassy Tel Aviv stands ready to aid in any 
further efforts to assist American citizens who seek to 
depart from the Gaza Strip. 
 
JONES