06USUNNEWYORK915
LARSEN TELLS SECURITY COUNCIL WHY SYRIA NEEDS TO
Thu May 04 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO4162
OO RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHKUK RUEHMOS
DE RUCNDT #0915/01 1241319
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 041319Z MAY 06
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8916
INFO RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT IMMEDIATE 0692
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS IMMEDIATE 0287UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 USUN NEW YORK 000915 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV UNSC LE SY
SUBJECT: LARSEN TELLS SECURITY COUNCIL WHY SYRIA NEEDS TO 
DO MORE ON UNSCR 1559 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary. During private consultations with the UNSC 
on April 26, UN Special Envoy Terje Roed-Larsen robustly 
argued that full implementation of UNSCR 1559 would not be 
achieved until Syria responded to Lebanon's offer to 
demarcate their shared border and establish diplomatic 
relations.  Characterizing these measures as operational 
requirements at "the heart" of UNSCR 1559, he firmly rejected 
the Russian argument that these issues are strictly bilateral 
matters.  Lebanon, he said, "simply can't do it alone."  On 
Sheba'a Farms, Larsen wryly observed that "maps are not 
occupied" to insist that delineation of the border could 
proceed despite Israeli control of the area.  Praising 
Lebanon's National Dialogue for its decision to disarm 
Palestinian militias in Lebanon, Larsen argued that both the 
Taif Agreement and UNSCR 1559 demand that Hizballah follow 
suit.  While he reiterated SYG Annan's view that no leader 
should remain in office beyond his term, Larsen declined 
further comment on the fate of Lebanese President Lahoud by 
noting the National Dialogue would soon take up the issue. 
He replied to USUN Ambassador Sanders's question about 
Iranian interference in Lebanon by explaining that he 
maintains a dialogue with all countries with influence on 
those "parties" critical to implementation of UNSCR 1559. 
While Russia offered a general defense of Syria's compliance 
with UNSCR 1559, Qatar and China delivered relatively neutral 
interventions that called for full implementation of the 
resolution but cautioned against outside pressure on the two 
sides.  Argentina, however, expressed reluctance to "impose" 
a solution.  Tanzania, Congo, and Japan joined the P-3 in 
welcoming the prospect of a new resolution.  End Summary. 
 
Larsen Gives Impressive Performance 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) While he praised the significant progress achieved 
in the implementation of UNSCR 1559 over the past six months, 
Larsen noted that several provisions of the resolution had 
yet to be fulfilled:  the disbanding and disarmament of all 
Lebanese and non-Lebanese militia; the extension of GOL 
control over all Lebanese territory; strict respect for the 
sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity, and political 
independence of Lebanon; and the holding of presidential 
elections.  He made clear that implementing these provisions 
would depend on the cooperation of parties other than 
Lebanon.  Specifically, he called on Syria to respond to the 
"outstretched hand" Lebanon had offered to delineate their 
common border, especially in the Sheba'a Farms area, and to 
establish full diplomatic relations.  Larsen praised the 
decision taken in the Lebanese National Dialogue to disarm 
Palestinian militias outside refugee camps in Lebanon, but 
observed that the Taif Agreement -- which was endorsed by the 
Arab League -- and UNSCR 1559 both demand that all Lebanese 
and non-Lebanese militia be disarmed.  While acknowledging 
that some Lebanese see Hizballah as a "resistance group," 
Larsen insisted that the fact that Hizballah is outside the 
control of the GOL means that it is a militia that should be 
disarmed.  He called on "all parties who have the ability to 
influence Hizballah and other militias" to urge them to 
disarm in order to facilitate Lebanon's historical 
transformation. 
 
France and UK Support USG 
------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) France and the UK joined USUN Ambassador Sanders in 
defending the need for an ongoing UNSC role in fully 
restoring Lebanon's sovereignty and in calling on the Council 
to act on PM Siniora's request for continued UNSC support. 
Both strongly urged Syria to respond to Lebanon's offer to 
establish diplomatic relations and demarcate their shared 
border, with the UK specifically rejecting Syrian arguments 
that these issues should be handled bilaterally.  Recalling 
references to Iran in the latest report on UNSCR 1559 
implementation, the UK highlighted the obligation of all 
countries to implement the resolution and averred that Iran 
"must become part of the solution rather than part of the 
problem."  French PermRep de la Sabliere did not cite Iran by 
name but called on "all those with influence on militias to 
build on the progress of the National Dialogue."  Declaring 
that the UNSC should "face up to its responsibility to 
support Lebanon," de la Sabliere announced that France would 
present a draft text to reinforce Larsen's report and the 
implementation of UNSCR 1559 in the next few days. 
 
Russia Fronts for Syria 
----------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Offering a general defense of Syria's position, 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000915  002 OF 003 
 
 
Russian Deputy PermRep Dolgov argued that Syria had complied 
with UNSCR 1559 by withdrawing its troops from Lebanon.  He 
characterized demarcation of borders and establishment of 
diplomatic relations as "bilateral issues" to be decided 
between the two sides alone.  He expressed hope that PM 
Siniora would visit Damascus soon.  The Russian DPR said "the 
only solution" to the question of Lahoud's authority is for 
the Lebanese to resolve the issue themselves "with no outside 
participation."  Describing Hizballah as an "internal 
Lebanese organization," Dolgov recalled the group's origins 
vis-a-vis Israel to explain away its refusal to disarm.  He 
went so far as to dismiss concerns about a continued Syrian 
intelligence presence in Lebanon by arguing that as a 
sovereign state, "Lebanon is open to ordinary intelligence 
activities."  Praising Syria's "cooperative approach" to its 
relations with Lebanon, Dolgov noted that Syria had just 
welcomed UNIIIC head Brammertz to Damascus for an interview 
with President Asad.  He welcomed Larsen's finding that no 
arms had been transferred across the Syrian-Lebanese border 
after February 2006 and asked the Special Envoy about 
Lebanese media reports to the contrary.  He regretted 
"sharp-tongued" statements about Syria by certain Lebanese 
politicians, blaming such Lebanese rhetoric for the current 
tension. 
 
Qatar and China Relatively Neutral 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) Qatar and China delivered relatively neutral 
interventions calling for full implementation of UNSCR 1559. 
Recognizing that the National Dialogue had confirmed the need 
for a "strong and positive bilateral relationship" between 
Syria and Lebanon, the Qatari PermRep opined that these links 
should be based on "mutual respect and shared history" and in 
a manner the two states "deem suitable."  China avoided 
comment on any of the contentious aspects of Larsen's 
presentation, with the sole exception of an assertion that 
Lebanon's internal issues (presumably a reference to Lahoud's 
presidency) should be resolved in a "constitutional manner." 
The Argentinian PermRep urged Syria to cooperate fully with 
Lebanon, but argued that dialogue between the two sides 
should not be imposed from the outside.  On Sheba'a Farms, 
however, he stated that Israeli occupation of the area is "no 
excuse (for the government of Lebanon) to fail to fulfill 
UNSCR 1559" by disarming militias and extending its authority 
over all its territory. 
 
Other UNSC Members Generally Support Larsen 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Most other UNSC members voiced general support for 
Larsen's efforts to implement UNSCR 1559.  Peru and Denmark 
urged Syria and Lebanon to demarcate their border and 
establish diplomatic links.  Noting Siniora's contention that 
Sheba'a Farms is the key to resolving the militia issue, Peru 
asked if the UNSC could take custody of the area pending its 
transfer to Syria or Lebanon.  Slovakia and Tanzania agreed 
with Peru that Sheba'a is a key to resolving the issue and 
that its status should be clarified.  The Japanese expressed 
hope that Lebanon would hold free and fair presidential 
elections, while Greece observed that full implementation of 
UNSCR 1559 would help ensure stability in the region.  Japan, 
Tanzania, and Congo welcomed the prospect of a new 
resolution. 
 
Larsen Rebuts His Critic(s) 
--------------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) After interventions by UNSC delegates, Larsen 
offered a spirited rebuttal of the Russian position and 
defended his own interpretation of the UNSCR, arguing that 
resolving the issue of the border and establishing embassies 
are operational requirements of 1559.  Citing language from 
the resolution, he said these two activities are  "part and 
parcel" and "the heart" of UNSCR 1559.  Achieving Lebanon's 
territorial integrity requires establishment of the border 
with Syria; obtaining strict respect for Lebanon's 
sovereignty and political independence depends upon the 
establishment of embassies.  He observed that Syria and 
Lebanon are the only two countries in the Arab League without 
diplomatic relations.  In an indirect bid for a new 
resolution, he advised the Council that it "takes two to 
tango" and "Lebanon can't do it alone." 
 
¶8. (SBU) On Sheba'a Farms, Larsen recalled the history of 
UNSCR 425, highlighting the conclusion by the UN 
Secretary-General in 2000 that the area is Syrian territory 
 
SIPDIS 
-- a conclusion that the Council has repeatedly endorsed, 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000915  003 OF 003 
 
 
including Syria during its term as an elected member of the 
Security Council.  He explained however, that the Blue Line 
is a line of withdrawal, not a formal boundary, and clarified 
that the UN had therefore maintained it was subject to 
review.  Now that Syria and Lebanon have agreed that the 
territory is Lebanese, Larsen mused that the two sides are 
well-positioned to draw a line delineating their border.  He 
outlined three ways to do so.  The first two options -- 
international arbitration or referral to the International 
Court of Justice -- are not feasible because Syria has 
rejected third party involvement.  The remaining option is a 
bilateral agreement between the two countries.  Larsen 
rejected the argument that Israeli control of Sheba'a 
prevents negotiation of such an agreement, observing that 
"maps are not occupied" and that the delineation process 
could begin immediately.  Demarcation of the physical border, 
he averred, could be addressed later. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Larsen responded to questions about Lahoud's 
authority by reiterating SYG Annan's view that no leader 
should serve longer than his term in office, a principle 
which he said applies to Lebanon as well.  He agreed that 
Hizballah's fate should be decided domestically, but on the 
basis of the Taif Agreement and UNSCR 1559.  Describing UNSCR 
1559 as an "instrument in support of Taif," which he recalled 
has been endorsed by the Arab League, Larsen reported that 
Taif had stipulated that all militias should be disbanded 
within six months.  By contrast, the Security Council had not 
established a deadline in UNSCR 1559.  Discounting Lebanese 
media reports of arms transfers from Syria to Lebanon after 
February 2006, Larsen said he had no information to back up 
these claims.  He admitted that while the GOL and SARG had 
supplied conflicting reports about the presence of Syrian 
intelligence in Lebanon, he had no way to verify either 
story.  In response to Ambassador Sanders's question about 
Iranian interference in Lebanon, Larsen explained he engaged 
in a dialogue with those countries that have influence on the 
"parties" (i.e., Syria and Iran) whose support is essential 
to achieve implementation of UNSCR 1559. 
 
Comment: Delineation vs. Demarcation 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶10. (SBU) Larsen's aide Fabrice Aidan told us that Larsen 
chose to emphasize "delineation" of the border on the map 
rather than physical "demarcation" on the ground as a way to 
counter arguments that Israel must withdraw from Sheba'a 
Farms before the process of establishing the Syrian-Lebanese 
border can begin. 
BOLTON