06USUNNEWYORK2085
SECURITY COUNCIL REAFFIRMS UNSCR 1559 GOALS AMID
Thu Nov 02 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO7947
OO RUEHAG RUEHAST RUEHBC RUEHBZ RUEHDA RUEHDBU RUEHDE RUEHDF RUEHFL
RUEHGI RUEHIK RUEHKUK RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHLH RUEHLN RUEHLZ RUEHPW
RUEHROV RUEHSR RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUCNDT #2085/01 3062031
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 022031Z NOV 06
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0642
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUCNISL/ISLAMIC COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 USUN NEW YORK 002085 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL UNSC KPKO IS LE SY
SUBJECT: SECURITY COUNCIL REAFFIRMS UNSCR 1559 GOALS AMID 
CALLS TO END ISRAELI OVERFLIGHTS 
 
REF: STATE 180176 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary.  During an October 30 closed-door briefing 
to the Security Council on the SYG's latest report on UNSCR 
1559 implementation, SYG Special Envoy Terje Roed-Larsen 
praised the "historic" deployment of the Lebanese Armed 
Forces (LAF) to south Lebanon, but highlighted the 
unfulfilled requirements of 1559: the need for the GOL to 
ensure full control over all its territory, hold free and 
fair presidential elections, and disarm all Lebanese and 
non-Lebanese militias.  Larsen said an effort by SYG Annan is 
in full swing to find a "territorial definition of Sheba'a 
Farms that is legally and cartographically defensible" given 
the contradiction between the cartographic record and recent 
Syrian and Lebanese statements that the area is Lebanese, but 
he declined to specify a timeline to present these 
conclusions.  Emphasizing that UNSCR 1701 incorporates UNSCRs 
1559 and 1680, Larsen underscored that all states -- 
particularly Lebanon's neighbors -- must comply with the arms 
embargo imposed under resolution 1701 and warned that 
hostilities could resume if Iran and Syria continued 
providing arms to Hizballah. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Summary, cont'd.  Larsen defended the non-specific 
nature of the report's reference to continuing violations of 
the arms embargo by explaining that senior GOL officials did 
not want to cited as the sources of information about arms 
transfers from Syria because they feared retaliation.  During 
his intervention, Ambassador Bolton expressed concern that 
Syria and Iran are actively trying to destabilize the GOL and 
called on the two countries to abide by their obligations to 
respect Lebanon's sovereignty and political independence. 
French PR de la Sabliere joined Ambassador Bolton in calling 
for progress on disarmament and strict respect for the arms 
embargo.  Russia, China, and several other non-permanent UNSC 
members supported France's call that Israel should cease 
overflights completely.  After the closed-door session, the 
Council adopted a Presidential Statement (PRST) reaffirming 
the need to fully implement UNSCR 1559 and calling on all 
states and parties as mentioned in the SYG's report to 
cooperate towards this goal.  End Summary. 
 
Larsen Offers Overview 
---------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Introducing the SYG's fourth semi-annual report on 
UNSCR 1559 implementation, Larsen praised the "historic" LAF 
deployment to south Lebanon but highlighted the unfulfilled 
requirements of 1559, including the need for the GOL to 
ensure full control over all its territory, hold free and 
fair presidential elections, disarm all Lebanese and 
non-Lebanese militias, and ensure strict respect for 
Lebanon's political independence, sovereignty, unity, and 
territorial integrity.  He commended GOL Prime Minister 
Siniora for his "able leadership" during the recent conflict 
with Israel, noted Speaker of Parliament Nabih Berri's plan 
to resume Lebanon's National Dialogue on November 6, 2006, 
and concluded that the government needs to recover its 
momentum toward the consolidation of the Lebanese state lost 
over the summer.  Recalling the SYG's characterization of 
Israel's "persistent and provocative" overflights of Lebanon 
as violations of UNSCRs 1559 and 1701, Larsen called on the 
GOI to cease this practice immediately.  Emphasizing that 
UNSCR 1701 incorporates UNSCRs 1559 and 1680, he expressed 
hope that the Security Council would retain its lead in 
ensuring implementation of these resolutions, but stated 
clearly that others needed to play their part, as well.  The 
conditions that challenged Lebanon -- a weak state beset by 
forces of extremism -- threatened the entire region, he 
concluded. 
 
Defining Sheba'a Farms 
---------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) While underlining that only an agreement between 
Syria and Lebanon could settle the issue of the Sheba'a Farms 
with finality, Larsen said the SYG was in the meantime 
exploring the possibility of a "temporary solution" based on 
public statements by Syrian and Lebanese officials to the 
effect that Sheba'a is Lebanese.  He acknowledged that this 
conclusion would contradict the Council's consistent 
position, reached on the basis of extensive cartographic 
evidence, that Sheba'a was not Lebanese (in this regard he 
noted additionally that UNDOF and UNIFIL areas of 
responsibility have always been based on the assumption that 
Sheba'a is not Lebanese).  But Larsen suggested that Syrian 
statements that Sheba'a is Lebanese might constitute a "new 
 
USUN NEW Y 00002085  002 OF 004 
 
 
legal reality."  The SYG, therefore, had assigned 
cartographers and UN lawyers to determine if it is possible 
to find a "territorial definition of Sheba'a Farms that is 
legally and cartographically defensible," and noted the issue 
also had a significant political dimension.  This effort was 
in full swing and would soon revert to the SYG, although 
Larsen declined to specify a timeline for completion given 
the "massive" cartographic challenges involved.  He also 
underscored the need for diplomatic relations between Lebanon 
and Syria, observing that bilateral dialogue is the "best and 
civilized way" to resolve border disputes. 
 
Disarmament and Arms Embargo 
---------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) Describing disarmament of all militias in Lebanon as 
a "key element" in securing a permanent end to hostilities as 
well as completing Lebanon's transition to a sovereign, 
democratic state, Larsen expressed the expectation that the 
GOL would present a timeline to move this process forward. 
He agreed with Russia, Qatar, Argentina, and others that the 
best way to resolve the issue of militias is through a 
domestic political process, but he added that the 
international community should encourage all parties to 
respect the GOL's declaration that it seeks to exercise a 
monopoly over the use of force.  Hizballah, Larsen stated, 
must become solely a political party. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Noting that Iran and Syria maintain a close 
relationship with Hizballah, including arms transfers, Larsen 
underscored that all states -- particularly Lebanon's 
neighbors -- must comply with the arms embargo established in 
UNSCR 1701.  Responding to Russian criticism of the reference 
in the SYG's report to continued arms shipments into Lebanon 
in violation of the embargo (see para 9), Larsen explained 
that senior representatives of the GOL had told the UN about 
weapons transfers from Syria before, during, and after the 
summer's hostilities, but had asked the Secretariat not to 
publicize these reports because they feared retaliation. 
When SYG Annan raised these reports with SARG President Asad 
in Damascus, Larsen said the Syrians did not deny that such 
transfers had taken place but claimed they were instances of 
smuggling and that the Syria-Lebanon border was impossible to 
control. 
 
U.S. and France Mostly Agree 
---------------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Drawing from reftel points, Ambassador Bolton 
praised LAF deployment to the south while calling for the 
full implementation of UNSCR 1559 -- including disarmament of 
Hizballah.  Avoiding the subject of Hizballah disarmament, he 
argued, could actually result in weakening the GOL. 
Ambassador Bolton expressed concern that Syria and Iran are 
actively trying to destabilize the GOL and called on them to 
abide by their obligations to respect Lebanon's sovereignty 
and political independence.  He demanded that Syria abide by 
the commitments it made to SYG Annan to respect the arms 
embargo established under UNSCR 1701.  Tying UNSCRs 1559 and 
1680 to 1701, Ambassador Bolton urged the SYG to maintain 
momentum towards implementing these resolutions by reporting 
to the Council on Syrian and Iranian adherence to the arms 
embargo, as well as efforts to ensure that Hizballah and 
other militias inside Lebanon disarm. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Joining Ambassador Bolton in calling for the full 
implementation of UNSCR 1559, French PR de la Sabliere 
described the existence of Hizballah's weapons an "attack" on 
GOL sovereignty and said Lebanon must begin a political 
process leading to Hizballah disarmament within the 
weapons-free zone and beyond.  He underscored the need for 
full respect for the arms embargo.  But de la Sabliere also 
expressed "grave concern" at GOI overflights of Lebanon, 
which he said endanger the safety and credibility of UNIFIL 
and the GOL, and he called on Israel to stop this practice 
completely.  While praising the LAF's deployment to the 
south, he also noted that Israeli forces remain in the 
northern part of the village of Ghajjar.  The French PR 
expressed support for efforts to resolve the issue of the 
Sheba'a Farms and noted in this regard the GOL's seven-point 
plan to place the disputed area under UN trusteeship until 
its permanent status is decided. 
 
Russia Questions Larsen on Arms Shipments 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) While agreeing that all states and parties bear 
 
USUN NEW Y 00002085  003 OF 004 
 
 
responsibility for enforcing the arms embargo established 
under UNSCR 1701, Russian DPR Dolgov questioned the reference 
in the SYG's report to continued arms smuggling into Lebanon 
in violation of the embargo.  Declaring the embargo to be an 
"extremely sensitive issue" and one on which Russia has a 
"serious position," Dolgov argued the UNSC could only take 
action based on concrete facts.  If there are facts to 
substantiate these reports of embargo violations, the Council 
should consider them.  If not, it must avoid "generalized 
conclusions" that inflame emotions.  In this context, Dolgov 
cited statements by the SARG and GOL Defense Minister Murr 
that there have been no instances of arms smuggling across 
the Syrian-Lebanese border since the passage of UNSCR 1701. 
 
Frequent Calls for End to IAF Overflights 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) Russia, China, Qatar, Greece, Ghana, Congo, 
Slovakia, and Argentina joined France in expressing strong 
concern about Israeli overflights of Lebanon and in calling 
on the GOI to cease this practice altogether.  Most of these 
delegations explicitly echoed the SYG's conclusion that 
Israeli overflights constitute a violation of UNSCR 1701. 
Russian DPR Dolgov claimed there is "no serious 
justification" for these "provocations." 
 
Regional Context: Borders, Embassies, MEPP 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶11. (SBU) Japan, Denmark, Slovakia, Tanzania, and France 
urged Syria and Lebanon to delineate their border and 
establish diplomatic relations.  Russia, China, Qatar, and 
Argentina, however, repeated their traditional position that 
these issues should be settled bilaterally between the two 
sides.  China argued that issues related to Lebanon and Syria 
should be seen in the context of the broader Middle East 
peace process.  It would be difficult to make progress on one 
issue without addressing the broader challenges facing the 
region. 
 
Text of UNSC Presidential Statement 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶12. (U) After closed consultations, Japanese PR Oshima (as 
President of the UNSC) read out the following Presidential 
Statement (PRST): 
 
The Security Council recalls all its previous resolutions on 
Lebanon, in particular resolutions 1559 (2004), 425 and 426 
(1978), resolution 520 (1982) and 1680 (2006), and resolution 
1701 (2006), as well as the statements of its president on 
the situation in Lebanon, in particular the statement of 18 
June 2000, of 19 October 2004, of 4 May 2005, and of 23 
January 2006. 
 
The Security Council reaffirms its strong support for the 
territorial integrity, sovereignty, unity, and political 
independence of Lebanon within its internationally recognized 
borders. 
 
The Security Council welcomes the fourth semi-annual report 
to the Security Council of 19 October 2006 on the 
implementation of resolution 1559 (2004). 
 
The Security Council notes that important progress has been 
made towards the implementation of resolution 1559 (2004), in 
particular through the deployment of the Lebanese Armed 
Forces in the south of the country for the first time in 
three decades, but it also notes with regret that some 
provisions of resolution 1559 (2004) have yet to be 
implemented, namely the disbanding and disarming of Lebanese 
and non-Lebanese militias, the strict respect for the 
sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity, and political 
independence of Lebanon, and free and fair presidential 
elections conducted according to the Lebanese constitutional 
rules, without any foreign interference and influence. 
 
The Security Council commends the Lebanese government for 
extending its authority throughout its territory, 
particularly in the South, and encourages it to continue its 
efforts in this regard. 
 
The Security Council reiterates its call for the full 
implementation of resolution 1559 (2004) and urges all 
concerned states and parties as mentioned in the report to 
cooperate fully with the Government of Lebanon, the Security 
Council, and the Secretary-General to achieve this goal. 
 
USUN NEW Y 00002085  004 OF 004 
 
 
 
The Security Council reaffirms its support to the 
Secretary-General and his Special Envoy in their efforts and 
 
SIPDIS 
dedication to facilitate and assist in the implementation of 
all provisions of resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1680 (2006). 
 
The Security Council acknowledges the Secretary-General's 
intention to revert to the Council in his next report on 
implementation of resolution 1701 and looks forward to his 
further recommendations on the relevant outstanding issues. 
BOLTON