06WARSAW819
INTERNATIONAL TRACING SERVICE:  POLAND SUPPORTS
Thu May 04 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Warsaw
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS WARSAW 000819 
 
SIPDIS 
 
EUR/NCE FOR VERNELLE TRIM AND EUR/OHI JOHN BECKER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AORC KNAR PREL PL MFA
SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL TRACING SERVICE:  POLAND SUPPORTS 
OPENING BAD AROLSEN ARCHIVES 
 
REF: STATE 48290 
 
¶1.  As requested reftel, Poloff delivered demarche request to 
the Polish MFA on April 27.  Poland's representative to the 
upcoming meetings in Luxembourg will be the MFA's Witold 
Spirydowicz.  Given the movement of the Germans on the issue 
of access to the Bad Arolsen archives, we proceeded with the 
meeting with Spirydowicz, to learn if the Poles had changed 
their position as well. 
 
¶2.  Spirydowicz claimed that Poland will now support the 
U.S.-German compromise to provide historians access to the 
Bad Arolsen archives.  He told Poloff that Poland will 
support the proposed amendments to the two governing 
treaties, and anticipated no difficulties at the upcoming 
Luxembourg meetings.  Spirydowicz said that now that the 
United States and Israel had agreed to a minimal standard of 
protecting private data (albeit lower than the European 
Union's standard), Poland would agree with Germany that 
access to the records should be granted broadly.  As to 
timing he said that it may take several months to draw up the 
rules governing such access, but they could be in place by 
the end of the year.  Spirydowicz said the only possible 
glitch to the new arrangement would be whether any of the 
responsible states would require parliamentary approval for 
the changes to the treaties governing Bad Arolsen.  With 
respect to Poland, he did not anticipate any problem with the 
Sejm. 
 
¶3.   With respect to reftel's separate language about 
Spirydowicz's lack of cooperation in the past, post will 
double track the demarche with other senior MFA officials. 
HILLAS