07ADDISABABA2825
Codel Jackson-Lee Advocates Agricultural Technology and
Tue Sep 18 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Addis Ababa
VZCZCXRO0011
PP RUEHROV
DE RUEHDS #2825/01 2610612
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 180612Z SEP 07
FM AMEMBASSY ADDIS ABABA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7825
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHMFISS/CJTF HOA PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ADDIS ABABA 002825 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL EAGR PHUM ET SO
SUBJECT: Codel Jackson-Lee Advocates Agricultural Technology and 
Human Rights 
 
Summary: 
¶1. Congresswoman Sheila Jackson Lee advocated for U.S. Technology as 
well as the need for Ethiopia to adopt land reform and 
liberalization of the fertilizer and seed markets to help Ethiopia's 
farmers enhance agricultural yields during a very cordial meeting 
with Prime Minister Meles on August 31.   The Congresswoman also 
pressed for the right of peaceful demonstration and raised questions 
on human rights issues stemming from demonstrations during the post 
2005 national elections which led to the deaths of 199 and arrests 
of thousands.  Accompanied by Congressmen Steve Chabot and Adrian 
Smith, Representative Jackson Lee also thanked the Prime Minister 
for Ethiopia's contributions to peacekeeping operations in Burundi 
and Liberia, its role in bringing peace to Sudan, and in stabilizing 
and supporting Somalia's Transitional Federal Government. 
Jackson-Lee asked for Ethiopia's continued efforts in assisting 
internally displaced persons in Sudan and Sudanese refugees. 
 
¶2. Prime Minister Meles remarked that Congressional legislation 
(H.R. 2003) focused on Ethiopia was an unfair criticism of 
Ethiopia's efforts to promote democracy.  He reviewed the tough 
negotiations with the opposition party after the 2005 elections and 
the refusal of the leadership to take their seats in parliament and 
Addis Ababa City Hall.  Meles noted the pardon the government 
granted to 71 former leaders of the opposition party and 
journalists, underscoring that the former detainees were given due 
process for their roles in the post election violent demonstrations. 
 Meles added that the government is making significant progress on 
the process of democratization, and human rights are being 
addressed.  On Agriculture, the Prime Minister said more work needs 
to be done to enhance yields and to become more self sufficient. 
Privitization, however, is difficult, but he noted that growth is 
averaging a remarkable 10 percent per annum.  End Summary. 
 
Regional Stability: 
 
¶3. Congresswoman Sheila Jackson Lee, accompanied by Congressmen 
Steve Chabot and Adrian Smith, as well as Major Thomas (escort 
officer), Ms. Brown (Foreign Affairs Committee Staff), Ambassador 
(note taker), and PolOff (control officer), met with Prime Minister 
Meles, Director General of American and European Affairs of the 
Foreign Ministry Tesfai, and Chief of Staff Gebretensai on August 
¶31.  Representative Jackson Lee thanked the Prime Minister for 
Ethiopia's commitment to peacekeeping operations in Africa.  Its 
troops, she noted, contributed to stability in Burundi and Liberia 
and she appreciated Ethiopia's commitment to provide troops for the 
hybrid operations in Sudan and Somalia.  Jackson-Lee did call on the 
Prime Minister to make every effort to support Sudan efforts.  The 
Congresswoman expressed support for Ethiopia's efforts to stabilize 
Somalia and support the Transitional Federal Government.  As a 
member of the Homeland Security Committee, the Congresswoman also 
praised Ethiopia's counter terrorism efforts and cooperation with 
the U.S. in the region. 
 
¶4. Prime Minister Meles thanked the U.S. for its close intel sharing 
relationship and also for its commitment to support Ethiopia meet 
logistical needs, such as procurement of C-130 spare parts to help 
its troops meet security as well as peacekeeping requirements. 
Meles also appreciated the U.S. commitment to support the 
U.S.-established command and staff college will help professionalize 
the Ethiopian military. 
 
¶5. On Somalia, Meles said the TFG is making progress, but lamented 
the slow pace of troop support for AMISOM.  Ethiopian troops, 
supported by Ugandan troops, continue to bear the burden for 
security.   Meles noted Eritrea as a threat to regional stability 
and security through its arms supply to extremists in Somalia. 
While noting that Ethiopia is committed to resolving the border 
conflict with Eritrea, Meles argued that the Eritrea-Ethiopia 
Boundary Commission which met on September 6 went beyond its 
mandate.  Ultimately, Meles noted, the parties must resolve their 
problems and normalize relations. 
 
¶6. Meles reiterated Ethiopia's commitment to Sudan.  Ethiopia is 
prepared to send 5,000 troops to the Hybrid AU-UN force.  He agreed 
with Representative Jackson-Lee to continue support for Sudan peace 
efforts, critical to regional stability. 
 
¶7. Representative Chabot thanked the Prime Minister for Ethiopia's 
commitment to counter-terrorism efforts and the cooperation between 
the two countries.  Meles noted that Admiral Hart, commander of the 
CJTF-HOA, visited Ethiopia recently and that through CJTF and 
CENTCOM, Ethiopia was an important partner with the U.S. on the war 
on terrorism.  Representative Smith urged the Prime Minster to 
explain any misunderstandings and the importance of cooperation, as 
well as agricultural development.  He also commended the Prime 
 
ADDIS ABAB 00002825  002 OF 003 
 
 
Minister for Ethiopia's efforts on peacekeeping. 
 
Improving Ethiopia's Economy: 
 
¶8. Representative Jackson Lee asked the Prime Minister about poverty 
reduction efforts and questioned why Ethiopia is still at a low USD 
300 per person annual income.  She suggested that U.S. technology 
may help per acre yields and raised the issue of land reform through 
private ownership as well as liberalizing the fertilizer and seed 
markets to help farmers become more productive.  Meles avoided the 
issue of liberalizing fertilizer and seed markets, which are 
controlled by the ruling party.  While he did not specifically 
address U.S. technology, he has in separate discussions acknowledged 
the importance of new techniques and technology to help expand 
acreage yield, which remains far below productivity in other 
countries.  Meles explained that Ethiopia is making steady progress 
with 10 percent annual growth.  On privatization of land, Meles 
argued that land ownership was not the reason for low productivity. 
(Note: The World Bank and farmers themselves say privatization 
should not be the focus).  Meles explained that 85 percent of the 
population are rural based with each family having an average of 
only a half a hectare of land.  In the low lands, farmers can have 
hundreds of hectares, but based on tradition, quality of soil and 
harsh climate in the low lands, farmers still remain tied to the 
highlands.  Meles added that even though farmers do not own their 
land, the family controls the land and is passed from one generation 
to the next. 
 
¶9. Meles said the solution is not land sale, which could result in 
creating thousands of unemployed people unable to sustain 
themselves. The answer is commercialization of the small plots of 
land -- from high value rose and vegetables to other types of small 
non-farm commercial ventures.  He stressed export led growth as an 
important factor in fighting poverty.   Another area for growth is 
livestock.  Noting USAID's important contributions to expanding the 
quality of livestock as well as marketing for export, Meles 
acknowledged that Ethiopia has a long way to go to develop its 
livestock market, the tenth largest in the world. 
 
Congressional Concerns over Human Rights: 
 
¶10. Representative Jackson-Lee said that recent legislation proposed 
by Congressman Payne (H.R. 2003) reflects the deep concerns of the 
Ethiopian American community and by Members of Congress on human 
rights in Ethiopia.  She noted that Meles can play a role in shaping 
the debate, addressing the concerns, and explaining the events of 
¶2005.  Meles replied that the 2005 national elections were 
remarkable, but the post election period met with the opposition 
party calling for an orange revolution to take over the government. 
The EU election observer head, Anna Gomes of Portugal, said the 
opposition won, but only focused on Addis Ababa, an opposition 
stronghold.  President Carter reported there were irregularities, 
but said the ruling party won the election.  Meles argued that the 
government did all it could to negotiate with the opposition, many 
refused to take their seats in Parliament and the Addis Ababa City 
Hall, while most of the opposition parliamentarians did take up 
their seats in parliament.  In the end the arrest and subsequent 
trial and conviction of some of the leaders was unavoidable.  Meles 
added that they were given due process.  The pardons granted to the 
final 71 opposition leaders and journalists were meant to put this 
issue aside and focus on the progress being made on 
democratization. 
 
¶11. Meles called the proposed Congressional legislation a 
misunderstanding of the progress being made to promote democracy and 
human rights.  At one point out of frustration, Meles asked why 
Congress focuses on alleged ills of Ethiopia yet Eritrea with its 
continued detention of eleven ministers without due process, arrests 
of families whose children do not serve in the military and arrests 
of religious leaders and followers is not condemned by Congress. 
 
Comment: 
 
¶12. The visit by Codel Jackson-Lee was significant because it 
highlighted clearly for the Prime Minister the concerns of Congress 
about Ethiopia's human rights record and, more important, the lack 
of information provided by the GOE on what it is doing to address 
such concerns.  It also underscored for the Prime Minister that 
there is no conspiracy by the U.S. Congress and the U.S. press to 
raise criticism of Ethiopia.  While Congress does recognize much of 
the important contributions made by Ethiopia to regional peace and 
stability, Ethiopia must do a better job articulating what it is 
doing to advance human rights and what it is doing to correct 
problems.  Rep Jackson-Lee noted that it is important for Ethiopia 
to create an environment to promote the ability of opposition groups 
 
ADDIS ABAB 00002825  003 OF 003 
 
 
to demonstrate peacefully without fear of arrest.  End Comment. 
YAMAMOTO