07BAGHDAD2011
RELIGIOUS RECONCILIATION CONFERENCE ENDS WITH
Mon Jun 18 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO8577
RR RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #2011/01 1691708
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 181708Z JUN 07
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1752
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 002011 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KDEM IZ
SUBJECT: RELIGIOUS RECONCILIATION CONFERENCE ENDS WITH 
ACCORD, POTENTIAL FUTURE ACTION 
 
 
¶1. (U) Summary:  The two-day Iraqi Inter-Religious Congress 
conference on the violence in Iraq brought together a 
geographically and ethnically diverse group of approximately 
55 religious and tribal leaders and parliamentarians. 
Although the primary product of the conference was agreement 
on a religious accord calling for a reduction of violence, 
conference organizers highlight the vehicle for dialogue that 
the event created.  During a side meeting, PM Maliki 
expressed to the delegation his strong support for the future 
work of the Congress.  End Summary. 
 
---------------------- 
The two-day conference 
---------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) The Foundation for Relief and Reconciliation in the 
Middle East (FRMME) and Canon Andrew White of the Anglican 
Church hosted the Iraqi Inter-Religious Congress (IIRC) on 
June 11-13 in Baghdad, the first of a series of conferences 
to address the problems facing Iraq from a religious 
perspective.  The conference, which was funded by the 
Department of Defense, brought together religious leaders to 
discuss methods of reducing violence within Iraq and to 
create a 'vehicle for dialogue' for the future. 
 
¶3. (U) The delegation fluctuated around 55 delegates and was 
comprised of Sunni, Shia, Christian, Kurdish, and Yezidi 
religious and tribal figures.  The conference organizers 
noted that this was the broadest representation of religious 
leaders, both by sect and geography, held in Iraq in the last 
37 years.  A number of parliamentarians attended the first 
morning while the press was present; only two, Samia Aziz 
Mohamed (PUK) and Safia al Sohail (Iraqiyya) attended the 
entire event.  Sheikh Fateh Kashkhif al Ghita, a Shia, 
moderated the discussions throughout. 
 
¶4. (U) The delegates broke into groups to work on sections of 
the final conference accord and Canon White and a group of 
ten delegates chosen as representatives (five Sunni, four 
Shia, and a Christian), agreed upon the text of the accord 
and signed it.  The full text of the accord is in paragraph 
¶11. 
 
¶5. (U) Throughout the conference, participants from all 
sides, including Sunni and Shia, made strong statements of 
support for the GoI and the Constitution, as well as for the 
establishment of rule of law throughout the country.  Many of 
the religious leaders were also focused on combating 
corruption throughout the GoI, and expressed worries that 
this corruption was spreading to the general population. 
Though facilitators refocused the conversation on the 
reduction of violence, the theme of corruption appeared in 
much of the discussion throughout. 
 
---------------------- 
Support from PM Maliki 
---------------------- 
 
¶7. (U) On the first day of the conference, a small group of 
delegates was invited to the Office of Prime Minister Maliki. 
 According to Canon White, the PM welcomed the delegation and 
told them that Iraq needed more of these conferences.  The PM 
also was "totally committed to this process" and "fully 
backed FRRME's efforts for the Iraqi people." 
 
-------------------- 
Possible Follow-ups? 
-------------------- 
 
¶8. (U) In a May 31 meeting, Canon White had told the 
Ambassador that he hoped to create a council of religious 
leaders who would meet regularly to discuss these issues.  He 
also had said that there was the possibility of a conference 
in Najaf, if it received Sistani's blessing.  While the IIRC 
has planned some follow-up, they have yet to finalize 
significant details for future actions. 
 
¶9. (U) The staff of FRRME indicated that they were reluctant 
to hold another conference in Baghdad, due to chronic 
problems with water and electricity availability at al-Rashid 
Hotel, where the conference occurred.  The staff believes 
that a conference held in a city such as London or Cairo 
would have a much greater appeal and attract more delegates. 
However, they did not rule out the possibility of a meeting 
in Najaf, provided that it received the support of the 
Marja'iya. 
 
¶10. (U) Canon White also briefly discussed a set of four 
working groups that would handle implementation of the 
accord.  However, it was not clear who would serve on these 
working groups or what their goal was beyond simply broad 
implementation of the accord.  The staff of the IIRC 
 
BAGHDAD 00002011  002 OF 003 
 
 
indicated that the members of each of these working groups 
were currently being decided.  The IIRC planned for a group 
the focus on religion and culture, one to focus on 
international relations, one to focus on reconstruction, and 
one to focus on the preservation and restoration of holy 
places. 
 
¶11. (U) The English translation of the accord provided by the 
IIRC can be found below: 
 
BEGIN TEXT 
 
In the name of God who is Almighty, Merciful and 
Compassionate, 
 
We clerics, intellectuals and political leaders gathered at 
this congress pray and appeal for the peace of Iraq and 
declare our commitment to doing all in our power to ensure to 
end all acts of violence and bloodshed which are in violation 
of the right to life, freedom and dignity.  "We have 
dignified man" (a verse from the Holy Quran).  We as Iraqis 
from different traditions have decided to endeavor to live 
together as one family respecting the moral and religious 
integrity of every individual and we call upon all to condemn 
and renounce the culture of incitement, hatred and the 
demonization of the other. 
 
According to our faith traditions killing human beings in the 
name of God is a desecration of the laws of heaven and 
defames religion not only in Iraq but in the world. 
 
¶1. We seek to rebuild our country, the country of Iraq. 
 
¶2. The acts of violence, terrorism, corruption, and all forms 
of oppression are contrary to the lofty principles of all our 
faiths. 
 
¶3. The traditions of faith from antiquity have created and 
nurtured Iraq as the Land of Holy Places.  The sanctity of 
all our places of worship and religious sites must be 
protected and preserved by all.  The freedom of religious 
worship must be guaranteed for all.  "No coercion in 
religion" (a verse from the Holy Quran). 
 
¶4. While we acknowledge and encourage the efforts of the 
government towards reconciliation, peace, and security we 
remind the government of its commitment to the mandate it has 
been given by the people.  We call on the political leaders 
in Iraq to support the principles of the constitution as they 
work for a just, fair and peaceful democracy, according to 
the divinely inspired commandments of messengers and prophets. 
 
¶5. We as religious clerics are against the criminal spread of 
arms in Iraqi society and ask for the removal of unauthorized 
weapons to create a safer civil society. 
 
¶6. We call on and urge the international community to assist 
in the positive spiritual, political, and economic 
reconstruction of Iraq away violence and chaos and in line 
with the International Compact for Iraq. 
 
¶7.  We denounce Al Qaeda and other extremist groups and we 
commit ourselves to a new model of truth, openness and 
reconciliation which will enable the spiritual, political and 
physical restoration of Iraq. 
 
¶8. We shall devote ourselves to continue our joint efforts 
for the unity of the people of Iraq and for the creation of a 
climate of togetherness in which our present and future 
generations may live with mutual trust and respect.  We shall 
also educate our present and future generations to maintain 
this commitment while denouncing all forms of terrorism and 
extremism, political, religious, or otherwise. 
 
¶9. We the clerics and intellectuals seek these goals of 
success, prosperity, fair governance, and religious freedom 
while denouncing the corruption and misuse of authority.  We 
recognize these goals require us to preserve these efforts 
with the integrity of our mutual commitments through a 
continuing process of vested actions, committees, and 
meetings that produce the results of our message.  We seek 
God Almighty's help in this regard and pledge to recruit 
likeminded leaders and remain unwavering in our desires to 
live in a free and sovereign Iraq. 
 
¶10. We implore the Iraqi Government and the Parliament to 
speed up and activate the recommendations of all national, 
tribal, and religious reconciliation meetings in order to 
achieve balance and fairness according to the capabilities 
and expectations of the Iraqi people. 
 
END TEXT. 
 
BAGHDAD 00002011  003 OF 003 
 
 
CROCKER