07BEIJING569
PRC/AFRICA: MFA PRESS BRIEFING ON HU JINTAO'S
Thu Jan 25 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO7914
RR RUEHBZ RUEHCN RUEHDU RUEHGH RUEHGI RUEHJO RUEHMA RUEHMR RUEHPA
RUEHRN RUEHROV RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #0569/01 0251007
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 251007Z JAN 07
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4134
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE
RUEHZO/AFRICAN UNION COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 BEIJING 000569 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV XA SU CH
SUBJECT: PRC/AFRICA: MFA PRESS BRIEFING ON HU JINTAO'S 
UPCOMING TRIP TO AFRICA 
 
 
¶1. Key points made by Assistant Foreign Minister Zhai 
Jun at the January 24 MFA press briefing on President 
Hu's upcoming visit to Africa were: 
 
-- Hu will visit Africa from January 30 to February 10, 
including stops in Cameroon (Jan. 30-Feb. 1), Liberia 
(Feb. 1), Sudan (Feb. 2-3), Zambia (Feb. 3-5), Namibia 
(Feb. 5-6), South Africa (Feb. 6-8), Mozambique (Feb. 
8-9) and Seychelles (Feb. 9-10). 
 
-- The PRC believes the Sudan Government seeks to 
improve the situation in Darfur and that the Darfur 
issue must be resolved through dialogue. 
 
-- The PRC opposes sanctions on the Sudan Government. 
 
-- China feels it is unfairly criticized for its trade 
practices with Africa, which are mutually beneficial 
to China and Africa. 
 
-- Hu will announce increased Chinese investment in 
Africa and establish the first of 35 proposed 
investment zones in Zambia during the trip. 
 
Eleven Days, Eight Countries 
---------------------------- 
 
¶2. AFM Zhai Jun announced that President Hu will visit 
eight African countries from January 30-February 10, 
his first trip abroad in 2007.  The trip is designed 
to implement the eight steps to promote China-Africa 
cooperation Hu outlined last year during the Beijing 
Summit of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation 
(FOCAC), to consolidate trade and development ties and 
to strengthen and deepen China's new strategic 
partnership with African countries, AFM Zhai said. 
Providing a run-down of each State Visit, AFM Zhai 
noted that President Hu could not visit all forty- 
eight countries that attended FOCAC in one trip, but 
the eight countries to be visited vary in size, region 
and length of time of diplomatic ties with the PRC so 
as to be representative of the broad scope of China's 
links with Africa.  AFM Zhai noted that each country 
supported the one China policy and said that President 
Hu would discuss relevant trade and development 
concerns at each stop in addition to local and 
regional issues.  The leaders of the eight countries 
each attach great importance to President Hu's visit 
and have arranged carefully to ensure positive 
outcomes, AFM Zhai said. 
 
Cameroon: Smooth Ties 
--------------------- 
 
¶3. AFM Zhai described China-Cameroon bilateral ties as 
smooth.  President Hu will pay a state visit to 
Cameroon from January 30 to February 1 at the 
invitation of President Biya, following Biya's recent 
visit to China.  Hu will meet with the President and 
the Speaker of Parliament and visit a Chinese 
construction project.  The leaders will discuss local 
and regional concerns and exchange views on FOCAC 
implementation.  Trade between the two countries 
reached USD 338 million for the first eleven months of 
2006, a 100 percent year-on-year increase from 2005. 
Cameroon has become an approved tourist destination 
for Chinese tour groups, AFM Zhai noted. 
 
Liberia: Burgeoning Trade 
------------------------- 
 
¶4. On February 1 President Hu will pay a state visit 
to Liberia at the invitation of President Johnson 
Sirleaf, AFM Zhai said, noting President Johnson 
Sirleaf paid a state visit to China in connection with 
FOCAC.  The Liberian government greatly values its 
relations with China, which were reestablished in 2003, 
and the visit will promote further growth in the 
bilateral relationship, AFM Zhai said. President Hu 
will meet with President Johnson Sirleaf and other 
leaders, attend the opening of a Chinese-sponsored 
malaria control center and visit Chinese military and 
police personnel participating in the United Nations 
Mission in Liberia peacekeeping operation.  Trade with 
Liberia reached USD 375 million during the first 
eleven months of 2006, up 305 percent from 2005, AFM 
Zhai said. 
 
Sudan: Major Trade Partner 
-------------------------- 
 
BEIJING 00000569  002 OF 004 
 
 
 
¶5. President Hu will visit Sudan from February 2-3 at 
the invitation of President al-Bashir, who has twice 
visited China, AFM Zhai said, noting that bilateral 
relations have grown smoothly since they were 
established in 1959.  President Hu and President 
Bashir will discuss bilateral and regional issues of 
mutual interest, including the situation in Darfur. 
Noting Sudan is China's third largest trading partner 
in Africa, AFM Zhai said bilateral trade for the first 
six month of 2006 was USD 2.9 billion, down slightly 
from 2005 levels due primarily to fluctuations in 
petroleum prices and normal supply and demand. 
Economic agreements are being prepared in advance of 
President Hu's visit, AFM Zhai added. 
 
Zambia: Special Trade Zone 
-------------------------- 
 
¶6. President Hu will meet President Mwanawasa and 
establish a Special Trade Zone in Zambia during his 
February 3-5 trip to the country, AFM Zhai said, 
adding that the two countries share a profound 
friendship.  This will be the first Chinese Special 
Trade Zone established in Africa pursuant to President 
Hu's eight-point proposal at FOCAC.  China is Zambia's 
third largest foreign investor, with over 180 Chinese 
companies active in the country in such areas as 
agriculture, communications and infrastructure 
development.  Trade during the first eleven months of 
2006 reached USD 310 million, AFM Zhai said. 
 
Namibia: Rising Trade 
-------------------- 
 
¶7. At the invitation of Namibian President Pohamba, 
President Hu will visit Namibia from February 5-6 to 
meet with Pohamba and former President Nujoma.  China 
supported Namibia's fight for independence and this 
visit follows a visit to China by President Pohamba in 
¶2005.  Namibia has become a Chinese approved tourist 
destination and trade reached USD 240 million for the 
first eleven months of 2006, up 103 percent from 2005, 
AFM Zhai said. 
 
South Africa: Speech to Youth 
----------------------------- 
 
¶8. To underscore the importance of China and South 
Africa's strategic partnership, President Hu will 
travel to South Africa February 6-8, AFM Zhai said. 
President Hu will meet President Mbeki and, at 
Pretoria University, deliver a speech to Africa's 
youth.  South Africa is China?s largest trading 
partner in Africa with a trade volume of USD 8.83 
billion in the first eleven months of 2006.  More than 
40,000 Chinese tourists visited South Africa in 2005. 
South Africa is a very influential country and Sino- 
South African cooperation is developing very rapidly 
across a great number of fields, AFM Zhai added. 
 
Mozambique, Seychelles: Closer Ties 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶9. President Hu will visit Mozambique February 8-9. 
Hu will meet President Guebuza and the Speaker of the 
Parliament and open a Chinese-sponsored agricultural 
technology center, AFM Zhai noted.  The visit builds 
on opportunities for cooperation discussed at the 
Second Ministerial Conference of the Forum on Economic 
and Trade Cooperation between China and Portuguese- 
Speaking Countries held in Macao last year.  In the 
first eleven months of 2006, China-Mozambique 
bilateral trade reached USD 190 million, a fivefold 
increase from 2001, AFM Zhai said.  In response to a 
reporter's question, AFM Zhai said he had no 
information on unfulfilled investment pledges by China 
or Chinese companies in Mozambique.  AFM Zhai said 
during the visit President Hu will announce new 
assistance packages to Mozambique and sign a number of 
economic and trade documents. 
 
¶10. President Hu will conclude his Africa tour with a 
visit to the Seychelles from February 9-10, AFM Zhai 
said.  President Hu will meet President Michel and 
seek to promote friendly cooperation across a range of 
issues.  This is President Hu's first trip to the 
Seychelles and follows President Michel's attendance 
at the Beijing Summit, AFM Zhai added. 
 
 
BEIJING 00000569  003 OF 004 
 
 
Sudan: AFM Zhai Testy On China's Role 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶11. During the press conference, AFM Zhai fielded a 
number of questions on Sudan/Darfur, with reporters 
asking whether President Hu would press President 
Bashir for a solution, whether China would curb its 
arms sales to the Government of National Unity (GNU) 
and what practical steps China would take to help 
address the crisis in Darfur.  AFM Zhai acknowledged 
Darfur would likely be on the agenda when Presidents 
Hu and al-Bashir meet and said China follows the 
Darfur situation closely.  China has had frequent 
contacts with all relevant parties and worked to 
resolve the situation through multiple diplomatic 
channels, including senior-level contacts and written 
correspondence.  The GNU has the will to solve the 
Darfur issue and wants to pursue Sudan's development, 
AFM Zhai said. 
 
¶12. Frequently animated in his responses, AFM Zhai 
said the Darfur issue is complex and involves many 
variables, including an ongoing dialogue between the 
GNU and some rebel groups, the question of 
international peacekeepers and humanitarian 
considerations.  The press should get its facts 
straight before challenging China's policies.  The GNU, 
the African Union (AU) and the United Nations (UN) 
have reached a preliminary agreement for a 
peacekeeping operation (PKO) in Darfur pursuant to 
former UN Secretary General Annan's three phase 
proposal.  Discussions continue but the overall 
direction is positive, AFM Zhai said, noting he had 
recently returned from Sudan.  The Darfur Peace 
Agreement (DPA) in itself indicates the situation is 
improving, but the non-signatory rebel groups should 
join the DPA.  AFM Zhai said that China would consider 
contributing peacekeepers to a PKO agreed to by the 
GNU, AU and UN but it is too early to discuss such 
contingencies.  If the Darfur issue is settled, a PKO 
will not be needed, AFM Zhai said. 
 
¶13. AFM Zhai stressed that China clearly favors 
national reconciliation and peace and stability in 
Sudan and the region.  Darfur's instability can affect 
neighboring countries, but Sudan's sovereignty and 
territorial integrity must be respected.  The GNU's 
consent is critical for any PKO deployment because the 
GNU best understands the situation on the ground. 
Sanctions and other undue pressures are not practical 
and will only complicate matters, leading to a bad 
settlement, AFM Zhai warned.  AFM Zhai bristled at 
questions related to China's arms sales to the GNU, 
saying that China only sells arms to sovereign 
national governments, requires buyers not to transfer 
the weapons to third parties without Chinese consent 
and abides by all applicable UN regulations and 
international law.  In response to a specific question, 
AFM Zhai denied knowledge of a GNU raid on the 
compound of a non-governmental organization hosting UN 
and AU personnel. 
 
¶14. Responding to questions about China's "grab for 
Africa's resources," AFM Zhai strenuously defended 
Chinese policy as mutually beneficial to both Africa 
and China.  Africa's strengths are its natural 
resources.  China's cooperation and investment helps 
African countries utilize these strengths to drive 
economic development and improve the lives of their 
citizens.  Moreover, China imports a mere 30 million 
barrels of oil from Africa a day, a fraction of what 
others who escape scrutiny import.  If China were 
looting African resources, AFM Zhai said, then African 
countries would be opposed to such actions as they 
have opposed Western colonialist powers for hundreds 
of years.  China has been subjected to foreign 
invasion and knows how African countries feel. 
African countries love China and seek cooperation with 
China, AFM Zhai said.  The unprecedented turnout of 
African leaders in Beijing for the 2006 FOCAC Summit 
shows the positive views African leaders have of China, 
AFM Zhai said. 
 
¶15.  AFM Zhai responded to a New York Times? 
reporter's point that China has been reluctant to 
cooperate with other multilateral donors and 
international financial institutions by saying that 
China-Africa cooperation is open and transparent. 
China consults with the European Union and European 
countries on Africa.  Sino-African cooperation is 
 
BEIJING 00000569  004 OF 004 
 
 
merely a subset of China's broader relations with the 
international community, which include South-South 
cooperation and other multilateral forums.  With 
Africa, China fosters cooperation in all fields, 
including agriculture, health, culture and education 
and requires companies give back to the community, not 
just through money but through development projects, 
directly benefiting the local people.  AFM Zhai said 
China asks its corporations to establish schools, 
hospitals, bridges and malaria control centers, all 
projects designed to benefit local communities. 
 
PRC To Boost Investment Levels 
------------------------------ 
 
¶16. Asked to provide details on any energy and mineral 
deals that might be announced during President Hu?' 
visit, AFM Zhai said that last year Chinese 
investments in Africa totaled between USD 7 and 8 
billion and he sees great potential for further growth, 
noting the China-Africa development fund President Hu 
announced during FOCAC.  AFM Zhai emphasized that 
President Hu's visit will build on the success of the 
Beijing Summit and work to implement the eight policy 
measures for China-Africa cooperation announced in 
Beijing.  The focus of these efforts, as outlined in 
the policy measures, will be on increasing investment, 
alleviating poverty and reducing debt.  AFM Zhai 
mentioned building agricultural centers, cooperative 
zones and rural schools as specific types of 
assistance.  Under President Hu's FOCAC proposal, 
China will establish 35 special trade zones, AFM Zhai 
noted. 
 
¶17. AFM Zhai refuted charges that PRC investments in 
Zambia created unrest last year, stating that 
occasional problems in a cooperative trade 
relationship are normal.  China-Zambia relations are 
in good shape and investment and trade have both 
increased.  A reported incident between Zambian 
laborers and a Chinese company was part and parcel of 
corporate-labor relations, AFM Zhai said.  Strikes are 
normal even in European countries.  AFM Zhai conceded 
that doing business in Africa is new to Chinese 
companies, noting that the Chinese government will try 
to educate businesses to respect local laws and 
customs and promote deeper cooperation. 
 
RANDT