07CAIRO1870
A DIVIDED ARAB LEAGUE CONDEMNS "CRIMINAL" ACTS IN
Tue Jun 19 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
VZCZCXRO8999
OO RUEHROV
DE RUEHEG #1870/01 1700538
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 190538Z JUN 07
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5729
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CAIRO 001870 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV MEPN ARABBL KPAL EG IS
SUBJECT: A DIVIDED ARAB LEAGUE CONDEMNS "CRIMINAL" ACTS IN 
GAZA, LINES UP BEHIND ABU MAZEN AND "LEGITIMATE" 
PALESTINIAN INSTITUTIONS 
 
¶1.  (U) Arab League (AL) foreign ministers, at the request of 
Egypt, met on June 15 at AL headquarters in Cairo to address 
Hamas's take-over of the Gaza Strip, next steps by - and 
assistance for - PA President Mahmoud Abbas (Abu Mazen), and 
the situation in Lebabon (septel).  The ministers (from 15 of 
the AL's 22 member states) met late into the night, finally 
agreeing to a text drafted by Egypt which directed Arab 
support toward President Abu Mazen and the legitimate 
institutions of Palestinian governance, "stemming from the 
Palestinian Liberation Organization."  Efforts to explicitly 
condemn Hamas for its violent take-over of Gaza were 
reportedly watered down by the Qatari and Syrian ministers. 
The Palestinians were represented by a Fatah official close 
to Abu Mazen.  Despite objections by Egypt and others, the 
Qataris reportedly succeeded in adding language creating a 
"fact-finding committee" that will report to the ministerial 
council in one month. 
 
¶2.  (U) Text of June 15, 2007 Arab League ministerial 
resolution on Palestine: 
 
Begin unofficial Embassy translation: 
 
The Rapid Developments on the Palestinian Scene 
 
In the emergency meeting dated June 15, 2007, the League's 
Council, at the ministerial level: 
 
After reviewing the General Secretariat's memorandum; 
 
It reminds all Palestinian factions of their continuous 
pledges to respect the national Palestinian unit and the 
inviolability of the Palestinian blood, including those 
referred to in the Cairo current negotiations since the year 
2005, in the Mecca Accord of 2007, and the Palestinian 
National Detente Charter. 
 
It confirms the importance of Palestinian national unity, the 
unity of the Palestinian territories, the importance of 
respect for Palestinian constants to protect the Palestinian 
national project. 
 
It confirms the inviolability of Palestinian blood and warns 
of the dangers of Palestinian killings in the interests of 
the Palestinian people, its fair struggle, and international 
support for it. 
 
It refers to the passive impacts and the acute situation that 
resulted from the unjust blockage which the Palestinian 
people are subjected to. 
 
After listening to the presentation of the Head of the 
Palestinian State delegation and the comments of delegation 
heads: 
 
Resolves to: 
 
First: 
 
Prohibit Palestinian internal killings and call upon both 
movements - Fath and Hamas - to halt, continuously and 
comprehensively, the killings in the occupied Palestinian 
territories and bear the responsibility of the consequences 
of it continuation, warning of the dangers of these 
developments on the struggle of the Palestinian people the 
future of its cause and the sympathy gained on the 
international level. 
 
Condemn the criminal acts that were recently committed in 
Gaza and call upon the return of normal conditions that 
prevailed prior to the latest incidents in the Gaza strip, 
prevent any violent acts in the West Bank, and protect the 
unity of the Palestinian territories in the West Bank, East 
Jerusalem, and the Gaza strip and the importance of directing 
the Palestinian efforts to end the invasion and achieve the 
Palestinian national project. 
 
Respect the Palestinian national legitimacy via the 
Presidency of Mahmoud Abbas, respect the legitimate 
associations of the Palestinian National Authority that is 
emanating from the Palestinian Liberation Organization 
including the elected Palestinian Legislative Council and 
commit to the unity of Palestinian decision-making to 
maintain the gains and rights of the Palestinian people which 
are in danger. 
 
Form a fact-finding committee comprised of representatives of 
the Summit Presidency, Ministers Council, Egypt, Jordan, 
Qatar (Arab member on the UN Security Council), where it will 
present its reports to the Ministers Council one month after 
 
CAIRO 00001870  002 OF 002 
 
 
issuance of this resolution. 
 
Assign the committee to follow and support the efforts of the 
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia since the signing of the Mecca 
Agreement to achieve Palestinian national unity, in addition 
to the efforts exerted by Egypt to negotiate a cease-fire, 
resume dialogue to resolve current differences, and call upon 
all Palestinian factions to respond to those efforts. 
 
Second: 
 
Commit to the Arab stance towards the Arab-Israeli conflict 
represented in the Arab Peace Initiative that is based on 
ending the Israeli invasion of the Palestinian occupied 
territories and the withdrawal of Israel to the line of June 
4, 1967 from all Arab occupied territories, the establishment 
of the Palestinian State on those territories, including East 
Jerusalem, and a fair settlement to the refugee issue in 
accordance with UN Resolution 194. 
 
Israel - the invading force - is to bear the responsibility 
of the deteriorating conditions in the Palestinian 
territories.  The Council calls upon Israel to immediately 
halt its continuous aggressive practices which include 
killings, assassinations, settlements, construction of its 
security wall, assaults on Christian and Moslem holy sites - 
which are clear violations of the Fourth Geneva Convention 
and international law, including humanitarian law. 
 
Revive the Peace Process and resume negotiations on all 
fronts within a specific time-frame and on the basis of 
agreed reviews in the Arab Peace Initiative. 
 
Assure an expeditious breakage of the economic financial 
blockade imposed upon the Palestinian people. 
 
Call upon all members to expedite fulfillment of their 
contributions to support the Palestinian National Authority 
budget in accordance with the resolutions of the March, 2007 
Riyadh Summit. 
 
Third: 
Keep this session open to further follow developments on the 
Palestinian scene. 
 
End text. 
JONES