07DAKAR871
SENEGAL: FY-2007 ESF AND INCLE PROJECT PROPOSALS
Fri Apr 20 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Dakar
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDK #0871/01 1101230
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 201230Z APR 07
FM AMEMBASSY DAKAR
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8124
INFO RUEHZK/ECOWAS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS DAKAR 000871 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR G/TIP, INL/AAE, AF/RSA AND AF/W 
ACCRA FOR USAID/WA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM ASEC ELAB KCRM SMIG SG
SUBJECT: SENEGAL: FY-2007 ESF AND INCLE PROJECT PROPOSALS 
TO COMBAT TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS 
 
REF: A. STATE 028157 
 
     ¶B. DAKAR 0869 
     ¶C. DAKAR 0297 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
¶1.  Embassy Dakar is pleased to submit four project proposals 
to strengthen and expand Senegal's commitment to combat 
trafficking in persons (TIP).  The proposals, listed in order 
of funding priority, would provide training in trafficking 
for law enforcement and health officials, give social 
assistance to vulnerable populations in the eastern Casamance 
along the border with Guinea-Bissau, provide legal counsel to 
women and child victims of violence, educate vulnerable women 
about the menace of trafficking, and help Senegal to advance 
from Tier 2 to Tier 1.  END SUMMARY. 
 
PROPOSAL ONE: CENTER FOR JUDICIAL TRAINING 
------------------------------------------ 
¶2.  The Center for Judicial Training (CFJ) would use INCLE 
funding to train policemen, gendarmes, customs officers, 
psychiatric hospitals, social assistants and others combating 
trafficking and helping children.  CFJ asks for up to USD 
250,000 to fund a three-year project.  It would develop and 
promote strategies for judicial protection of young children 
through training on the functioning of the judicial system. 
It would begin by holding three national training sessions 
for 50 people (USD 180,000), and then expand with two large 
sessions for the West Africa region.  The CFJ was created in 
1995 under the Justice Ministry to train Senegalese and 
regional magistrates, lawyers, bailiffs and court clerks. 
 
¶3.  Performance indicators include:  a) number of 
professionals trained; b) numbers of juveniles arrested and 
sentenced; and c) number of texts adopted (in countries of 
the region with no specific legislation).  Follow-up would be 
conducted annually.  Meanwhile, the CJT would contribute 
expertise, personnel, facilities and an already established 
partnership with police, schools, social workers and child 
psychologists. 
 
PROPOSAL TWO:  CARITAS IN KOLDA 
------------------------------- 
¶4.  Caritas requests USD 75,000 in ESF funds to conduct 
anti-trafficking training for security forces, police, 
customs officers, magistrates, local authorities, religious 
leaders and forest agents in the southern region of Kolda. 
Located in the eastern Casamance, Kolda receives those 
fleeing from rebellion-created distress in the 
Ziguinchor/West Casamance region and from poverty and chronic 
instability in Guinea-Bissau and Guinea-Conakry.  CARITAS 
would draw on experience in peace-building to target likely 
trafficking victims including illiterate and unemployed 
adolescents previously involved in conflict, as well as those 
most likely to engage in trafficking for profit. 
 
¶5.  Key performance indicators are:  a) one training session 
for CARITAS' own committee members, b) one session for 
security forces; c) 20 village-level presentations; c) five 
presentations for relevant authorities, and, e) holding of 
meetings in the "bush" to make sure that all young people 
have birth certificates and can therefore be identified at 
all times.  Evaluation would be done by a committee composed 
of government representatives, village chiefs, a magistrate, 
a trafficking victim and a member of the security forces.  A 
CARITAS representative would head the committee.  There would 
be a report of activity every four months and an annual 
program evaluation. 
 
PROPOSAL THREE:  ASSOCIATION OF SENEGALESE LAWYERS 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
¶6.  The Association of Senegalese Lawyers (AJS) requests USD 
125,000 in ESF or INCLE funds for a 12-month project to 
insure that relevant laws are known and effectively applied. 
The proposal would contribute to prevention of trafficking, 
conviction and prosecution of traffickers, and protection and 
rehabiliation of victims.  It targets women and child victims 
of violence or of trafficking who are preparing to appear in 
court.  AJS would create counseling centers in four of 
Senegal's regions to educate and support women and child 
victims of trafficking.  AJS would also publish a newsletter 
to discuss women's and children's rights, enabling it to 
reach a larger population in remote areas. 
 
¶7.  Performance indicators would include:  a) number of women 
and children assisted in judicial procedures, and b) 
percentage of women and children helped among all those 
involved in court cases.  There would be follow-up 
evaluations and written reports every six months. 
 
 
PROPOSAL FOUR:  AWA 
------------------- 
¶8.  AWA (Eve) requests USD 82,500 in ESF funds to conduct a 
yearlong awareness campaign against trafficking of women and 
girls, and to teach them alternative skills such as cooking, 
sewing and farming.   It would use its extensive experience 
and well-developed networks among vulnerable women, including 
its work to reintegrate former prostitutes, to deal with the 
threat of trafficking.  AWA is a non-profit organization 
created in 1996 and working principally with HIV/AIDS 
victims, mainly young girls and children. 
 
¶9.  Performance indicators for AWA would include:  a) 
organization of a workshop for 50 women/girls to raise 
trafficking awareness, b) hold two mass meetings of 3,000 
people in Dakar and Rufisque, and up to 100 smaller sessions 
in Dakar and Louga, c) two training seminars in management 
and entrepreneurship for women; and d) 50-100 girls saved 
from trafficking.  Project evaluation would be coordinated by 
a team of social workers, an accountant, two lawyers and a 
psychologist, and would consist of monthly visits throughout 
Dakar and Louga. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
¶10.  Since Senegal was placed on the TIP Tier 2 Watch List in 
 
2004, the country has made enormous progress, passing TIP 
legislation in 2005 and beginning to use it in 2006.  Public 
awareness of TIP has increased, and TIP grants have made a 
significant impact.  The above proposals are only a fraction 
of the worthwhile ideas suggested to us by Senegalese civil 
society and by the Government.  END COMMENT. 
 
EMBASSY POINT OF CONTACT 
------------------------ 
¶11.  For further information on these projects and any 
others, contact Political Officer Osman Tat at (221) 
823-4296, ext. 2420. 
JACKSON