07HARARE425
AMBASSADOR'S FUND FOR REFUGEES FY 2007 - ZIMBABWE
Tue May 15 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Harare
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHSB #0425 1351450
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 151450Z MAY 07
FM AMEMBASSY HARARE
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1476UNCLAS HARARE 000425 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PRM/AFR FOR M. LANGE 
AF/S FOR S. HILL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREF
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR'S FUND FOR REFUGEES FY 2007 - ZIMBABWE 
 
REF: STATE 0027884 
 
¶1. (U) Per reftel, post submits the following request for 
Ambassador's Fund for Refugees funding for a project to 
improve the educational facilities at Tongogara Refugee Camp 
in Zimbabwe. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Description of the Service Required 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) Given the lack of adequate classroom space to 
accommodate all school age children at the Tongogara Refugee 
Camp, UNHCR is seeking US$20,000 in funding to meet the 
urgent need to expand infrastructure facilities at the camp's 
primary school.  The project includes the construction of two 
classroom blocks (US$16,000) and purchase of benches and 
tables (US$4,000). 
 
------------------------------- 
Justification for this Request 
------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (U) At present, Tongogara Refugee Camp has one primary 
school accommodating 610 students ) 70 percent from the 
refugee community and 30 percent from the surrounding local 
community.  Lessons are done in morning and afternoon 
sessions.  There are many instances, however, when new 
arrivals to the camp during the middle of a term cannot 
enroll in school due to limited space and must wait for 
openings in the following term.  For those with access to 
education, facilities are overcrowded and substandard. 
Building additional classroom facilities will improve 
enrollment rates and the quality of education. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Identification of Appropriate Agency 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶4. (U) The Inter-Regional Meeting of the Bishops of Southern 
Africa (IMBISA) organization will be responsible for 
implementation/ management of the project funds.  IMBISA will 
submit progress and final reports to the U.S. Embassy and 
UNHCR.  UNHCR field based staff will monitor the 
implementation of the project and submit verification reports 
to the U.S. Embassy. 
 
¶5. (U) Post has requested a copy of IMBISA's signed code of 
conduct per requirements set out in paragraph 3 reftel. UNHCR 
has also offered to provide a copy of its code of conduct. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Post's Authority to Award Grant 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (U) Post certifies that it has the authority and capacity 
to award the grant to the intended recipient agency prior to 
the end of the fiscal year (September 30). 
 
-------------------- 
Contact Information 
-------------------- 
 
¶7. (U) Post's point of contact for the Ambassador's Fund for 
Refugee program is Scott C. Higgins, Political-Economic 
Section, Tel.  263-4-250-593 ext. 321, email 
HigginsSC@state.gov. 
DELL