07JERUSALEM1802
UNGA ATTENDANCE FROM THE PALESTINIAN AUTHORITY
Mon Aug 27 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Jerusalem
VZCZCXRO1239
OO RUEHROV
DE RUEHJM #1802/01 2391240
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 271240Z AUG 07
FM AMCONSUL JERUSALEM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8831
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 2044
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 JERUSALEM 001802 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NEA FOR FRONT OFFICE; NSC FOR ABRAMS/SINGH/WATERS; IO/PPC 
BATLLE; USUN MCBRIDE; NSC MCDONALD; NEA/RA 
LANGEVIN/MACDONNELL/ADLER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG PGOV PREL PTER IS KDEM
SUBJECT: UNGA ATTENDANCE FROM THE PALESTINIAN AUTHORITY 
 
REF: SECSTATE 101170 
 
JERUSALEM 00001802  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1.  (U) In response to reftel action request, information 
regarding Palestinian Authority (PA) attendance at the United 
Nations General Assembly (UNGA) meeting follows. 
 
¶A.  (U) Attendance of the Head of State:  PA President Mahmud 
Abbas (Abu Mazen) will attend the UNGA meetings.  Post does 
not yet know intended arrival and departure dates.  His 
spouse will not attend.  Interpretation from Arabic to 
English will/will be required. 
 
¶B.  (U) Attendance of the Head of Government:  PA Prime 
Minister Salam Fayyad will attend the UNGA meetings.  Post 
does not yet know intended arrival and departure dates.  His 
spouse will not attend.  Interpretation from Arabic to 
English will not be required. 
 
¶C.  (U) Attendance of the Foreign Minister:  The Prime 
Minister is acting Foreign Minister. 
 
¶D.  (U) Attendance of other PA VIPs: 
 
--Secretary General of the PLO Yasir Abed Rabbo will attend 
the UNGA meetings.  Post does not yet know intended arrival 
and departure dates.  His spouse will not attend. 
Interpretation from Arabic to English will not be required. 
 
--Head of the PLO Negotiations Affairs Saeb Erekat will 
attend the UNGA meetings.  Post does not yet know intended 
arrival and departure dates.  His spouse will not attend. 
Interpretation from Arabic to English will not be required. 
 
--Former PA Prime Minister Ahmad Qurei (Abu Ala) will attend 
the UNGA meetings.  Post does not yet know intended arrival 
and departure dates.  His spouse will not attend. 
Interpretation from Arabic to English will not be required. 
 
--PA Minister of Information Riyad al-Malki will attend the 
UNGA meetings.  Post does not yet know intended arrival and 
departure dates.  His spouse will not attend.  Interpretation 
from Arabic to English will not be required. 
 
--PA Minister of Planning Samir Abdallah will attend the UNGA 
meetings.  Post does not yet know intended arrival and 
departure dates.  His spouse will not attend.  Interpretation 
from Arabic to English will not be required. 
 
--Director General of the International Relations and 
Projects Department of the PA Ministry of Finance Mazen 
Jadallah will attend the UNGA meetings.  Post does not yet 
know intended arrival and departure dates.  His spouse will 
not attend.  Interpretation from Arabic to English will not 
be required. 
 
--Assistant to the Prime Minister Manal Zeidan will attend 
the UNGA meetings.  Post does not yet know intended arrival 
and departure dates.  Her spouse will not attend. 
Interpretation from Arabic to English will not be required. 
Manal Zeidan is an American citizen. 
 
--Assistant to the Prime Minster Diana Buttu will attend the 
UNGA meetings.  Post does not yet know intended arrival and 
departure dates.  Her spouse will not attend.  Interpretation 
from Arabic to English will not be required.  Diana Buttu is 
a Canadian citizen. 
 
--Palestinian Legislative Council (PLC) member Nabil Shaath 
will attend the UNGA meetings.  Post does not yet know 
intended arrival and departure dates.  His spouse will not 
attend.  Interpretation from Arabic to English will not be 
required. 
 
--Chief of Protocol Abdal Karim Ewaida will attend the UNGA 
meetings.  Post does not yet know intended arrival and 
departure dates.  His spouse will not attend.  Interpretation 
from Arabic to English will not be required. 
 
--Head of Presidential Security Shehada Ismail will attend 
the UNGA meetings.  Post does not yet know intended arrival 
and departure dates.  His spouse will not attend. 
Interpretation from Arabic to English will not be required. 
 
--Official Photographer Omar al-Rashidi will attend the UNGA 
meetings.  Post does not yet know intended arrival and 
departure dates.  His spouse will not attend.  Interpretation 
from Arabic to English will not be required. 
 
JERUSALEM 00001802  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
 
--Official Cameraman Muhammad al-Teeq will attend the UNGA 
meetings.  Post does not yet know intended arrival and 
departure dates.  His spouse will not attend.  Interpretation 
from Arabic to English will not be required. 
 
--Presidential Security officer Muhammad Assi will attend the 
UNGA meetings.  Post does not yet know intended arrival and 
departure dates.  His spouse will not attend.  Interpretation 
from Arabic to English will not be required. 
 
--Presidential Security officer Muhammad Daajna will attend 
the UNGA meetings.  Post does not yet know intended arrival 
and departure dates.  His spouse will not attend. 
Interpretation from Arabic to English will not be required. 
 
--Presidential Security officer Said Khalil will attend the 
UNGA meetings.  Post does not yet know intended arrival and 
departure dates.  His spouse will not attend.  Interpretation 
from Arabic to English will not be required. 
 
--Presidential Security officer Yusef Barghouti will attend 
the UNGA meetings.  Post does not yet know intended arrival 
and departure dates.  His spouse will not attend. 
Interpretation from Arabic to English will not be required. 
 
--Presidential Security officer Nidal Abu Dukhan will attend 
the UNGA meetings.  Post does not yet know intended arrival 
and departure dates.  His spouse will not attend. 
Interpretation from Arabic to English will not be required. 
 
--Presidential Security officer Mahmud Issa will attend the 
UNGA meetings.  Post does not yet know intended arrival and 
departure dates.  His spouse will not attend.  Interpretation 
from Arabic to English will not be required. 
 
--Presidential Security officer Akram Thawabta will attend 
the UNGA meetings.  Post does not yet know intended arrival 
and departure dates.  His spouse will not attend. 
Interpretation from Arabic to English will not be required. 
 
--Presidential Security officer Allam Saqqa will attend the 
UNGA meetings.  Post does not yet know intended arrival and 
departure dates.  His spouse will not attend.  Interpretation 
from Arabic to English will not be required. 
 
--Presidential Security officer Mujahed Yasin will attend the 
UNGA meetings.  Post does not yet know intended arrival and 
departure dates.  His spouse will not attend.  Interpretation 
from Arabic to English will not be required. 
 
--Presidential Security officer Alabed Khalil will attend the 
UNGA meetings.  Post does not yet know intended arrival and 
departure dates.  His spouse will not attend.  Interpretation 
from Arabic to English will not be required. 
 
--Security officer for Mr. Qurei Amjad Qurei will attend the 
UNGA meetings.  Post does not yet know intended arrival and 
departure dates.  His spouse will not attend.  Interpretation 
from Arabic to English will not be required. 
 
--Assistant to Mr. Qurei Said Nayef Said al-Zhaghmouri will 
attend the UNGA meetings.  Post does not yet know intended 
arrival and departure dates.  His spouse will not attend. 
Interpretation from Arabic to English will not be required. 
 
--Presidential Financial Assistant Bassam Mezher will attend 
the UNGA meetings.  Post does not yet know intended arrival 
and departure dates.  His spouse will not attend. 
Interpretation from Arabic to English will not be required. 
 
¶E.  (U) Post is unaware of plans of other Foreign Ministry 
officials to the UNGA meetings. 
DUFFY