07KHARTOUM1940
PREVIEW OF UNAMID'S 2008-2009 BUDGET FRAMEWORK
Fri Dec 07 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO6318
OO RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #1940/01 3411228
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 071228Z DEC 07
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9478
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/CJTF HOAUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 001940 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/SPG, S/CRS 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/SUDAN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KPKO SOCI AU UNSC SU
SUBJECT: PREVIEW OF UNAMID'S 2008-2009 BUDGET FRAMEWORK 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: UN HQ's budget team presented its initial 
framework for UNAMID's 2008-2009 budget to JSR Adada December 5. 
This strategic document lays out goals and outputs for achieving 
UNAMID's mandate but does not yet include funding requirements. 
Although a first step in the budget process, the framework provides 
valuable insights into UNAMID's priorities and hoped-for 
achievements. END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (SBU) A six-person team from UN HQ spent a week in Darfur meeting 
with UN partners and senior UNAMID and AMIS leaders to help prepare 
UNAMID's 2008-2009 budget request.  On December 5, they presented 
their framework paper to Joint Special Representative (JSR) Rodophle 
Adada.  The framework lays out a strategic blueprint for the JSR to 
use in achieving UNAMID's mandate.  Adada's team will have a week to 
review and modify the document and then submit it formally to DPKO 
for consideration.  An ABACQ team is expected to come out to Darfur 
January 7-14 to put figures to the framework activities (although 
UNAMID staff is requesting a later visit due to the holidays). 
 
¶3. (SBU) The paper breaks UNAMID's mission into five categories, 
reflecting UNAMID's UNSCR 1976 (2007) mandate: peace process; 
security; governance, rule of law and human rights; humanitarian 
assistance, recovery and reintegration; and support.  Various 
highlights under each category include: 
 
- Peace: UNAMID will provide assistance and support to the 
Transitional Darfur Regional Authority (TDRA), periodically consult 
with parties to review DPA implementation and convene monthly Joint 
Commission meetings. 
 
- Security: UNAMID hopes to decrease serious violations of the DPA 
by 50% (from 203 in 2007/2008 to 100 for 2008/2009 - NOTE: it is not 
clear where the 2007/2008 figure comes from since the CFC has not 
been keeping track of such violations for several months), reduce 
the number of civilians killed by UXO by 50% as well (30 in 2007), 
and increase the number of refugees/IDPs returning to their homes 
from 0 in 2007/2008 to 200,000 in 2008/2009).  It will do this by 
increasing the number of patrols (3 patrols a day for each of the 38 
team sites - NOTE: AMIS, with 6,000 personnel, is often able to 
mount only 3-4 patrols a day for the entire Darfur region).  It 
anticipates holding weekly CFC meetings at HQ and twice-monthly CFC 
meetings at the Sector level.  It also plans for 3 convoys a day for 
mission/military operational and logistics transports convoys and in 
support of humanitarian convoys.  (COMMENT: AMIS now provides 
logistics re-supply by air.  With 38 team sites to supply by ground 
as well as humanitarian and operational convoys to provide for, this 
planning number looks woefully low.  END COMMENT.)  UNAMID 
anticipates increasing demining activity as well as 
disarmament/demobilization/reintegration activities where UNAMID's 
mandate is greater than AMIS's was.  It will also emphasize reform 
of security institutions, like the police. 
 
- Rule of Law, Governance and Human Rights: Focusing on 
capacity/institution building, UNAMID will hold numerous workshops 
on good governance, assist the Darfur state Land Commissions address 
land use and land tenure issues, facilitate dialogue between local 
communities, the TDRA and state governments on the planning and 
budget process, patrol jointly with police and hold training courses 
for prison guards.  UNAMID also plans 8 human rights monitoring 
mission per month by regional offices and 6 per month by each of the 
38 military posts. 
 
- Humanitarian Assistance, Recovery and Reintegration: Currently, 
UNAMID's mandate calls for it only "to facilitate the effective 
provision of humanitarian assistance and full access to people in 
need."  The UN HQ team recommends the mandate be changed to give 
UNAMID the lead in humanitarian coordination efforts. 
 
- Support: UNAMID is planning to support 19,555 military, 2,620 
police, 5,621 civilian (1,435 international, 3,490 national, and 581 
UN Volunteer) staff.  It will build and maintain 1 Mission HQ, 3 
Sector HQ, 2 logistics bases (El-Obeyd, Nyala), 1 Customs clearance 
facility, 1 radio station and 54 other locations.  It will construct 
4 level-1, 2 level-2 and 1 level-1 hospitals.  It will maintain and 
renovate 1000 km of roads and 35 bridges as well as 3 airfields and 
50 helicopter landing sites.  It will operate 4,500 vehicles and 19 
fixed wing and 39 rotary wing aircraft.  It will need 7 million 
litres of petrol, oil and lubricants for generators, 12.5 million 
litres for the vehicles and 33 million litres for the aircraft. 
 
¶4. (SBU) These projections are based on the assumption there will be 
a comprehensive and all-inclusive peace agreement by July 2008. 
(NOTE: Accordingly, the framework does not provide for any support 
for the Joint Mediation Support Team (JMST).  If there is an 
agreement, its activities will be folded into UNAMID's 
Political/Civil Affairs Units.  If not, the UN will have to find 
ways to support it, according to the UN HQ team.)  It does not 
anticipate any significant progress in the disarming or 
 
KHARTOUM 00001940  002 OF 002 
 
 
neutralization of the janjaweed.  It assumes the HQ structure will 
be fully operational by July 2008 with 14 of the 18 infantry 
battalions deployed (remainder by the end of 2008). 
 
¶5. (SBU) The UN HQ team urged Adada and the UNAMID staff to review 
the framework to make sure all mandated activities were covered. 
They stressed that indicators had to be measurable and UNAMID should 
quantify their activities as much as possible.  UNAMID needed to 
make sure there were no duplications (internally or with the work of 
other UN agencies in the field).  The UN HQ team noted it was 
important the document disclose who does what and what is expected 
to be accomplished. 
 
¶6. (SBU) There was general concern by JSR Adada and UNAMID staff 
about the team's assumption of a peace agreement by July 2008. 
Since the budget document will be public in March or April, they 
were worried the public would expect an agreement if a deadline is 
put in the framework and would then blame UNAMID if there wasn't 
one.  Furthermore, the staff thought the timeframe was unreasonable. 
 With no contingency built into the framework, they assumed 
continued support for the negotiation process and JMST would have to 
come out of UNAMID's budget.  The HQ team admitted the peace 
agreement assumption was a political decision.  The world community 
expected some sort of agreement by mid-year.  The staff also raised 
doubts about the deployment schedule, noting any deployment would be 
affected by a peace agreement.  JSR Adada said he would have to 
build more uncertainty and flexibility into the framework and would 
discuss with UNSG Special Envoy Jan Eliasson, arriving in El Fasher 
December 6, how UNAMID should support his efforts. 
 
¶7. (SBU) COMMENT: Although a preliminary document, the framework 
provides an inside view into UNAMID's mission, how it plans to 
accomplish its goals and the material resources needed.  UNAMID 
staff raises legitimate concerns about the peace agreement 
assumption, since any agreement will impact their mission.  The 
document also assumes full UNAMID deployment in 2008, which is 
optimistic and far from assured, especially if the TCC issue is not 
resolved and helicopter units are not identified. 
 
¶8. (U) Tripoli minimize considered. 
 
FERNANDEZ