07KHARTOUM1620
SPLM RESOLUTIONS AND COMMUNIQUE
Tue Oct 16 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO0704
PP RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #1620/01 2891433
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 161433Z OCT 07
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8852
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE
RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/CJTF HOAUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 KHARTOUM 001620 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/SPG, S/CRS, AF/SE NATSIOS, AF/AS FRAZER 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/SUDAN 
NSC FOR PITTMAN AND HUDSON 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL SU
 
SUBJECT: SPLM RESOLUTIONS AND COMMUNIQUE 
 
REF: KHARTOUM 1612 
 
¶1. (SBU) This cable conveys the text of the SPLM Interim Political 
Bureau (IPB) resolutions and communiqu from the IPB's October 4 to 
11 Meeting. 
 
SPLM Interim Political Bureau Resolutions: 
----------------------------------------- 
 
BEGIN TEXT OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
RESOLUTIONS 
 
¶1. The IPB directs the SPLM General Secretariat to coordinate the 
mapping out of political programs and to develop an agenda to be 
reviewed by the Interim Political Bureau before the presentation to 
the Convention to be held in the first quarter of 2008. 
 
¶2. The IPB after reviewing the SPLM activities commends the ongoing 
efforts of the SPLM General Secretariat and directs further 
intensification of the SPLM work, particularly the current political 
mobilization and organization of the SPLM as well as the 
sensitization of the grassroots on SPLM political agenda. 
 
¶3. The IPB and the INC members shall lead the SPLM mobilization and 
reorganization campaign. 
 
¶4. The IPB calls upon the Sudanese people to join the SPLM en masse 
to achieve democratic transformation and enhance peace-building; in 
order to realize the vision of New Sudan. 
 
¶5. The IPB deplores the lack of cooperation between some SPLM State 
Chairpersons and their State Secretariats and directs the General 
Secretariat to resolve such matters. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
¶6. The IPB notes with deep concern the recurrent violations of human 
rights in Juba and other towns in Southern Sudan by indisciplined 
elements from the regular forces; and urges the GOSS to consider the 
following measures: 
 
(a) The Ministry of SPLA Affairs, in collaboration with the Ministry 
of Internal Affairs, to take the necessary disciplinary measures, 
including the transfer of the current military police from Juba; 
 
(b) Replacing all military bodyguards stationed in the houses of 
constitutional post holders with police; 
 
(c )Prosecution of individuals that commit human rights violations 
against fellow citizens and foreigners; 
 
(d) Replacement of General Headquarters police station in IDP camps 
and the border with State police; without prejudice to the 
competence of national and Southern Sudan components, such public 
security, civil registry, CID, immigration and aliens, anti-narcotic 
and smuggling and customs units. 
 
(e) Significant investment by GOSS into the security sector by 
providing resources for training and capacity and institutional 
building of police service. 
 
¶7. The IPB directs the General Secretariat to carry out awareness 
campaign on human rights and security. 
 
¶8. The IPB directs the General Secretariat to draft an SPLM 
membership "Code of Conduct and Disciplinary Procedures" that shall 
be presented to SPLM INC for approval. 
 
¶9. The IPB shall establish a committee to review the Interim Basic 
Rules and Regulations. 
 
¶10. The IPB directs the SPLM General Secretariat to set up a CPA 
Implementation Unit within the Secretariat General to monitor and 
compile violations and other relevant information on the CPA. 
 
¶11. To strengthen communication, coordination and information 
sharing, the IPB encourages both SPLM Sector Secretariats to 
organize regular consultative fora on current issues attended by 
SPLM leaders at Executive, Legislature and Secretariats. 
 
¶12. The IPB directs the General Secretariat to establish SPLM 
Satellite TV, Radio and newspapers. 
 
¶13. The IPB directs the General Secretariat and both Sectors to meet 
regularly to coordinate their work. 
 
 
KHARTOUM 00001620  002 OF 004 
 
 
¶14. The IPB while recognizing the importance of its partnership with 
the National Congress Party that is critical for the implementation 
of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA); regrets the serious 
deterioration in this relationship as a result of the violations of 
numerous provisions of CPA by the NCP. In this regard, the IPB 
resolves the following: 
 
(a) Mobilizes the Sudanese people around the objective of achieving 
peace and democracy in the Sudan; 
 
(b) Calls upon all the Sudanese political parties to support the 
immediate implementation of all outstanding provisions of the CPA; 
 
(c) Encourages for South - South dialogue; 
 
(d) Mobilizes the region around the objective of holding an IGAD 
Summit where the SPLM and NCP shall submit their reports on the 
implementation of CPA; 
 
(e) Mobilizes the international community to organize a meeting of 
IGAD Partners Forum (IPF) focusing on CPA implementation; and 
 
(f) Requests the UN Security Council (UNSC) to call a meeting on CPA 
implementation as being one of the custodians of the CPA. 
 
¶15. Given the deterioration in the relationship between the SPLM and 
NCP, general stagnation in the implementation of the CPA and the 
process of democratic transformation and the evolving crisis as a 
result; the IPB mandates the SPLM Chairman to set up a CRISIS 
MANAGEMENT TEAM to manage the present situation on a day-to-day 
basis. 
 
¶16. The IPB condemns in the strongest terms the raids on SPLM 
offices in Khartoum by police forces; and regards them as a gross 
violation of the CPA and Bill of Rights enshrined in the 
constitution and an attack on the political freedoms and democratic 
transfom1ation of the country. 
 
¶17. The IPB notes with deep concern the reluctance by the NCP 
component of GONU to avail funds for the conduct of the forthcoming 
population census and exclusion of ethnicity and religion from the 
census form; and resolves the following: 
 
(a) To urge the NCP component of GONU to avail funds for the Sudan 
Population Census. 
 
(b) Maintaining the questions related to "ethnicity and religion" in 
the census form, as has been the case in all previous censuses. 
 
¶18. The IPB reviewed the electoral bill and recommendations and 
commends the role of SPLM members in the NCRC and encourages them to 
continue their work guided by the recommendations which they 
presented and adopted by the IPB. In this regard, the IPB: 
 
(a) Reaffirms its commitment to the holding of national elections in 
the specified time in the constitution and CPA; 
 
(b) Calls for free and fair elections under international monitoring 
and supervision, as provided for in the CPA; 
 
(c) Directs the Secretariat to organize a meeting between the SPLM 
Chairman and leaders of national political forces with a view to 
reaching a national consensus on draft electoral law; 
 
(d) Resolves to reinforce the SPLM NCRC team and urges all members 
to carry on with their work; and 
 
 (e) Establishes a Standing Committee to work out SPLM strategy and 
technical requirements for the elections at national, Southern Sudan 
and State levels. 
 
¶19. The IPB expresses deep concern about the continuation and 
escalation of the war in Darfur and deplores the attack on the AU 
peace-keeping force in Heskanita. In this regard, the IPB: 
 
(a) Supports the peaceful resolution of the conflict in Darfur; 
 
(b) Welcomes the urgent deployment of the hybrid AU/UN forces in 
Darfur; 
 
( c) Firmly stands behind the SPLM initiative to help the Darfurian 
Movements reach a common negotiating position in the forthcoming 
peace talks; and 
 
(d) Condemns the recurrent attacks on Heskanita and Mahajeriya towns 
 
KHARTOUM 00001620  003 OF 004 
 
 
and calls for investigation of these incidents. 
 
END TEXT OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
SPLM Interim Political Bureau (IPB) Communique 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
BEGIN TEXT OF COMMUNIQUE 
 
Communique 
 
The Interim Political Bureau of the SPLM met in Juba on 4 - 11 
October 2007 under the Chairmanship of Comrade Salva Kiir Mayardit, 
SPLM Chairman.  After exhaustive discussion, the IPB resolved the 
following: 
 
¶1. The IPB appreciates the positive steps taken by the SPLM Chairman 
to appoint three Deputies and expand both the Interim Political 
Bureau and Interim National Council. 
 
¶2. The IPB warmly congratulates and welcomes the appointment of 
Comrades Yasir Saeed Arman and Dr. Anne Itto as Deputies of the 
Secretary-General for Northern and Southern Sectors respectively. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
¶3. The IPB after reviewing the SPLM activities commends the ongoing 
efforts of the SPLM General Secretariat and directs further 
intensification of the SPLM work, particularly the current political 
mobilization and organization of the SPLM as well as the 
sensitization of the grassroots on SPLM political agenda. 
 
¶4. The IPB notes with grave concern the violations of the CPA by 
NCP, particularly critical issues such as; obstruction of democratic 
transformation, lack of initiation of national reconciliation and 
healing process, non-implementation of Abeyei Protocol, 
non-completion of SAF redeployment, lack of transparency in oil 
sector operations, inadequate funding of census process and delay of 
North-South borders demarcation, inaction on the SPLM reshuffle list 
in the Government of National Unity (GONU) among others; as called 
by the CPA and Interim National Constitution (INC). 
 
¶5. The IPB condemns the ill designs of the NCP to dilute the 
institution of the Collegial Presidency by encroaching on the 
constitutional powers of the First Vice President. 
 
¶6. The IPB is seriously disturbed by the actions of the NCP 
component of the Government of National Unity that contravene the 
INC, especially the Bill of Rights; such as unlawful detention of 
political opponents and partners alike (e.g. Yien Mathiew, SPLM 
member of Interim National Council), censorship of the press and 
harassment of journalists, high-handedness by law enforcement 
agencies in carrying out their duties, partisan approach by the 
Minister of Justice in undertaking the duties entrusted to him under 
the constitution, expulsion of diplomats without due consultation 
with the SPLM and attempts to turn the independent Assessment and 
Evaluation Commission into a rubberstamp. 
 
¶7. The IPB condemns the hostile media campaign, persistent attacks 
and character assassination of SPLM leaders, especially by the print 
media, such as Al-Intibaha, Akhir Lahza and Sudan Media Center 
(SMC).  The IPB notes with dismay that those heinous accusations 
only appear in media controlled by the NCP figures or well-known NCP 
journalists. 
 
¶8. The IPB calls upon the Sudanese people to join the SPLM en masse 
to achieve democracy transformation and enhance peace-building; in 
order to realize the vision of New Sudan. 
 
¶9. The IPB resolves to convene the Second SPLM National Convention 
during the first quarter of 2008.  This is an important forum in 
which the SPLM shall assess and evaluate its performance as a basis 
for charting the future. 
 
¶10. The IPB assisted by the SPLM General Secretariat shall develop 
and map out the political program of the party by sectoral 
committees for presentation before the Second SPLM National 
Convention. 
 
¶11. The IPB notes with deep concern the recurrent violations of 
human rights in Juba and other towns in Southern Sudan by some 
indisciplined elements from the regular forces and other 
unidentified criminals; and urges GOSS to take the necessary 
measures to address this situation. 
 
¶12.  The IPB is committed and obliged to contribute to the 
achievement of a comprehensive and durable peace in all parts of 
 
KHARTOUM 00001620  004 OF 004 
 
 
Sudan, particularly in Darfur.  In this regard, the Interim 
Political Bureau appreciates the good work being done by the SPLM 
Darfur Taskforce in facilitating the unification of the Darfurian 
groups and the peace process; and deplores the attack on the AU 
peace-keeping force in Heskanita.  To that end, the IPB: 
 
(a) Supports the peaceful resolution of the conflict in Darfur; 
 
(b) Welcomes the urgent deployment of the hybrid AU/UN forces in 
Darfur; 
 
(c) Firmly stands behind the SPLM initiative to help the Darfurian 
Movements reach unification and common negotiating position in the 
forthcoming peace talks; 
 
(d) Condemns the recurrent attacks on Heskanita and Mahajeria towns 
and call for investigation for these incidents. 
 
¶13. The IPB calls for the full implementation of the Cairo Peace 
Agreement, Darfur Peace Agreement (DPA) and Eastern Sudan Peace 
Agreement. 
 
¶14. The IPB reviewed the electoral bill and recommendations and 
commends the role of SPLM members in the NCRC and encourages them to 
continue their work guided by the recommendations which they 
presented and adopted by the IPB.  In this regard, the IPB stands 
for a mixed election system and for free and fair internationally 
monitored elections held in the specified time, as stipulated in the 
constitution and CPA. 
 
¶15. The SPLM leadership shall engage other Sudanese political 
parties and organizations on elections and other national issues. 
 
END TEXT OF COMMUNIQUE 
 
POWERS