07RABAT1117
COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR KOGAN, FELIX
Fri Jul 06 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Rabat
VZCZCXYZ0010
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHRB #1117/01 1871602
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 061602Z JUL 07
FM AMEMBASSY RABAT
TO RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDC PRIORITY
INFO RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 1532
RUEHCL/AMCONSUL CASABLANCA 3194UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 RABAT 001117 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OTRA MO
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR KOGAN, FELIX 
 
REF: USDOC 06213 
 
¶1. Embassy Rabat is pleased to grant country clearance for to 
the Department of Commerce, NOAA meteorologist Felix Kogan to 
travel to Morocco, July 9-13, 2007 for the purpose of 
conducting meetings with GOM and embassy officials. 
 
¶2. Post understands travelers require no further assistance. 
 
3 ICASS Policy: 
 
¶A. Due to ICASS funding reductions, we regret that Post has 
had to curtail services and pass the cost of select services 
through direct charging of non-ICASS contributors visiting 
Post through direct charging.  Therefore we request that each 
visitor, regardless of length of stay, bring/forward fiscal 
data to pay for direct costs of the visit and share copies 
with their control officer and FMO.  Each agency, 
organization, or visiting delegation will be charged for the 
actual costs attributed to their visit.  Direct charge costs 
include, but are not limited to:  American and LES staff 
overtime (e.g., expediter, airport pick-up and drop-off, 
accommodation exchange, representational event support), 
field travel-lodging and M&IE by Embassy employees, vehicle 
rentals, long distance telephone calls, equipment rentals, 
office supplies and all other costs that are directly 
attributable to visitor needs.  Please note that all visitors 
should be prepared to be charged approximately ninety-five 
dollars (subject to periodic adjustment) for airport pick-ups 
and drop-offs that occur after normal business hours. 
 
¶B. In accordance with worldwide ICASS policy, TDYers over 
thirty (30) days, are subject to a charge for ICASS support 
services.  If your sponsoring agency is not signed up for 
ICASS services at post, please be prepared to sign an MOU for 
ICASS support services upon arrival.  The agency should 
provide post with written communication, generated by the 
traveler's headquarters, that confirms the agency will pay 
ICASS charges for the TDYer and provides the agency ICASS 
billing code to which TDY support charges should be applied. 
 
¶C. Where travel is urgent, the TDYers should bring this 
documentation with them to ensure there are no interruptions 
in the provision of service.  We regret that due to budget 
restraints, Post will not provide service to a TDYer staying 
in excess of thirty days without provision of this 
documentation.  We thank you in advance for your 
understanding. 
 
¶4. Security Concerns 
 
¶A. Mandatory Personal Security Training (Ref: 04 State 066580 
and 001360):  Effective June 1, 2004, all personnel 
transferring to an overseas location under Chief of Mission 
authority must complete appropriate overseas personal 
security training prior to their travel.  Effective January 
1, 2005, this same requirement will also apply to American 
personnel requesting country clearance to perform extended 
temporary duty (TDY defined as more than 30 days) at overseas 
locations. 
 
¶B. Terrorism: 
 
In March/April 2007, a series of terrorist bombings occurred 
in Casablanca, two of which simultaneously targeted the U.S. 
Consulate General and the private American Language Center. 
In 2003, a series of similar attacks in Casablanca targeted 
hotels and restaurants.  The potential for terrorist violence 
against American interests and citizens remains high in 
Morocco.  Moroccan authorities continue to disrupt groups 
seeking to attack U.S. or Western-affiliated and Moroccan 
government targets, arresting numerous individuals associated 
with international terrorist groups.  With indications that 
such groups still seek to carry out attacks in Morocco, it is 
important for American citizens to be keenly aware of their 
surroundings and adhere to prudent security practices such as 
avoiding predictable travel patterns and maintaining a low 
profile.  Establishments that are readily identifiable with 
the United States are potential targets for attacks.  These 
may include facilities where U.S. citizens and other 
foreigners congregate, including clubs, restaurants, places 
of worship, schools, hotels, movie theaters and other public 
areas.  Such targets may also include establishments where 
activities occur that may offend religious sensitivities, 
such as casinos or places where alcoholic beverages are sold 
or consumed.  Travelers should stay abreast of recent 
developments within the country and read the latest State 
Department Consular Information Sheet covering travel to 
Morocco and any current Worldwide Caution Messages about 
travel to the Middle East and North Africa before arrival in 
country.  The Mission takes all information concerning 
terrorist incidents and terrorism very seriously.  The 
 
RABAT 00001117  002 OF 003 
 
 
Mission investigates all incidents fully in conjunction with 
Moroccan authorities.  All travelers are expected to report 
any suspicious incidents or information to the RSO 
immediately, 24 hours a day, at Tel. 037-76-96-39. 
 
¶C. Crime: 
 
The threat level for crime in Morocco has been designated 
"high."  Crimes ranging from aggressive panhandling pick 
pocketing, purse snatching, theft from vehicles, and 
harassment of women occur periodically.  Attempted break-ins 
of mission residences by burglars have occurred, but in 
general crime in Morocco tends to be non-violent.  Most 
criminals look for opportunities to steal by stealth rather 
than confrontation but there are exceptions. 
 
Women walking alone in certain areas of cities and rural 
areas are particularly vulnerable to verbal harassment from 
young men. Women are advised to travel with a companion or in 
a group when possible and to ignore any harassment.  Some 
women who have responded to verbal harassment have come under 
physical attack.  If physical provocation occurs, visitors 
are urged not to resist in order to avoid injury and to 
report the incident to the Regional Security Officer 
immediately (see telephone number above). 
 
Travelers should be alert for pickpockets and 
purse-snatchers, especially in outdoor shopping areas, 
tourist attractions, and in transportation centers.  Taxis 
and trains in Morocco are relatively safe, city buses are not 
considered safe.  Avoid carrying large sums of cash, and 
credit cards should be secured in the safe deposit box at 
your hotel.  In the event you are victimized by crime, or an 
attempted crime, or experience any security-related incident 
during your stay in Morocco, please report the incident to 
the RSO as soon as possible. 
 
¶D. Demonstrations/Harassment: 
 
When regional tensions increase many diplomatic missions, 
including ours, from time to time receive threatening phone 
calls, e-mails and harassing letters/faxes.  Should you 
receive any of these while at post, contact Marine Post One 
and/or the RSO immediately. 
 
Further, the Mission has received several white powder 
letters through the local mail.  Please note: Mission Policy 
strictly prohibits any unopened mail, packages or boxes from 
being brought into any facility prior to screening by the 
Embassy and Consulate mailroom staff.  There are no 
exceptions to this policy and all personnel are expected to 
abide by it rigidly for the protection of the Mission and its 
personnel. 
 
Finally, demonstrations do occur with some frequency in 
Morocco during periods of heightened tension.  Occasionally, 
a few of these demonstrations have been anti-American/Western 
with a small number of these resulting in some minor 
destruction of personal and public property.  Travelers 
should be cognizant of the current levels of tension in the 
region, always be alert to their surroundings and avoid large 
crowds.  Demonstrations and suspicious incidents should be 
immediately reported to the Marine Security Guard (Post 1) 
and the RSO. 
 
¶E. Electronic Devices: 
 
Privately owned laptops, PCs, cellular telephones, cameras 
and similar devices are strictly prohibited in controlled 
access areas (CAAs) of the chancery and Consulate.  Travelers 
with USG unclassified and classified laptop/notebook 
computers must notify the Information Management Officer 
(IMO) through Marine Post One or the RSO before bringing 
these machines into the Embassy or Consulate.  Questions 
concerning other types of electronic devices must be directed 
to either the IMO or the RSO. 
 
¶F. Cultural Awareness: 
 
Travelers need to be cognizant of the fact that Morocco is an 
Islamic country despite the appearance of some aspects of 
Western culture.  Generally, women should not travel alone 
and should dress conservatively for all occasions to avoid 
harassment from young men in public or offending Moroccan 
interlocutors during social occasions.  Men should not wear 
ostentatious apparel that draws attention.  The purchase and 
consumption of alcohol is permitted in Morocco but Islamic 
conservatives in Moroccan society are fundamentally against 
its sale or use.  Travelers should let common sense prevail 
and only buy or consume alcohol in shops, restaurants and 
hotels where it is readily available and permitted. 
 
RABAT 00001117  003 OF 003 
 
 
¶G. Post Specific Security Briefings: 
 
Travelers planning to stay in Morocco 14 days or longer 
should request that their sponsoring office schedule a 
security briefing for them with the RSO. 
 
****************************************** 
Visit Embassy Rabat's Classified Website; 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/rabat 
****************************************** 
 
RILEY