07STATE108741
SOMALILAND - ARREST OF OPPOSITION POLITICIANS
Fri Aug 03 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0004
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #8741 2151919
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 031908Z AUG 07
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY NAIROBI IMMEDIATE 4524UNCLAS STATE 108741 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV SO
SUBJECT: SOMALILAND - ARREST OF OPPOSITION POLITICIANS 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action request, please see paragraph 2. 
 
OBJECTIVES 
---------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Post is asked to approach the authorities of the 
self-declared Republic of Somaliland to pursue the following 
objectives: 
 
-- Convey USG concerns regarding the recent arrest of three 
leaders of the Qaran political association in Somaliland; 
 
-- Emphasize the USG expectation that Somaliland will adhere 
to the terms of its own constitution and allow political 
associations to compete for seats in the upcoming municipal 
elections; 
 
-- Stress that any efforts to prevent the creation of a new 
political party within the terms outlined by the constitution 
would significantly undermine the democratic gains achieved 
by Somaliland since 2001; and 
 
-- Press for the immediate release of the three leaders of 
the Qaran political association. 
 
BACKGROUND 
---------- 
 
¶3. (U) On Saturday, July 28, authorities in the self-declared 
Republic of Somaliland arrested three opposition politicians 
planning to form a new political party.  The opposition 
figures - Mohamed Abdi Gaboose, Mohamed Hashi Elmi, and Jamal 
Aideed Ibrahim ) are affiliated with the Qaran political 
association and were charged with founding an illegal 
organization and creating instability.  All three are now 
being held at Mandera prison in Somaliland. 
 
¶4. (U) Article 9 of the Somaliland constitution limits the 
number of political parties to a maximum of three.  Under 
this framework, political associations may be formed prior to 
municipal elections and would be eligible to compete for 
seats in local elections.  The three associations to receive 
the highest percentage of the vote during municipal elections 
would then be allowed to register as political parties and 
move forward to contest parliamentary and presidential 
elections.  Municipal elections are currently scheduled to 
take place in Somaliland in December 2007, followed by 
presidential elections o/a April 2008. 
 
¶5. (SBU) The current three political parties ) UDUB, 
Kulmiye, and UCID ) have been in place since the previous 
municipal elections in December 2002.  The leaders of each 
party, including President Dahir Riyale Kahin (UDUB), Ahmed 
Mohamoud "Silanyo" (Kulmiye), and Faisal Ali Warabe (UCID), 
are established politicians who leave little political space 
for the emergence of a new generation of democratic 
leadership.  Each of the current parties opposes the 
establishment of a new political party out of fear of being 
prevented from seeking seats in the upcoming presidential 
elections.  However, efforts to prevent the establishment of 
a new political party is both illegal under the Somaliland 
constitution and undermines the democratic gains that 
Somaliland has achieved since 2001. 
 
REPORTING DEADLINE 
------------------ 
 
¶6. (U) Department greatly appreciates Post's continued 
engagement and reporting on this issue. Please report results 
of this effort via front-channel cable to AF/E Nole Garey by 
Friday, August 10. 
 
POINT OF CONTACT 
---------------- 
 
¶7. (U) Please contact AF/E Nole Garey for any further 
background information or argumentation to meet our 
objectives. 
RICE