07USNATO89
USNATO WELCOMES JAMES STARKEY FOR VCC EXPERTS
Mon Feb 12 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Mission USNATO
VZCZCXYZ0021
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHNO #0089/01 0431603
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 121603Z FEB 07
FM USMISSION USNATO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0477
INFO RUEHKV/AMEMBASSY KYIV PRIORITY 0006
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW PRIORITY 5638UNCLAS USNATO 000089 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL AMGT NATO OTRA PARM UP
SUBJECT: USNATO WELCOMES JAMES STARKEY FOR VCC EXPERTS 
MEETING FEBRUARY 12-13, 2007 
 
REF: STATE 12958 
 
¶1.  Mission welcomes Mr. James Stakey to Brussels for the 
February 12-13 VCC Meetings.  Control officer for the visit 
is Don Sheehan, work tel:(32)2-724-3486 and fax: 
(32)2-724-3421, home tel: (32) 2-779-2047, cell: 
(32)476-663-647. Admin. support is Lucia Krul (32) 
2-724-3233. 
 
¶2.  Hotel reservations have been confirmed at the Sheraton 
Rogier, arriving February 11, departing February 14. 
Confirmation # is 236210213. 
 
¶3.  The primary mode of transportation for visitors to 
Brussels is metered taxis, which are plentiful and reliable. 
However, fares, which can be vouchered, are quite expensive. 
The bus, tram and metro system are excellent. 
 
¶4.  NATO visitor passes have been arranged for meeting 
participants and can be picked up at NATO's main gate 
entrance between 0800-1700.  After 1700 passes are available 
for pick up at the main reception desk.  Visitors should then 
proceed directly to the U.S. Mission, near the NATO "F-wing" 
entrance.  For security reasons, all visitors, even those 
with green NATO badges, must present two pieces of 
identification or their blue State Department-issued badge to 
the Marine Guard before being admitted into the U.S. Mission. 
Visitors must also leave cell phones and other electronic 
equipment with the Marine Guard.  Mission appreciates your 
cooperation. 
 
¶5.  Computer and Electronics Usage:  Inter-agency security 
standards prohibit the introduction or use of non-USG owned 
computer hardware and software at all USG diplomatic 
facilities.  Cell phones, palm pilots, radios and other 
convenience electronics are prohibited in all secure areas of 
the Mission.  Travelers who anticipate having special needs 
in terms of either access or computer usage should contact 
the RSO office before arriving at post. 
 
¶6.  Regarding money, there is a branch of the ING Bank at 
NATO which has an ATM that accepts U.S. bank/credit union 
cards on the "PLUS" system.  Numerous downtown banks also 
have ATM machines.  Traveler's checks can be exchanged in 
most banks.  On Tuesday and Thursday mornings, there is a 
cashier at USNATO to which TDY visitors with travel orders 
have access. 
 
¶7.  Threat Assessment:  A worldwide caution regarding the 
threat of transnational terrorism was issued by the 
Department of State.  (Please consult the Department's 
website for text:  HTTP:HTravel.State.Gov.)  In light of this 
caution and the events of September 11, 2001, all visitors 
are encouraged to assess their security posture, and be alert 
to their surroundings.  All visitors should exercise caution 
while traveling abroad as U.S. citizens and facilities are 
often the target of groups demonstrating opposition to the 
U.S. foreign policy. 
 
¶8.  Belgium remains a relatively safe country but as a result 
of the war in Iraq, and sentiments expressed by its citizens 
against the war, American visitors are advised to exercise 
caution and avoid anti-American demonstrations.  Also, it is 
prudent not to wear clothes or carry articles with logos and 
emblems associated with the United States at this time.  By 
taking reasonable precautions, visitors should enjoy an 
uneventful stay. However, purse snatching and pick-pocketing 
are occuring more frequently.  In Brussels, pick-pocketing 
and purse snatching are more prevalent in the metro system 
(subway, bus, tram) and at Brussels' three major train 
stations:  Gare du Nord (North Station), Gare Central 
(Central Station), and especially Gare du Midi (South 
Station).  Extra caution should be used at the Gare Centrale 
Station.  Victims have been asked for assistance by someone 
who appeared lost and anxious to catch their train.  As the 
victim responds to the request, a third person appears and 
steals laptop computers, and other related travel items. 
According to the police, this is a new strategy by criminal 
gangs operating at Central Station.  Apparently they prefer 
platforms 3 and 4, used by trains going to the airport and 
obviously carrying the best category of potential victims. 
Valuables should never be left unattended in vehicles and car 
doors should always be kept locked when driving.  Carry only 
a minimum amount of cash, credit cards and ID.  Expensive 
jewelry, financial records, address books and other personal 
effects should be left at home or stored in a safe place 
during your visit. 
 
¶9. Emergency numbers for the Police and Medical Assistance 
are 101 and 100 respectively, and for cellular phones 
(locally) 112.  Visitors to Belgium requiring additional 
 
information should contact the Brussels Regional Security 
Office at 32-2-508-2370 (if dialing locally, 02-508-2370). 
 
¶10.  Please advise if further assistance is needed. 
NULAND