07USUNNEWYORK632
UNSC UNANIMOUSLY ADOPTS HYBRID RESOLUTION
Thu Aug 02 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO8635
PP RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHGI RUEHJO RUEHMA RUEHMR RUEHPA RUEHRN RUEHROV
RUEHTRO
DE RUCNDT #0632/01 2140001
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 020001Z AUG 07
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2374
INFO RUEHZO/AFRICAN UNION COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHDS/AMEMBASSY ADDIS ABABA PRIORITY 1416
RUEHAE/AMEMBASSY ASMARA PRIORITY 1179
RUEHRL/AMEMBASSY BERLIN PRIORITY 0839
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 0863
RUEHDR/AMEMBASSY DAR ES SALAAM PRIORITY 0256
RUEHKH/AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM PRIORITY 0829
RUEHNJ/AMEMBASSY NDJAMENA PRIORITY 0314
RUEHNY/AMEMBASSY OSLO PRIORITY 0755
RUEHOT/AMEMBASSY OTTAWA PRIORITY 0901
RUEHTRO/AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 USUN NEW YORK 000632 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PREF PREL SU UNSC KPKO
SUBJECT: UNSC UNANIMOUSLY ADOPTS HYBRID RESOLUTION 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 106479 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000632  001.2 OF 006 
 
     ¶B. HTTP://WWW.UN.ORG/NEWS/PRESS/DOCS/2007/SGSM11 110.- 
        DOC.HTM 
     ¶C. HTTP://WWW.UN.ORG/NEWS/PRESS/DOCS/2007/SC9089 .DOC- 
        .HTM 
 
¶1. (U) At a July 31 public meeting, the United Nations 
Security Council adopted the draft resolution authorizing the 
hybrid UN-African Union (AU) peacekeeping operation for 
Darfur.  The resolution was co-sponsored by Belgium, Congo, 
France, Italy, Peru, Slovakia and the UK, and was adopted 
unanimously by a vote count of 15 in favor and zero opposed. 
The resolution was adopted as UN document S/RES/1769 (2007); 
text in paragraph 6. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Given the significance of Council authorization for 
the hybrid force, UN Secretary-General (SYG) Ban Ki-moon 
participated in the meeting and delivered a statement 
welcoming the resolution's adoption while cautioning that 
"time is not on our side" with regard to deployment of the 
force, which will require a massive troop and police 
recruiting effort and establishment of command and control 
structures.  Full text of the SYG's remarks can be found ref 
¶B.  Department of Peacekeeping Operations Under-SYG Guehenno 
and Assistant-SYG Holl Lute also attended the meeting and 
made subsequent remarks to the press in support of SYG Ban's 
statement and the UN intent to mobilize to support prompt 
implementation of the resolution.  Highlighting the need for 
the hybrid to have a quick reaction capability, Guehenno 
noted that mobility would be a challenge for the hybrid force 
and warned that air assets necessary for this mobility, like 
attack helicopters, would constitute a large portion of the 
$2.5 billion price tag for the hybrid's first year.  Guehenno 
added that there was a substantial deficiency in hybrid 
police contributions. 
 
¶3. (SBU) 13 of 15 Council Members delivered explanations of 
vote, all welcoming adoption by consensus of the resolution 
(summaries of Members' statements can be found at ref C). 
Drawing from ref A guidance, Ambassador Khalilzad emphasized 
the hybrid's Chapter VII mandate for the force to act to 
prevent armed attacks against civilians and disruption of the 
Darfur Peace Agreement.  He called on President Bashir to 
provide the maximum level of compliance, in the absence of 
which the USG would explore unilateral and multilateral 
measures against Sudan.  UK Permanent Representative (PR) 
Jones Parry made a similar warning about possible 
consequences for non-compliance.  After the meeting the 
Sudanese PR, who attended the meeting but did not 
participate, remarked to Ambassador Khalilzad that the U.S. 
had been the only delegation to mention the possibility of 
sanctions in its intervention on the hybrid resolution. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Khartoum's Council allies, including Qatar, 
Indonesia and China, made a point in their interventions of 
highlighting the importance of the Tripartite Mechanism (the 
UN, AU and Sudanese Government of National Unity) in moving 
forward on Darfur.  Chinese PR and July Council President 
Wang went so far as to call the Tripartite Mechanism "the 
political prerequisite on which the resolution was adopted," 
something the Indonesian PR echoed in his statement that the 
resolution "was based on the Tripartite approach."  (COMMENT: 
 This call, clearly orchestrated by Sudan, could foreshadow 
Sudanese obstruction to come in implementing UNSCR 1769 and 
in deploying the hybrid operation.  END COMMENT.) 
 
¶5. (SBU) A representative of the AU also participated in the 
meeting and delivered a statement thanking the Council for 
its support and seeking its continued collaboration on 
Darfur.  She made an appeal to Members for support to AMIS 
until the transition was completed and for "generous 
contributions" to the hybrid.  In this regard the UN 
Secretariat earlier in the day circulated to Members a July 
 
SIPDIS 
30 letter from the SYG to the Council Presidency informing 
the Council of his intention to seek General Assembly 
authorization to reimburse AMIS troop contributors for 
military troop costs per UN standard rates until AMIS' 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000632  002.2 OF 006 
 
 
mandate expiration on December 31.  In his intervention the 
French Deputy PR alluded to the need for the Council to 
settle the situations in Chad and Central African Republic to 
provide security for IDPs and refugees.  (NOTE: The French 
have signaled they intend to circulate a Council resolution 
on Chad/CAR in August.  END NOTE.) 
 
¶6. (U) Begin UNSCR 1769 text: 
 
The Security Council, 
 
Recalling all its previous resolutions and presidential 
statements concerning the situation in Sudan, 
 
Reaffirming its strong commitment to the sovereignty, unity, 
independence and territorial integrity of Sudan, and to the 
cause of peace, and expressing its determination to work with 
the Government of Sudan, in full respect of its sovereignty, 
to assist in tackling the various problems in Darfur, Sudan, 
 
Recalling the conclusions of the Addis Ababa high-level 
consultation on the situation in Darfur of 16 November 2006 
as endorsed in the communiqu of the 66th meeting of the 
Peace and Security Council of the African Union held in Abuja 
on 30 November 2006 as well as the communiqu of 79th meeting 
of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union on 22 
June 2007, recalling the statement of its President of 19 
December 2006 endorsing the Addis Ababa and Abuja agreements, 
welcoming the progress made so far and calling for them to be 
fully implemented by all parties without delay and for all 
parties to facilitate the immediate deployment of the United 
Nations Light and Heavy Support packages to the African Union 
Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) and a Hybrid operation in Darfur, 
for which back-stopping and command and control structures 
will be provided by the United Nations, and recalling that 
co-operation between the UN and the regional arrangements in 
matters relating to the maintenance of peace and security is 
an integral part of collective security as provided for in 
the Charter of the United Nations, 
 
Re-affirming also its previous resolutions 1325 (2000) on 
women, peace and security, 1502 (2003) on the protection of 
humanitarian and United Nations personnel, 1612 (2005) on 
children and armed conflict and the subsequent conclusions of 
the Security Council Working Group on Children in Armed 
Conflict pertaining to parties to the armed conflict in Sudan 
(S/2006/971), and 1674 (2006) on the protection of civilians 
in armed conflict, as well as recalling the report of its 
Mission to Addis Ababa and Khartoum from 16 to 17 June 2007, 
 
Welcoming the report of the Secretary-General and the 
Chairperson of the African Union Commission of 5 June 2007, 
 
Commending in this regard the agreement of Sudan that the 
Hybrid operation shall be deployed in Darfur, as detailed in 
the conclusions of the high-level AU/UN consultations with 
the Government of Sudan in Addis Ababa on 12 June 2007 and 
confirmed in full during the Council's meeting with the 
President of Sudan on 17 June in Khartoum, 
 
Recalling the Addis Ababa Agreement that the Hybrid operation 
should have a predominantly African character and the troops 
should, as far as possible, be sourced from African countries, 
 
Commending the efforts of the African Union for the 
successful deployment of AMIS, as well as the efforts of 
member states and regional organisations that have assisted 
it in its deployment, stressing the need for AMIS, as 
supported by the United Nations Light and Heavy Support 
Packages, to assist implementation of the Darfur Peace 
Agreement until the end of its mandate, calling upon the 
Government of Sudan to assist in removing all obstacles to 
the proper discharge by AMIS of its mandate; and recalling 
the communiqu of the 79th meeting of the Peace and Security 
Council of the African Union of 22 June to extend the mandate 
of AMIS for an additional period not exceeding six months 
until 31 December 2007, 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000632  003.2 OF 006 
 
 
 
Stressing the urgent need to mobilise the financial, 
logistical and other support and assistance required for AMIS, 
 
Welcoming the ongoing preparations for the Hybrid operation, 
including the putting in place of logistical arrangements in 
Darfur, at United Nations Headquarters and the African Union 
Commission Headquarters, force and police generation efforts 
and on-going joint efforts by the Secretary General and the 
Chairperson of the African Union to finalise essential 
operational policies, and further welcoming action taken so 
that appropriate financial and administrative mechanisms are 
established to ensure the effective management of the Hybrid, 
 
Re-iterating its belief in the basis provided by the Darfur 
Peace Agreement for a lasting political solution and 
sustained security in Darfur, deploring that the Agreement 
has not been fully implemented by the signatories and not 
signed by all parties to the conflict in Darfur, calling for 
an immediate cease-fire, urging all parties not to act in any 
way that would impede the implementation of the Agreement, 
and recalling the communiqu of the second international 
meeting on the situation in Darfur convened by the African 
Union and United Nations Special Envoys in Tripoli from 15-16 
July 2007, 
 
Noting with strong concern on-going attacks on the civilian 
population and humanitarian workers and continued and 
widespread sexual violence, including as outlined in the 
Report of the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the 
African Union Commission on the Hybrid Operation in Darfur 
and the report of the Secretary-General of 23 February 2007, 
emphasising the need to bring to justice the perpetrators of 
such crimes and urging the Government of Sudan to do so, and 
reiterating in this regard its condemnation of all violations 
of human rights and international humanitarian law in Darfur, 
 
Reiterating its deep concern for the security of humanitarian 
aid workers and their access to populations in need, 
condemning those parties to the conflict who have failed to 
ensure the full, safe and unhindered access of relief 
personnel to all those in need in Darfur as well as the 
delivery of humanitarian assistance, in particular to 
internally displaced persons and refugees, and recognising 
that, with many citizens in Darfur having been displaced, 
humanitarian efforts remain a priority until a sustained 
cease-fire and inclusive political process are achieved, 
 
Demanding that there should be no aerial bombings and the use 
of United Nations markings on aircraft used in such attacks, 
 
Reaffirming its concern that the ongoing violence in Darfur 
might further negatively affect the rest of Sudan as well as 
the region, stressing that regional security aspects must be 
addressed to achieve long-term peace in Darfur, and calling 
on the Governments of Sudan and Chad to abide by their 
obligations under the Tripoli Agreement of 8 February 2006 
and subsequent bilateral agreements, 
 
Determining that the situation in Darfur, Sudan, continues to 
constitute a threat to international peace and security, 
 
Decides, in support of the early and effective implementation 
of the Darfur Peace Agreement and the outcome of the 
negotiations foreseen in paragraph 18, to authorise and 
mandate the establishment, for an initial period of 12 
months, of an AU/UN Hybrid operation in Darfur (UNAMID) as 
set out in this resolution and pursuant to the report of the 
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African Union 
 
SIPDIS 
Commission of 5 June 2007, and further decides that the 
mandate of UNAMID shall be as set out in paragraphs 54 and 55 
of the report of the Secretary General and the Chairperson of 
the African Union Commission of 5 June 2007; 
 
Decides that UNAMID, which shall incorporate AMIS personnel 
and the UN Heavy and Light Support Packages to AMIS, shall 
consist of up to 19,555 military personnel, including 360 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000632  004.2 OF 006 
 
 
military observers and liaison officers, and an appropriate 
civilian component including up to 3,772 police personnel and 
19 formed police units comprising up to 140 personnel each; 
 
Welcomes the appointment of the AU-UN Joint Special 
Representative for Darfur Rodolphe Adada and Force Commander 
Martin Agwai, and calls on the Secretary-General to 
immediately begin deployment of the command and control 
structures and systems necessary to ensure a seamless 
transfer of authority from AMIS to UNAMID; 
 
Calls on all parties to urgently facilitate the full 
deployment of the UN Light and Heavy Support Packages to AMIS 
and preparations for UNAMID, and further calls on member 
states to finalise their contributions to UNAMID within 30 
days of the adoption of this resolution and on the 
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African Union 
 
SIPDIS 
Commission to agree the final composition of the military 
component of UNAMID within the same time period; 
 
Decides that: 
      (a)   no later than October 2007, UNAMID shall 
establish an initial operational capability for the 
headquarters, including the necessary management and command 
and control structures, through which operational directives 
will be implemented, and shall establish financial 
arrangements to cover troops costs for all personnel deployed 
to AMIS; 
      (b)   as of October 2007, UNAMID shall complete 
preparations to assume operational command authority over the 
Light Support Package, personnel currently deployed to AMIS, 
and such Heavy Support Package and hybrid personnel as may be 
deployed by that date, in order that it shall perform such 
tasks under its mandate as its resources and capabilities 
permit immediately upon transfer of authority consistent with 
sub-paragraph (c) below; 
      (c)   as soon as possible and no later than 31 December 
2007, UNAMID having completed all remaining tasks necessary 
to permit it to implement all elements of its mandate, will 
assume authority from AMIS with a view to achieving full 
operational capability and force strength as soon as possible 
thereafter; 
 
Requests the Secretary General to report to the Council 
within 30 days of the passage of this resolution and every 30 
days thereafter, on the status of UNAMID's implementation of 
the steps specified in paragraph 5, including on the status 
of financial, logistical, and administrative arrangements for 
UNAMID and on the extent of UNAMID's progress toward 
achieving full operational capability; 
 
Decides that there will be unity of command and control 
which, in accordance with basic principles of peacekeeping, 
means a single chain of command, further decides that command 
and control structures and backstopping will be provided by 
the United Nations, and, in this context, recalls the 
conclusions of the Addis Ababa high level consultation on the 
situation in Darfur of 16 November; 
 
Decides that force and personnel generation and 
administration shall be conducted as set out in paragraphs 
113-115 of the report of the Secretary-General and the 
Chairperson of the African Union Commission of 5 June 2007, 
and requests the Secretary-General to put in place without 
delay the practical arrangements for deploying UNAMID 
including submitting to the General Assembly recommendations 
on funding and effective financial management and oversight 
mechanisms; 
 
Decides that UNAMID shall monitor whether any arms or related 
material are present in Darfur in violation of the Agreements 
and the measures imposed by paragraphs 7 and 8 of resolution 
1556 (2004); 
 
Calls on all Member States to facilitate the free, unhindered 
and expeditious movement to Sudan of all personnel, as well 
as equipment, provisions, supplies and other goods, including 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000632  005.2 OF 006 
 
 
vehicles and spare parts, which are for the exclusive use of 
UNAMID in Darfur; 
 
Stresses the urgent need to mobilise the financial, 
logistical and other support required for AMIS, and calls on 
member states and regional organisations to provide further 
assistance, in particular to permit the early deployment of 
two additional battalions during the transition to UNAMID; 
 
Decides that the authorised strength of UNMIS shall revert to 
that specified in resolution 1590 (2005) upon the transfer of 
authority from AMIS to UNAMID pursuant to paragraph 5(c); 
 
Calls on all the parties to the conflict in Darfur to 
immediately cease all hostilities and commit themselves to a 
sustained and permanent cease-fire; 
 
Demands an immediate cessation of hostilities and attacks on 
AMIS, civilians and humanitarian agencies, their staff and 
assets and relief convoys, and further demands that all 
parties to the conflict in Darfur fully co-operate with AMIS, 
civilians and humanitarian agencies, their staff and assets 
and relief convoys, and give all necessary assistance to the 
deployment of the United Nations Light and Heavy Support 
Packages to AMIS, and to UNAMID; 
 
Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations: 
      (a)   decides that UNAMID is authorised to take the 
necessary action, in the areas of deployment of its forces 
and as it deems within its capabilities in order to: 
      (i)   protect its personnel, facilities, installations 
and equipment, and to ensure the security and freedom of 
movement of its own personnel and humanitarian workers, 
      (ii)  support early and effective implementation of the 
Darfur Peace Agreement, prevent the disruption of its 
implementation and armed attacks, and protect civilians, 
without prejudice to the responsibility of the Government of 
Sudan; 
      (b)   requests that the Secretary-General, in 
consultation with the Chairperson of the African Union 
Commission, and the Government of Sudan conclude within 30 
days a status-of-forces agreement with respect to UNAMID, 
taking into consideration General Assembly resolution 58/82 
on the scope of legal protection under the Convention on the 
Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel and General 
Assembly resolution 61/133 on the Safety and Security of 
Humanitarian Personnel and the Protection of United Nations 
Personnel, and decides that pending the conclusion of such an 
agreement the model status-of-forces agreement dated 9 
October 1990 (A/45/594) shall provisionally apply with 
respect to UNAMID personnel operating in that country; 
 
Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary measures 
to achieve actual compliance in UNAMID with the United 
Nations zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and 
abuse, including the development of strategies and 
appropriate mechanisms to prevent, identify and respond to 
all forms of misconduct, including sexual exploitation and 
abuse, and the enhancement of training for personnel to 
prevent misconduct and ensure full compliance with the United 
Nations code of conduct, and to further take all necessary 
action in accordance with the Secretary-General's Bulletin on 
special measures for protection from sexual exploitation and 
sexual abuse (ST/SGB/2003/13) and to keep the Council 
informed, and urges troop-contributing countries to take 
appropriate preventive action including the conduct of 
pre-deployment awareness training and, in the case of forces 
previously deployed under AU auspices, post-deployment 
awareness training, and to take disciplinary action and other 
action to ensure full accountability in cases of such conduct 
involving their personnel; 
 
Calls on all concerned parties to ensure that the protection 
of children is addressed in the implementation of the Darfur 
Peace Agreement, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure 
continued monitoring and reporting of the situation of 
children and continued dialogue with parties to the conflict 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000632  006.2 OF 006 
 
 
towards the preparations of time-bound action plans to end 
recruitment and use of child soldiers and other violations 
against children; 
 
Emphasises there can be no military solution to the conflict 
in Darfur, welcomes the commitment expressed by the 
Government of Sudan and some other parties to the conflict to 
enter into talks and the political process under the 
mediation, and in line with the deadlines set out in the 
roadmap, of the United Nations Special Envoy for Darfur and 
the African Union Special Envoy for Darfur, who have its full 
support, looks forward to these parties doing so, calls on 
the other parties to the conflict to do likewise, and urges 
all the parties, in particular the non?signatory movements, 
to finalise their preparations for the talks; 
 
Welcomes the signature of a Joint Communiqu between the 
Government of Sudan and the United Nations on Facilitation of 
Humanitarian Activities in Darfur, and calls for it to be 
fully implemented and on all parties to ensure, in accordance 
with relevant provisions of international law, the full, safe 
and unhindered access of relief personnel to all those in 
need and delivery of humanitarian assistance, in particular 
to internally displaced persons and refugees; 
 
Emphasises the need to focus, as appropriate, on 
developmental initiatives that will bring peace dividends on 
the ground in Darfur, including in particular, finalising 
preparations for reconstruction and development, return of 
IDPs to their villages, compensation and appropriate security 
arrangements; 
 
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Council for 
its consideration no later than every 90 days after the 
adoption of this resolution on progress being made on, and 
immediately as necessary on any obstacles to: 
      (a)   the implementation of the Light and Heavy Support 
Packages and UNAMID, 
      (b)   the implementation of the Joint Communiqu 
between the Government of Sudan and the United Nations on 
Facilitation of Humanitarian Activities in Darfur, 
      (c)   the political process, 
      (d)   the implementation of the Darfur Peace Agreement 
and the parties' compliance with their international 
obligations and their commitments under relevant agreements, 
and 
      (e)   the cease-fire and the situation on the ground in 
Darfur; 
 
Demands that the parties to the conflict in Darfur fulfil 
their international obligations and their commitments under 
relevant agreements, this resolution and other relevant 
Council resolutions; 
 
Recalls the reports of the Secretary-General of 22 December 
2006 (S/2006/1019) and 23 February 2007 (S/2007/97) which 
detail the need to improve the security of civilians in the 
regions of eastern Chad and north-eastern Central African 
Republic, expresses its readiness to support this endeavour, 
and looks forward to the Secretary-General reporting on his 
recent consultations with the Governments of Chad and CAR; 
 
Emphasises its determination that the situation in Darfur 
shall significantly improve so that the Council can consider, 
in due course and as appropriate, and taking into 
consideration recommendations of the Secretary-General and 
the Chairperson of the African Union, the drawing down and 
eventual termination of UNAMID; 
 
Decides to remain seized of the matter. 
 
¶7. (U) End UNSCR 1769 text. 
 
KHALILZAD