08ANKARA1195
TURKISH CANDIDATES FOR MAKTOUM FOUNDATION
Tue Jul 01 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXYZ0012
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHAK #1195/01 1831452
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 011452Z JUL 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6714
INFO RUEHRC/DEPT OF AGRICULTURE WASHDC PRIORITY
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDC PRIORITYUNCLAS ANKARA 001195 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
EEB FOR STEPHEN KAPLITT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON PGOV PREL
SUBJECT: TURKISH CANDIDATES FOR MAKTOUM FOUNDATION 
ENTREPRENEURS CONFERENCE 
 
REF: STATE 62387 
 
¶1.  Per reftel, we offer seven candidates for possible 
participation in a Maktoum Foundation Conference to be held 
in Dubai in early 2009.  Their names and descriptions follow: 
 
¶2.  Ms. Mutlu Alkan:  She is an executive in the family 
company Malkan Makina textile machinery and has greatly 
expanded its reach.  She is the Director of the International 
Relations Committee of AKP, Istanbul branch.  She 
participated in an International Visitors Program (IVP) in 
FY2006.  She is an active IV Alumni, keeping in touch with 
other participants, and traveling to their countries to give 
speeches.  She also invited IVP alumni to Turkey to 
participate in various meetings organized by the Justice and 
Development Party (AKP).  She became a member of the Women 
Entrepreneurs Committee that was recently established in TOBB 
Turkish Chambers and Commodity Exchanges of Turkey. 
 
Contact information:  Piyale Pasa Bulvari, Pim3 Is Merkezi, 
Kat 1, Caglayan, Turkey, 90-532-563-3808, email: mutlu at 
alkan.com.tr 
 
¶3.  Ms. Ayse Bali, Rafineri Advertising-Istanbul: A graduate 
of Robert College, she is one of the top graphic designers in 
Turkey.  She founded Rafineri Advertising in 2001 with two 
other partners.  The company is now the largest independent 
advertising agency in Turkey.  In addition she owns a T-shirt 
brand which displays Ottoman motifs. 
 
Contact information:  Rafineri Advertising, Asmalimescid 
Mahallesi,  Mesrutiyet Caddesi, No: 99, Tepebasi-Istanbul, 
Turkey 34420, 90-212-334-6600, Email: ayse.bali at 
rafineri.net 
 
¶4.  Mr. Mustafa Kaygusuz, Foreign Trade Manager, Lastik 
Dunyasi Inc.; Foreign Trade Manager, Veday Mining Inc.; 
Owner, Zett Bijoux Store; General Secretary, International 
Interaction Society.  Mustafa Kaygusuz is a young Muslim who 
works in foreign trade.  He and a friend founded the 
International Interaction Society after they encountered a 
foreigner who lived in Ankara but had been trying without 
success to meet Turks.  The non-profit organization has grown 
rapidly and now hosts regular "IIS Country Seminars" at which 
diplomatic representatives are invited to introduce their 
countries in informal lectures; offers excursions to 
historical sites and cities in the region; welcomes language 
learners to weekly Turkish conversation nights; and even 
offers Turkish cooking courses. 
 
Contact information:  Birlik Mahallesi, 18th Sokak No. 14/1, 
Cankaya, Ankara, 90-312-496-1146 
 
¶5.  Mr. Obahan Obaoglu, owns and directs Strategic 
Communications Consultancy and the Genc Lider youth leader 
NGO.  He is the former deputy vice chairman for youth in True 
Path Party (DYP) and Party Vice Chairman for Science and 
Technology.  He is involved in national and international 
educational programs and has taken an active role in lobbying 
parliament to reduce the eligible age for  election to 25. 
Former International Visitor Program participant.  He speaks 
English and German. 
 
Contact information:  39. Caddesi 14/21 Birlik Apt., 
Cukurambar, Ankara, 90-312-468-8750 
 
¶6.  Mr. Selcuk Ozturk -- President of the Konya branch of 
conservative businessmen association MUSIAD.  He works in the 
 auto spare parts industry.  He represents a typical central 
Anatolia businessman in that he does not use bank credits, 
and instead relies on family resources for company financing. 
 He speaks no English. 
 
Contact information: MUSIAD Konya Subesi, Havzan Mahallesi, 
Sapanca Sok. 1/A, Meram, Konya, Turkey 90-332-320-6500 
 
¶7.  Ms. Fide Postaagasi is a young female entrepreneur in 
Kayseri.  She owns a chain of restaurants named "Kasik-la" 
serving Kayseri specialties.   She opened a branch of the 
restaurant in Istanbul.  She also sells her products to Real 
Supermarket in Ankara.  She is fluent in English and was 
educated in the U.S.  Three years ago her mother was selected 
as the best female entrepreneur of the year in Kayseri.  Her 
family owns iron mines, a mining company named Ozkoyuncu, and 
a Toyota dealership. 
 
Contact information:  Kasik-la Restaurant, Anbar Mahallesi, 
Zafer Caddesi No. 4, Toyota Ustu, 38070 Kayseri, Turkey, 
 
90-352-326-3075 
 
¶8.  Mr. Ali Turktas is a young Konya businessman who owns 
gasoline stations.  He is a former International Visitor 
Program participant.  He created a web site for Turkish-U.S. 
friendship.  He was Mainland Party (ANAP) Konya Youth Branch 
President.  His wife is a deputy dean at Konya Selcuk 
University. 
 
Contact information:  Bezirciler Alpet Petrol, Fatih 
Mahallesi, Yeni Istanbul Caddesi, Itfaiye Karsisi, No. 6, 
42300 Selcuklu, Konya, Turkey, 90-332-320-7363, email: 
aliturktas at yahoo.com 
 
¶9.  We have several suggestions for possible cosponsors for 
funding the conference or related activities.  These are the 
Bilkent Foundation, the Union of Chambers and Industries 
(TOBB), the Businessmen's and Industrialists' Association 
(TUSIAD), Independent Industrialists' and Businessmens' 
Association (MUSIAD), Turkish Confederation of Businessmen 
and Industrialists (TUSKON), the Turkish-American Business 
Association (TABA), the Ankara Chamber of Commerce, and the 
Istanbul Chamber of Commerce.  Endeavor is a private group 
which might also be a good cosponsor.  Their website is 
www.endeavor.org. 
 
Visit Ankara's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.intelink.sgov.gov/wiki/Portal:Turk ey 
 
WILSON