08BAGHDAD2913
STATE OF DETENTION FACILITIES IN IRAQ: NORTH AND
Tue Sep 09 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXYZ0007
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHGB #2913/01 2531146
ZNR UUUUU ZZH (CCY ADD4C606 MSI8695-695)
P 091146Z SEP 08
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9323
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS BAGHDAD 002913 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
C O R R E C T E D COPY CAPTION 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM KJUS PINS IQ
SUBJECT: STATE OF DETENTION FACILITIES IN IRAQ: NORTH AND 
WEST 
 
REF: BAGHDAD 1667 
¶1.  (SBU)  SUMMARY:  Similar to conditions in southern and 
central Iraq, there are serious problems with overcrowding in 
detention facilities in northern and western Iraq.  Ongoing 
GOI military operations and a lack of sufficient facilities, 
especially prisons, have exacerbated overcrowding in Diyala 
and Al-Anbar.  Almost all the facilities are experiencing a 
lack of food, medical care, and basic supplies.  There are 
also widespread reports of delays in judicial processing. 
There are some, although fewer than before, allegations of 
abuse and torture, specifically during the investigation 
period.  For non-KRG facilities, the most immediate need is 
more prison space.  Detention facilities in the KRG are in 
relatively better condition, and the KRG reformed its 
detention operations in 2008 in order to improve conditions. 
Currently the primary concern with KRG detention facilities 
is the treatment of pre-trial detainees, as there are still 
reports of forced confessions.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (SBU)  PRTs and ePRTs around the country have increased 
efforts to visit and inspect GOI detention facilities in 
northern and west Iraq.  (Note:  The state of detention 
facilities in southern Iraq reported septel.  End Note.) 
Detention facilities are run by four GOI ministries and two 
KRG ministries.  (Note:  The KRG also has security facilities 
run by its intelligence service, Asayish.  End Note.)  The 
Ministry of Interior (MoI) runs pre-trial detention 
facilities, or jails, and also holds detainees in numerous 
police stations.  There are five National Police detention 
facilities and 275 Iraqi Police facilities around the 
country, except for in the KRG.  The Ministry of Defense 
(MoD) operates Iraqi Army (IA) detention facilities.  There 
are approximately 29 MoD facilities above the brigade level. 
The Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs (MoLSA) operates two 
juvenile facilities in Baghdad.  (Note:  The Ministry of 
Justice runs the other seven juvenile facilities outside of 
the KRG.  Juveniles are also held at various MoI facilities 
across the country, sometimes in their own quasi-facility but 
generally in a separate cell from the adults.  End Note.) 
The Ministry of Justice (MoJ) runs all post-trial prisons and 
some pre-trial facilities.  (Note:  The MoJ has the legal 
responsibility to operate all detention facilities in the 
country other than temporary holding facilities (i.e., police 
station holding cells).  End Note.)  In the KRG, all 
post-trial prisons are under the KRG Ministry of Labor and 
Social Welfare (KMoLSW).  Pre-trial facilities are operated 
by the KRG MoI.  On September 1, the MoI had 8815 pre-trial 
detainees and MoD had 1,601 pre-trial detainees.  There were 
9,581 additional pre-trial detainees and 10,522 post-trial 
prisoners in MoJ, KRG, and MoLSA custody. 
 
------ 
DIYALA 
------ 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  The main concern in Diyala detention facilities is 
massive overcrowding, which has been exacerbated by ongoing 
military operations in the province.  The crowded jails, 
which have recently absorbed almost 600 new detainees in the 
GOI military operations, have caused shortages in food, 
water, and medical treatment.  The worst overcrowding is in 
the MoJ pre-trial facility in Baqubah, which is at 300 
percent over capacity, and the Fifth IA Division holding 
facility.  PRT officers regularly visit the MoD, MoJ, and MoI 
facilities in the province and note concerns about the 
increased strains on the facilities by increasing detainee 
populations. 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  The MoD Fifth IA Division detention facility at 
Khamees houses approximately 360 men, four women, and a 
child, in a facility designed for around 180 detainees.  The 
women are separated from the men and housed in a cell with no 
electricity.  The men are in overcrowded cells that make it 
difficult for detainees to have enough room to sleep.  There 
is no air conditioning, conditions are unsanitary, and 
outside exercise or recreation is not allowed.  On a recent 
visit, PRTOffs noted evidence of abuse of one detainee. 
There is access to medical care, and each detainee is 
examined by a doctor. 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  The PRT and U.S. Military officials regularly 
visit three MoI jails in Diyala.  In the most recent visit to 
Baqubah Jail and Major Crimes Unit, which are collocated, 
there were 634 detainees in the jail and 88 detainees in the 
Major Crimes Unit, including two juveniles.  (Note:  The ten 
year old has since been released by the Court of Cassation. 
End Note.)  PRTOffs took note of 13 blindfolded detainees 
with their hands tied behind their backs who had been sitting 
in a hallway for three days waiting to see a judge.  (Note: 
PRTOffs asked prison officials to at least tie their hands in 
front of their bodies.  The request was agreed to, and the 
 
prison officials noted that the detainees are untied at night 
and allowed to sleep.  End Note.)  They also noted a ten year 
old juvenile housed with adult males in a large cell.  The 
Khan Bani Saad Jail held 59 detainees (well over the capacity 
of 20) in the last PRT visit, and was in relatively better 
condition than the others.  However, the detainees are not 
given food by the jail and have to rely on food from their 
families.  The Khalis Jail held 100 detainees in a facility 
designed for 50.  All three jails were grossly overcrowded 
and unsanitary, with little ventilation to ameliorate the 
foul smells.  Detainees in Baqubah and Khalis reported 
several cases of scabies and other contagious skin diseases. 
 
------------ 
SALAH AD-DIN 
------------ 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  Previous reporting on the Tikrit jail (reftel and 
unclassified O/I July 22), has highlighted the problems with 
overcrowding and its effect on health and security.  During 
visits of provincial jails, PRTOffs saw overcrowding and 
unsanitary conditions, particularly in the Tikrit Terrorist 
Jail.  There are plans for the GOI to build a new 1000-bed 
jail; however construction has not begun, and the facility 
will not likely be ready before the end of 2009. 
 
¶7.  (SBU)  Since the issue was raised in June, the PRT has 
intensified efforts to visit the jail and raise issues of 
concern with Iraqi officials.  PRT officials have brought 
Iraqi parliamentarians, military commanders, health 
officials, engineers, and judicial authorities to visit the 
jail in order to find solutions to expand the facility, 
improve health facilities, and improve coordination between 
the police and judicial authorities.  MNF-I DCG visited the 
facility with the MoI Inspector General to increase pressure 
on the MoI to improve its detention facilities. 
 
-------- 
AL-ANBAR 
-------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  The MoI operates several jails in Al-Anbar 
province, all at over-capacity levels.  Although there is a 
strong need for a prison in the province, the MoJ does not 
operate a post-trial facility in the area.  The USG is in the 
process of acquiring land on which to build a 1500-bed prison 
in Ramadi to relieve some overcrowding problems.  (Note: 
There is a dispute between the MoJ and Ministry of Finance on 
the land title.  If this is not resolved soon, the USG will 
lose the funding for this prison.  End Note.)  Causing much 
of the overcrowding is the problem with judicial delays. 
EPRTs in Ramadi and Fallujah report long delays in the 
judicial process, with some pre-trial detainees being held in 
jails for over a year before trial.  The biggest cause of the 
delays is the lack of coordination between the investigative 
judges and the police on moving cases forward.  Additionally, 
there are reports that police hold some cases back for 
bribes. 
 
¶9.  (SBU)  Facilities in Anbar faced shortages of food for 
detainees over the last several months.  The MoJ, which 
legally has the responsibility to provide food for all 
detention facilities, had neglected to provide funding for 
food to detainees in Anbar.  Detainees had to rely on food 
donations from family members and a U.S. Military CERP 
program that provided food from January to June.  In July, 
the MoJ finally signed a contract for food distribution to 
Anbar facilities; however, some western facilities still 
report a lack of food. 
 
¶10.  (SBU)  The Fallujah jail has capacity for 100 detainees 
but usually has between 350-400 detainees.  The conditions in 
the facility are bad, with both juvenile and adult detainees 
crammed into small rooms.  There is evidence of scabies, 
which has the capability to spread easily.  The facility is 
run by the Major Crimes Unit of the police, whose focus is 
investigations and not maintaining and overseeing detention 
facilities.  Many reports indicate cases of abuse during the 
investigations by the major crimes unit. 
 
¶11.  (SBU)  There are five district MoI jails, for pre-trial 
detainees, and one provincial jail in Ramadi.  The provincial 
jail is used to hold detainees awaiting trial and those post 
trial awaiting transfer to a prison.  Previously, detainees 
were held at smaller facilities in the province, experiencing 
inconsistent methods of treatment, but the system was 
consolidated to create a more efficient and humane system. 
Detainees now are in facilities with air conditioning, at 
times, and are now allowed outside recreation time.  A new 
provincial jail will be completed in early 2009 and will ease 
some overcrowding problems.  While overcrowding is an issue, 
there have been drastic improvements from previous 
 
conditions.  The Ramadi ePRT assists in training classes for 
the police and will soon begin a training course designed to 
improve correction standards for jail managers.  The ePRT is 
also working with the Commission of Integrity on establishing 
anti-corruption training classes. 
 
¶12.  (SBU)  The ePRT inspects each of the MoI facilities in 
Ramadi.  The Jazeera IP station, with a capacity of 40, is 
new and in good condition.  Shamiya IP station is also a new, 
clean facility but is more congested.  The North IP station 
holds about 100 detainees and is well maintained and managed 
by an engaged staff.  Shabab is an older facility with a 
crumbling infrastructure.  Although there have been 
improvements in sanitary conditions over the year, the 
physical plant is still in bad shape, and about 90 detainees 
are in three cramped cages, acting as cells, generally 
without air conditioning.  The East IP station is in poor 
condition and is in need of rehabilitation.  Detainees are 
held in the basement with limited light and electricity. 
These facilities are visited by a Ministry of Health doctor 
on a weekly basis.  Detainees are either allowed to spend 
time outside twice a week or daily, depending on the 
facility.  Some detainees report they have spent months in 
the jail, but most at least said they had seen an 
investigative judge.  The Provincial Transfer Jail is a 
temporary holding station for those awaiting trial or 
transfer to a prison and is relatively new and 
well-maintained.  It is the only facility with a doctor on 
site. 
 
------ 
KIRKUK 
------ 
 
¶13.  (SBU)  There are two pre-trial facilities in Kirkuk, a 
jail and juvenile detention facility.  There is no post-trial 
prison in the province, and prisoners are either transferred 
to Ft. Suse prison in Sulaymaniyah or Badush prison in 
Ninewa.  The judiciary, police, and government leaders agree 
that Kirkuk is in need of a post-trial facility.  Provincial 
authorities have not addressed any of the concerns from the 
jail on improving conditions and capacity. 
 
¶14.  (SBU)  The Kirkuk Jail comprises two buildings, one 
built by the USG in 2007 and another older building. 
Currently, the jail is a little over capacity, but crowding 
has improved this year with over a hundred amnesty releases. 
According to Colonel Korsheed, who runs the jail, there have 
been no complaints of human rights abuses or torture; the PRT 
has also not received any reports of torture or abuse at the 
jail.  The detainees have access to medical care full time 
and limited outdoor time.  There are no rehabilitation and 
educational programs at the jail because it is a pre-trial 
facility and intended to only house prisoners for a short 
period of time. 
 
¶15.  (SBU)  The PRT most recently visited the Kirkuk Juvenile 
detention facility in August.  There were 15 juvenile males 
detained in one cell.  Due to a past bombing of the facility, 
four rooms were destroyed, limiting capacities of the 
facility.  There is no longer any space for female juveniles, 
so the facility is currently all male.  The one room is in 
poor condition; there are not enough beds or space, and there 
is mold growing on the walls making the juveniles sick. 
After sentencing, juvenile prisoners would be transferred to 
the Northern Juvenile General Prison in Sulaymaniyah. 
However, the KRG recently decided it would no longer accept 
juvenile detainees or women from Kirkuk to the post-trial 
facility.  This has forced sentenced juveniles to remain at 
the Kirkuk pre-trial jail.  The development is exacerbating 
existing overcrowding concerns and needs to be addressed. 
 
--- 
KRG 
--- 
 
¶16.  (SBU)  The KRG reformed its prisons system through 
several executive decisions in the first quarter of 2008, 
putting control of all post-trial prisons under the KRG 
Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare (KMoLSW).  (Note: 
Previously, some were under KMoLSW and some under the KRG 
MoI.  End Note.)  Pre-trial facilities remained with the KRG 
MoI.  A KRG Prime Ministerial special committee that was 
formed in response to criticism from international human 
rights report promoted this reform, according to the KRG 
Minister of Labor and Social Welfare.  Currently, the primary 
concern with KRG detention facilities is the treatment of 
pre-trial detainees, as there are still reports that coercion 
is used to influence confessions.  Human Rights Watch 
registered concern in 2007 that some interpreted the regional 
Anti-Terrorism Law of 2007 as allowing coerced confessions as 
long as there was some corroborating evidence.  There are two 
 
federal prisons in the KRG region that house prisoners from 
around the country.  Both of these, Ft. Suse and a new 
facility at Chamchamal that is under construction, are in 
Sulaymaniyah province and are run by the federal MoJ.  The 
KRG intelligence services (the Asayish, which are under 
regional ministerial authority), and two party security 
institutions that do not report to the elected government) 
also operate pre-trial detention facilities, which are not 
monitored by outside entities.  The Erbil RRT does not have 
mandate to fund or contribute to programs related to 
detention facilities but does monitor and report on prisons 
as possible.  The KRG funds the staffing, supply, operations, 
and maintenance of all regional prisons and pre-trial 
detention facilities in the KRG without any direct linkage to 
national resources. 
 
¶17.  (SBU)  The RRT conducted its first inspection of 
facilities in Sulaymaniyah in February, not including 
security force facilities, which are restricted.  RRTOffs 
also meet with the Minister and Director General of the 
KMoLSW, who reports that the ministry is actively trying to 
address concerns raised in human rights reports on the 
region, such as improving the quality of life of detainees 
and increasing access to occupational training.  The ministry 
has a clear tracking system for detainees, which is linked to 
the court systems.  (Comment:  This level of tracking 
information and detainee information is more advanced than 
GOI facilities, where there are no standard procedures for 
tracking detainees.  End Comment.)  There is a separate 
prison for women, which includes a wing for juveniles.  The 
facility is well-resourced and maintained, and the KRG is 
planning to build a larger facility in 2009. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶18.  (SBU)  To ease overcrowding issues, Post will continue 
to push for resolution of the land title dispute in order to 
begin building a prison in Al-Anbar.  We will also continue 
urging ministries to budget for new detention facility 
construction, specifically in areas of primary concern. 
Detainees from recent operations are awaiting judicial 
processing, and Post and the Military will monitor which 
facilities are in dire need of more investigative judges and 
encourage judges from Baghdad to travel to the provinces and 
process detainees.  The PRTs and Military will continue to 
visit more MoI and MoD facilities, and we will rely on 
reporting from the PRTs and MNF-I, MNC-I, MNSTC-I, and TF134, 
who all conduct extensive inspection duties.  Our presence in 
the facilities has been beneficial to improving conditions, 
and we will continue to place pressure on GOI and detention 
facility officials. 
CROCKER