08DILI67
TIMOR-LESTE 2008 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT SUBMISSION
Sat Mar 01 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Dili
VZCZCXRO2055
OO RUEHCHI RUEHHM RUEHNH
DE RUEHDT #0067/01 0610331
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O R 010331Z MAR 08
FM AMEMBASSY DILI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3890
INFO RUEHC/USAID WASHDC
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DC
RUEFHLC/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVE
RUEHDT/AMEMBASSY DILI 3317UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 DILI 000067 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EAP/RSA, G/TIP, EAP/MTS, EAP/RSP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PREL SMIG ID
SUBJECT: TIMOR-LESTE 2008 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT SUBMISSION 
 
REF: STATE 2731 
 
DILI 00000067  001.2 OF 008 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) The following is Embassy Dili's submission in 
preparation for the 2008 Trafficking in Persons Report. Please 
note paragraph designations are keyed to reftel questions: 
 
 
 
-------- 
 
OVERVIEW 
 
-------- 
 
 
 
¶A. Timor-Leste is a destination country for trafficking victims. 
 Nearly all trafficking victims are women.  It is difficult to 
give a precise estimate of the number of trafficking victims as 
there have been no recent comprehensive studies and the 
government does not compile statistics on this issue.  In 2004, 
a local NGO conducted a baseline study of human trafficking and 
the sex industry and estimated that as many as 115 of the 
approximately 360 sex workers in the capital might be victims of 
trafficking. Although there has been no recent study, reliable 
sources estimated that the number of foreign trafficking victims 
remained approximately the same. Several establishments in the 
capital are known commercial sex operations suspected of being 
involved in trafficking; following the increased presence of 
internationals since 2006, several additional establishments 
have reopened. There are indications that increased 
vulnerability accompanying the long-term internal displacement 
of thousands of East Timorese over the last year, widespread 
poverty, and lack of understanding of human trafficking among 
the populace, could contribute to Timor-Leste becoming a source 
country.  The sources for information on trafficking victims are 
the offices of the Prosecutor General and Immigration, in 
addition to two women's and children's rights NGOs. The numbers 
and the sources are reliable.  However, due to limitations in 
their mechanisms to prevent and prosecute human trafficking, 
more cases likely go unidentified.  Women are at higher risk 
from being trafficked into Timor-Leste from neighboring 
countries in the region, as well as internally from throughout 
the districts into Dili to work on the sex trade. 
 
 
 
High transportation costs in and out of the country combined 
with relatively high wages make Timor-Leste a comparatively 
expensive source country, particularly when compared with 
neighboring Indonesia.  There were no known attempts to traffic 
Timorese men, women, or children abroad this past year. 
 
 
 
¶B. Although Embassy sources indicate that the decline in 
internationals in Dili through early 2006 may have caused the 
numbers of foreign trafficking victims to decrease, this trend 
appears to have been reversed with the new influx of 
internationals that accompanied the arrival of international 
peacekeeping forces in May 2006, followed by the establishment 
of a new UN mission in August 2006.   Moreover, local NGOs and 
international organizations have noted a continued increase in 
domestic trafficking.  Whereas initially it appeared that 
domestic trafficking victims were taking the place of foreign 
victims in some establishments as the international presence 
decreased, observers now note that the new influx of 
internationals since June 2006 raises the concern that both 
external and internal trafficking may increase; however, it is 
difficult to gauge any specific degree to which this is in fact 
the case.  International forces are subject to a "zero 
tolerance" policy for participating and/or enabling trafficking, 
to include procuring prostitutes.  International forces 
authorities conducted eight investigations for allegations of 
impropriety by its members, with the results of these 
investigations still pending.  The age of the domestic 
trafficking victims, cites as low as 12 in some cases, is also a 
cause for concern.  These victims, usually from extremely poor 
families, are promised lucrative jobs or educational 
opportunities in Dili.  It appears that the domestic victims are 
not subsequently held forcibly or through debt bondage, nor are 
false documents being used.  Neither are employment, travel, and 
tourism agencies or marriage brokers involved with or fronting 
for traffickers or crime groups to traffic individuals.  Rather, 
having become dependent on the money they earn for survival and 
facing humiliation at home and an almost complete lack of 
services for victims, they conclude that they have no 
 
DILI 00000067  002.2 OF 008 
 
 
alternative other than to continue. We have not yet seen 
evidence of coercion or force being used to keep victims trapped 
in prostitution but rather lack of education and social 
pressures tend to keep victims in prostitution once they have 
been lured through fraudulent practices.  A widespread lack of 
understanding that their treatment is forbidden by law also 
contributes to victims' inability to take action.  Trafficking 
victims in Timor-Leste are mostly forced to work as sex workers. 
 There have been vague reports of incidents of labor 
trafficking, particularly involving men, but none have been 
verified and there is a lack of research into this possibility. 
 
 
 
In November 2008, a group of 18 Timorese children were stopped 
by Timor-Leste's immigration authorities at Dili's airport from 
departing to Malaysia for what their sponsor, a local foundation 
closely affiliated with orphanages, called a trip to study in 
that country.  The children's ages ranged from 7 to 17.  The 
group also included an additional eight Timorese over the age of 
¶18.  The Prosecutor General issued the order preventing their 
departure on the grounds that the sponsoring foundation failed 
to account for critical information, such as letters of parental 
consent, the location of the schools, the names and addresses of 
the minor's guardians in Malaysia, and an approximate date of 
return upon completion of studies.  The letters of parental 
consent were critical because some children in Timor-Leste who 
live in orphanages have living parents.  The steps taken by the 
Prosecutor General and the Timorese immigration authorities 
demonstrate the Government of Timor-Leste's commitment to 
strengthen their mechanisms to prevent the possible trafficking 
of children.  At present, the investigation launched by the 
Prosecutor General and immigration authorities on this case 
remains pending.  This event pointed to the possibility of 
Timor-Leste becoming a source country as well as the increased 
vulnerability to such efforts resulting from poverty and the 
displacement of large numbers of Dili residents over the last 
year. In addition, local contacts and the International 
Organization for Migration (IOM) are concerned that domestic 
trafficking may have become more of a problem since 2006.  In 
several cases, Timorese victims are working as sex workers along 
with foreign victims, but they are unable to confirm a trend. 
 
 
 
¶C. The Government of Timor-Leste continued to rely on 
international organizations and NGOs to raise awareness and 
prevent trafficking in persons. The Trafficking Working Group is 
chaired by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and includes the 
Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of Labor, the Ministry of 
Social Solidarity, the Victims Protection Unit (VPU) of the 
national police (PNTL), and the Office for the Promotion of 
Gender Equality, in addition to international organizations and 
NGOs.  It did not meet for over a year after the political 
crisis of 2006, however, it resumed meetings last August 2007 
and held another meeting in February 2008.  Of these, the 
Ministry of Labor has been most active in anti-trafficking 
efforts, although essentially on an ad hoc basis to provide 
protection and assistance to victims.  The Ministry of Justice 
was responsible for drafting the new penal code, which defines 
and punishes the crime of trafficking; however, the code remains 
in limbo, awaiting action by the government, and the judicial 
system continues to rely on the Indonesian penal code.  At this 
time the Immigration and Asylum Act of 2003 remains the only 
applicable law for prosecuting TIP cases. The Ministry of the 
Interior oversees the Immigration Police, Border Police and the 
national police force, all of which theoretically have 
significant logistical roles to play in the protection of 
victims. 
 
 
 
¶D. Both financial and human resources are major obstacles to the 
government effectively monitoring the trafficking problem and 
providing adequate protection to victims.  There have also been 
rumors that some police officers, possibly with higher level 
collaboration, have protected brothels, but these reports remain 
difficult to substantiate. The police are not well funded and 
lack adequate training to identify and assist trafficking 
victims.  Due to its access to relatively large inflows of 
petroleum revenues, the government has sufficient financial 
resources available.  However, the continued shortage of trained 
civil servants and the fact that the scope of the trafficking 
problem in Timor-Leste is relatively small when compared to 
other challenges make it unlikely that substantial government 
funds will be committed to providing assistance or protection 
 
DILI 00000067  003.2 OF 008 
 
 
for trafficking victims in the near future. The national 
political and security crisis that commenced in April 2006, and 
the remaining problems stemming from it, have only increased the 
scope of problems faced by Timor-Leste, temporarily displaced 
the priority given to anti-trafficking in persons (TIP) efforts. 
 The February 11, 2008 armed attacks against the President and 
Prime Minister may continue to distract from the government's 
ability to focus attention on this issue. 
 
 
 
¶E. The government does not have specific anti-trafficking 
efforts in place beyond basic legislation and the establishment 
of a working group, however, it has made significant 
improvements in working with NGOs to train police and civil 
service staff in human trafficking awareness.  The government 
also does not collect or publish assessments or statistics of 
anti-trafficking efforts by law enforcement officials.  The 
services provided by international organizations or NGOs are not 
systematically monitored by the government, although they have 
been discussed in the working group. 
 
 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION OF TRAFFICKERS 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶A. The Immigration and Asylum Act of 2003 criminalizes both 
internal and external trafficking in persons for sexual 
exploitation and trafficking for non-sexual purposes.  The law 
was written to reflect the norms established by the Protocol to 
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons.  There are 
no other laws currently applicable in Timor-Leste that address 
trafficking.  The government has not taken steps toward 
promulgating a comprehensive anti-TIP law based on the Bali 
Process. However, immigration officials, with funding from IOM, 
regularly attend meetings on the Bali Process. A new penal code 
based largely on the Portuguese penal code was approved by the 
Council of Ministers (cabinet) in late 2005.  However, due to 
unrelated concerns, the President at the time did not promulgate 
it and the establishment of a Timorese penal code remains in 
limbo.  The articles in the 2005 draft that pertain to 
trafficking conform largely to the norms established by the 
Trafficking Protocol.  Pending the promulgation of a penal code, 
Timor-Leste's judicial system continues to rely on the 
Indonesian penal code. 
 
 
 
¶B.  The penalties applied to traffickers do not vary depending 
on the type of trafficking.  The Immigration and Asylum Act 
states that traffickers "shall be punished by imprisonment of 
not more than 8 years or fewer than 3 years."  The law does have 
a special provision for minors.  Those convicted of trafficking 
a minor under 18 years of age, "shall be punished by 
imprisonment of not more than 12 years or fewer than 5."  There 
were no convictions or cases persecuted for sexual exploitation 
or human trafficking during the reporting period. 
 
 
 
¶C. The criminalization of trafficking contained in the 
Immigration and Asylum Act of 2003 applies to all forms of 
trafficking, including for labor exploitation.  There are no 
separate laws addressing labor trafficking as a distinct 
offense.  There were no known or reported cases of labor 
trafficking during the reporting period. 
 
 
 
¶D. Under the Indonesian Penal Code, which is still in force, 
rape carries a maximum penalty of 12 years imprisonment and is 
thus more severe than the penalty for trafficking, (except 
trafficking of minors). 
 
 
 
¶E. Government regulations prohibit persons from organizing 
prostitution; however, under the Court of Appeals' 
interpretation of Indonesian laws, prostitution is not illegal. 
Nonetheless in past years, there were reports of women being 
 
DILI 00000067  004.2 OF 008 
 
 
arrested for prostitution.  That was not the case in this 
reporting period.  Foreign women allegedly involved in 
prostitution during two law enforcement raids on two Dili bars 
in January 2008 were detained for immigration violations.  Local 
authorities acknowledge the criminality of the activities of the 
brothel owner/operator and pimps under provisions of the 
Indonesian penal code.  However, raids and arrests are 
infrequent and there have to date been no prosecutions for such 
activities. 
 
 
 
¶F. The Prosecutor General has not prosecuted any cases against 
human trafficking in this reporting period.  The absence of a 
witness protection system compounds this problem.  However, it 
took some steps to prevent human trafficking in the country.  In 
January 2, 2008, the United Nations Police forces (UNPOL) and 
the National Police of Timor-Leste (PNYL) conducted a joint raid 
at a Dili bar suspected of serving as a brothel.  They arrested 
32 suspects, most of them women from the People's Republic of 
China, Indonesia, Malaysia, and some Timorese.  On January 16, 
the PNTL held a unilateral raid without prior planning or 
coordination with UNPOL at another Dili bar, where they arrested 
over 87 suspects.  In both cases, the Timorese police detained 
but released all suspects after 48 hours with the only charges 
levied against them being immigration violations, since the 
suspects entered the country on tourist visas or without visas. 
Over 30 women were repatriated under "voluntary abandonment," 
while the remaining victims are still receiving assistance from 
local NGOs, or remain in the country unaccounted for.  The 
Office of the Prosecutor General dismissed the case without any 
indictments and no further action was taken due to the lack of 
witnesses against the suspected human traffickers and bar 
owners.  The foreign suspects in the 2006 case in which Timorese 
women were being targeted for travel to Syria as domestic 
servants, but were intended to be forced into prostitution 
overseas, was dropped by the Prosecutor General for lack of 
evidence.  However, there have been no reports of Timorese women 
being recruited to work abroad under human trafficking schemes. 
The high transportation costs in and out of the country combined 
with relatively high wages make Timor-Leste a comparatively 
expensive source country, particularly when compared with 
neighboring Indonesia. 
 
 
 
It should also be noted that 4000 criminal cases.  The 
government is in the process of retraining and recertifying 
personnel throughout the system, from police to judges, and has 
only a couple of dozen functioning judges and prosecutors.  The 
national police are still recovering from complete collapse in 
2006 and are under the tutelage of the United Nations.  The 
Timorese police will only begin to acquire independent authority 
over an incremental basis during the course of 2008. 
 
 
 
¶G. The Deputy Prosecutor General attended a U.S. State 
Department sponsored International Visitors Program in the fall 
of 2007 which was focused on recognizing, investigating, 
preventing, and prosecuting human trafficking.  Upon returning 
to the U.S., he promoted greater awareness of this issue through 
an editorial on the evils of human trafficking and the rights of 
victims, as well as through close cooperation with international 
organizations and local NGOs who combat human trafficking. 
While no specialized training is provided exclusively by the 
government, it held several short training courses for 
Dili-based police officers conducted by IOM in partnership with 
the government.  IOM in coordination with the Alola Foundation 
implemented a comprehensive awareness program for officials and 
police officers in this reporting period.  In addition, the 
government's Victims Protection Unit (VPU) received gender 
protection training from these NGOs. 
 
 
 
¶H. There were no reports of cases requiring cooperative 
international investigations with foreign governments in the 
investigation and prosecution of trafficking cases.  However, on 
December 5, 2007, the Indonesian police patrolling the border 
between Indonesia and Timor-Leste in Belu district, East Nusa 
Tenggara province (West Timor), detained eight Chinese teenage 
girls who were believed to be victims of a human trafficking 
operation that would have forced them into prostitution in Dili. 
 The women had Timorese tourist visas, but admitted under 
questioning that they wanted to go to Dili to seek employment. 
 
DILI 00000067  005.2 OF 008 
 
 
The International Criminal Police Organization (Interpol) was 
informed of this case. 
 
 
 
¶I. The government has never extradited a person charged with 
trafficking in other countries.  No country has ever made a 
request for extradition from Timor-Leste.  There were no reports 
of human trafficking cases requiring extraditions during this 
reporting period. 
 
 
 
¶J. There is limited evidence of tolerance of trafficking by 
border officials who are allegedly bribed to let victims enter 
Timor-Leste.  There are also reports that some police officers 
in Dili have accepted bribes in exchange for allowing brothels 
where potential trafficking victims are working to continue 
operating.  Some international and local NGOs have alleged 
credibly that some members of the police frequent these 
establishments. 
 
 
 
¶K. No investigations have been undertaken to explore these 
claims of low-level government tolerance of trafficking. 
 
 
 
¶L. Timor-Leste does not contribute troops to international 
peacekeeping efforts, except for a National police member 
assigned to peacekeeping operations in Bosnia. 
 
 
 
¶M. Sex tourism is not currently known as a problem in 
Timor-Leste.  The country does not have child sexual abuse laws 
with extraterritorial coverage at this time.  However, the 
Government of Timor-Leste has worked with local women's and 
children's rights NGOs to raise public awareness on prevention 
against human trafficking and child sex abuse.  These campaigns 
have included distribution of leaflets in Tetum, the local 
language, throughout various communities, which included the 
telephone numbers for the government's National Social Service 
Division, the police, and three local and international NGOs. 
 
 
 
------------------------------------ 
 
PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS 
 
------------------------------------ 
 
 
 
¶A. The government does not provide temporary or permanent 
residency status to foreign trafficking victims.  Several 
victims have been repatriated through the help of their 
embassies or an international organization and were thus not 
deported.  Shelter and access to services is mostly provided by 
NGOs and international organizations. 
 
 
 
¶B. Timor-Leste does not fund or have victim care or victim 
health care facilities.  Despite these weaknesses, the Ministry 
of Labor has shown a consistent willingness to help arrange 
assistance and shelter for victims with international and local 
NGOs when cases are brought to their attention and have made 
safe houses available to victims.  Overall, the lack of services 
does not reflect a lack of political will to assist victims, but 
rather a lack of human resources.  In addition, there is 
currently a lack of clear standard operating procedures (SOP) 
for authorities to refer to when handling trafficking cases.  At 
present, only the Immigration Department of the Ministry of 
Interior has an SOP for TIP cases.  However, the Deputy 
Prosecutor General wrote an extensive editorial on the evils of 
human trafficking and the rights of victims which was printed on 
Timor-Leste's largest newspaper in December 2007.  He was also a 
participant in the State Department's fall 2007 International 
Visitors Program on combating human trafficking. 
 
 
 
¶C. The government does not provide any funding to foreign or 
 
DILI 00000067  006.2 OF 008 
 
 
domestic NGOs for services to trafficking victims.  This is not 
specifically because of a lack of will, but because of emerging 
priorities the government has had to deal with since the 2006 
crisis and its lingering problems which remain unresolved. In 
spite of this, the office of the Prosecutor General has reported 
that they are aware of this problem and will seek future funding 
to assist trafficking victims. 
 
 
 
¶D. The government's law enforcement, immigration, and social 
services personnel do not have a formal referral process system 
of proactively identifying victims of trafficking among 
high-risk persons with whom they come in contact (e.g., foreign 
persons arrested for prostitution or immigration violations). 
NGOs, international organizations, and the Ministry of Labor 
have offered services to victims on an ad hoc basis upon being 
informed of trafficking cases.  Sources at IOM informed us that 
the development of standard operating procedures for referrals 
and other aspects of handling TIP victims continues to be a top 
priority among the organizations working on this issue. 
 
 
 
¶E. Although the laws of Timor-Leste do not penalize 
prostitution, it is not a regulated trade. 
 
 
 
¶F. The rights of trafficking victims are respected.  In the 
January 2 and January 16 raids against two Dili bars, the women 
were charged for immigration violations due to working in the 
country with a tourist visa, but were released within 24 hours 
and referred to two local women's and children's rights NGO. 
Some were repatriated under "voluntary departure." 
 
 
 
¶G. There were no prosecutions for trafficking. The lack of a 
witness protection system makes it difficult for victims to step 
forward and serve as witnesses, which is essential for the 
government to successfully prosecute such cases. However, 
victims may file civil suits or seek legal action against 
traffickers and they are not impeded access to such legal 
redress.  There are no other means for victims to seek 
restitution. 
 
 
 
¶H. There are no formal forms of protection for victims and 
witnesses.  Nonetheless, the Ministry of Labor has provided safe 
houses as well as basic supplies to victims identified in 
cooperation with local NGOs on a case by case basis.  These 
supplies are meant to help the victims rebuild their lives and 
rejoin the community, but typically fall short of what the 
victims actually require. 
 
 
 
¶I. The government does not provide specialized training on this 
issue.  However, IOM working with four ministries established a 
migration research center which provides training that includes 
anti TIP materials.  A short training course has been organized 
in previous years by IOM for members of the police force.  A 
significant expansion of such training was made possible during 
this reporting period by a joint IOM/Alola Foundation project 
which has been approved for funding by the State Department's 
Global Fund for Trafficking.  IOM reports that law enforcement 
officials have, to date, responded positively to the idea of 
such courses. 
 
 
 
¶J. Local representatives of international organizations and NGOs 
are not aware of any Timorese victims of trafficking in general 
and certainly none who have returned to Timor-Leste.  The quick 
action by both the Ministry of Labor and the Ministry of 
Interior in 2006 to prevent an apparent international 
trafficking scheme from successfully transporting young women 
out of the country is a good sign.  However, there has to date 
been no test case to determine what, if any, assistance would be 
provided to repatriate Timorese victims of TIP. 
 
 
 
¶K. The International Organization for Migration (IOM) and the 
 
DILI 00000067  007.2 OF 008 
 
 
Ministry of Labor have provided safe houses as well as basic 
supplies to victims identified in cooperation with local NGOs on 
a case by case basis.  These supplies are meant to help the 
victims rebuild their lives and rejoin the community, but 
typically fall short of what the victims actually require. 
International organizations and NGOs did not receive any funding 
from the government for victim assistance during this period. 
 
 
 
--------- 
 
PEVENTION 
 
--------- 
 
 
 
¶A. The government acknowledges that trafficking victims are 
present in Timor-Leste.  In part because of the relatively low 
incidence of trafficking compared to other more widespread 
problems, the government has not devoted substantial resources 
to analyzing the issue.  The government is also greatly hindered 
by lack of qualified staff overall and a general inability to 
implement programs without international assistance; e.g., for 
five consecutive years the government has been unable to fully 
execute its budget, often by wide margins.  International 
organizations, diplomatic missions, and local NGOs play an 
important role in bringing this issue to the government's 
attention. Although there were no known cases of Timorese women 
being lured for trafficking abroad during this reporting period, 
the 2006 case in which an apparent international effort to 
traffic Timorese women to Syria has made the government more 
aware of the risks of Timor-Leste becoming a source country. 
There has also been an increase in awareness of internally 
displaced person (IDP) camps as potential targets for both 
domestic and international trafficking. International 
Organization for Migration (IOM), in coordination with the 
government and other international organizations, has led focus 
groups within the camps to educate camp populations about the 
risks of TIP.   The numbers of IDPs peaked at 150,000 in May 
2006, of which approximately 80,000 were in Dili.  By February 
2008, the number of IDPs in the country was approximately 
100,000, and in Dili the numbers estimated were 30,000 people in 
about 58 camps. 
 
 
 
¶B. There have been no exclusively government-run 
anti-trafficking information or education campaigns conducted 
during the reporting period.  However, they have been conducted 
in partnership with international and local NGOs. Over 600 
police officers have been trained on identifying and combating 
human trafficking through this partnership of institutions.  In 
addition, poster and leaflets campaigns against human 
trafficking -targeted at assisting potential victims have been 
distributed in Dili and through the districts reaching countless 
citizens.  These leaflets and posters provide emergency contact 
telephone numbers for the police and NGOs.  One poster campaign 
prominently features high-level government officials with 
handcuffs and arms extended calling against bondage, human 
trafficking, and abuse. 
 
 
 
¶C. The Trafficking Working Group serves as the medium for 
exchange and collaboration among international organizations, 
NGOs, and government.  The group's mandate is to review current 
trafficking cases and advise the government on appropriate 
legislative actions. One of the working group's main future 
goals is to establish clear standard operating procedures for 
the handling of all TIP cases across the different agencies and 
organizations involved.  The group ceased to be active with the 
onset of national crisis early 2006, but resumed meetings last 
August 2007 with the inauguration of a new government.  It held 
a second meeting in Dili on February 20, 2008. 
 
 
 
¶D. Government authorities do not monitor immigration and 
emigration patterns for evidence of trafficking. Senior 
immigration officials admit that border police and immigration 
officials are often unable to distinguish between illegal 
immigrants and trafficking victims. 
 
 
 
DILI 00000067  008.2 OF 008 
 
 
 
¶E. The government has a Trafficking Working Group but does not 
have a public corruption task force, although it does have an 
Inspector General who is charged with investigating allegations 
of corruption against public officials.  In addition, the 
responsibilities of the independent Office of the Provedor for 
Human Rights and Justice included anticorruption and the office 
has the power to investigate cases and make recommendations to 
the relevant authorities. 
 
 
 
¶F. There is no national plan of action against human trafficking 
plan at present. International organizations expect the current 
Trafficking Working Group to develop a national plan of action 
to combat human trafficking a top priority. 
 
 
 
¶G. The government has not taken any steps to reduce the demand 
for commercial sex acts.  The two January 2 and January 16 bar 
raids in Dili did not target prostitution in itself but rather 
possible human trafficking (of which there was no proof) and 
illegal immigration. 
 
 
 
¶H. Timor-Leste is not included in the list of countries as part 
of the new criteria to the TVPA's minimum standards by the 2005 
TVPRA, and a response is not applicable. 
 
 
 
¶I. Timor-Leste does not contribute over 100 troops for 
international peacekeeping efforts, thus the government has not 
had to adopt measures to ensure that its nationals deployed 
abroad as part of a peacekeeping operation do not engage in or 
facilitate severe forms of trafficking or exploit victims of 
such trafficking. 
KLEMM