08KABUL2471
KARZAI ASKS CODEL TAUSCHER TO WORK TO REDUCE
Fri Sep 12 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO1195
PP RUEHPW
DE RUEHBUL #2471/01 2560255
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 120255Z SEP 08
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5455
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KABUL 002471 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR SCA/FO, SCA/A, S/CRS 
CENTCOM FOR CSTC-A, CG CJTF-101, POLAD, H FOR RICH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PTER OREP MOPS ASEC PK
SUBJECT: KARZAI ASKS CODEL TAUSCHER TO WORK TO REDUCE 
CIVILIAN CASUALTIES 
 
 ¶1. (U)Summary: On September 6, President Karzai told Codel 
Tauscher that he has confidence in the results of IRoA's 
investigation of the Shindand operation. He urged the 
delegation to push Washington to establish a strategy to 
prevent future civilian casualties.  Karzai expressed slight 
optimism that security in Afghanistan could improve due to 
the change of leadership in Pakistan. He acknowledged that 
lack of IRoA control in Helmand Province allows drugs to flow 
freely from Helmand out of Afghanistan.  Finally, Karzai 
criticized the role of security contractors in Afghanistan. 
End Summary. 
 
Introduction 
------------ 
 
¶2. (U) Codel Tauscher, comprised of Chairwoman of the 
Strategic Forces Subcommittee of the House Armed Services 
Committee Representative Ellen Tauscher and Representatives 
Petri, Cooper, Porter, Reichert, and Boyda, called on 
President Karzai at the Palace. Ambassador Wood accompanied. 
 
¶3. (U) Tauscher gave an overview of the delegation's 
itinerary during the three day visit, which included a trip 
to a police training facility in Jalalabad and meetings with 
General McKiernan and General Cone.  She emphasized how proud 
the delegation is of the U.S. mission and troops in 
Afghanistan.  Karzai said that U.S. politicians are most 
welcome in Afghanistan, and that it is always a pleasure for 
him to meet with them. 
 
Civilian Casualties 
------------------- 
 
¶4. (U) Tauscher expressed deep regret on behalf of the 
delegation for the loss of any civilian lives in Afghanistan. 
 Karzai said he appreciated that sentiment and also President 
Bush's recent communication to him regarding the Shindand 
operation.  Karzai asked the delegation to work with other 
members of Congress to develop a strategy to reduce future 
civilian casualties.  Tauscher assured Karzai that the 
delegation would take that request back to Congress, and that 
Congress takes the occurrence of civilian casualties 
extremely seriously. 
 
¶5. (U) Reichert asked how Afghanistan and the U.S. could move 
past the tragic loss of civilian lives.  Karzai said that 
Afghanistan has already started to move on, noting that 
Afghans were not out in the street protesting the Shindand 
operation.  He also asked that IRoA and USG provide aid to 
Shindand, which he noted was a poor district even by Afghan 
standards.  Finally, Karzai again urged the delegation to 
push for a new military strategy to prevent civilian 
casualties. 
 
Pakistan 
-------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Petri asked what the challenges of leading 
Afghanistan were. Karzai remarked that compared to Pakistan, 
Afghanistan was a more united country with a less efficient 
government.   Karzai had called to congratulate newly elected 
Pakistani President Zadari. Karzai said that Zadari was a 
good person but questioned if Zadari could control Pakistani 
insurgents. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Boyda asked Karzai to predict the situation in 
Afghanistan in five to ten years.  Karzai said that how 
Afghanistan's future develops depends largely on the security 
and political situation in Pakistan.  Karzai expressed 
frustration with past U.S. policy toward Pakistan, stating 
that Pakistan had cheated the U.S. by using aid money to 
train insurgents to send to Afghanistan.  Karzai claimed that 
Afghanistan would be a paradise if there were no problems 
coming from Pakistan. 
 
Narcotics 
--------- 
 
¶8. (U) Porter asked what IRoA was doing to control the flow 
of narcotics out of Afghanistan.   Karzai said that 18 or 19 
provinces were poppy free or almost poppy free.  He 
acknowledged that Helmand Province is not under IRoA's 
control. Porter asked what USG could do to help IRoA 
establish control in Helmand.  Karzai suggested sending more 
troops to protect the border with Pakistan. 
 
Security Contractors 
-------------------- 
 
KABUL 00002471  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
¶9. (SBU) Cooper asked whether there were problems with 
specific security contractors.  Karzai said that Afghans feel 
uncomfortable when they see so many security personnel openly 
displaying guns, and that security contractors had "gone over 
the line" in the past.  Karzai also expressed discontent that 
there was no reliable process to complain about particular 
contractors.  Ambassador noted that in the past 18 months 
there had been only one, legitimate, escalation of force 
incident with security contractors. Ambassador also said that 
while he was pleased with the record of service of his 
contractors, he favors a stronger system for regulating and 
controlling them to separate the good ones from the bad ones. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Comment: Karzai's manner was friendly and in 
reference to Shindand, he expressed willingness to work with 
coalition forces in a positive manner to develop a strategy 
to better protect civilians.  End comment. 
 
¶11. (U) The Codel did not have an opportunity to clear this 
message. 
WOOD