08KABUL2914
ELECTION SECURITY COOPERATION IMPROVING
Sun Nov 02 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO1083
PP RUEHPW
DE RUEHBUL #2914/01 3070718
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 020718Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6052
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KABUL 002914 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR SCA/FO, SCA/A, S/CRS 
STATE PASS TO USAID FOR AID/ANE, AID/DCHA/DG 
NSC FOR JWOOD 
OSD FOR MCGRAW 
CG CJTF-101, POLAD, JICCENT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM PGOV AF
SUBJECT: ELECTION SECURITY COOPERATION IMPROVING 
 
REF: A. KABUL 2708 
     ¶B. KABUL 2551 
     ¶C. KABUL 2896 
     ¶D. HOFFMAN-MATA EMAIL 
 
 ¶1.  (SBU) Summary: Cooperation on voter registration 
security among the Independent Election Commission (IEC), the 
Ministry of Interior (MOI), and the Ministry of Defense (MOD) 
is much improved over its early stumbles (REF A) and the 
fractious planning of the late summer (REF B.)  The security 
forces are taking on the challenge of opening up districts in 
Phase 1 provinces where anti-government forces have delayed 
or shut out voter registration activities. The Afghan 
National Police operations chief now hosts a weekly 
coordination meeting, and the operations center based at IEC 
headquarters will continue to serve as a practical mechanism 
for identifying and resolving security issues. 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  Discussion: Daoud Ali Najafi, Chief Technical 
Officer of the IEC, noted that in mid-October he wrote to the 
Minister of Interior in exasperation about Ghazni, Wardak, 
and Logar provinces, where the activities of anti-government 
fighters have shut out citizens in specific districts from 
voter registration activity.  Najafi is delighted to see 
that, in response, the Afghan National Police (ANP) and 
Afghan National Army (ANA) cooperated with coalition forces 
to organize operations in Ghazni, allowing two troubled 
districts to open for registration.  As in Nuristan province 
(REF C) and the other Phase one districts (REF D) where 
security problems and difficult logistics delayed the opening 
of sites, the IEC will add back days of registration to 
enfranchise Ghazni voters.  An increased security force 
presence will remain nearby to keep these centers open. 
Najafi reports that the MOI has promised him additional 
operations to open the six other districts (four in Ghanzi, 
one each in Logar and Wardak) where voter registration is 
unable to take place. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  Security planning for the end of Phase 1 and the 
opening of Phase 2 is progressing well.  To ensure the safety 
of voter registration data, the IEC sent its logistics plan 
to the MOD on October 26, so that Afghan and international 
forces can organize the return by air of completed voter 
registration forms from violence-prone areas.  In a unique 
incident in Kharwar district in Logar, Taliban reportedly 
burst into a wedding party and tore up the voter registration 
cards of the guests. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The week of October 20, Najafi consulted directly 
with the Phase 2 ISAF regional commander, and detailed 
planning by Phase 2 regional corps commanders is underway. 
The IEC is cognizant that in Phase 2 Kabul city and province 
will draw great media attention; while generally optimistic, 
Najafi believes the two southern districts of Khak-e-Jabbar 
and Musahi may be problematic.  The IEC also assesses that 
one district each in Kunduz and Baghlan provinces may have 
difficulty opening.  Chitmal district in Balkh is the first 
northern, Phase 2 district to report a "night letter" 
threatening those who participate in voter registration. 
 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  Election officials are adding more outreach to 
traditional leaders into the mix of the security strategy, an 
approach that has floated up from the successful initiatives 
of local IEC staff working in Phase 1.  ANP operations chief 
Colonel Almas, who is an effective, dynamic chair to the 
weekly MOI-MOD-IEC operations coordination meeting, is 
enthusiastic about greater public outreach in remote and 
troubled areas.  The IEC is hosting a large gathering of 
religious leaders in Kabul on November 2, to publicize that 
these leaders endorse elections as compatible with Islam, 
including the participation of women.  Najafi recently met 
with two groups of tribal elders from Phase 2 provinces, and 
the IEC is funding shuras so these groups can rally support. 
MOI and MOD representatives have agreed to sponsor short 
public information radio and TV spots about their work on 
voter registration security. 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  Najafi on October 29 proclaimed, "With all the 
challenges, with all the difficulties, the health of the 
electoral process is good."  IEC field operations chief 
Raheem Siyal on October 30 pointed to the success of Kunar 
province, where security forces regularly engage 
anti-government elements, yet only one voter registration 
center opened late, due to logistical reasons, and all 
centers remain open. IEC figures show that as of October 28, 
 
KABUL 00002914  002 OF 002 
 
 
some 662,855 new voters have joined the rolls, including 
244,976 women (37 percent.)  The new IEC operations center is 
tracking and reporting activity daily at the district level, 
enabling the IEC to quickly address problems as they arise. 
Najafi is especially proud of the dedication of IEC field 
employees, who have forged on despite delays in supply 
deliveries, operational funding, and salary payments. "They 
pay ahead from their own pockets to solve problems," Najafi 
said, because they are committed to the democratic process. 
WOOD