08MANAMA799
RESPONSE TO MEPI SMALL BUSINESS INITIATIVE FOR WOMEN
Wed Dec 03 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Manama
VZCZCXYZ0031
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMK #0799 3381320
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 031320Z DEC 08
FM AMEMBASSY MANAMA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 8292UNCLAS MANAMA 000799 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR NEA/PI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EAID KMPI BA
SUBJECT: RESPONSE TO MEPI SMALL BUSINESS INITIATIVE FOR WOMEN 
PROJECT 
 
REF: STATE 115408 
 
¶1. Summary: Reftel requested Post's views on MEPI's proposal to fund 
a Small Business Initiative for Women (SBIFW) program in Bahrain. 
Post believes such an initiative could advance economic goals in its 
Mission Strategic Plan (MSP).  We request that MEPI coordinate with 
Post in the design and implementation of any programs that result 
from this initiative. End Summary. 
 
¶2. In Post's view, the SBIFW has the potential to strengthen the 
role of women in business in Bahrain.  Although the social and 
regulatory environments in Bahrain are among the more favorable for 
women in the region, there is certainly room for improvement. 
Non-governmental societies such as the Bahrain Business Women's 
Society (BWS) and Young Entrepreneurs Society provide support for 
local businesswomen, but need organizational training.  While the 
societies offer business elites an opportunity for regional 
networking, there remains a public perception that they are 
inaccessible to the general public.  Additionally, explanations of 
government regulations and requirements related to setting up a 
small business are not readily available. 
 
¶3. In our view, the three SBIFW programs offered in reftel that 
would most effectively advance our MSP goal -- "promoting a 
prosperous economy consistent with the U.S.-Bahrain FTA" are: 
 
a) Training on how to monitor regulatory and other policy proposals 
affecting women-owned businesses. 
 
At the October MEPI Corporate Ambassador's conference in Bahrain, 
there was significant discussion of the U.S. Small Business Act of 
1953, which requires the USG to set aside five percent of all 
procurement contracts for small and medium enterprises.  The 
Ministry of Finance, the BWS, and UNIDO-Bahrain all expressed 
interest in learning more about the U.S. law,  and then  advocating 
for a similar law in Bahrain.  The BWS, however, has said that it 
does not know how to proceed. 
 
b) Creation of a reference document library explaining government 
regulations and requirements to establish a small business. 
 
Information is not readily accessible to potential entrepreneurs, 
men and women alike, who may be interested in starting up a 
business.  Bahraini entrepreneurs might benefit from facilities like 
the U.S. Small Business Administration's website [www.sba.gov], 
which includes online training, and a library of reference materials 
on marketing, laws and regulations, business planning, and SOPs. 
Alternatively, this information might be made available as pamphlets 
and booklets. 
 
c) Industry-specific training. 
 
Existing MEPI programs and GOB training in Bahrain are largely 
focused on generic management courses, such as marketing or 
accounting.  Businesswomen have repeatedly voiced an interest in 
more specialized training. 
 
HENZEL