08MOSCOW2039
MEDVEDEV SPEECH AND FOREIGN POLICY PAPER HIGHLIGHT
Thu Jul 17 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Moscow
VZCZCXYZ0010
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMO #2039/01 1991327
ZNR UUUUU ZZH (CCY ADXB765FF MSI7576-623)
P 171327Z JUL 08
FM AMEMBASSY MOSCOW
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9054
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RUEHXD/MOSCOW POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RUEHZG/NATO EU COLLECTIVEUNCLAS MOSCOW 002039 
 
C O R R E C T E D  C O P Y  (GARBLED TEXT) 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL EU NATO RS
SUBJECT: MEDVEDEV SPEECH AND FOREIGN POLICY PAPER HIGHLIGHT 
RUSSIAN GOALS AND CONCERNS 
 
REF: A. MOSCOW 2012 
     ¶B. MOSCOW 229 
 
¶1. Summary: Medvedev's July 15 address to Russian diplomats 
and the release by the Presidential Administration of an 
official concept paper laid out Russian policy goals and 
concerns without breaking new ground (ref A).  The paper 
covered in detail many of the same themes Medvedev made in 
his speech, including Russia's call for Europe to move beyond 
divisions created by a Cold War-era security structure and 
genuinely unite through "equal interaction" by Russia, the EU 
and U.S.  Both Medvedev and the paper criticized those that 
chose to selectively interpret history to blame Russia for 
events that occurred during WWII and the postwar period.  The 
concept paper went beyond the speech to say that the GOR 
would protect Russians in other countries and promote Russian 
language and culture, and highlighted the GOR goal to 
positively influence international media.  In the part of the 
speech that was not public, Medvedev reportedly directed 
Russian diplomats to more forcefully protect Russian 
interests and respond to criticism of GOR policy, leading one 
diplomat to predict a shake-up within the MFA.  The Russian 
press viewed the speech and paper as demonstrating that 
Russia would stick to the principles of Putin's foreign 
policy, although one commentator noted that whereas the 
previous concept paper issued in 2000 called for a multipolar 
system to replace a U.S.-dominated, unipolar world, the 2008 
paper assumed that the multipolar world had already arrived. 
End summary. 
 
Move Beyond NATO 
---------------- 
 
¶2. Russian concern that NATO propagated the artificial 
division of Europe was a major theme of both Medvedev's July 
speech and the concept paper issued shortly after the address 
to an assembly of Russian diplomats.  Medvedev said that with 
the end of the Cold War there was no longer a need for 
"bloc-based policy and bloc discipline," nor for 
"paternalism" in which one country dictated to other states. 
What was needed instead was a collective security system 
"open to all."  The paper offered an oblique critique of 
NATO, which was a manifestation of the "lingering political 
and psychological" need of some to deter Russia.  Such 
"traditional, bulky political-military unions" were 
inadequate to meeting contemporary challenges that required 
"diplomacy based on flexible participation in multilateral 
structures." 
 
¶3. The concept paper called for ensuring "greater stability 
and predictability" in Russia-U.S. relations.  Both needed to 
move beyond historical "barriers" and build a contemporary 
partnership that took into account the "huge potential for 
mutually advantageous bilateral cooperation" while also 
recognizing that such a partnership would have great 
influence in international affairs. 
 
Opposition to NATO Expansion 
---------------------------- 
 
¶4. On NATO expansion, the concept paper criticized "limited 
and selective" integration processes that further divided 
Europe at a time when a new approach was necessary to 
confront modern challenges.  Russia would, however, continue 
to cooperate with NATO, although future relations would 
depend upon whether NATO treated Russia as an equal partner 
and complied with the commitment made through the NATO-Russia 
Council not to secure NATO's safety at the expense of 
Russia's. 
 
Russia Calls for European Unity 
------------------------------- 
 
¶5. The concept paper called for a genuinely united Europe 
without dividing lines, achieved through the "equal 
integration" of Russia, the EU and U.S.  Achieving this 
required an "open, democratic system of regional collective 
security and cooperation" without the "bloc approach" that 
emerged during the Cold War and continued today.  Russia 
would seek a "long-term strategic partnership" with the EU, 
including formal "mechanisms of interaction" in the areas of 
security, political, economic, and social policy.  The 
concept paper also called for further development of 
bilateral relations with a list of European countries that 
the press noted were major consumers of Russian gas. 
 
Emphasis on Soft Power 
---------------------- 
 
¶6. Expanding Russia's ability to influence the foreign media 
 
and provide information was a highlight of the concept paper 
not covered in Medvedev's speech.  The paper said the GOR 
would develop the ability to provide the "international 
public...full and precise information about the Russian 
attitude to key international problems," as well as internal 
Russian developments and cultural and scientific 
achievements.  The GOR would do so by supporting Russian 
media internationally, as well as by responding to 
information "threats to national sovereignty and security. 
Russia would also finance "foreign political events," an 
undefined term that may refer to efforts such as the new GOR 
financed Institute for Democracy and Cooperation, a policy 
organization with offices in Paris and New York (ref B). 
 
Do Not Reinterpret History 
-------------------------- 
 
¶7. GOR concern with the situation of Russian citizens and 
Russian-speakers in former Soviet states was a focus of both 
Medvedev's speech and the concept paper, which said a Russian 
priority was "comprehensively protecting the rights and 
legitimate interests of Russian citizens and compatriots 
living abroad."  The GOR would also expand its cultural 
outreach by "popularizing the Russian language and culture of 
Russia's peoples in foreign countries."  The paper echoed 
Medvedev's complaint about countries selectively interpreting 
WWII and the postwar period, calling instead for a "common 
vision of modern history."  Medvedev continued this theme 
when he told the press after the speech that it was "immoral" 
to blame Russia for the Golodomor, the Soviet-era famine 
brought on by collectivization that killed millions. 
Medvedev said that the tragedy was "our common grief" and to 
single out Russia was politically motivated. 
 
Medvedev Calls for More Action by Diplomats 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶8. During a closed-door part of the speech, the press 
reported that Medvedev took Russian diplomats to task for 
failing to aggressively pursue Russian interests and 
effectively rebuff criticism of Russia.  Medvedev reportedly 
pointed to North Korea, where the Russian Embassy had not 
been invited to witness the destruction of the Yongbyon 
reactor, as an example.  Russian Ambassador to NATO Rogozin 
told the press he predicted a MFA shakeup because the "old 
school" among Russian diplomats was "not ready" to take on 
the task Medvedev expected.  A prominent analyst told us that 
by criticizing Russian diplomats, Medvedev reserved for 
himself an opportunity to make future changes within the MFA. 
 Medvedev also proposed new legislation to improve the living 
and working situation of diplomats overseas. 
 
Continuity in a Multipolar World 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶9. RIA Novesti contrasted the new concept paper, which laid 
out a positive approach to forming an international system 
not reliant on Cold War security mechanisms, with its 
predecessor from 2000, a time when Russia was still smarting 
over the NATO bombing of Serbia and railing against the 
so-called unipolar world.  Kommersant noted that the 2000 
document said Russia would "press for a multipolar system of 
international relations," whereas the current document 
assumed this result has already occurred.  Medvedev picked up 
on this theme in his speech, telling the diplomats that 
Russia had the ability to address regional and global 
challenges. 
BEYRLE