08PRETORIA73
FAA INTERNATIONAL AVIATION SAFETY ASSESSMENT
Mon Jan 14 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Pretoria
VZCZCXRO1247
RR RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHJO RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHSA #0073/01 0141157
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 141157Z JAN 08
FM AMEMBASSY PRETORIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3136
INFO RULSDMK/DEPT OF TRANSPORTATION WASHINGTON DC
RUCNSAD/SOUTHERN AF DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY COLLECTIVE
RUEHDK/AMEMBASSY DAKAR 1349UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PRETORIA 000073 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EB/TRA/OTP 
DAKAR FOR FAA REP 
ROME FOR TSA REP 
FAA FOR NANCY ANGELO 
FAA FOR API-1/AFS-50/AGC-7 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EAIR SF
SUBJECT: FAA INTERNATIONAL AVIATION SAFETY ASSESSMENT 
RESULTS DELIVERED 
 
REF:  STATE 00721 
 
¶1. (U) Summary. Post delivered results of the FAA 
International Aviation Safety Assessment (IASA) to South 
African Civil Aviation Authority (SACAA) officials on 
January 7, 2008 (reftel).  Economic Counselor used the 
opportunity to discuss continued civil aviation cooperation 
including logistics for the upcoming January 15-17, 2008, 
TSA assessment.  SACAA CEO/Commissioner Captain Colin 
 
SIPDIS 
Jordaan supported continued cooperation and discussed 
expansion of routes to the United States.  Jordaan had the 
opportunity to express his appreciation of FAA's 
professional and cooperative relationship with SACAA to the 
Chair of the House Subcommittee on Aviation on January 10, 
¶2008.  End Summary. 
 
----------------------------- 
Response to FAA IASA Results 
----------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) Economic Counselor, Minerals and Energy Officer, and 
Transportation Officer provided formal notification of 
SAG's continued Category I rating under the FAA IASA 
program to SACAA officials, including CEO/Commissioner 
Captain Colin Jordaan and SACAA Board Chairman Duke 
Moorosi, delivering a letter from the FAA Flight Standards 
Director James J. Ballough on January 7, 2008.  Jordaan and 
Moorosi were accompanied by a team of 12 officials and used 
the formal notification as a photo opportunity in advance 
of a SACAA press release. (See http://www.caa.co.za/ for 
press release dated January 7, 2008).  Economic Counselor 
also used the opportunity to introduce the newly arrived 
Transportation Officer, who will be an additional point of 
contact for SACAA officials. 
 
¶3. (U) Captain Jordaan expressed relief in receiving the 
official confirmation of Category I status.  He emphasized 
that the results indicated a positive response by FAA to 
SACAA's process to implement changes as outlined in its 
action plan for the FAA.  He added that the FAA should 
expect radical changes when the assessment team returns in 
May 2008 for a follow-up consultation. (Note: The South 
African Workers' Day holiday on May 1 should be taken into 
account when scheduling this follow-up consultation). 
Jordaan said a huge recruitment drive is underway to fill 
vacancies identified during the FAA assessment.  SACAA has 
already hired 21 new airworthiness inspectors and expects 
them to complete training by March. Additional inspectors 
will be hired in the coming months. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Jordan said SACAA would be relying on the SAA as 
the primary source for its new operations inspectors, as 
the SAA continues its restructuring program.  Once the SAA 
knows how many of its "low-end" pilots will be picked up by 
foreign airlines like Emirates Airlines, the SAA will know 
how many of its "high-end" pilots it can release to meet 
the SACAA's requirements for experienced pilots to serve as 
inspectors.  He explained that SAA does not want to release 
too many pilots until it has a better idea of total pilot 
loss to its competitors. 
 
¶5. (U) Responding to a question about plans for the passage 
of new civil aviation legislation, Jordaan said the SAG has 
decided to review all existing aviation legislation and 
replace it with one comprehensive act.  According to 
Jordaan, Minister of Transport Jeff Redebe has personally 
committed to expediting this process and completing it 
within eighteen months.  A final time frame for legislative 
harmonization and progress to date will be presented to FAA 
Qharmonization and progress to date will be presented to FAA 
during the May follow-up consultation. 
 
--------------- 
TSA Assessment 
 
SIPDIS 
--------------- 
 
 
¶6. (U) SACAA officials indicated a need for additional 
information concerning the upcoming TSA assessment of SAA 
and Delta air carriers from January 15-17, 2008.  According 
to these officials, SAA expressed surprise at the short 
notice provided for the TSA assessment.  SACAA has informed 
SAA and has requested a confirmation of readiness.  Jordaan 
explained that SAA had recently lost some of its senior 
 
PRETORIA 00000073  002 OF 002 
 
 
staff as a result of the SAA's on-going restructuring, 
which might have caused them to be surprised by the timing 
of the TSA assessment.  Regardless, Jordan said TSA or any 
other aviation authority should be able conduct an audit or 
assessment without advance notice. 
 
------------------------ 
Expansion of SAA Routes 
------------------------ 
 
¶7. (SBU) Responding to a question about the expansion of 
routes to the U.S., Jordaan said SAA is considering a new 
route between Miami and Cape Town.  He believes a new route 
to Miami would be commercially viable, as was previously 
the case with the American Airlines code-share, but 
technical feasibility issues with the Airbus 380 are 
holding back a decision.  (Note: SAA has phased out the use 
of Boeing 747s for its international flights). 
Specifically, oxygen availability could become a problem on 
the Airbus 380 if decompression occured during the proposed 
flight.  Jordaan said that, unlike the Boeing 747, the 
Airbus 380 does not have sufficient oxygen supplies in the 
event that such a decompression occured.  According to 
Jordaan, the Boeing 747 can complete the flight at an 
altitude of 14,000 or 10,000 feet with its existing oxygen 
supply.  With the Airbus 380, 30 less passengers would be 
required to be able to carry the extra fuel needed to 
complete the flight at the necessary lower altitude.  These 
30 passengers represent the profit margin for the flight, 
making it commercially unviable.  SAA will continue to try 
to find a way around this technical problem.  If a solution 
can be found, the SAA would consider the establishment of a 
Miami to Cape Town route. 
 
---------------------- 
Continued Cooperation 
---------------------- 
 
¶8. (U) Jordaan said the SACAA is supported in its efforts 
by Minister Redebe.  For example, Redebe authorized the 
SACAA press release announcing the results of the FAA 
assessment on January 7, 2008, and spoke with Secretary of 
Transport Mary Peters on January 8, 2007.  Jordaan also 
noted that South Africa's preparations for the 2010 FIFA 
World Cup could serve as an opportunity for continued 
cooperation with the United States.  Jordaan closed the 
meeting by reiterating the SACAA's commitment to achieve 
the goals it outlined during the FAA's December 2007 
consultation.  Jordaan praised the FAA for its cooperative 
and professional relationship with SACAA.  SACAA Class A1 
Project Manager Riaan Myburgh also indicated a desire to 
work with the FAA on safety oversight and surveillance 
issues in the broader Southern African Development 
Community (SADC). 
 
¶9. (U) Jordaan participated in the House Committee on 
Transportation and Infrastructure's call on Minister Redebe 
on January 10.  Jordaan was able to visit with Subcommittee 
on Aviation Chairman Jerry Costello (D-IL) prior to 
Redebe's arrival.  Jordaan discussed the SACAA action plan 
with Chairman Costello and said his biggest problem was 
finding qualified pilots to serve as operations inspectors. 
He said the FAA had offered technical assistance to help 
the SACAA complete its action plan, but that he did not 
think the SACAA needed assistance at this time. 
Nevertheless, he would not hesitate to ask for it if it 
were needed.  Costello was also able to visit Cape Town 
International Airport on January 11, while the rest of the 
delegation visited Robben Island. 
 
 
END TEXT 
QEND TEXT 
 
BOST