08SANAA1564
AMEMB SANAA 9/22 DAILY SITREP
Mon Sep 22 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Sanaa
P 220747Z SEP 08
FM AMEMBASSY SANAA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0337UNCLAS SANAA 001564 
 
OP CENTER, NEA/FO, NEA/ARP, M, AND NEA/SCA/EX 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PTER YM
SUBJECT: AMEMB SANAA 9/22 DAILY SITREP 
 
¶1. Security: RSO is still coordinating residential security 
issues with the host nation.  Security upgrades inside Hadda 
Compound are fully in place.  DS has agreed to a controlled 
release to certain ROYG security services of the video of the 
attack.  RSO will coordinate with the relevant section heads 
to complete this. 
 
¶2. Consular: Security screening issues will limit access for 
consular services to a few genuine emergency cases the rest 
of this week.  We expect to be able to admit approximately 
twenty persons per day starting next week. 
 
¶3. Media: The local press is reporting that Yemeni security 
have arrested six people who sent a threat message to "a 
foreign embassy" under the name of Islamic Jihad.  We're 
looking into it. 
 
¶4. Investigation: Legat Sana'a learned that Yemen News took 
an extensive amount of footage of the crime scene shortly 
after the attack and while the scene was still being worked 
by MOI.  Legat is working with the PAO to obtain copies of 
the raw footage.  Evidence recovery inside the compound is 
ongoing.  The FBI forensics team continues their 
investigation at the morgue, and Amcit victim Susan 
el-Baneh's remains may now be released to her family for 
burial.  The forensic examination of the terrorists' remains 
is ongoing. 
 
¶5. TDY Assistance: The RMO/P arrived this morning for a 
three-day visit. 
 
¶6. Embassy Operations: Our LES colleagues return to work on 
Tuesday 9/23.  We plan to hold a Town Hall to welcome them 
back, brief them on the attack, outline procedures for 
pursuing compensation for damaged personal property, and 
introduce the RMO/P. 
 
¶7. AD Takers: To date five official Americans have decided to 
go on Authorized Departure (AD) status.  Details will be 
provided via e-mail. 
 
SECHE