08STATE75414
TALKING POINTS FOR 7/15 MINURCAT CONSULTATIONS
Mon Jul 14 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0003
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #5414 1962118
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 142108Z JUL 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 2469UNCLAS STATE 075414 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPKO UNSC CD SU
SUBJECT: TALKING POINTS FOR 7/15 MINURCAT CONSULTATIONS 
 
In consultations on Tuesday, July 15, 2008, USUN may draw on 
the following points: 
 
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his July 8 
report on the status of the MINURCAT mission.  With the 
recent cross-border incursions by Chadian rebels into eastern 
Chad, and the increased tensions in the region, MINURCAT 
personnel have displayed how crucial their mission is in 
providing protection to vulnerable civilian populations. 
Today, I would like to make three points. 
 
First, we deplore the violence that transpired in eastern 
Chad during the week of June 11, and condemn the June 14 
attack by the National Alliance on the village of Goz Beda 
that resulted in human suffering and increased displacement 
in and around the area.  We reiterate that there can be no 
military solution to this conflict.  We urge both Chad and 
Sudan to respect the spirit and the letter of the Dakar 
Accord and we urge the Government of Chad to consider 
entering into a dialogue with Chadian rebel groups that can 
lead a peaceful resolution of the conflict.  We remind all 
sides that the burden of creating peace rests on their 
shoulders and that the international community stands ready 
to assist them. 
 
To date, neither side has taken any notable steps toward 
implementation of the March 2008 Dakar Accord and renewed 
hostilities between the two countries has continued.  We 
implore the parties to recognize that there is no viable 
military solution to the conflict that exists between them 
and ask both Chad and Sudan to make an earnest effort to 
utilize the Dakar Accord as a means for peaceably resolving 
their differences. 
 
Second, the United States would like to reiterate its support 
for the MINURCAT mission. We commend the actions of MINURCAT 
and EUFOR personnel during the June hostilities and applaud 
their work to help protect refugees, displaced persons, and 
civilians in danger.  We appreciate the efforts of EUFOR 
personnel in the region and recognize that the deployment of 
over 3,000 EUFOR troops to the region has greatly enhanced 
and complemented MINURCAT's ability to fulfill its mission. 
We are pleased that the first group of 77 Chadian police have 
graduated from a six week UN training program and are 
beginning to provide urgently needed police protection to 
civilians in eastern Chad. 
 
We welcome the Secretary General,s recommendation that the 
deployment of MINURCAT,s civilian police be accelerated and 
we strongly encourage the continuation of UN training of 
Chadian police.  We also urge donors to provide continued 
bilateral assistance to the Chadian police for their 
essential humanitarian mission.  We note that the United 
States has provided $2 million to assist the Chadian police 
and we urge other donors to join in this endeavor. 
 
Third, we urge MINURCAT to continue to coordinate and share 
information with UNAMID and UNMIS, so that it can best 
fulfill its crucial mandate of protecting vulnerable 
civilians who are suffering repeated displacements. 
 
Conclusion 
---------- 
MINURCAT plays a crucial part towards helping stabilize the 
region and the United States remains committed to its success. 
RICE