08STATE77361
T LETTER OF THANKS TO SPANISH MFA OFFICIALS FOR
Fri Jul 18 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0009
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #7361 2001330
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 181325Z JUL 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY MADRID IMMEDIATE 0000UNCLAS STATE 077361 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KNNP MNUC PARM PREL SP
SUBJECT: T LETTER OF THANKS TO SPANISH MFA OFFICIALS FOR 
PSI 5TH ANNIVERSARY PRESENTATIONS 
 
REF: STATE 023568 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY AND BACKGROUND:  At the Senior-Level Meeting for 
all states endorsing the Proliferation Security Initiative 
(PSI) held May 28, 2008, in Washington, DC, on the occasion 
of the PSI's Fifth Anniversary, two Spanish officials had 
formal roles.  MFA Director-General for External Policy 
Rafael Dezcallar gave a presentation reviewing five 
successful years of the PSI during the first session of the 
day, on taking stock of the first five years of the PSI.  MFA 
Department for Non-Proliferation and Disarmament official 
Tada Bastida Eizaguirre gave a presentation in the afternoon 
on Spain's ratification of the 2005 Protocols to the 
Convention on the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the 
Safety of Maritime Navigation.  The PSI Senior-Level Meeting 
was attended by representatives of 85 countries, almost all 
of the 92 states that have endorsed the PSI. 
 
¶2.  ACTION REQUESTED:  Embassy is requested to deliver under 
appropriate cover the following letters from Acting Under 
Secretary John Rood to MFA Director-General for External 
Policy Rafael Dezcallar and MFA Department for 
Non-Proliferation and Disarmament official Tada Bastida 
Eizaguirre, thanking each of them for their role in the PSI 
Fifth Anniversary Senior-Level Meeting.  The State Department 
does not plan to release the texts of these letters but has 
no objection if the Government of Spain wishes to do so. 
There will be no signed originals. 
 
¶3.  Begin text of letter to Mr. Dezcallar: 
 
Dear Mr. Dezcallar: 
 
On behalf of the U.S. Government, I want to thank you for 
your presentation "PSI 2003-2008:  Five Successful Years" in 
the opening panel of the May 28, 2008 Senior-Level Meeting of 
Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI) participants in 
Washington DC.  Your presentation made an important 
contribution to the meeting.  This panel was a good way for 
the meeting participants to take stock of the first five 
years of the PSI, including the views of Spain and several 
other key PSI partners. 
 
I believe the PSI Fifth Anniversary Senior-Level Meeting was 
very successful in reaffirming the strong commitment of the 
PSI partner states to respond to the WMD proliferation 
challenge.  It also provided the participants from 85 
countries an opportunity to strengthen communication with one 
another.  We hope this event will result in expanded 
participation in PSI activities, particularly on a regional 
basis.  The United States recognizes that Spain plays a 
significant role in the PSI, and we greatly appreciate your 
Government's continued efforts and contributions to advancing 
the PSI goals. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
John C. Rood 
Acting Under Secretary of State for Arms Control and 
International Security 
 
End text of letter. 
 
¶4.  Begin text of letter to Ms. Bastida Eizaguirre: 
 
Dear Ms. Bastida Eizaguirre: 
 
On behalf of the U.S. Government, I want to thank you for 
your presentation "Ratification of the 2005 Protocols to the 
SUA Treaties: Paving the Way Forward" at the May 28, 2008 
Senior-Level Meeting of Proliferation Security Initiative 
(PSI) participants in Washington DC.  Your presentation made 
a valuable contribution to the meeting, covering one of the 
most important additions to the international legal framework 
to counter WMD-related trafficking since the PSI was 
established.  Spain's example as the first signatory state to 
ratify the 2005 SUA Protocols is an inspiration to all PSI 
partners. 
 
I believe the PSI Fifth Anniversary Senior-Level Meeting was 
very successful in reaffirming the strong commitment of the 
PSI partner states to respond to the WMD proliferation 
challenge.  It also provided the participants from 85 
countries an opportunity to strengthen communication with one 
another.  We hope this event will result in expanded 
participation in PSI activities, particularly on a regional 
basis.  The United States recognizes that Spain plays a 
significant role in the PSI, and we greatly appreciate your 
Government's continued efforts and contributions to advancing 
the PSI goals. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
John C. Rood 
Acting Under Secretary of State for Arms Control and 
International Security 
 
End text of letter. 
 
¶5.  POINTS OF CONTACT:  Washington points of contact on the 
PSI are Jane Purcell (e-mail: PurcelJa@state.gov, 
202-647-6186); and Carlos Guzman (e-mail: GuzmanCS@state.gov, 
202-647-6320).  Department appreciates Post's assistance. 
RICE