08TELAVIV1191
PROJECT PROPOSAL FOR THE PRM AMBASSADOR'S FUND FOR REFUGEES
Wed Jun 04 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0004 
RR RUEHWEB 

DE RUEHTV #1191/01 1561258 
ZNR UUUUU ZZH 
R 041258Z JUN 08 
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6982 
INFO RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 9846UNCLAS TEL AVIV 001191 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREF
SUBJECT: PROJECT PROPOSAL FOR THE PRM AMBASSADOR'S FUND FOR REFUGEES 
 
REF: STATE 6779 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary. Post is pleased to endorse the African 
Refugee Development Center's (ARDC) project proposal to 
establish a community center for African asylum-seekers in 
Israel. Over 10,000 African asylum-seekers have entered 
Israel in the past two years. While UNHCR is working with 
Israeli authorities to receive, register and interview this 
population, UNHCR Representative Steven Wolfson acknowledges 
that UNHCR is unable to fulfill an important need, namely 
legal aid, health and education services and basic 
assistance. ARDC currently operates shelters for refugees in 
Tel Aviv and hopes to establish a community center that would 
provide a safe environment for African asylum-seekers to 
access cultural orientation classes, Hebrew language 
training, job placement assistance, and psycho-social 
counseling. End Summary. 
 
African Refugee Development Center (ARDC) 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) ARDC was founded in 2004 by Yohannes Lemma, an 
Ethiopian refugee who entered Israel in 1999 as an 
asylum-seeker and is now a legal resident of Israel. Lemma 
works a night job in Jerusalem and spends his days in Tel 
Aviv helping others like himself. His dedication has 
inspired scores of Israelis and other expatriates, including 
lawyers, social workers, and doctors, to volunteer for ARDC. 
 
¶3. (SBU) To date, ARDC activities have focused exclusively on 
providing shelter to newly-arrived asylum-seekers, but that 
was not Lemma's vision or intention when he founded the 
organization. ARDC's goals are to promote humane and fair 
policies on the reception, protection and integration of 
asylum-seekers and refugees; to assist refugees and 
asylum-seekers in leading independent, productive, and 
dignified lives; to facilitate their participation and 
empowerment of refugees and asylum-seekers through their 
inclusion in education opportunities, the labor market and 
health care; and to facilitate the integration in and 
interaction with Israeli society through cultural exchange 
and bridging programs. 
 
Project Proposal: An Educational Program for Asylum-Seekers 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) ARDC is requesting $19,889 to support the 
establishment of a community center where African 
asylum-seekers can come for cultural orientation, Hebrew 
language classes, job placement, and counseling. The program 
will specifically focus on children's needs through a 
"Children's Place" providing a pre-school and drop-in program 
for ages 3-12 years and a "Life Skills Program" for youth 
ages 13-18 years providing Hebrew language classes, computer 
training, sports, and field trips promoting an understanding 
of Israeli culture. ARDC estimates that 30-35 youth will 
immediately benefit from one-on-one care and counseling by a 
professional volunteer social worker and a mentoring program 
that will join refugee children with local Israeli mentors. 
 
¶5. (SBU) ARDC has identified volunteer teachers, 
psychologists, and social workers who will deliver the 
services and programs. Extensive media coverage of this 
issue in Israel has led to dozens of Israelis volunteering 
for ARDC; the organization is now in the privileged position 
of "picking and choosing" its volunteer manpower. For the 
first year, the activities will take place in a core facility 
consisting of 4 rooms provided for a fee by a local community 
center. The facility will feature a small community library 
with study materials and an adjoining study room for the 
children. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Total program cost for the community center is 
$100,179, which includes renting a four-room facility, salary 
for a part-time coordinator, supplies (e.g., books, art 
supplies, educational materials) and equipment (e.g., 
computers, furniture, copier). PRM support is specifically 
requested for rent ($9,257), utilities ($3,086), books 
($1,930), art supplies ($2,286), and field trips ($1,200) 
with a 12% overhead of $2,131. In addition to the 
Ambassador's Fund request of $19,889, ARDC is seeking support 
from private foundations and individuals. Thus far, ARDC has 
successfully raised $56,110, much of it in-kind support, such 
as computers and furniture, from Israeli organizations, and 
has been approved for $2,650 of support through the 
PD-administered Small Grants program. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Post requests the Department to consider funding the 
ARDC project proposal as it fills an unmet gap in assistance 
to African asylum-seekers in Israel. If PRM approves this 
project, Post certifies that it has the authority and 
capacity to award a grant to ARDC. 
 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
 
JONES