08USUNNEWYORK1199
UNSC: OPEN DEBATE ON MIDDLE EAST - MOST STATES
Tue Dec 23 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO3899
OO RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUCNDT #1199/01 3581953
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 231953Z DEC 08
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5586
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 USUN NEW YORK 001199 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL UNSC KWBG KPAL IS PA LE SY EG
SUBJECT: UNSC: OPEN DEBATE ON MIDDLE EAST - MOST STATES 
WELCOME RESOLUTION 1850 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: On December 18, the Security Council held 
its first Open Debate on the Middle East in five months only 
two days after a ministerial-level Security Council meeting 
that saw the passage of UN Security Council Resolution 1850 
which confirms the irreversibility of the bilateral 
negotiations between the two parties.  In addition to a 
briefing by the UN Special Coordinator for the Middle East 
Peace covering recent developments in Gaza, the West Bank, 
and the region, the 15 Council members spoke, as well as 
Israel, the Palestinians, and 15 other member states.  Most 
welcomed the adoption of UNSCR 1850 and the Quartet's 
December 15 statement and expressed hope for a peace 
agreement in 2009.  Many states called for an improvement of 
conditions on the ground, especially in terms of humanitarian 
access to Gaza and a continuation of the "calm." Libya, 
Syria, Iran, and Cuba came out stridently against Israeli 
actions.  Syria raised the October 26 incident on the 
Syrian-Iraqi border and termed it unjustified aggression that 
constituted a serious violation of Syrian sovereignty.  The 
full verbatim transcript of the Council meeting is available 
on the Security Council's website at www.un.org. End summary. 
 
UNSCO briefing: direct appeal 
for calm to be extended 
----------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) On December 18, UN Special Coordinator for the 
Middle East Peace Process Robert Serry briefed the Council at 
the start of its Open Debate on the Middle East.  Serry, on 
behalf of the Secretary-General, made a "direct and urgent 
appeal for the calm to be respected and extended."  He also 
strongly appealed for "basic humanitarian principles to be 
continuously observed."  He noted the daily average of 
truckloads of supplies entering Gaza was currently 29, down 
from 123 in October and 475 in May 2007.  He said, "the 
unprecedented level of closure of crossing points into Gaza 
has caused unacceptable hardship to the civilian population" 
and noted that UNRWA had suspended all food distributions. 
He said that UN projects worth over USD 150 million remain 
suspended due to a lack of materials.  He noted the 
Secretary-General's letter to his Quartet colleagues 
outlining his concerns about Gaza and said that the UN 
continues to "seek more effective communication and 
cooperation with the Government of Israel, to ensure that the 
UN is able to execute its mandated programs."  On Palestinian 
reconciliation, he urged Hamas to respond positively to the 
exhortations of the Quartet and the Security Council to 
restore Palestinian unity based on PLO commitments.  He said, 
"It cannot be in the interests of the Palestinian people for 
essential cornerstones of Palestinian legitimacy and national 
aspirations to be challenged." 
 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) On the West Bank, he said, "efforts of the 
Palestinian Authority, together with unprecedented donor 
support, and improved Israeli-Palestinian security 
cooperation are enhancing security and creating prospects for 
economic improvements."  While there were 620 obstacles to 
movement in the West Bank, he did note the easing of 
restrictions around Nablus instituted on December 7.  He 
welcomed the Israeli release of 227 Palestinian prisoners and 
called for the implementation of Quartet Representative 
Blair's measures and for Israeli action on its Roadmap 
commitments regarding settlement expansion and refraining 
from unilateral actions in Jerusalem.  He welcomed the 
Israeli evacuation of the house in Hebron on December 4, 
condemned the resulting settler violence, and reminded Israel 
of its obligation to protect the civilian Palestinian 
population under occupation.  He welcomed the Security 
Council's reaction December 5, commended the restraint of the 
PA security forces, the efforts by the parties to contain the 
violence, and noted the forceful denunciation of the settler 
attacks by Israeli Prime Minister Olmert. 
 
Region and Lebanon 
------------------ 
 
¶4.  (SBU) In the region, Serry said he had held consultations 
in Damascus, Amman, and Cairo.  No further round of 
Israeli-Syrian indirect talks had taken place.  He noted the 
joint letter from the Saudi Foreign Minister and the Arab 
League Secretary-General to the U.S. President-elect 
underscoring the Arab world's continuing commitment to the 
Arab Peace Initiative.  In Lebanon, he noted several isolated 
security incidents; that Lebanon and Syria had exchanged 
documents on the locations of their future respective 
embassies in Damascus and Beirut; and that bilateral visits 
continued.  In terms of preparing for 2009 legislative 
 
USUN NEW Y 00001199  002 OF 005 
 
 
elections, he confirmed that the ten members of the 
Supervisory Commission on Election Campaign were appointed 
December 13 by the Lebanese cabinet.  While reconstruction 
continues at the Nahr el-Bared refugee camp, he said the 
appeal remains under-funded.  The UNIFIL area of operations 
remains quiet, he added. 
 
Palestinian statement 
--------------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Palestinian Ambassador Mansour said that the 
Council's actions in December to address current developments 
"are welcome and signal reassertion of the Council's 
authority and its intention to play a more active role in 
advancing a peace settlement."  He welcomed UNSCR 1850 
"despite serious misgivings about the exclusionary process 
and limited scope."  He emphasized the importance of the Arab 
Peace Initiative.  He called for a reflection on what 
happened over the last year that prevented the conclusion of 
a peace treaty by the end of the year, saying, "Only this 
will enable us to pinpoint what has gone wrong and to 
determine what needs to be done henceforth to avoid the 
pitfalls...."  He called for the sharing of the report by 
U.S. General Fraser with the Quartet and the Council so that 
it can be known who is upholding their obligations and who is 
not and what needs to be done to create the appropriate 
conditions on the ground and between the parties to advance 
the process towards a two-state solution. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Ambassador Mansour then called for an end to the 
"siege of the Gaza Strip" and an opening of the crossings, 
and for Israel to freeze its settlements and dismantle 
outposts in the West Bank.  He also cited the increased 
number of obstacles in the West Bank over the last year, 
while all concerned parties are praising Palestinian 
Authority security efforts.  He called on the Security 
Council and the Quartet to uphold their responsibilities and 
to ensure that obligations are met and that the parties 
refrain from any steps that undermine confidence or prejudice 
the outcome of negotiations.  He expressed appreciation for 
Egypt's help and for the latest Arab Ministers' meeting's 
effort to help achieve Palestinian reconciliation.  He said 
he hoped the cease-fire would be upheld and extended to the 
West Bank and that "2009 will indeed be the year we bring an 
end to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict." 
 
Israeli statement 
----------------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Israeli Perm Rep Shalev opened her statement by 
noting the substantial progress that had been made in 2008 on 
the Annapolis framework.  She congratulated the Council on 
the passage of UNSCR 1850 which she said sent a clear message 
to Hamas that lasting peace will be based on "an enduring 
commitment to mutual recognition, freedom from violence, 
incitement, and terror...."  She said the real test is with 
the parties on the ground and noted that Israel is operating 
on two tracks -- "trying to promote peace with the moderate, 
responsible leadership on the Palestinian side" and "fighting 
the extremist Hamas terrorist organization in the Gaza 
Strip."  She said the two parties have demonstrated real 
courage in the negotiations over the last 13 months.  She 
noted the growing cooperation between the security services 
in Jenin and Hebron and the opening of more than 20 new 
Palestinian police stations.  She stressed the need to 
encourage moderates in the region and noted the Israeli 
decision to release 230 convicted Palestinian prisoners for 
Eid al-Adha. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Ambassador Shalev said that serious obstacles 
remain, namely the 2,900 rockets that were launched from Gaza 
at Israeli territory in 2008.  She noted the incessant 
attacks targeting crossings and fuel depots that are needed 
to deliver humanitarian aid into Gaza but said that "Israel 
acknowledged the need to provide humanitarian aid to the Gaza 
Strip, and we do our utmost to facilitate the work of the 
international community."  She noted that CPL Shalit has 
remained in captivity for 910 days and commented on the rally 
in Gaza which had mocked his suffering.  She said that Iran 
and Syria remain the epicenter of Hamas' world and that 
Israel remains concerned by the rearming and redeployment of 
Hizballah, both north and south of the Litani River. 
Nevertheless, she stressed that Israel remains fully 
committed to the peace process because "peace remains the 
salient goal for the State of Israel." 
 
Council members welcome 
adoption of UNSCR 1850 
----------------------- 
 
 
USUN NEW Y 00001199  003 OF 005 
 
 
¶9.  (SBU) The U.S., UK, Italian, French, Burkinabe, Belgian, 
Russian, Indonesian, Chinese, Costa Rican, South African, 
Vietnamese, Croatian Perm Reps welcomed the adoption of UNSCR 
¶1850.  (Note: U.S. remarks are posted on the Mission's 
Internet site.  The full verbatim transcript of the Council's 
meeting is available on the Security Council's page on the 
UN's website, www.un.org.  End note.)  The UK Perm Rep said 
that UNSCR 1850 "is an important milestone in a series of 
resolutions, including 242, 338, 1397, and 1515."  Many 
delegations noted that the real test for UNSCR 1850 will be 
whether it is implemented.  The South African Perm Rep noted, 
"It is thus imperative that both sides ensure that their 
actions and pronouncements be calculated to advance the quest 
for peace."  Many delegations, including the U.S., UK, 
France, and Panama, called on Israel to take action to freeze 
settlement building and improve conditions for Palestinians 
in the West Bank and Gaza.  The British Perm Rep called on 
Palestinians to find a "way to reunite around negotiations 
and nonviolence, with Hamas ceasing their rocket attacks and 
moving towards the Quartet principles."  The Russian Perm Rep 
called for intra-Palestinian agreement on the Quartet 
criteria and said the matter would be discussed with 
President Abbas in Moscow. 
 
¶10.  (SBU) China and Costa Rica specifically called for the 
"calm" to be extended.  Both the UK and French Perm Reps 
called for an early commitment from the next U.S. 
administration to sustain the peace process from the start of 
its term in office.  The Burkinabe Perm Rep said he hoped 
2009 keeps the spirit of Annapolis alive.  As he usually 
does, the Libyan Perm Rep focused his comments almost 
exclusively on Israeli practices that violate Palestinian 
human rights and on Palestinian humanitarian issues.  Italian 
Acting Perm Rep devoted most of his statement to Lebanon, 
calling for Israel and Lebanon to work with UNIFIL to effect 
a quick withdrawal from northern Ghajar and for Syria to 
provide a written confirmation to the SYG of Lebanon's 
sovereignty over the Sheba'a Farms. 
 
Other parties brief Council: 
Syria and Lebanon 
---------------------------- 
 
¶11.  (SBU) The Syrian Perm Rep began his remarks to the 
Council stressing that Syria has "chosen peace as a strategic 
option" since its participation in the Madrid Conference. 
However, he then launched into a litany of Israeli wrongs and 
abuses in the West Bank and Gaza.  He accused Israel of 
plundering the Golan's natural resources and continuing to 
bury nuclear waste there.  He said that while Syria has 
entered into indirect talks with Israel, "we would have liked 
to have agreed on a basis to start direct negotiations under 
the auspices of multiple international partners, but the 
matter requires an American will to make peace in the Middle 
East one of its top priorities."  He then turned to the 
October 26 incident on the Syrian-Iraqi border and said, 
"this aggression was unjustified and constitutes a serious 
violation of Syrian sovereignty and of the principles and 
purpose of the United Nations Charter."  He said his 
government "has appealed to the United Nations and the 
Security Council in particular to shoulder their 
responsibilities to prevent the repetition of this serious 
violation and to lay the responsibility for the killing of 
innocent Syrian civilians squarely on the aggressors in order 
to maintain security and stability in the Middle East."  At 
the end of his statement he accused the Israeli Perm Rep of 
referring to Syria as a funder of Hamas as a way to "divert 
attention from the root cause of the problem of violence and 
terrorism in our region, which is the Israeli occupation of 
Arab territories."  He referred to Israel as "imposing an 
unjust siege and carrying out a sadistic and pathological 
holocaust against more than 1.5 million people in Gaza and a 
similar number in the West Bank."  (Comment: There was no 
mention of Lebanon in the Syrian Perm Rep's statement.  End 
comment.) 
 
¶12.  (SBU) The Lebanese Perm Rep noted the Council's passage 
of UNSCR 1850, but commented that it lacks: a specific 
timeline for the achievement of peace, a clear call to put an 
end to the Israeli occupation, and a denunciation of Israeli 
practices against Palestinian civilians.  He recalled 
Israel's settlement expansion, its continued construction of 
the separation barrier, its obstacles to Palestinian movement 
in the West Bank, and increased settler violence.  He 
referred to Israeli Foreign Minister Livni's recent statement 
which he said "brought to mind something similar to the 
policy of transfer."  With regard to Lebanon, he said "Israel 
continues its stubborn refusal to fulfill all its 
obligations" under UNSCR 1701.  He said Israeli violations of 
Lebanese airspace totaled more than 1,100 over the last four 
 
USUN NEW Y 00001199  004 OF 005 
 
 
months and called for an immediate cessation of them. 
Referring to northern Ghajar, Sheba'a Farms, and Kfar Shouba, 
he called for the UN to "launch a new diplomatic initiative 
that allows the restoration of the land to its rightful 
owners and puts an end to the occupation."  He referred to 
statements by the Israeli Prime Minister threatening to 
"destroy Lebanon," but said Lebanon has chosen to abide by 
"the choice of a comprehensive and just peace based on the 
Arab Peace Initiative." 
 
Future Council members, a future 
permanent member contender, and an 
unsuccessful SC candidate weigh-in 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶13.  (SBU) 2009 Security Council member Turkey welcomed UNSCR 
1850 and urged both parties to not take any action that might 
prejudice or undermine future negotiations.  The Turkish Perm 
Rep quoted recent Nobel Peace Prize winner Martti Ahtisaari 
that "all conflicts can be settled and there are no excuses 
for allowing them to be eternal."  He pledged that Turkey 
will continue to work for a comprehensive peace based on a 
two-state solution and will contribute to the "stability, 
security, and prosperity of the region."  The Japanese Perm 
Rep, also representing an incoming 2009 Security Council 
member country, reiterated Japan's strong support for a 
negotiated two-state solution and welcomed UNSCR 1850 and the 
Quartet's efforts.  He noted Japan's concern for the 
deteriorating humanitarian situation in Gaza and urged that 
the blockade be lifted; and called for the end of the rocket 
fire and an extension of the cease-fire.  He also called for 
a freeze on settlement activity and the need for rule of law 
to counter settler violence.  He noted Japan's commitment to 
Palestinian economic development and noted that it had 
provided over a billion dollars in assistance since Oslo and 
would continue to do so. 
 
¶14.  (SBU) Permanent Security Council seat contender Brazil 
also took advantage of the debate to note its ties to the 
region, including the fact that some 10 million Brazilians 
trace their roots to the Middle East.  The Brazilian Perm Rep 
welcomed UNSCR 1850 and said the leaders of Israel, the 
Palestinian Authority, and the U.S. bear a special 
responsibility to assist the Council with its implementation. 
 Iceland, which failed in its bid for a two-year rotation on 
the Council, addressed the Council as a strong supporter of 
UNSCR 1325 on Women, Peace, and Security and advocated for 
greater women's participation in the peace process, 
especially for proposals by the International Women's 
Commission for a Just and Sustainable Israeli-Palestinian 
Peace.  The Icelandic Perm Rep said, "The solidarity among 
women across the lines of conflict can offer inspiration and 
hope for their societies as a whole and has generated proven 
added value in the resolution of numerous conflicts." 
 
OIC members: Morocco, 
Qatar, Pakistan, Iran 
--------------------- 
 
¶15.  (SBU) Given Pakistan's own domestic and regional 
challenges, one might have expected the Pakistani Perm Rep to 
draw some comparisons between the Middle East and his own 
region but he did not do so, except when referring to the 
responsibilities of the "occupying power;" and his 
intervention made no mention of the challenges of terrorism. 
He attributed the current situation largely to "Israel's 
policies and actions," though at the end he did "urge our 
Palestinian brothers to put aside their differences and pool 
all their energies in the pursuit of peace."  He lamented the 
lack of progress in negotiations for the past year and gently 
criticized UNSCR 1850 for not doing "full justice to the 
gravity of the situation."  He did call on the Quartet to 
"engage more seriously" with the Arab League and with the 
Organization for the Islamic Conference, which he termed "a 
key partner for peace efforts in the Middle East." 
 
¶16.  (SBU) The Moroccan Perm Rep expressed support for the 
negotiations, welcomed UNSCR 1850, and said that progress 
should be protected from rollbacks. The Qatari Perm Rep 
referred to UNSCR 1850 and said that while it was 
commendable, it only focuses on principles.  He called on the 
Council to adopt the Arab draft resolution on settlements 
which is still before the Council "in blue."  He went on to 
criticize Israel for its blockade of Gaza, for turning away 
vessels bearing humanitarian aid, and for not protecting 
Palestinians from settler violence.  The Iranian Perm Rep 
criticized the Council for failing to live up to its 
responsibility to protect Palestinians from increased Israel 
settler violence and from Israel's collective punishment in 
the Gaza Strip.  He accused "a permanent member" of the 
 
USUN NEW Y 00001199  005 OF 005 
 
 
Security Council of extending its "unqualified support" to 
the Israeli regime which has "emboldened the said regime in 
its war crimes and crimes against humanity."  (Note: Israel 
later replied to Iran,s remarks, calling them against the 
spirit of hopefulness that characterized the remarks made by 
most delegations.  End note.) 
 
Others: Norway, Australia, 
Venezuela, Cuba 
-------------------------- 
 
¶17.  (SBU) The Norwegian DPR stressed the importance of 
economic growth to the political process and a successful 
settlement between the Israelis and the Palestinians.  She 
noted that support from donors has increased.  While she 
criticized increased Israeli settlement activity, she did 
laud Israel's evacuation of the Hebron house in early 
December.  She said that Norway welcomes UNSCR 1850 and its 
call on donors to assist in the development of the 
Palestinian economy and reminded the Council that the Ad Hoc 
Liaison Committee remains the key instrument for mobilizing 
and coordinating donor support.  The Australian Acting Perm 
Rep welcomed the December 15 Quartet statement and UNSCR 1850 
and pledged Australia's commitment to provide international 
support for the peace process. 
 
¶18.  (SBU) The Venezuelan Perm Rep welcomed UNSCR 1850, 
co-sponsored by the U.S. and Russia, and urged its broad 
implementation.  He also called for an end to "the ongoing 
aggression against the Government and people of Palestine" 
and said that "we must not allow those who have committed 
crimes of genocide to go unpunished."  Cuba, on behalf of the 
Non-aligned Movement, expressed support for UNSCR 1850 but 
stressed that the Council still needs to implement the 
resolution, as well as previous resolutions on the Middle 
East.  Cuba criticized Israel extensively in its statement, 
stating that Israel had increased unilateral actions in the 
face of renewed interest in peace efforts, and expressed 
support for refugees' right-of-return. 
Khalilzad