09ABUDHABI318
NEW UAE NGO SEEKS TO CONFRONT ROOT CAUSES OF TERRORISM,
Sun Mar 29 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Abu Dhabi
VZCZCXRO3091
RR RUEHDE RUEHDH RUEHDIR
DE RUEHAD #0318/01 0881334
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 291334Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2302
INFO RUEHDE/AMCONSUL DUBAI 8211
RUEHZM/GULF COOPERATION COUNCIL COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ABU DHABI 000318 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM KMPI KWMN PTER XF SU AF AE
SUBJECT:  NEW UAE NGO SEEKS TO CONFRONT ROOT CAUSES OF TERRORISM, 
OPEN TO COOPERATION WITH USG 
 
ABU DHABI 00000318  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  Embassy officers met March 12 with Saif Bin Helal 
Al Shehhi, Founder and CEO of a new international humanitarian NGO 
based in Dubai, "Peace Without Limits (PWL)."  PWL is inspired by a 
desire to reduce terrorism and extremism by addressing the root 
causes of discontent in the region.  PWL has already lined up some 
impressive backers, including the Crown Prince of the Emirate of 
Fujairah, and has made strides towards the creation of its own 
satellite TV channel.  While PWL's achievements to date are unclear, 
and we as yet cannot assess its credibility or viability, it appears 
to have begun some initial projects in Jordan, Yemen, Darfur, 
Pakistan and Afghanistan looking at madrasah curriculum reform, 
electronic literacy, interfaith dialogue, domestic violence and 
women and children's education.  Given the breadth of its vision and 
plans, PWL is looking for international input and guidance.  Al 
Shehhi made it clear that his organization is open to partnerships 
with the USG to generate projects and attract international 
expertise.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) On March 12, representatives of the Middle East Partnership 
Initiative (MEPI) Regional Office and Embassy Public Affairs Section 
(PAS) met with Saif Bin Helal Al Shehhi, Founder and CEO of a new 
international NGO, based in Dubai, Peace Without Limits (PWL).  PWL 
is the English translation of the name of the organization, called 
Salam Bila Hudoud in Arabic.  PWL's literature is printed in five 
languages: Arabic, English, French, Pashto, and - surprisingly - 
Hebrew.  The languages reflect the areas in which they operate, 
which are the Middle East/North Africa (including Sudan), 
Afghanistan, and Pakistan.  Initial projects are operating in 
Darfur, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Jordan and Yemen.  Al Shehhi is a 
36-year old Emirati from the northern emirate of Ras al-Khaimah.  A 
former police officer out of the Dubai Police Academy (Note. In the 
UAE, an Emirati police officer is a prestigious and well-paid 
position.  End note.), Al Shehhi used his personal and family wealth 
and connections to put his ideas on counter radicalization into 
practice. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Al Shehhi told Emboffs that he founded PWL to address 
"political and religious fanaticism" in the Islamic world in order 
to "get to the sources of terrorism" and to stress that the three 
Abrahamic religions (Islam, Christianity, and Judaism) have "nothing 
to do with violence."  PWL is based in Dubai, and is funded by 
Al-Shehhi and the Crown Prince of the Emirate of Fujairah, Mohamed 
bin Hamad al-Sharqi.  The organization is three months old.  Given 
that the UAE has very restrictive laws for registering as a 
not-for-profit organization, the speed with which Al-Shehhi's 
project has gotten off the ground indicates support within the UAEG. 
 Indeed, Al-Shehhi says he has UAEG backing to apply to become a "UN 
recognized organization," though this process will take a 
considerable amount of time. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Thematically, PWL's main focus is currently on curriculum 
reform in Islamic madrasahs (religious schools).  Crucial to the 
success of this reform is teacher training and electronic literacy. 
PWL is already working with the Ministry of Education in Afghanistan 
to provide qualified moderate instructors for the madrasahs there. 
Al-Shehhi said that PWL's programs are based in part on Saudi 
Arabia's experience rehabilitating terrorists and that PWL is 
working with the Saudi government in this field.  The focus now is 
on radical madrasahs in Afghanistan, Sudan (in particular Darfur), 
Jordan, and Yemen.  Regarding the work in Sudan, Al-Shehhi said that 
the Sudanese government asked PWL to come to Sudan as the "face of 
NGOs" as hostility to Western NGOs has increased there. 
 
¶5. (SBU) In an attempt to improve the status of women, PWL is 
developing programs to combat violence against women and children. 
It also provides scholarships for women in the Middle East to study 
political science, specifically in the areas of democracy and human 
rights. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) In the area of interfaith dialogue, PWL is interested in 
reducing religious fanaticism and promoting mutual understanding and 
dialogue among faiths through international conferences.  PWL 
supports the recent interfaith efforts of Saudi King Abdullah and is 
cooperating with the UAE's Mohammed Bin Rashid Al Maktoum Foundation 
on an upcoming interfaith conference in Jordan in May.  Al-Shehhi 
said the Pope is expected to attend this conference. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Much of PWL's work in the last three months has been spent 
preparing to launch a satellite TV channel.  PWL purchased a 
frequency and equipment from a defunct real estate channel in Dubai, 
and Al-Shehhi estimates that the TV program is "70%" complete.  The 
channel will broadcast programming in, or subtitled in, the five 
languages mentioned above.  Programming will generally support the 
themes outlined, as well as the peace initiative of King Abdullah of 
Saudi Arabia. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) MEPI and PAS officers described the MEPI Local Grants 
Program and other U.S. Department of State grant and exchange 
programs.  We consider Al-Shehhi a strong nominee for an IVLP 
program.  While PWL does not seem to need the money a grant 
 
ABU DHABI 00000318  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
provides, Al-Shehhi made it clear that he is interested in 
partnering, as MEPI could bring new ideas for projects and 
connections with networks of skilled and experienced implementers. 
Given the access PWL seems to enjoy, it would be worth exploring 
such partnerships. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Comment:  As this was an introductory meeting, it is hard 
to accurately assess PWL's credibility and long-term viability.  We 
know PWL has an office in Dubai but do not know how many staff they 
have, although we have heard they are recruiting.  Resources do not 
appear to be an issue as PWL recently held a well-attended 
(including by Embassy LES) launch reception at the luxury Emirates 
Palace Hotel.  Our understanding is that Al-Shehhi is putting much 
of his own money into the project.  One point to note is that the 
Ambassadors of Jordan and Afghanistan to the UAE attended PWL's 
launch reception and gave supportive remarks, implying that PWL has 
the buy-in to work in those countries.  Mission UAE and the MEPI 
Regional Office will continue to monitor developments and explore 
opportunities for collaboration.  End comment. 
 
OLSON