09ADANA65
SE TURKEY SECURITY INCIDENTS: OCTOBER 12 - 18, 2009
Mon Nov 02 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
VZCZCXRO5903
RR RUEHDA
DE RUEHDA #0065/01 3060754
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 020754Z NOV 09
FM AMCONSUL ADANA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4787
INFO RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 1329
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 1099
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 1396UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ADANA 000065 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR DS/IP/NEA, DS/IP/ITA, INR AND NEA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PTER PINR CASC TU
SUBJECT: SE TURKEY SECURITY INCIDENTS: OCTOBER 12 - 18, 2009 
 
¶1. The following security incidents for the period of October 
19-25, 2009, were compiled by the Security Assistant at 
Consulate Adana from RSO sources, to include Turkish security 
contacts, government officials and media. Similar reports have 
been previously shared informally by e-mail. Post is now sending 
this information in cable format to ensure wider and more 
regular distribution. The RSO uses the information to determine 
the security situation and trends of violence and crime 
throughout Turkey. The RSO shares the information with the 
country team and visas viper coordinator. 
 
¶2. Military operations against the Kurdistan Workers' Party 
(PKK) as reported by the Turkish General Staff: 
 
¶A. Weapons, ammunition, and equipment seized: 
 
Hakkari - 10.24.09: 1 hand grenade, 1 Kalashnikov infantry 
rifle, 4 magazines and 120 rounds of ammunition. 
 
Hakkari - 10.24.09: A pressure sensitive IED. 
 
Hakkari - 10.24.09: 1 RPG-7 rocket launcher, 1 Kannas brand 
sniper weapon, 1 Bixi brand machine gun, 4 Kalashnikov rifles, 1 
Docka anti-aircraft missile, 15 hand grenades, 8 rounds of 
mortar (60 mm), and 5 magazines. 
 
Hakkari - 10.22.09: 6 hand grenades, 1 wireless radio, 1 digital 
camera, 1 Kannas rifle binoculars, 20 kilograms of ammonium 
nitrate, bomb-making materials, various logistical and food 
materials. 
 
Siirt - 10.19.09: 160 kilograms of food materials. 
 
¶B. PKK members captured or surrendered: 
 
Hakkari - 10.24.09: 1 PKK member captured. 
 
10.19.09 through 10.25.09: Security forces neutralized 1 PKK 
member, AND 1 PKK member surrendered to security officials. 
 
¶C. PKK attacks: 
 
Hakkari - 10.21.09: PKK members attacked a military patrol team, 
no injuries reported. 
 
Siirt - 10.20.09: Troops were deployed in the mountains based on 
intelligence in search of PKK members. A firefight ensued when 
terrorists opened fire. No injuries were reported. 
 
Hakkari - 10.19.09: A hand-made IED exploded as a military 
convoy was passing by the area; no injuries reported. 
 
¶3. Media reports related to PKK and pro-Kurdish organizations 
 
¶A. Anti - PKK operations: 
 
Turkish Armed Forces (TAF) anti-PKK operations in SE Turkey 
continue. Many armored vehicles, military personnel and 
ammunition were sent to the operation areas in Hakkari 
(Cukurca), Sirnak (Mount Cudi, Mount Kato, Beytussebap, Uludere 
and Guclukonak) and Siirt. 
 
Sirnak - 10.22.09: Forest fire at the Mount Cudi continues after 
the area was bombed by Turkish artillery teams. 
 
¶N. Iraq - 10.21.09 though 10.23.09: TAF bombed the Zap region. 
 
¶N. Iraq - 10.20.09: Turkish war jets made low altitude flight 
over the suspected PKK positions at the Mount Kandil, but did 
not attack the targets. PKK members responded with Docka 
missiles. According to KYB's (Patriotic Union of Kurdistan) 
website, PKK positions on Mount Kandil were in fact bombed by 
war jets belonging to an unknown country. Another Kurdish 
language web site has claimed that Turkish war jets bombed PKK 
targets. The web site reported that 4 separate targets were 
bombed but did not give any information about casualties. 
 
Sirnak - 10.19.09: 1 PKK member was killed by Turkish Artillery 
team's fire, pro-Kurdish ANF reported. 
 
¶B. Arrests: 
 
Bitlis - 10.25.09: Security forces detained 1 person suspected 
of terrorism. 
 
Hakkari - 10.25.09: 1 person (age 71), who joined in the funeral 
ceremony of a killed PKK member, was sentenced to a year in 
prison on the charge of "making propaganda for the PKK." 
 
Sanliurfa - 10.24.09: DTP Mayor of Viransehir was sentenced to 1 
 
ADANA 00000065  002 OF 004 
 
 
year in prison on charges of "praising crime and the criminal." 
 
 
Sanliurfa - 10.24.09: Abdullah Ocalan's lawyer Muzeffer Demir 
was sentenced to 3 years in prison on charges of "praising crime 
and the criminal." 
 
Diyarbakir - 10.23.09: Security forces detained 12 people on the 
charges of "assisting and harboring the PKK." Many 
organizational documents and logistical equipment were seized. 
 
Adana - 10.23.09: 2 minors (ages 16 and 17) who joined in 
illegal street demonstrations on behalf of the PKK, were 
sentenced to 4 year in prison on the charge of "making 
propaganda for PKK." In total 103 minors have been sentenced to 
a cumulative total of 457 years for the same crime. 
 
Adana - 10.22.09: 2 people who threw Molotov cocktails at a BIM 
supermarket in Sakirpasa Parish were arrested on the charge of 
"carrying out illegal action on behalf of the PKK." 
 
Adana - 10.22.09: A representative of the pro-Kurdish Azadiya 
Welat (The Free Country) newspaper was sentenced to 2 years in 
prison on the charge of "making propaganda for the PKK." 
 
Siirt - 10.22.09: An employee of the pro-Kurdish Azadiya Welat 
newspaper was sentenced to 10 months in prison on the charge of 
"making propaganda for the PKK." 
 
Sanliurfa - 10.20.09: 2 people were arrested on the charge of 
"chanting illegal slogan in favor of the PKK." 
 
Hakkari - 10.20.09: Security forces detained 3 people suspected 
of terrorism. 
 
Sanliurfa - 10.20.09: Security forces detained 1 person 
suspected of terrorism. 
 
Van - 10.19.09:  Security forces detained 2 people trying to 
recruit members for the PKK. 1 of 2 people later was arrested on 
charges of "assisting and harboring the PKK." 
 
Sirnak - 10.20.09: 36 PKK members, who surrendered to security 
officials at the Habur Border Gate, were released by a court 
decision. 
 
¶C. Other media stories about PKK: 
 
Adana - 10.25.09: A pro-Kurdish group calling themselves "Voices 
of Mountains" attacked a house with Molotov cocktails in 
Sakirpasa Parish. 
 
Adana and Osmaniye - 10.25.09: Families of soldiers killed by 
the PKK protested the recent celebrations following the 
surrender of PKK members from Kandil Mountain and Mahmur refugee 
camp. 
 
10.24.09: Despite negative reaction from the military and 
Turkey's judiciary, the Democratic Society Party (DTP) insisted 
on welcoming the return of members of the PKK from European 
countries next week with a massive reception, which was later 
cancelled due to increasing tension. 
 
Elazig - 10.24.09: Nationalists attacked a DTP group who were 
holding a press statement to protest the assaults against 
Kurdish students at Firat University. The nationalist group 
later held a protest march in the city center with the 
participation of hundreds of people. 
 
10.24.09: MHP (Nationalist Movement Party) plans to gather at 
meeting places (squares/streets) across Turkey to protest the 
Democratic Initiative period (Kurdish Initiative). 
 
10.21.09: Security forces are on high alert against possible 
provocative actions during the Kurdish initiative period. Some 
groups may carryout action to sabotage the ongoing opening 
period. The tension between nationalist (MHP, BBP, Alperen 
Ocaklari, etc) and Kurdish people (DTP and other pro-Kurdish 
organizations) has increased in the past week in Turkey. Many 
fights have been reported across Turkey. 
 
10.21.09: PKK terrorists launched 10 mortar rounds onto the 
Dagbasi military base in Gukurca, near the Iraqi border. Firing 
back, the soldiers were able to repel the terrorist group. One 
soldier was wounded in the crossfire. 
 
Hatay and Mersin - 10.20.09: Hatay and Mersin Democracy Platform 
members held press statements and marches in order to support 
the latest developments in the Kurdish initiative. 
 
 
ADANA 00000065  003 OF 004 
 
 
¶4. Media reports on significant crime or security incidents: 
 
Hatay - 10.24.09: Security forces seized 5 pistols and 205 
rounds of ammunition and detained 3 people. 
 
Sirnak - 10.23.09: 1 person wanted in connection with the murder 
of 2 DTP members in July was detained by security forces. It was 
reported that the person is a member of the Dagger Team. 
 
Sirnak - 10.23.09: Security forces stopped a vehicle and 
detained a person, resulting in a street brawl. Many people 
attacked security forces with stones and Molotov cocktails and 
police intervened with tear gas and sticks. 3 police officers 
were wounded. 
 
Gaziantep - 10.22.09: Security forces seized 1,175 rounds of 
ammunition, 1 pistol and 1 magazine and detained one person. 
 
Sanliurfa - 10.22.09: Birecik District's Mayor's vehicle was 
attacked by unidentified people with long-range rifles, wounding 
the driver. 
 
Turkey-wide - 10.22.09: More than 200 people have been arrested 
as part of an illegal fuel trade that extends to 30 provinces. 
Operation "Bypass" took place in 30 provinces simultaneously and 
resulted in the arrest of 200 people in connection with the 
procurement and sale of illegal fuel. The gendarmerie operation 
included raids in Ankara, Izmir, Samsun, Kirikkale, Van, Mugla, 
Adana, Mersin, Manisa and Balikesir and other surrounding 
provinces and resulted in the arrest of gas station owners, 
managers and employees. 
 
Mardin - 10.22.09: Security forces found a hand grenade by the 
roadside in Nusaybin and destroyed it on site. 
 
Mersin - 10.21.09: A park in the Tarsus District of Mersin was 
set on fire by unidentified people. 
 
Mersin - 10.21.09: A group of ultranationalist sympathizers 
allegedly attempted to lynch Kurdish residents in the Anamur 
District. The incident was prevented after the intervention of 
government officials. 
 
Elazig - 10.21.09: It was reported that a group of Kurdish 
students from the Firat University was attacked by a group of 
ultranationalists. 2 students were seriously wounded. 
 
Hatay - 10.20.09: Security forces confiscated 1 
assassination-type pen pistol, 2 bullets, 1 blank pistol and 7 
round of ammunition belonging to the blank pistol, 95 rounds of 
blank pistol ammunition, and 250 grams of hashish. 3 people were 
detained in the operation. 
 
Hakkari - 10.19.09: A group of PKK supporters attacked police 
vehicles with stones during a demonstration to celebrate the 
release of detained PKK members. Police intervened with sticks 
and tear gas while PKK supporters responded with stones and 
Molotov cocktails. 
 
Sirnak - 10.19.09: A 3-year old child who was wounded during 
illegal street demonstrations on October 9 died at the hospital. 
 
Van - 10.19.09: Iranian forces killed a smuggler who was trying 
to enter Iran from Van. 
 
¶5. Illegal immigrant arrests: 
 
10.15.09 through 10.22.09: Security forces captured and deported 
991 illegal immigrants from Sirnak, Antalya, Izmir, Aegean 
Coast, Siirt, Agri, Kilis, Hatay, Canakkale, Erzurum, Kayseri, 
Edirne, Yalova,   Kirklareli, Canakkale, Adana, Van, Artvin, 
Aydin, Ardahan, Aksaray, Mugla, and Bitlis, and the borders of 
Iran, Iraq, Syria and Greece. 
 
¶6. Counter-narcotic operations: 
 
Gaziantep - 10.25.09: Security forces seized 22 kilograms of 
hashish and detained 2 people. 
 
Sanliurfa - 10.25.09: Security forces confiscated 25 kilograms 
of hashish and detained a person. 
 
Van - 10.25.09: Security forces confiscated 68 kilograms of 
hashish and detained 1 person. 
 
Gaziantep and Agri - 10.22.09: Security forces seized 24 
kilograms of hashish in a joint operation and detained 2 people. 
 
 
Hatay - 10.22.09: Security forces seized 6 kilograms of hashish 
 
ADANA 00000065  004 OF 004 
 
 
and detained 3 people. 
 
Van - 10.21.09: Security forces seized 295 kilograms of hashish 
and detained 1 person. 
 
Van - 10.21.09: Security forces seized 63 kilograms of hashish 
and detained 1 person. 
 
Adana - 10.20.09: Security forces confiscated 23 kilograms of 
hashish and arrested 3 people. 
 
Adana - 10.13.09 through 10.19.09: In separate operations 
carried out by the Department and Smuggling and Organized Crime, 
60 cartons of smuggled cigarettes, 2, 500 liters of smuggled 
gas, and 6 kilograms of hashish was seized. 1 of 5 people was 
arrested. 
 
Batman - 10.19.09: Security forces seized 3 kilograms of hashish 
and arrested 1 person. 
 
Sanliurfa - 10.19.09: Security forces seized 36 kilograms of 
hashish and arrested 1 person. 
DARNELL