09ADANA62
SE TURKEY SECURITY INCIDENTS: OCTOBER 05 - OCTOBER 12, 2009
Fri Oct 16 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
VZCZCXRO1629
RR RUEHDA
DE RUEHDA #0062/01 2890754
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 160754Z OCT 09
FM AMCONSUL ADANA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4777
INFO RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 1319
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 1089
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 1386UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 ADANA 000062 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR DS/IP/NEA, DS/IP/ITA, INR AND NEA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PTER PINR CASC TU
SUBJECT: SE TURKEY SECURITY INCIDENTS: OCTOBER 05 - OCTOBER 12, 2009 
 
¶1. The following security incidents for the period of October 05 
- October 12, 2009 were compiled from RSO sources by the 
Security Assistant at Consulate Adana, to include Turkish 
security contacts, government officials and media reports. 
Similar reports have previously been shared informally by 
e-mail.  Post is now sending this information in cable format to 
ensure wider and more regular distribution.  The RSO uses the 
information to determine the security situation and trends of 
violence and crime throughout Turkey.  The RSO also tracks the 
information by location and shares the information with the 
Country Team and Visas Viper coordinator. 
 
¶2. Military operations against the Kurdistan Workers' Party 
(PKK) as reported by the Turkish General Staff: 
 
¶A. Weapons, ammunition, and equipment seized: 
 
Year to date: Security forces seized or safely detonated 179 
kilograms of TNT, 84 kilograms of plastic explosive materials, 
2100 kilograms of ammonium/potassium nitrate, 45 landmines, and 
73 units of unknown explosive material. 
 
Hakkari - 10.11.09: Various logistical equipment, food, and an 
explosive made from 1 kilogram of C-4. 
 
Sirnak - 10.09.09: 300 rounds of BKC machine gun ammunition. 
 
Sirnak - 10.09.09: 1 hand grenade was found and destroyed on 
site. 
 
Sirnak - 10.06.09: 20 rounds of RPG-7 rocket launcher 
ammunition, 40 hand grenades, 1500 rounds of Kalashnikov 
infantry rifle ammunition (7.62 mm), and 840 rounds of BKC 
machine gun ammunition. 
 
Sirnak - 10.02.09: Security forces safely detonated an explosive 
device made of 10 kilograms of ammonium nitrate and 300 grams of 
plastic explosives. 
 
Sirnak - 10.02.09: Security forces found a round of RPG-7 rocket 
launcher ammunition. 
 
Agri - 10.02.09: Security forces seized 131 rounds of 
Kalashnikov infantry rifle ammunition, 151 rounds of Biksi 
machine gun ammunition and 64 rounds of Kannas rifle ammunition. 
 
Mardin - 10.02.09: Security forces seized 3 rounds of mortar 
ammunition. 
 
¶B. PKK members captured or surrendered: 
 
10.06.09 through 10.12.09: Security forces neutralized 5 total 
PKK members. 2 were captured dead, 1 alive and 2 surrendered. 
 
Bitlis - 10.09.09: 1 PKK member surrendered. 
 
Bingol - 10.08.09: Security forces found 2 corpses of PKK 
members who were killed in a clash. 
 
Mardin - 10.06.09: 1 PKK member surrendered. 
 
Tunceli - 10.06.09: Security forces captured 1 PKK member. 
 
¶C. PKK attacks: 
 
Year to date: PKK members carried out 60 incidents using 
explosive materials. 
 
Hakkari - 10.11.09: An explosive device blasted near a military 
convoy. There was no loss of life or property in the incident. 
 
Sirnak - 10.11.09: PKK members attacked a military patrol team; 
no injury reported. 
 
Tunceli - 10.09.09: 2 troops were wounded in a hand grenade 
explosion. 
 
Diyarbakir - 10.07.09: PKK stormed a worksite of a dam 
construction company setting 2 heavy construction machines and a 
truck on fire. 
 
Tunceli - 10.06.09: 1 soldier was killed and 1 wounded in a 
clash with PKK. 
 
Hakkari - 10.05.09: PKK members attacked security forces with 
long-range rifles. There was no loss of life. 
 
Sirnak - 10.4.09: 1 village guard and 1 civilian were killed in 
an explosive material blast. 
 
 
ADANA 00000062  002 OF 005 
 
 
Bitlis - 10.03.09:  2 troops were wounded by a booby trapped 
explosive. 
 
Sirnak - 10.01.09: PKK members killed a soldier in a clash. 
 
¶3. Media reports on Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) and 
pro-Kurdish organizations 
 
¶A. Anti-PKK operations: 
 
TAF's anti-PKK operations and deployments continue in 
Diyarbakir, Siirt, Sirnak, Hakkari, Bitlis, Tunceli and Bingol 
Provinces. 
 
¶B. Arrests: 
 
Sirnak 10.12.09: 1 child was arrested on the charge of "making 
propaganda for the terror organization PKK." 
 
Sirnak - 10.12.09: DTP's Silopi District administrator Nusret 
Yildirim was arrested on the charge of violating restrictions on 
marches and demonstrations. 
 
Hakkari - 10.11.09: 1 child was arrested on the charge of 
"making propaganda for the terror organization PKK." 
 
Hakkari - 10.11.09: 3 people, who joined in illegal street 
demonstrations on October 9, were arrested on the charges of 
"making propaganda for the terror organization PKK," and 
"resisting a police officer." 
 
Diyarbakir - 10.11.09: DTP Kayapinar District Administrator 
Sevval Karakas and 2 DTP council members were arrested on the 
charge of "making propaganda for the terror organization PKK." 
 
Adana - 10.10.09: 1 person, who joined in pro-Kurdish illegal 
activities on October 8, was arrested on the charge of "making 
propaganda for the terror organization PKK." 
 
Sanliurfa - 10.10.09: 59 students from Harran University are on 
trial on the charge of "making propaganda for the terror 
organization PKK." 
 
Van - 10.10.09: 2 people were arrested on the charges of 
"causing damage to public property" and "threatening the 
public." 
 
Diyarbakir - 10.10.09: Security forces caught 7 people who were 
in preparations to carry out actions on behalf of the terror 
organization PKK. The suspects later were arrested. 
 
Van - 10.10.09: Security forces caught 7 people who were 
supplying logistical equipment and food to PKK. Five suspects 
were later arrested on the charge of "assisting and harboring 
the terror organization PKK." 
 
Sirnak - 10.09.09: Security forces detained 10 people who joined 
in illegal street clashes. Four of 10 people later were arrested 
on charges of "making propaganda for the terror organization 
PKK," and "causing damage to public property." 
 
Adana - 10.08.09: Security forces detained 3 employees of the 
pro-Kurdish Azadiya Welat newspaper on the suspicion of 
terrorism. 
 
Mardin - 10.08.09: 2 children (ages 17), who were detained after 
the illegal street demonstrations held in October 17, were 
sentenced to a year in prison on the charge of "making 
propaganda for the terror organization PKK." 
 
Van - 10.08.09: Security forces detained 3 people in Ercis 
District on the suspicion of terrorism. 
 
Sirnak - 10.08.09: Security forces detained a person in Cizre 
District on the suspicion of terrorism. 
 
Hakkari - 10.07.09: Security forces are on high alert and 
conducting many operations to apprehend terrorists. 3 people, 
including a police officer, were killed when a group of 
terrorists opened fire with long-range rifles at a civilian 
vehicle. 
 
Agri - 10.07.09: 18 of 19 people, including DTP Agri Provincial 
Chairman, who were arrested for "making propaganda for the 
terror organization PKK," were released by the court decision. 
 
Sirnak - 10.07.09: A school principal and a shopkeeper were 
detained and will face trial because an "expert" said the 
silhouette of Turkey's founder Ataturk on the school tie really 
depicted the jailed leader of the outlawed Kurdistan Workers' 
 
ADANA 00000062  003 OF 005 
 
 
Party, Abdullah Ocalan. 
 
Hakkari - 10.07.09: Anti-terror teams detained 3 people on the 
suspicion of terrorism. 
 
Van - 10.07.09: Security forces detained 7 people, who were in 
preparations to take food to the mountain staff of the terror 
organization PKK. 
 
Batman - 10.07.09: Security forces detained 2 people on 
suspicion of terrorism links. 
 
Agri - 10.07.09: Security forces detained 3 people on suspicion 
of terrorism links 
 
Tunceli - 10.06.09: Security forces detained pro-Kurdish Gunluk 
Newspaper's employee. The person was later released. 
 
Hakkari - 10.06.09: Anti-terror teams detained 4 people on 
suspicion of terrorism links. 
 
Sirnak - 10.06.09: Anti-terror teams detained 15 people on 
suspicion of terrorism links. 
 
Adana - 10.05.09: A person was arrested for making "propaganda 
for the terror organization PKK." 
 
¶C. Other media stories about PKK: 
 
10.09.09 through 10.11.09: PKK supporters mark the 10th 
anniversary of jailed terrorist leader Abdullah Ocalan's 
expulsion from Syria, holding demonstrations in the southern 
provinces of Mersin, Adana, Hakkari, Sirnak, Mardin, Siirt, Van, 
Diyarbakir and elsewhere. Demonstrators clashed with police in 
many areas, and some were detained. A police officer in 
Diyarbakir was wounded during the demonstrations there. 
 
Sirnak - 10.12.09: Many people gathered to protest the 10 days 
of cell punishment which was given to Ocalan. Demonstrators 
chanted slogans in favor of PKK and Ocalan. 
 
Mersin - 10.11.09: PKK supporters gathered in Sevket Sumer 
Parish for an illegal street demonstration. Security forces 
intervened with sticks, tear gas bombs and pressurized water and 
PKK supporters responded with stones, Molotov cocktails and 
fireworks. 
 
Iraq Border - 10.10.09: Iraqi Kurds have expressed concern over 
a motion passed in the Turkish Parliament this week to extend by 
one year a mandate to conduct cross-border operations in 
northern Iraq to eliminate the terrorist Kurdistan Workers' 
Party (PKK) bases there. 
 
Bingol - 10.10.09: During excavation process to find a grave of 
a PKK member who was killed in a clash almost 12 years ago, 
security forces found mass graveyards. 
 
Diyarbakir - 10.10.09: Approximately 3000 people gathered to 
support Ocalan's road map. The demonstration turned into a clash 
when a group of people attacked the AK Party's building and 
security forces with stones. Police intervened with sticks, tear 
gas bombs and pressurized water and demonstrators responded with 
Molotov cocktail, stones and fireworks. The clashes spread to 
many parishes of Diyarbakir. 
 
Batman - 10.09.09: Security forces clashed with PKK 
sympathizers, opening fire in the air with plastic bullets and 
intervening at demonstrators with sticks, pressurized water and 
tear gas bombs. PKK supporters responded with stones and Molotov 
cocktails. 5 people were detained. 
 
Mardin - 10.09.09: Security forces intervened at PKK supporters 
that were holding an illegal street demonstration in Derik 
District. 
 
Mersin - 10.06.09: Almost 60 PKK supporters gathered in Tarsus 
District and chanted illegal slogans in favor of PKK and Ocalan. 
Security forces intervened at demonstrators who wanted to block 
the Adana-Mersin Highway (D-400) temporarily to traffic. Police 
intervened with tear gas bombs, sticks and pressured water and 
PKK supporters responded with stones and Molotov cocktails. 
 
Hakkari - 10.05.09: PKK members attacked a vehicle with 
long-range rifles killing 3 people including a police officer. 
 
¶4. Media reports on significant crime or security incidents: 
 
Diyarbakir - 10.12.09: The-Sub-Governor's officer in the Ergani 
District of Diyarbakir was attacked by unidentified people with 
Molotov cocktails. There was no loss of life or property in the 
 
ADANA 00000062  004 OF 005 
 
 
incident. 
 
Adana - 10.12.09: 4 vehicles were set on fire by unidentified 
people with flammable materials in Mitatpasa and Guzelevler 
(north) Parishes of Adana. 
 
Diyarbakir - 10.12.09: Controversy surrounds the death of a 
Diyarbakir girl who died while grazing her sheep, reportedly 
killed by rounds fired from an unknown location overlooking the 
village of Senlik, sparking anti-government protests throughout 
the region. 
 
Mersin - 10.10.09: A vehicle was set on fire by unidentified 
people in the Anamur District. 
 
Sirnak - 10.11.09: Security forces detained 2 people on the 
suspicion of terrorism. 
Hakkari - 10.10.09: The military branch in the Yuksekova 
District of Hakkari was attacked by unidentified people with 
hand grenades. There was no loss of life or property in the 
incident. 
 
Tunceli - 10.10.09: Almost 20,000 people held a peaceful 
anti-government demonstration to protest the ongoing dam 
construction. 
 
Adana - 10.09.09: Unidentified people attempted to set 6 
vehicles on fire, which were parked at parking lots of an 
apartment in Barajyolu Parish (North of Adana). 
 
Zap - 10.07.09: A pro-Kurdish news channel reports that the 
Seve, Petrot, and Kinayis areas of the Zap Region were bombed by 
Turkish artillery teams for 3 hours. 
 
Sanliurfa - 10.07.09: Unidentified people attacked a branch of a 
bank with bomb. 
 
Sanliurfa - 10.06.09: Unidentified people set on fire a civilian 
vehicle in Siverek District. 
 
Mersin - 10.06.09: Unidentified people set fire to 6 vehicles in 
Toroslar and Cumhuriyet Parishes of Yenisehir District. 
 
Malatya - 10.05.09: A heavy construction machine belonging to a 
private company was set on fire by unidentified people. 
 
¶5. Illegal migrant arrests: 
 
10.02.09 Through10.05.09: Security forces captured and deported 
523 illegal migrants from the following regions: Iranian Border, 
Agri, Syrian Border, Greek Border, Bitlis, Erzurum, Izmir, 
Mugla, Sirnak, Van, Balikesir, Canakkale, Kilis, Hakkari and 
Edirne. 
 
10.07.09 through10.11.09: Security forces captured and deported 
502 illegal migrants from the following regions: Aegean Coast, 
Greek Border, Iraqi Border, Iranian Border, Adana, Aydin, Mugla, 
Igdir, Van, Edirne, Hatay, Hakkari, Canakkale, Sirnak, 
Gaziantep, Artvin, Agri, Elazig Syrian Border.  7 Turks, who 
were assisting them, were also detained in the operations. 
 
¶6. Anti-crime operations: 
 
Diyarbakir - 10.12.09: The Diyarbakir Police Department's 
anti-smuggling and organized crime unit has conducted raids in 
nine provinces as part of an investigation into several 
Democratic Society Party (DTP)-run municipalities, related 
institutions and Diyar Inc., an institution established by the 
Diyarbakir Metropolitan Municipality. Security forces detained 
35 DTP members in the recent anti-fraud operations, 11 of whom 
were later arrested. 
 
Sanliurfa - 10.09.09: Security forces seized 200 rounds of 
Kalashnikov rifle ammunition at a road check point and detained 
one person. 
 
¶7. Counter-narcotic operations: 
 
Kilis - 10.12.09: Security forces seized 600 units of drug pills 
and detained a person. 
 
Van - 10.12.09: Security forces seized 21 kilograms of hashish 
and detained one person. 
 
Hatay - 10.12.09: Security forces seized 12 kilograms of hashish 
and detained 2 people who were later arrested. 
 
Erzurum - 10.10.09: Security forces detained 12 people in an 
anti-narcotic operation, 7 of whom were later arrested. 
 
 
ADANA 00000062  005 OF 005 
 
 
Bingol - 10.09.09: Security forces seized 5 kilograms of hashish 
and detained 3 people, 2 of whom were later arrested. 
 
Sanliurfa - 10.07.09: Security forces seized 105 kilograms of 
hashish and detained 3 people. 
 
Van - 10.07.09: Security forces seized 39 kilograms of hashish 
and detained 1 person. 
 
Bingol - 10.06.09:  Security forces seized 567 kilograms of 
hashish, 135 seeds of Indian hemp, 45 kilograms of heroin, 12 
tons of smuggled tea, and 150 boxes of smuggled cigarettes in 
the first 9 months of 2009. Security forces detained 931 people 
in the operations. 
 
Diyarbakir - 10.06.09: Security forces seized 316 kilograms of 
hashish in 15 separate operations conducted against street 
vendors. 
 
Malatya  - 10.06.09: Security forces seized 7,250 drug pills. 
 
Elazig - 10.06.09: Security forces seized 5 kilograms of hashish 
and arrested 1 person. 
 
Van - 10.06.09: Security forces seized 45 kilograms of hashish 
and arrested 1 person. 
 
Van - 10.05.09: Security forces seized 37 kilograms of hashish 
and detrained 1 person. 
 
Diyarbakir - 10.05.09: Security forces seized 28 kilograms of 
hashish. 
DARNELL