09BAGHDAD1856
SECOND MEETING OF SERVICES AND INFORMATION
Thu Jul 09 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO5146
RR RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDH RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #1856/01 1901521
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 091521Z JUL 09 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3865
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 001856 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID ECON EINV ETRD IZ PREL
SUBJECT: SECOND MEETING OF SERVICES AND INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGY JOINT COORDINATION COMMITTEE MEETING 
 
REF: A. BAGHDAD 00427 
     ¶B. BAGHDAD 00297 
     ¶C. BAGHDAD 00399 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) Deputy Prime Minister Rafi Al Eissawi and EMIN Marc 
Wall convened the second meeting of the Strategic Framework 
Agreement (SFA) Services and Information Technology Joint 
Coordination Committee (JCC) on July 6, 2009.  Both sides 
highlighted the continued significance of the SFA as the 
foundation of a strong bilateral relationship and the 
positive impact the Services and Information Technology JCC 
is having on the lives of Iraqi citizens.  Notably, Eissawi 
was adamant that the Iraqi co-chairs of the six 
implementation working groups (WGs) remain focused on 
identifying priorities, developing practical plans to achieve 
those priorities, supporting the USG,s efforts to build 
capacity within ministries and among professionals in various 
fields, and providing recommendations to overcome any 
challenges facing their WGs. 
 
---------------------------------- 
OVERVIEW: SFA STRATEGIC ENGAGEMENT 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) On July 6, 2009, EMIN Ambassador Marc Wall and 
Deputy Prime Minister (DPM) Rafi Al Eissawi hosted the second 
meeting of the Strategic Framework Agreement (SFA) Services 
and Information Technology Joint Coordination Committee 
(JCC).  Iraqi media was present throughout.  They received 
presentations from each of the six implementation working 
groups (WGs) ) electricity and essential services; 
agriculture and water; transportation; health; environment; 
and communications and information technology ) on their 
activities since the last JCC meeting on March 28. 
 
¶3. (SBU) In his opening remarks, Eissawi expressed 
appreciation for Wall,s strong support and enthusiasm for 
the Services and Information Technology JCC and welcomed 
Ambassador Patricia Haslach as the in-coming JCC co-chair. 
He noted that while the U.S. military is disengaging from 
Iraq, the USG and Government of Iraq (GoI) are focusing on 
&re-engagement on the strategic side8 through cooperation, 
coordination, and a strong relationship based on the SFA ) a 
message that Vice President Joseph Biden reinforced on his 
recent visit to Iraq and that Prime Minister Nouri Al Maliki 
will emphasize during his upcoming trip to Washington. 
Eissawi underscored the importance of focusing on civilian 
efforts with the Iraqi ministries in light of the U.S. 
military withdrawal. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Wall stated that nothing symbolizes the U.S.-Iraqi 
relationship better than the SFA, which provides a solid 
foundation for all non-military efforts in Iraq.  He added 
that activities under the SFA ) and as a result of the 
Services and Information Technology JCC efforts in particular 
) touch Iraqi lives directly.  Wall noted that the Prime 
Minister will likely highlight these achievements during his 
upcoming Washington trip and that Iraqi business leaders will 
build upon these accomplishments when they visit the United 
States this fall.  He emphasized the continued importance of 
creating an environment hospitable to private investment for 
developing a robust, diverse national economy. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Before turning to Iraqi WG co-chairs for progress 
reports, Eissawi requested that each official: focus on 
priorities and &plans to achieve priorities;8 identify 
challenges facing his or her group; and provide 
recommendations to address those challenges.  He repeated 
this request several times throughout the meeting, making it 
clear that he wants to maintain the JCC,s momentum, leverage 
U.S. assistance to develop ministerial capacity, and focus on 
QU.S. assistance to develop ministerial capacity, and focus on 
future deliverables that can continue to impact positively 
the lives of Iraqi people. 
 
---------------------------------- 
ELECTRICITY AND ESSENTIAL SERVICES 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Reporting on the work of the Electricity and 
Essential Services WG, Ministry of Municipalities and Public 
Works Deputy Minister Ayad Ibrahim Alsafy highlighted the 
group,s focus on developing technologies for clean water and 
electricity production, as well as obtaining new technologies 
to treat sewer water and waste. He characterized sewage 
treatment as &catastrophic,8 noting that only 10 percent of 
the urban population has access to clean water and that there 
are no factories for recycling or solid waste management. 
 
BAGHDAD 00001856  002 OF 003 
 
 
U.S. co-chair Ms. Eva-Marie Wohn outlined the U.S. support to 
this WG, including establishing a legal and regulatory 
environment hospitable to private investment and developing 
an &electricity master plan8 that looks out at both 3- and 
10-year frames.  Also, she noted the importance of passing 
and implementing the draft electricity law. On the topic of 
investments in electricity, DPM Eissawi recognized the 
current situation with General Electric and Siemens and said 
that the Government of Iraq is working these issues to get 
financing for these two projects. 
 
------ 
HEALTH 
------ 
 
¶7. (SBU) Deputy Minister of Health Dr. Issam Namiq Abdulla 
reported that the Health WG has focused attention on 
technical abilities, basic services, ambulatory care, and 
communications, including a number of programs at the 
workforce level in key areas.  Issam mentioned quality 
assurance for training in hospital administration, financial 
administration, and nursing, and U.S. co-chair Dr. Lawrence 
¶J. Furman noted that Iraqis are receiving laboratory and 
epidemiological training in Iraq and clinic/hospital 
management training at two facilities in the United States. 
Furman said that developing &centers of excellence8 in Iraq 
-- whether at existing or new facilities -- would help to 
attract Iraqi medical personnel, including those who have 
left the country, to Iraq.  The WG will also focus on 
securing basic utilities and services that will enable 
facilities to operate on a sustained basis; for example, 
medical facilities should not rely on generators as their 
sole source of power.  Eissawi thanked the WG co-chairs for 
identifying needs and asked them to develop a plan &with 
practical steps8 to address those challenges. 
 
----------- 
ENVIRONMENT 
----------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) Deputy Minister of Environment Dr. Kamal H. Latif 
emphasized the need for training, as well as improved 
laboratory testing and information-sharing, and stressed the 
importance of evaluating the current environmental situation 
(including infrastructure requirements), developing a 
national strategy with priorities and a plan, and drafting 
and implementing legislation. U.S. co-chair Ms. Ruth Hall 
reinforced these points by outlining agreed areas of 
cooperation: field sampling; strategic planning; laboratory 
analytical capabilities; commercial and environmental 
legislation, regulations and policies; and bilateral 
exchanges.  She highlighted that 25 Iraqis received training 
in ground and surface water monitoring and that remote 
sensing water equipment is ready for transfer to the GOI.  A 
bilateral work plan was agreed on June 23, 2009 with 
Environment Minister Narmin Othman. 
 
-------------- 
TRANSPORTATION 
-------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) The Transportation Working Group is the only group 
of the JCC that has been unable to convene to date.  The 
report on the Transportation WG,s activities, as provided by 
Advisor to the Transportation Minister Mr. Ismat Amr Jieyad, 
focused on a range of issues, including drinking water, power 
generation, and a duty-free area within Baghdad International 
Airport.  Eissawi expressed concern that these projects were 
going on prior to the SFA.  He noted that during his recent 
trip to Washington, he met with the U.S. Secretary of 
Transportation and understood that the U.S. Government is 
ready to sign a Memorandum of Understanding to support 
transportation projects.  U.S. co-chair Mr. David Decarme 
noted that they should receive a copy of the MOU soon and 
that the WG could use it as a framework for specific 
projects.  He also noted that transportation projects are 
Qprojects.  He also noted that transportation projects are 
particularly capital-intensive; creating an inviting climate 
for private investment is key.  Again, Eissawi asked that the 
WG present recent accomplishment, identify challenges, and 
provide recommendations at the next JCC meeting. 
 
--------------------- 
AGRICULTURE AND WATER 
--------------------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) The Agriculture and Water WG co-chair,s top 
priority is improving capabilities as Iraqi farmers are 
&very much behind8, particularly in many highly technical 
methods and inputs. While the United States has reduced many 
burdens, he would like an easing of the Test of English as a 
Foreign Language requirement, asking for a broad program of 
 
 
*********************** 
* Missing Section 003 * 
***********************