09BRAZZAVILLE228
SUBJECT : OVERVIEW OF FRENCH AID TO THE REPUBLIC OF THE
Thu Jul 30 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Brazzaville
R 301102Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY BRAZZAVILLE
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 1499
INFO AMEMBASSY PARIS 
USEU BRUSSELS 0039
AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 
AFRICOM
AMEMBASSY KINSHASA 
AMEMBASSY NAIROBI 
AMEMBASSY BRAZZAVILLEUNCLAS BRAZZAVILLE 000228 
 
 
DEPT FOR AF/C 
NAIROBI PLEASE PASS TO USAID EAST AFRICA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID PREL CF FR
SUBJECT: SUBJECT : OVERVIEW OF FRENCH AID TO THE REPUBLIC OF THE 
CONGO 
 
¶1. (U) Summary:  In a detailed press interview, Nicolas Normand, 
French Ambassador to the ROC, described the major areas of GOF 
aid efforts in the ROC. Currently, the GOF has a multi-faceted 
aid program that focuses on intervention in infrastructure 
development, cultural advocacy, environmental issues, 
professional training and education, defense training, study 
abroad programs, and support for local projects and NGOs. End 
Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) In a lengthy press interview, done in conjunction with 
France's Bastille Day celebration and in anticipation of the 
49th anniversary of Congolese independence August 15, French 
Ambassador Nicolas Normand outlined the major subject heads of 
French assistance. 
 
3.(U) Infrastructure comprises a large proportion of GOF aid to 
ROC, with loan support towards projects such as a 20 billion CFA 
loan, with supplementary components from the European Investment 
Bank and the African development bank, to improve infrastructure 
at the port of Pointe Noire.  (COMMENT:  This loan is clearly 
and explicitly linked to the container terminal concession 
granted for a period of 27 years to the French company Groupe 
Bollore. END COMMENT.) Other GOF efforts also include a study to 
assess sanitation standards in the Congo River. 
 
¶3. (U) Environmental aid focuses on forest preservation, 
training of "ecoguards" to deter poaching, and technical support 
for climate change negotiations. The GOF provided a 2 billion 
CFA grant to establish Sangha National Park, which encompasses 
areas of the Central African Republic, Cameroon, and northern 
ROC. The French Development Agency also provided a 3.5 billion 
CFA loan to the GOC to improve management of forests in the 
southern region. 
 
¶4. (U) GOF Professional training and education efforts in the 
ROC include establishment of two professional centers that 
provide training on public works and industrial maintenance in 
Brazzaville and Pointe Noire, respectively.  These efforts stem 
from a 2007 project agreement which allocated 4 billion FCA 
towards these projects, which are aimed at debuting before 2010. 
 
¶5. (U) Health efforts of the GOF in ROC include efforts to 
support the Executive Secretary of the National Fight against 
AIDS, specifically with technical assistance personnel in the 
HIV/AIDS office, and provision of salaries for the French Red 
Cross to employ personnel at mobile treatment centers for 
HIV/AIDS in Brazzaville and Pointe-Noire.  Upcoming health 
projects include training for nurse and nurse assistants, as 
well as a feasibility study for a 4 billion CFA project to 
increase human resources in the ROC health sector. 
 
¶6. (U) French cultural advocacy efforts include management of 
two French cultural centers, in Brazzaville and Pointe Noire, 
which provide media centers, library resources, and cultural 
events to the general public.  A fund of 600,000 Euro and six 
staff manage these centers.  (COMMENT:  There is also 
cost-sharing with the Congolese government in the form of 
matching funding from the newspaper "les depeches de 
Brazzaville" which is controlled by the Congolese government. 
END COMMENT.) GOF educational outreach includes scholarships for 
sixty Congolese students (who are among the 3,000 congolese 
students in France) and an academic advising service available 
at the French cultural centers. 
 
¶7. (U) GOF aid efforts extend training and support to ROC 
defense and police sectors, with thirteen French officers and 
enlisted men posted in ROC and seven large projects in 
partnership with the ROC Ministry of Defense.  Most projects 
involve training of military, army, and police, but the GOF is 
also establishing a school for military engineering that will be 
run by the Congolese army as well as the formation of a 
Congolese regional reserve force in partnership with C.E.E.A.C. 
 
¶8. (U) Other GOF aid efforts in ROC include small grants support 
for civil society, NGO groups, and municipal projects. The GOF 
currently also provides support for maintenance of navigable 
waterways and river transportation. 
 
EASTHAM