09JAKARTA1772
EPA ADMINISTRATOR JACKSON'S OCT. 19-22 JAKARTA VIST
Thu Oct 22 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Jakarta
VZCZCXRO7034
OO RUEHDT RUEHPB
DE RUEHJA #1772/01 2951204
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 221204Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3638
INFO RUCNARF/ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 JAKARTA 001772 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR EAP, EAP/MTS, EAP/MLS, EAP/RSP, S/ECC, OES 
NSC FOR J. BADER, D. WALTON 
EPA/OIA  R.KASAT ,M.KASMAN , K.BUCKLEY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KGHG SENV ECON KDEM ID
SUBJECT: EPA ADMINISTRATOR JACKSON'S OCT. 19-22 JAKARTA VIST 
 
REF: JAKARTA 01765 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  EPA Administrator Lisa Jackson led the 
Presidential Delegation to President Yudhoyono's October 20 
inauguration.  On October 21 the Administrator held separate 
meetings and discussions with key players on the environment. 
Several officials stated that a U.S.-China deal was the key to 
success in Copenhagen.  Indonesia's Climate Change Council saw 
forest and peat as the top priority for emissions reduction, which 
could reduce emissions by 26 percent, the goal that President 
Yudhoyono announced at the G-20 in Pittsburgh.  Representatives of 
several environmental NGOs agreed with the Administrator that SBY's 
public commitment to emissions reductions provided an important 
partnership opportunity and that President Obama was in a position 
to support President Yudhoyono's goals.  October 22 the 
Administrator visited an air quality monitoring station, a component 
of Jakarta's clean air initiatives.  The Administrator assured all 
of her interlocutors that she would share their suggestions on 
future cooperation with the EPA with President Obama.  END SUMMARY. 
 
 
INAUGURATION 
 
¶2. (SBU) As reported reftel, EPA Administrator Lisa Jackson led the 
Presidential Delegation to President Yudhoyono and Vice President 
Boediono's inauguration on October 20.  Other members of the 
delegation were Ambassador Hume and Ambassador Merrill.  During his 
inaugural speech President Yudhoyono highlighted environmental 
issues facing both Indonesia and the world. 
 
JAKARTA: PARTNERING WITH THE EPA 
 
¶3. (SBU) On October 20 the Administrator met with key players on the 
environment.  Governor Fauzi Bowo and Administrator Jackson 
discussed their planned partnership. Areas under consideration for 
the partnership included air quality, clean fuels and vehicles, 
clean energy, energy efficiency (particularly in buildings), 
renewable energy, water and sanitation, waste management, green port 
construction, public information and education.  Bowo welcomed the 
partnership, explaining that the most difficult challenge he faced 
was changing the mindset of Jakarta's residents.  Much of the 
conversation focused around "Breathe Easy, Jakarta," an air quality 
management initiative.  The greatest single issue in addressing air 
pollution was transport, given that the 8-9% annual increase of new 
vehicles registered was difficult to limit.  The central government 
considered transport to be the backbone of the economy, but the 
responsibility to reduce pollution had fallen on sub-national 
governments.  In recognition of the imperative to shift to public 
transportation, Jakarta launched the TransJakarta Busway - the 
longest busway system in the world and has instituted other 
measures, such as "Car Free Day." 
 
¶4. (SBU) Administrator Jackson recognized Jakarta's progressive 
leadership, and noted that President Obama was very interested in 
the EPA supporting Jakarta's efforts.  The EPA, Jackson noted, could 
offer expertise in air quality management, such as air quality 
monitoring and emissions inventories.  She also offered to help 
facilitate and enhance existing city-to-city partnerships.  Jackson 
stressed the importance of low sulfur fuel regulations. In many 
areas such as construction of the new port and green building 
development, she highlighted the opportunity of avoiding costly 
retrofits. 
 
SENIOR ADVISOR: COPENHAGEN, CHALLENGES, COOPERATION 
 
¶5. (SBU) In her meeting with Presidential Advisor Emil Salim, Salim 
stated that China was a key player in achieving success at 
Copenhagen and asked if U.S. could make an agreement with China. 
Administrator Jackson said she would carry that message back to 
Washington.  Salim also noted that Indonesia was committed to 
getting to 26% by 2020, but had not yet calculated the amount of CO2 
being absorbed by its oceans, which made up two-thirds of the 
country. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Salim highlighted a number of challenges facing Indonesia 
as it sought to protect the environment.  The primary challenge was 
linking economic growth to environmental concerns.  Secondly, 
Indonesia had a deficit of scientific experts to drive research and 
development.  Lastly, due to decentralization of the government, the 
district level now had all the power but weak capacity.  In response 
to Salim's question on whether the U.S. model of environmental 
protection would work in Indonesia, Administrator Jackson explained 
that the EPA had strong federal laws which most states followed, 
while a few more progressive states pushed the larger government 
towards higher standards. 
 
 
JAKARTA 00001772  002 OF 002 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) Jackson told Salim that she would share his ideas on how 
the U.S. could partner with Indonesia with President Obama.  Salim 
suggested that the U.S. should consider using Indonesia as a model 
on how a developing country adapts to climate change.  Salim also 
asked for specific technical assistance on drought-resistant rice 
and adapting to rising sea levels.  Other possible areas for 
strategic cooperation were technology sharing, educational exchange, 
and investment in biodiversity protection.  Administrator Jackson 
and Ambassador Hume expressed their concern about food security, 
specifically related to fisheries, as well as a hope that Indonesia 
would adopt cleaner fuel standards for international shipping. 
 
 
NCCC: PEAT DECOMPOSITION, COPENHAGEN, WORKING WITH U.S. 
 
¶8. (SBU) The National Climate Change Council Secretary Agus Purnomo 
explained that 85 percent of Indonesia's emissions came from the 
deforestation, decomposition of open or drained peat, and forest 
fires.  Indonesia had 50 percent of the world's tropical peat, but 
58 percent of global emissions from peat decomposition, which 
amounted to 1.8 gigatons of emissions annually.  The cost of 
reducing forest and peat sector emissions was relatively low. 
Solutions to peat and forestry emissions lie in poverty alleviation 
through avoided deforestation programs.  Indonesia had a forest 
management regime, but not a peat land management regime.  Prunomo 
identified three measures in this sector that could attain 
Yudhoyono's 26% reduction target: a) sustainable forest management 
in production forests (drylands), b) a REDD program on smallholder 
dry land forest that includes alternative income for the poor, and 
c) peat land forest management.  Although emissions from energy 
generation and transport were expected to rise, both areas are 
second priorities to reducing emissions from forestry and peat. 
 
¶9. (SBU) In line with Salim, Purnomo also believed that the toughest 
issue for Copenhagen was agreement between the U.S. and China on 
national binding commitments.  Indonesia communicates often with 
China, but U.S. leadership was crucial to achieving a breakthrough. 
Purnomo also noted NCCC's desire to invite Al Gore to Indonesia, and 
Administrator Jackson agreed to convey this message. 
 
NGOS: HIGHLIGHT PROBLEMS, SUGGEST SOLUTIONS, WELCOME EPA 
 
¶10. (SBU) At a roundtable with representatives from environment 
focused NGOs, the participants outlined both problems and solutions. 
 Several NGOs said that transportation in Indonesia's cities was a 
significant and growing source of greenhouse gases and other 
pollutants. Another rep argued for the need for better peat land 
management.  At the same time, they pointed out the need for 
financial incentives to avoid deforestation and a national 
regulatory framework for REDD.  On the positive side, one 
participant highlighted electrification of rural areas using clean 
energy technology was a green-growth opportunity. 
 
¶11. (SBU) A common concern voiced by NGOs was that President 
Yudhoyono was not going to make headway achieving his higher 
emissions target without significant assistance from developed 
countries.  The more concrete support that was offered early on, the 
easier it would be for Yudhoyono to achieve his emissions targets. 
One environmental economist noted the scarcity of research and data 
on greenhouse gas emissions and climate change impacts in Indonesia. 
 This presented yet another possible area for partnership and 
capacity building. 
 
SITE VISIT TO CLEAN AIR PROJECT 
 
¶12. Administrator Jackson visited an existing air quality monitoring 
station managed by the City of Jakarta. During the visit, City of 
Jakarta staff highlighted the lack of operational monitors 
throughout Jakarta and how information from the monitors is 
collected and reported.  Staff also highlighted steps the City of 
Jakarta has taken to improve air quality, such as "Car Free Day." 
Jackson confirmed EPA's commitment to offer technical assistance and 
work with the City of Jakarta to improve air quality management. 
 
¶13. (U) Administrator Jackson has cleared this message. 
 
Hume#