09KABUL1565
UNAMA HIGHLIGHTS NEED FOR FAIRNESS AND CREDIBILITY
Thu Jun 18 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kabul
P 181403Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9554
INFO AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS KABUL 001565 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM PGOV AF
SUBJECT: UNAMA HIGHLIGHTS NEED FOR FAIRNESS AND CREDIBILITY 
IN CAMPAIGNS 
 
REF: A. KABUL 1299 
     ¶B. KABUL 922 
 
¶1.  On June 15, UNAMA SRSG Kai Eide issued a statement in 
anticipation of the June 16 opening of the campaign period 
for the August presidential and provincial council elections. 
 Eide called on candidates to campaign with dignity and 
fairness, noting the responsibility of all candidates to 
ensure the upcoming electoral cycle strengthens the Afghan 
peoples' confidence in the democratic process.  Eide's 
statement builds on existing lines of effort to ensure the 
candidates are committed to ensuring a credible, secure and 
inclusive electoral process.  The Afghan press has not yet 
widely publicized Eide's comments. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
DISCOURSE ON ISSUES AND NON-INTERFERENCE 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  Eide urged candidates to focus on issues, suggesting that 
each candidate should present a vision for the future of 
Afghanistan.  He noted that a public debate focusing on key 
political challenges and proposals on how to move forward 
would allow the Afghan people to choose between policies 
instead of individuals.  He also stressed that "intimidation, 
inflammatory language and violence of any sort have no place 
in this election campaign." Eide cited the significance of 
supporting the May presidential decree on non-interference by 
government institutions and officials (ref A), asserting that 
all candidates must have the right to campaign without 
interference to ensure a credible election process with an 
acceptable result.  Eide concluded by noting that while 
Afghan authorities will administer the elections, the 
international community is supportive of a fair and credible 
election process. 
 
------------------------- 
GUIDELINES FOR CANDIDATES 
------------------------- 
 
¶3.  Eide's statement follows the SRSG's recent publication of 
Essential Guidelines Applicable to Conducting the Electoral 
Process.  The guidelines, which Eide has raised with 
President Karzai as well as opposition candidates Dr. 
Abdullah Abdullah and Ashraf Ghani, lay out a recommended 
course for candidates, their officials, agents, party members 
and supporters.   Focusing on positive actions, the 
guidelines highlight the need during the campaign period for 
candidates to act with responsibility, respect the rights and 
freedoms of other candidates to campaign without fear, 
respect the rights of voters to take part in political 
activities and cast votes freely, to respect freedom of the 
press, abide by the Presidential Decree on Non-Government 
Interference, contribute to a peaceful atmosphere and prevent 
intimidation or violence.  The guidelines restate the 
requirements of compliance with the candidate finance 
regulations (ref B) and avoiding coercion, or intimidation. 
 
--------------------- 
AND CODES OF CONDUCT 
--------------------- 
 
¶4.  The Independent Election Commission (IEC) also has a code 
of conduct for candidates and political parties.  All 
candidates were required to sign the code of conduct during 
the registration process.  The IEC's code mirrors UNAMA's 
guidelines, focusing on ensuring ethical and legal standards 
to regulate activities during the electoral process.   The 19 
rights and duties, which range from respecting the principals 
of Islam and the provisions of the constitution to refraining 
from making false complaints and the secrecy of the vote, are 
an important step toward a credible election.  Adding weight 
to the code, the IEC and the Electoral Complaints Commission 
(ECC) will consider violations of the code as electoral 
offenses, subject to ECC sanctions against the candidate in 
breach.  Depending on the significance of the violation, the 
ECC's authority allows for the possibility of 
disqualification from the current election. 
 
EIKENBERRY