09LEIPZIG27
CDU-FDP TO FORM COALITION IN SAXONY
Mon Aug 31 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Leipzig
P 311633Z AUG 09
FM AMCONSUL LEIPZIG
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0166
INFO FRG COLLECTIVE
AMCONSUL LEIPZIGUNCLAS LEIPZIG 000027 
 
 
FOR EUR/CE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV GM
SUBJECT: CDU-FDP TO FORM COALITION IN SAXONY 
 
REF: LEIPZIG 25 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (U) The Free Democratic Party (FDP) having won 10 percent of 
the vote in Saxony state elections August 30, is primed to 
replace the Social Democratic Party (SPD) here as preferred 
coalition partner for the Christian Democratic Union (CDU), 
which won 40.2 percent.  The SDP's poor results at 10 percent, 
shows it is not a major party in this state.  SPD party chairman 
Thomas Jurk announced his resignation August 31.  Although the 
CDU can form coalitions with the SPD or FDP, its declared goal 
is to govern with the FDP.  A CDU-FDP coalition is also in the 
interest of the national CDU and FDP, both of which hope the 
August 30 results will boost chances for a similar outcome in 
the September 27 national elections.  End summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
CDU-FDP Try to Pave the Way for a National Coalition 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶2. (U) In Saxony's August 30 state elections, the CDU is the 
clearly dominant party (40.2 percent -- the same as 2005), with 
The Left Party a distant second with 20.6 percent (- 3 percent), 
the SPD 10.4 percent (same as 2005), the FDP 10 percent (+ 4.1), 
the Greens 6.4 percent (+ 1), and the NPD 5.6 percent (- 3.6). 
The results mean the CDU and FDP can fulfill their shared goal 
of forming a coalition in Saxony, hoping to boost both parties 
in the national elections four weeks away.  FDP politicians told 
us they intended to have a coalition agreement signed days 
before the national elections. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
NPD Retains Some Seats, Despite Losses 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (U) The right-wing extremist NPD succeeded, for the second 
time, in overcoming the 5 percent threshold for entry into 
Saxony's parliament despite a loss of 3.6 percent from their 
results in the 2005 elections Hard campaigning against the 
unpopular social reform Hartz IV gave them a boost in 2005.  The 
party's ineffectiveness and criminal activities of some of its 
representatives probably disappointed some of its former 
supporters, although it maintained a voter base of about 100,000 
people.  This is the first time the NPD has managed to re-enter 
a state parliament. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Saxony remains strong "CDU" territory even though 
support has waned over time -- they won 58.1 percent in 1994 and 
56.9 percent in 1999.  The Left Party retained its position as 
second strongest, while the SPD, with results similar to the 
FDP, is actually one of the "smaller" parties in Saxony.  The 
results in Saxony breathe life into the notion that the CDU-FDP 
is a viable political constellation.  Chancellor Merkel and her 
CDU can take some comfort from the CDU's success in Saxony, 
although there was never any doubt of these results here. End 
Comment. 
 
¶5.  This message was coordinated with U.S. Embassy, Berlin. 
 
BRUCKERK