09RABAT490
MOROCCAN ENTHUSIASM FOR PRESIDENT'S CAIRO
Wed Jun 10 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Rabat
VZCZCXRO5763
RR RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHDH RUEHKUK RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHRB #0490/01 1612311
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 102311Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY RABAT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0254
INFO RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVE
RUCNMGH/MAGHREB COLLECTIVE
RUEHDK/AMEMBASSY DAKAR 0503
RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD 1078
RUEHJA/AMEMBASSY JAKARTA 0436
RUEHKL/AMEMBASSY KUALA LUMPUR 0058UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 RABAT 000490 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR R (MDAVIDSON) AND NEA/PPD (ASOMERSET) 
STATE ALSO FOR IIP/NEA-SCA (CHIGGINS) 
DUBAI FOR MEDIA HUB 
LONDON FOR MOC 
 
E.O.12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL OIIP KPAO MO
SUBJECT: MOROCCAN ENTHUSIASM FOR PRESIDENT'S CAIRO 
SPEECH REMAINS HIGH: CONTACT FEEDBACK AND EDITORIAL 
REACTION 
 
¶1. (U) Summary:  At five separate events organized 
around President Obama's speech last week, Mission 
Morocco not only saw and heard the extraordinarily 
positive reaction of Moroccans first hand, but also 
helped shape insights that found their way directly 
into the media.  The Mission also amplified the 
message through new media, as well as traditional 
email outreach, and print, radio and TV interviews. 
 Respondents appreciated the early mention of 
Morocco and the deft use of Quranic quotes.  Many 
favored the comments on Israel-Palestine, although 
some felt they did not go far enough, and were 
skeptical that actions could match words.  Press 
commentary tracked these themes closely, striking 
overwhelmingly positive notes about the tone and 
ambition of the speech, with a healthy dose of "the 
proof is in the pudding."  Several commentators used 
the speech as an opportunity to criticize what they 
perceive as a lack of democratic values in the Arab 
World.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Mission Hosts Five Viewing Events 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) A group of prominent opinion leaders and 
media commentators, both men and women, gathered at 
the home of the Charge d'Affaires to watch the 
President's June 4 speech.  Casablanca Consul 
General Millard hosted a viewing party and lunch at 
her residence for five prominent newspaper 
publishers, who among themselves account for seven 
newspapers and a radio station.  The Political 
Counselor hosted a group to watch the speech, 
including the editor of the main Islamist newspaper, 
a local council candidate in upcoming elections, and 
a Jewish leader of the Rabat community.  USAID 
hosted a group of young people to watch the speech, 
mainly university students aged 21-31.  About 20 
journalists from across Morocco, participating in a 
workshop with a visiting U.S. speaker, watched the 
speech together at Dar America in Casablanca. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Opinion leaders embrace the speech 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Key opinion leaders were enormously 
impressed, intellectually and emotionally, 
emphasizing repeatedly the "humanity" and "humanist 
spirit" that the President expressed in Cairo, and 
the clarity and accessibility of his ideas.  The 
director of the Moroccan International Relations 
Institute (IMRI) described the speech as historic. 
The deputy head of Morocco's most influential 
business council felt the President had laid a 
strong foundation for tackling the Israel-Palestine 
problem first, which nearly all saw as essential to 
solving broader regional problems.  A lawyer, the 
first woman to deliver a lecture at the king's 
annual Ramadan lecture series on Islam, welcomed 
Obama's emphasis on women's education and women's 
rights, and on human rights generally.  They all 
spoke in near-reverent tones of the President's 
clarity, honesty, and intelligence.  Several 
commented that they just hoped he remained President 
long enough to achieve his goals. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) One attendee, a medical doctor who writes 
about women and Islam and who is also married to a 
top MFA official, published an article on the speech 
in the June 9 edition of Le Soir newspaper.  She 
stated that, through his speech, Obama had 
"destroyed the idea of a clash of civilizations" and 
called for a new Muslim "critical conscience" 
capable of rising to challenges such as democratic 
governance, human rights, education and reformist 
approaches to questions related to Islam.  Obama is 
not going to resolve all the problems in the Muslim 
 
RABAT 00000490  002 OF 005 
 
 
world, she said, but noted that his speech presented 
some "passageways" that could help find a way 
forward. 
 
-------------------------------- 
News Media Directors Bowled Over 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (U) In Casablanca, the reactions of the 
assembled media moguls were equally positive, with 
participants using expressions such as "seductive" 
and "inspirational" to describe the speech; not one 
attendee expressed disappointment. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) One prominent independent newspaper 
director admittedly freely that he was unable to be 
objective about President Obama, whom he adored.  He 
stated several times that many people in the Muslim 
world were going to be "disturbed" by the speech, 
challenging as it did many stereotypes and 
preconceptions about the U.S.  Another independent 
newspaper director stated (approvingly) that the 
rhetoric was typical Obama, while cautioning that 
one had to get beyond the seductive words; actions, 
especially on the Israeli-Palestinian negotiations, 
were essential, and the window of opportunity was 
narrow.  This news editor published an editorial in 
the following day's paper that closely tracked the 
(overwhelmingly positive) discussion the group had 
over lunch.  A third attendee felt Obama's target 
audience was not Muslim governments but the Muslim 
masses, and he praised the President's use of 
Quranic quotes as an effective way to beat Bin Laden 
at his own game. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Staff met separately with a top editor at 
2M TV on Friday, who said it was a good speech but 
in view of the obvious change in foreign policy, 
i.e. a new, firmer U.S. tone towards the Israelis, 
Barack Obama should be more afraid of his allies 
than of traditional U.S. enemies.  The U.S. 
President withdrawing unconditional support was a 
shock to the Israelis, he said, which could lead to 
Israel making a stupid mistake (like attacking Iran) 
in panicked reaction. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
Islamist Party Newspaper Director is Impressed 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶8.  (SBU) The director of an Islamist party 
newspaper (a former Fulbright grantee who can be 
stridently critical of U.S. foreign policy) was 
impressed that Obama did not use word "terrorism" 
but rather "violent extremism," which is more 
acceptable and does not label Muslims.  He 
appreciated the president's use of verses from the 
Quran, and found positive both the timetable for 
withdrawal from Iraq and the discussion on Iran.  He 
could find nothing in the speech to criticize, only 
what was not included.  In this category he put lack 
of a timetable for resolution of the Israeli- 
Palestinian issue, or any mention of Israel taking 
down the security barriers; he also felt the 
speech's discussion of HAMAS was no different from 
the Bush administration's stance.  Furthermore, he 
asserted that Obama's mention of religious freedom 
meant Christian evangelicals having the right to 
proselytize, and that Morocco has had problems with 
that. 
 
¶9.  (U) One current political candidate loved the 
speech and believed that 95 percent of Muslims 
around the world would approve of it.  He was 
enthusiastic about Obama's emphasis on education, 
scientific innovation and mutual exchanges.  His 
only complaint was Obama's failure to suggest using 
sanctions against countries that did not respect 
human rights. 
 
RABAT 00000490  003 OF 005 
 
 
 
¶10.  (SBU) The leader of Rabat's Jewish community 
was impressed with the president's emphasis on the 
core values of the three religions (Islam, Judaism 
and Christianity).  In response to the Islamist 
party newspaper editor's comments on Israel, he said 
that one can't expect the U.S. to impose solutions 
on any part of the world.  He also liked Obama's 
comment that the "use of power and aggression" will 
not solve the problems and that we need more 
diplomacy.  Finally, he applauded the speech's 
support of women's rights as well as other basic 
human rights, and said that the economy is vital to 
human rights because the first need is for jobs. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
USAID listens to youth representatives 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶11.  (U) University students appreciated the 
President's focus on the role of youth in building 
and changing the future they want.  They urged more 
development programs in the Muslim world as the way 
for the President to "concretize" his speech.  They 
also stressed the importance of encouraging 
scientific research and exchange programs between 
the Muslim world and the United States.  Some of the 
students also expressed skepticism and even 
cynicism, attributing U.S. motivations to a desire 
to "make the world safe for McDonald's and Coca 
Cola."  Their views may reflect heavy student 
involvement in periodic boycott efforts against 
multinational companies, for example during the Gaza 
conflict several months ago. 
 
--------------------- 
Journalists Speak Out 
--------------------- 
 
¶12.  (U) Journalists appreciated the Quranic 
quotations and felt that Islam (finally) had been 
included as the equal of Christianity and Judaism. 
They also liked the distinction between "violent 
extremists" and Islamists, and they agreed that 
terrorism is everyone's enemy and fighting it is 
legitimate for all.  They found Obama balanced, 
thoughtful, well prepared, and confident (in the 
"Yes, we can!" mode).  They also liked the 
president's call to youth to work to change the 
world, and his emphasis on women's rights. 
Reflecting a common concern, one journalist found 
Obama's statement on U.S. policy toward Israel 
unclear, especially on settlements. 
 
---------------------- 
The Wisdom of Teachers 
---------------------- 
 
¶13.  (U) Senior teachers gathered at a regional 
meeting in Rabat took a break to watch the speech, 
and a PAS local employee noted the following 
reactions: 
-- The humanity and realism of Mr. Obama are 
outstanding, worth considering and dealing with; 
-- Now Muslims can listen to what U.S. says since 
Obama showed a deep understanding of what Islam is, 
unlike many U.S. presidents before him; 
-- Now the idea of considering the U.S. as an enemy 
is no longer appropriate; 
-- If Obama can force Israel to give Palestinians 
their legitimate rights as he implied, fighting 
terrorism can be then a common goal of both the U.S. 
and the Muslim world; 
-- Obama's view of the necessity of progress through 
education and business development is highly 
appreciated; and 
-- The idea of interfaith dialogue and mutual 
understanding and respect by means of more cultural 
and exchange programs is a crucial starting point. 
 
RABAT 00000490  004 OF 005 
 
 
 
¶14.  (U) At the same time, these teachers reflected 
widespread Moroccan concern that the key issue is 
Israel-Palestine, and that Obama may not be prepared 
to go far enough: 
-- Obama should not ask Palestinians to pay for what 
others did to the Jews (Shoah), and 
-- Obama criticized some Muslims for not recognizing 
Israel but did not say a word on Israel ignoring two 
UN resolutions, which puts the latter above 
international law. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
"Man on the street" comments in Casablanca 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶15.  (U) A local employee from the Public Affairs 
Section in Casablanca noted the following exchanges: 
 
a. In a cafe, where everyone was focused on Al 
Jazeera news broadcasts: "The Americans are at last 
back to reason."  "Let's hope they put Obama's words 
into practice."  "I thought he was sincere and 
poignant."  "Thank God, the Americans are talking 
about the necessity of a Palestinian state."  "But 
how is he going to force Israel to stop 
settlements?"  "Let's first hope HAMAS gets back to 
reason after America's good intentions." 
 
b.  Outside the cafe, where campaigners for the 
upcoming local elections were distributing candidate 
posters, a bystander called out, "Did you hear Obama 
saying that you advocate democracy only when you are 
out of power; once in power, you become cruel in 
suppressing the rights of others.  You'd better do 
it right." 
 
c.  At a downtown mosque frequented by Islamists, 
where a group of young men were gathered for Friday 
prayers, the Quran reading that preceded the sermon 
was:  "O mankind!  We have created you male and a 
female, and we have made you into nations and tribes 
so that you may know one another" -- the same verse 
quoted by President in his speech.  "They should 
recite it the way Obama used it yesterday," said one 
young man.  "Do you mean in English?"  "No, I mean 
the emotional and eloquent way Obama uttered it." 
Another man declared, "I appreciate his honesty when 
he said that American views about Muslims would not 
change overnight." 
 
------------------ 
New Media Outreach 
------------------ 
 
¶16.  (U) In addition to posting IIP's SMS Arabic 
option on our websites and on the websites and blog 
and Facebook pages of several contacts, the Mission 
also distributed the speech to hundreds of contacts 
in Arabic and French and asked for their opinion . 
Following are some representative comments: 
-- The speech has achieved many political gains at 
the level of U.S.-Arab Muslim relationships. 
 
-- Obama's speech seduces, but it does not conquer. 
 
-- The gap is deep between Arabs and Muslims' 
dreams and the U.S. dream.  Arabs would like to 
return to a specific period of history to convince 
Americans of the fairness of their own cause, while 
Americans would like to jump voluntarily over 
certain important historical phases and convince 
Arabs and Muslims to forget the past. 
 
------------------------ 
Press Editorial Reaction 
------------------------ 
 
¶17.  (U) The Mission made a substantial effort to 
 
RABAT 00000490  005 OF 005 
 
 
shape public opinion via direct engagement with the 
press, as well as by reaching out to media opinion 
leaders, as outlined above.  An exclusive interview 
with leading Arabic daily Assabah by the Charge, a 
live television interview in French by IO David Ranz 
during the prime-time news bulletin on the evening 
of the speech, and lengthy radio interviews (in 
French and Arabic respectively) by PolCouns Craig 
Karp and ConGenOff Matthew Lehrfeld enabled the 
Mission to link key messages of the speech to the 
U.S.-Moroccan partnership. 
 
¶18.  (U) Editorial response to the speech has been 
voluminous and overwhelmingly positive, and 
continues nearly a week after the speech took place. 
 In addition to sounding many of the main themes 
mentioned above, some journalists are focusing 
particular attention on President Obama's theme of 
democracy, noting that the closest U.S. allies in 
the region,  such as Obama's host Egypt and Saudi 
Arabia, are hardly good exemplars.  As one newspaper 
director wrote, "If only there were half the 
democracy in the Arab world that exists in India, 
the world's poorest country, there would be no Bin 
Laden, no Zawahiri, no Abu Musaab, no Abu Qatada, 
and no youth to bomb Madrid's trains on a beautiful 
morning."  Several newspaper commentators also took 
critics of the speech to task, saying that President 
Obama had extended his hand in friendship, and 
Muslims should respond in kind. 
 
JACKSON