09RABAT928
UNDER SECRETARY OF EDUCATION MARTHA
Tue Nov 24 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Rabat
VZCZCXYZ0006
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHRB #0928/01 3281803
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 241803Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY RABAT
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 0848UNCLAS RABAT 000928 
 
SIPDIS 
TOPEC 
 
STATE NEA/PI AND NEA/MAG 
STATE PLS PASS DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION - U/S 
MKANTER, DAS ALEWIS AND CHIEF OF STAFF ACEJA 
USAID/W FOR ME/MEA - GLAUDATO AND SDAVIS-CLEMONS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID SOCI MO
SUBJECT: UNDER SECRETARY OF EDUCATION MARTHA 
KANTER'S VISIT TO MOROCCO 
 
¶1.  Summary:  From November 1 through 4, 2009, Under 
Secretary of Education Martha Kanter, Deputy 
Assistant Secretary for International and Foreign 
Language Education Andre Lewis, and the Under 
Secretary's Chief of Staff, Alejandra Ceja, 
represented the U.S. Department of Education at a 
series of visits with Moroccan students, Moroccan 
government representatives and members of civil 
society, as well as at the Forum for the Future 
(FfF) held in Marrakesh, Morocco.  The Forum is an 
annual gathering of G8, European and BMENA Foreign 
Ministers with civil society to discuss and advance 
reforms.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  Forum for the Future:  Under Secretary Kanter 
attended the opening session of the Forum on 
November 2 and the principal event on November 3, at 
which Secretary of State Hillary Clinton spoke. 
When the Secretary was in other meetings, Under 
Secretary Kanter chaired the Economic Reform 
Thematic Group for the USG and represented the USG 
in the Political Reform Thematic Group. 
 
¶3.  Meetings during Forum for the Future:  Under 
Secretary Kanter actively engaged in side meetings 
and informal discussions with representatives from 
Yemen, Jordan, Canada, the UK and other delegations 
throughout her time at the Forum.  After the Forum, 
Under Secretary Kanter participated in an interview 
for posting on the embassy's YouTube site. 
 
¶4.  Site Visits to USAID and Peace Corps activities: 
Genuinely interested in the Moroccan educational 
system and the views and needs of Moroccan youth, 
Under Secretary Kanter actively participated in a 
series of visits on November 2 and 3 to several 
sites: 
 
a.  Marrakesh Girl's Dormitory:  The dormitory 
visited is run by a local NGO that has allowed rural 
girls to attend university.  U/S Kanter met with the 
president and members of NGOs, women caretakers, and 
26 students.  The students are young women from 
simple backgrounds and limited means who have 
demonstrated strong academic ability and 
determination.  These young women are among the 11 
percent of students across Morocco who complete 
their baccalaureate degrees and enter some form of 
tertiary education.  This visit highlighted a true 
development success as the originally USG financed 
activities are now being supported, financed and 
expanded under the leadership of Moroccan ministries 
and local NGOs.  During this visit, U/S Kanter was 
accompanied by her DAS for International Education, 
her Chief of Staff, a State Department DAS for 
European Affairs, the USAID Morocco Mission Director 
and the USAID/Washington Chief Operating Office 
representative.  U/S Kanter was impressed with the 
level of academic determination of the girls and 
engaged them in a lively discussion. 
 
b.  Peace Corps Volunteer Sites:  U/S Kanter visited 
two sites in Ait Ourir, a small town located 37 kms 
(22 miles) from Marrakesh.  During these visits she 
was accompanied by the Ambassador and Mrs. Kaplan, 
the DAS for International Education, the Chief of 
Staff, the State DAS for European Affairs, the USAID 
Morocco Mission Director, the representative from 
USAID/Washington's Chief Operating Office and the 
Peace Corps Morocco's Director.  The Youth Center is 
a Moroccan Ministry of Youth and Sports facility 
that is supported by Peace Corps Volunteer Kate 
Tsunoda.  Kate teaches English at the center and 
helps engage the youth in after-school developmental 
activities, such as leading drama and music clubs. 
The regional delegate from the Ministry of Youth and 
Sports, the Director of the Youth Center, and 
students greeted the party with traditional Moroccan 
drumming, tea and sweets.  The delegation was 
treated to a welcome rap song and then engaged in a 
question and answer session focused on what Moroccan 
youth are hoping to see from the Obama 
administration. 
 
c.  U/S Kanter, the Ambassador and their delegation 
also visited a Women's Association called Tadamon- 
Tifaout ("shining dawn" in the local Berber 
 
dialect), supported by Peace Corps Volunteer Barbara 
Eberhardt.  Barbara helps the group of 32 women with 
product development, sales techniques, business 
development and has recently helped them display 
their crafts at an exhibit in Fez.  The association 
has on display in its "two-room" workshop all of the 
stitched items the women make, including hand- 
stitched purses to fill an order of 1,000 from 
Abercrombie and Fitch.  Sitting down to Moroccan tea 
and sweets, U/S Kanter, the Ambassador and the 
delegation engaged in a discussion with the women 
about their experiences and aspirations. 
 
¶5.  Comment:  During her three days in Morocco, 
Under Secretary Kanter and her team were able to 
participate in the Forum for the Future, engage with 
leaders from the G8 and BMENA countries and view 
first hand the educational realities of Morocco's 
youth at both the middle school and university 
levels.  Her genuine interest in Morocco's future 
and her heartfelt message of support from President 
Obama made a substantial impact on those with whom 
she met.  Under Secretary Kanter was an engaged and 
engaging representative of the USG.  End Comment. 
 
KAPLAN