09STATE38033
USUN INSTRUCTIONS: UN MISSION IN SUDAN MANDATE
Thu Apr 16 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO1990
OO RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHC #8033/01 1062304
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 162241Z APR 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 5706
INFO DARFUR COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 STATE 038033 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPKO UNSC CD SU
SUBJECT: USUN INSTRUCTIONS: UN MISSION IN SUDAN MANDATE 
RENEWAL RESOLUTION 
 
¶1.  This is an action request.  USUN is requested to 
circulate to the Security Council for discussion the draft 
resolution set forth in paragraph 2, authorizing extension 
of the UN Mission in Sudan (UNMIS), at such times and 
sequences as deemed appropriate to ensure timely adoption 
of a resolution acceptable to the United States.  USUN 
should draw from, as appropriate, the language in 
paragraph 2 in negotiating and finalizing the text of the 
proposed resolution continuing the mandate.  USUN should 
seek additional Department guidance if significant changes 
are made to the text below. 
 
¶2.  Begin text: 
 
        The Security Council, 
 
        Recalling all its resolutions and presidential 
statements concerning the situation in the Sudan, 
 
        Reaffirming its previous resolutions 1674 (2006) 
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, which 
reaffirms, inter alia, the relevant provisions of the 
United Nations World Summit outcome document, 1612 (2005) 
on children in armed conflict, 1502 (2003) on the 
protection of humanitarian and United Nations personnel, 
and 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) on women, peace, and 
security, 
 
        Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General 
on Sudan dated January 30, 2009 (S/2009/61), the report on 
Children and Armed Conflict in Sudan dated February 10, 
2009 (S/2009/84), including his recommendations, and 
taking note of the report on Children and Armed Conflict 
in the Sudan (S/2007/520) dated 29 August 2007, and 
recalling the conclusions endorsed by the Security Council 
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict in the Sudan 
S/AC.51/2008/7, 
 
        Reaffirming its commitment to the sovereignty, 
unity, independence, and territorial integrity of the 
Sudan and to the cause of peace throughout the region, 
 
        Recognizing the work of the United Nations Mission 
in Sudan (UNMIS) in support of the Comprehensive Peace 
Agreement (CPA), and commending the continuing commitment 
by troop and police contributing countries in support of 
this mission, 
 
        Recognizing that continuing progress toward 
implementation of the CPA is essential to resolution of 
the crisis in Darfur and to sustainable peace and 
stability throughout the region, and condemning actions of 
violence and any other actions perpetrated by any party to 
prevent or hinder peace and stability in the region, 
 
        Recognizing that the CPA has reached a critical 
juncture and desiring all parties to take positive action 
in order to consolidate and build upon achievements since 
2005 particularly on elections, transitional areas, and 
disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration, and to 
begin preparations for a 2011 referendum and reaffirming 
UNMIS' support for these efforts, 
 
        Deploring the potential for increased insecurity 
in the Three Areas, southern Sudan, and Darfur, and the 
reduced humanitarian assistance to the civilian 
populations throughout Sudan caused by the expulsion of 
humanitarian and development assistance organizations, and 
the negative impact the expulsions will have on the 
health, safety, and welfare of displaced persons, refugees 
and other vulnerable and conflict-affected populations 
reliant on this assistance, 
 
        Welcoming the continuing work of the Assessment 
and Evaluation Commission (AEC) chaired by Derek Plumbly, 
 
        Recalling the commitment of the international 
community to support the CPA process, including through 
development assistance, and expecting donors to support 
implementation of the CPA and to honor all pledges of 
financial and material support, 
 
        Noting with concern recent indications of 
increased tension between Chad and the Sudan, and 
emphasizing the importance of normalized relations to 
achieving peace in the region, 
 
STATE 00038033  002 OF 004 
 
 
        Recalling the importance of free and fair 
elections, including the forthcoming national elections, 
for the longer-term restoration of peace and stability, 
national reconciliation, and democratic transformation of 
Sudan, 
 
        Welcoming the completion of the enumeration phase 
of the national census as a significant benchmark in the 
implementation of the CPA, but alarmed by the delay in 
announcing the results and the possibility of rejection of 
those results, 
 
        Noting with deep concern the failure of the GNU to 
fund the Abyei Interim Administration thereby preventing 
it from reducing political instability and insecurity in 
the Abyei region, 
 
        Welcoming the appointment of liaison officers to 
increase coordination among UNMIS, the UN Mission in the 
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), the UN Mission 
in Darfur (UNAMID), and the UN Mission in the Central 
African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT), 
 
        Determining that the situation in the Sudan 
continues to constitute a threat to international peace 
and security, 
 
        ¶1.  Decides to extend the mandate of UNMIS until 
April 30, 2010, with the intention to renew it for further 
periods as may be required; 
 
        ¶2.  Requests the Secretary General to report to 
the Council every three months on the implementation of 
the mandate of UNMIS, progress on implementation of the 
CPA, and respect for the ceasefire, and to provide an 
assessment and recommendations on measures UNMIS might 
take to further support elections and advance the peace 
process, 
 
         ¶3.  Welcomes the military capability review 
conducted into UNMIS' deployment, stresses the importance 
of appropriate and flexible deployment of UNMIS in order 
to address the most likely points of conflict and requests 
regular reviews of deployment and implementation of 
recommendations to ensure that the force is best placed to 
support the implementation of the CPA; 
 
        ¶4.  Stresses the importance of full, expeditious, 
and good faith implementation of all elements of the CPA, 
implementation of the Abyei Roadmap Agreement, agreements 
on Darfur, and the October 2006 Eastern Sudan Peace 
Agreement, and calls upon all parties to respect and abide 
by their commitments to these agreements without delay; 
 
        ¶5.  Encourages the parties' sustained commitment 
to work together in the GNU and urges the continued 
cooperation of the National Congress Party (NCP) and the 
Sudan People's Liberation Movement (SPLM) in carrying out 
their responsibilities in further implementing the CPA; 
 
        ¶6.  Stresses the critical role of the AEC in 
overseeing and reporting on implementation of the CPA; and 
urges all parties to cooperate fully with the AEC and 
implement its recommendations; 
 
        ¶7.  Calls for all parties to afford full and 
unrestricted access to UNMIS in monitoring and 
verification of the Abyei region, without prejudice to the 
final agreement on the Abyei boundaries, and urges UNMIS, 
consistent with its current mandate, to consult with the 
parties, and to deploy, as appropriate, sufficient 
personnel to the Abyei region to improve conflict 
prevention efforts and security to the civilian 
population, 
 
        ¶8.  Calls upon the parties to find a mutually 
agreeable solution to the Abyei boundary dispute; urges 
the GNU to fully fund the Interim Administration in 
accordance with the CPA; and urges all parties to redeploy 
their military forces away from the disputed 1 January 
1956 border; 
 
        ¶9.  Urges the parties to reach agreement 
immediately on the 2008 national census results; 
 
        ¶10.  Calls upon all Sudanese parties to 
demonstrate their full commitment to the democratic 
process by preparing in good faith and expeditiously for 
the conduct of peaceful, transparent, and credible 
elections in February 2010 as recommended by the NEC; 
 
STATE 00038033  003 OF 004 
 
 
      ¶11.  Requests UNMIS, consistent with its mandate and 
within its current capabilities, to support the NEC in 
preparing for credible national elections, including by 
providing security around election sites and coordinating 
UN election support efforts in close collaboration with 
UNDP, and ensuring that UNMIS' efforts are complementary 
to those of the international community and the parties to 
the CPA, and urges the international community to provide 
technical and material assistance to support credible 
elections; 
 
        ¶12. Requests UNMIS conduct a scoping exercise to 
assess needs and timelines for supporting the preparations 
for and conduct of a National Referendum in 2011. 
 
        ¶13.  Expresses its concern for the health and 
welfare of the civilian populations placed in jeopardy by 
the March 4 expulsion and closure of humanitarian 
organizations in Sudan; and noting the potential negative 
impact this decision could have on the CPA, demands the 
parties to the CPA to grant immediate, full, and unimpeded 
access by humanitarian personnel throughout Sudan to all 
persons in need of assistance as provided for in 
applicable international law; and calls upon the parties 
to support, protect, and facilitate all humanitarian and 
development operations and personnel in the Sudan; 
 
        ¶14.  Requests UNMIS, acting within its current 
mandate, means, and capabilities, to provide security to 
the civilian population, refugees, displaced persons, 
returnees, humanitarian and development actors and UN 
personnel under threat of violence from armed groups, 
including by conducting ongoing programs of conflict 
prevention and deterrence; 
 
        ¶15.  Deplores the persistent localized conflict 
and violence and its effect on civilians, especially in 
the border area, and the continuing potential for violence 
and calls upon UNMIS to strengthen its conflict management 
capacity by developing and executing an integrated 
strategy to support local tribal conflict resolution 
mechanisms in order to maximize protection of civilians; 
and requests UNMIS, consistent with its current mandate, 
to proactively conduct patrols in areas at high risk of 
localized conflict; 
 
        ¶16.  Notes that conflict in one area of Sudan 
affects conflict in other areas of Sudan and in the 
region, and therefore urges UNMIS, consistent with its 
current mandate, to coordinate closely with all UN 
entities operating in the region, including the AU-UN 
Joint Mediation Support Team and other stakeholders, to 
ensure implementation of these bodies' mandates and the 
overall objective of peace in Sudan and the region; 
 
        ¶17.  Encourages Chad and Sudan to work with 
regional partners to implement the Dakar Agreement, 
continue the process of normalizing relations, and end 
cross-border support to rebel groups; 
 
        ¶18.  Requests UNMIS, acting within its current 
mandate and within its current means and capabilities, to 
provide technical and logistical support to the Technical 
ad hoc Border Committee, as requested, to help the parties 
in the process of demarcation of the 1956 North/South 
border, in accordance with the CPA; 
 
        ¶19.  Requests UNMIS to take a lead role in 
reforming and supporting JIUs and JIPUs; calls upon the 
Joint Defense Board to exercise command, control and 
management of the JIUs; and urges donors to offer support, 
both materiel and training, coordinated by UNMIS in 
consultation with the Joint Defense Board, to enable the 
full establishment and operational effectiveness of JIUs 
and JIPUs as soon as possible; 
 
        ¶20.  Encourages UNMIS, consistent with its 
mandate, and within authorized levels of civilian police, 
to continue efforts to assist the parties to the CPA in 
promoting the rule of law, restructuring the police and 
corrections services throughout Sudan, assisting in the 
training of civilian police and corrections officers, and 
transitioning to a civilian system of justice; 
 
        ¶21.  Encourages the parties to launch disarmament, 
demobilization, and reintegration (DDR) implementation in 
all states, and requests UNMIS to work closely with the 
Sudanese Armed Forces (SAF) and SPLA to assist in 
voluntary disarmament and weapons collection and 
destruction efforts in implementation of DDR under the 
 
STATE 00038033  004 OF 004 
 
 
CPA; 
 
        ¶22.  Further urges donors to respond to calls for 
assistance to the DDR process; 
 
        ¶23.  Requests UNMIS, consistent with its mandate 
and in coordination with the relevant parties and taking 
into account the need to pay particular attention to the 
protection, release and reintegration of children 
recruited to and participating with armed forces and armed 
groups, to increase its support for the National DDR 
Coordination Council and the Northern and Southern DDR 
Commissions with special emphasis on reintegrating such 
children with their families, and to monitor the 
reintegration process to ensure that approaches are 
conflict sensitive; 
 
        ¶24. Welcomes the continuing organized return of 
internally displaced persons and refugees to the Three 
Areas and southern Sudan, and encourages the promotion of 
efforts, including the provision of necessary resources to 
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for 
Refugees and implementing partners, to ensure that such 
returns are voluntary and sustainable; and requests UNMIS, 
within its current mandate, capabilities and areas of 
deployment, to coordinate with partners to facilitate 
sustainable returns, including by helping to establish and 
maintain the necessary security conditions; 
        ¶25.  Emphasizes the need for UNMIS to make full 
use of its current mandate and capabilities with regard to 
the activities of militias and armed groups such as the 
Lord's Resistance Army in Sudan, as stated in resolution 
1663 S/1663/2006, dated March 24, 2006, and requests 
UNMIS, within its capabilities and area of responsibility, 
to assist the Government of Southern Sudan in its efforts 
to maintain the integrity of its borders against 
incursions by LRA elements, 
 
      ¶26.  Requests the Secretary-General to submit for 
the Council's consideration, in the next 
Secretary-General's report, recommendations for measures 
UNMIS could take to assist the Government of Sudan in 
reducing LRA incursions into southern Sudan and to prevent 
LRA attacks on civilians as a result of those incursions; 
 
        ¶27.  Reiterates its concern over the restrictions 
and impediments placed by the GOS on UNMIS personnel and 
materiel, and the adverse impact such restrictions and 
impediments have on UNMIS' ability to perform its mandate 
effectively and on the ability of the humanitarian 
community to reach affected persons; and calls in this 
regard for all parties to cooperate fully with UNMIS and 
to facilitate the performance of its mandate, and to abide 
by their obligations under international humanitarian law; 
 
        ¶28.  Requests the Secretary-General to continue to 
take the necessary measures to ensure full compliance by 
UNMIS with the United Nations zero-tolerance policy on 
sexual exploitation and abuse and to keep the Council 
fully informed, and urges troop contributing countries to 
take appropriate preventive action including redeployment 
awareness training, and other action to ensure full 
accountability in cases of such conduct involving their 
personnel; 
 
        ¶29.  Decides to remain actively seized of this 
matter. 
CLINTON