09STATE51914
SECRETARY CLINTON'S RESPONSE TO A LETTER FROM
Thu May 21 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
O R 210009Z MAY 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY DOHA IMMEDIATE 
INFO AMEMBASSY KHARTOUMUNCLAS STATE 051914 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPDC PGOV PREL QA SU UN
SUBJECT: SECRETARY CLINTON'S RESPONSE TO A LETTER FROM 
QATAR STATE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS AHMED BIN ABDULLA 
AL-MAHMOUD 
 
¶1.  (U) Please deliver the following reply from the 
Secretary to Qatar State Minister for Foreign Affairs Al- 
Mahmoud.  The Department does not plan to release the 
text of the letter but has no objections if the 
Government of Qatar wishes to do so.  There will be no 
signed original. 
 
¶2.  Begin text: 
 
Your Excellency: 
 
Thank you for your efforts in seeking a resolution to the 
conflict in Darfur.  The United States appreciates the 
role Qatar has been playing by hosting the peace talks 
between the Government of Sudan (GOS) and the Justice and 
Equality Movement over the past several months. 
 
We are also grateful for your efforts, in conjunction 
with African Union/United Nations Joint Chief Mediator 
Djibril Bassole, to engage those parties and others who 
are crucial actors in the peace process.  The United 
States further commends your efforts to support the 
Government of Libya's mediation on the Chad-Sudan border 
conflict that so adversely affects Darfur.  We are 
disappointed that the agreement between the Government of 
Sudan and the Government of Chad, signed on May 3, was 
followed immediately by incursions into Chad by the 
Chadian rebels.  The United States believes the 
international community must continue to press Chad and 
Sudan to abide by the terms of their agreements. 
 
Thank you for your suggestion for a meeting among several 
members of the international community to coordinate 
efforts on Darfur.  This is also a desire of our Special 
Envoy to Sudan, Scott Gration.  I am pleased with the 
close coordination you have had with Special Envoy 
Gration and am confident he will be communicating with 
you about this issue very soon. 
 
The United States continues to support the leadership of 
Chief Mediator Bassole, with Qatar's important role as 
facilitator, in bringing the parties together to find a 
solution to the conflict in Darfur.  I invite you to 
remain in close touch with Special Envoy Gration, who 
will keep me up to date about the progress on this 
important issue. 
 
Sincerely yours, 
 
Hillary Rodham Clinton 
 
End text. 
 
¶3.  BEGIN BACKGROUND: 
 
(U) FM Al-Mahmoud wrote on May 5 to inform the Secretary 
of his desire to convene a meeting of the special 
representatives for Sudan of the five permanent 
representatives of the UN Security Council and the 
European Union for the purpose of seeking coordination 
and promoting international unity on finding a resolution 
to the conflict in Darfur.  Although the letter makes no 
official requests, the Department believes this is a good 
opportunity to express our thanks for Qatar's positive 
role in the Darfur peace process and to reiterate our 
support for both Al-Mahmoud's efforts and those of AU/UN 
Chief Mediator Bassole.  Special Envoy Scott Gration is 
in close communication with Al-Mahmoud and several of the 
other special representatives who may attend this 
meeting.  He will work with them to find a suitable time 
and place for the meeting. 
 
END BACKGROUND. 
 
CLINTON