09STATE24365
KUDOS TO EMBASSY BEIRUT
Fri Mar 13 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0013
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #4365 0722255
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 132239Z MAR 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 0206UNCLAS STATE 024365 
 
SIPDIS 
FROM AA/S FELTMAN TO AMBASSADOR SISON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: APER AMGT LE
SUBJECT: KUDOS TO EMBASSY BEIRUT 
 
Michele, 
 
Thank you for the outstanding support the mission provided 
during my travel to Beirut.  The dedication and hard work of 
the entire Embassy team made this visit a resounding success, 
and I truly appreciate all of your efforts.  I was heartened 
by the warm welcome I received following such an abrupt 
departure 14 months ago and am grateful for the hospitality 
you provided to me and NSC Senior Director for the Middle 
East and North Africa Dan Shapiro. 
 
I particularly would like to commend the entire GSO and RSO 
teams for their tireless work to support our hectic schedule 
and to protect us while on the ground in Lebanon.  I 
especially want to thank Kenneth Greenblatt and all the 
bodyguards for the multiple trips and Syrian border crossing. 
 I also would like to thank several members of your staff 
that worked closely on our numerous meetings.  Susanne Rose 
was an excellent control officer, keeping her pulse on the 
closely-timed events.  Jacqueline Ward, Meghan McCulloch, 
Bridgette Walker, Alyssa Teach, and Michael Brennan's 
contributions to the visit were exemplary.  Each of these 
officers provided crucial support during our meetings, 
drafting the corresponding reporting cables with great 
precision and in record time.  Fady Hafez also did an 
excellent job with scheduling and notetaking. 
 
I know Embassy Beirut carries a full schedule of visitors 
throughout the year, which takes a toll on your resources. 
Your team's efforts help Washington decision makers gain 
valuable context, which results in a better understanding of 
the strategic importance of the bilateral relationship, and 
better policy.  I expect the heavy visits load will continue, 
and I want to assure the mission that all of us in Washington 
stand by ready to support you. 
 
Thanks again to the entire mission for the high standard you 
set in NEA. 
 
Best, 
 
Jeff 
CLINTON