09STATE76508
GUIDANCE: UNAMI MANDATE RENEWAL
Wed Jul 22 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0004
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #6508 2031746
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 221730Z JUL 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD IMMEDIATE 0000
RUEHKU/AMEMBASSY KUWAIT IMMEDIATE 0000UNCLAS STATE 076508 
 
SIPDIS 
USUN FOR GERMAIN AND KUJAWINSKI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL UNSC IZ
SUBJECT: GUIDANCE: UNAMI MANDATE RENEWAL 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action request. 
 
¶2. (U) Washington requests USUN to share the following UN 
Security Council resolution (UNSCR) text with the P5, and 
then with the full Council as appropriate, to seek their 
support in renewing the United Nations Assistance Mission in 
Iraq's (UNAMI) mandate for another twelve months. UNAMI was 
reauthorized by UNSC resolution 1830 on August 7, 2008 and 
will expire on August 7, 2009. USUN should keep Washington 
informed on the progress of discussions and seek further 
guidance as needed. 
 
¶3. (U) Begin Non-paper: 
 
--The Security Council, 
 
--Recalling all its previous relevant resolutions on Iraq, in 
particular  1500 (2003) of 14 August 2003, 1546 (2004) of 8 
June 2004, 1557 (2004) of 12 August 2004, 1619 (2005) of 11 
August 2005, 1700 (2006) of 10 August 2006, 1770 (2007) of 10 
August 2007, and 1830 (2008)of 7 August 2008, 
 
--Reaffirming the independence, sovereignty, unity and 
territorial integrity of Iraq, 
 
--Emphasizing the importance of the stability and security of 
Iraq for the people of Iraq, the region, and the 
international community, 
 
--Welcoming improvements in the security situation in Iraq 
achieved through concerted political and security efforts and 
stressing that challenges to security in Iraq still exist and 
that improvements need to be sustained through meaningful 
political dialogue and national unity, 
 
--Underscoring the need for all communities in Iraq to 
participate in the political process and an inclusive 
political dialogue, to reach a comprehensive solution on the 
distribution of resources, and develop a just and fair 
solution for the nation,s disputed internal boundaries, 
 
--Reaffirming the importance of the United Nations, in 
particular the United Nations Assistance Mission for 
Iraq(UNAMI), in advising, supporting and assisting the Iraqi 
people and Government to strengthen democratic institutions, 
advance inclusive political dialogue and national 
reconciliation, facilitate regional dialogue, aid vulnerable 
groups, strengthen gender equality, promote the protection of 
human rights, including through the work of the Independent 
High Commission for Human Rights, and promote judicial and 
legal reform, 
 
--Commending the important efforts made by the Government of 
Iraq to strengthen democracy and the rule of law, to improve 
security and public order and to combat terrorism and 
sectarian violence across the country, and reiterating its 
support to the people and the Government of Iraq in their 
efforts to build a secure, stable, united and democratic 
nation, based on the rule of law and respect for human rights, 
 
--Expressing concern for human rights challenges in Iraq and 
stressing the importance of addressing those challenges, 
 
--Expressing concern also for the humanitarian issues 
confronting the Iraqi people and stressing the need to 
continue a coordinated response and to provide adequate 
resources to address these issues, 
 
--Underscoring the sovereignty of the Government of 
Iraq,reaffirming that all parties should continue to take all 
feasible steps and develop modalities to ensure the 
protection of affected civilians, including children, and 
should create conditions conducive to the voluntary, safe, 
dignified, and sustainable return of refugees and internally 
displaced persons, welcoming new commitments of the 
Government of Iraq for the relief of internally displaced 
persons, encouraging continued efforts for internally 
displaced persons and refugees, and noting the important role 
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for 
Refugees, based on its mandate, in providing advice and 
support to the Government of Iraq, in 
coordination with UNAMI, 
 
--Urging all those concerned, as set forth in international 
humanitarian law, including the Geneva Conventions and the 
Hague Regulations, to allow full unimpeded access by 
humanitarian personnel to all people in need of assistance, 
and to make available, as far as possible, all necessary 
facilities for their operations, and to promote the safety, 
security, and freedom of movement of humanitarian personnel 
and United Nations and its associated personnel and their 
assets, 
 
--Emphasizing UNAMI's efforts to assist the Independent High 
Electoral Commission and the Iraqi Government in the 
development of processes for holding successful Iraqi 
provincial elections in January 2009 and Kurdistan Regional 
Government elections in July 2009, and towards Iraqi national 
parliamentary elections in January 2010, 
 
--Thanking former SRSG Staffan de Mistura for his service and 
strong leadership of UNAMI, 
 
--Welcoming the Secretary-General's appointment of Ad Melkert 
on 7 July 2009, as the new Special Representative for Iraq, 
 
--Expressing deep gratitude to all the UN staff in Iraq for 
their courageous and tireless efforts, 
 
 
¶1. Decides to extend the mandate of the United Nations 
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) for a period of twelve 
months from the date of this resolution; 
 
¶2. Decides further that the Special Representative of the 
Secretary-General and UNAMI, at the request of the Government 
of Iraq, and taking into account the letter of (DATE) from 
the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Iraq to the Secretary 
General (S/2009/XXX, annex), shall continue to pursue their 
expanded mandate as stipulated in resolution 1770 (2007) and 
recognized in resolution 1830 (2008); 
 
¶3. Recognizes that security of UN personnel is essential for 
UNAMI to carry out its work for the benefit of the people of 
Iraq and calls upon the Government of Iraq and other Member 
States to continue to provide security and logistical support 
to the UN presence in Iraq; 
 
¶4. Welcomes the contributions of Member States in providing 
UNAMI with the financial, logistical, and security resources 
and support that it needs to fulfill its mission and calls 
upon Member States to continue to provide UNAMI with these 
resources and support; 
 
¶5. Expresses its intention to review the mandate of UNAMI in 
twelve months or sooner, if requested by the Government of 
Iraq; 
 
¶6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Council on 
a quarterly basis on the progress made towards the 
fulfillment of all UNAMI's responsibilities; and 
 
¶7. Decides to remain seized of the matter. 
 
End Non-paper. 
CLINTON