09STATE110980
UN MISSION IN SUDAN: USUN TALKING POINTS FOR
Tue Oct 27 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO1834
OO RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHC #0980/01 3002318
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 272257Z OCT 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 8386
INFO DARFUR COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 STATE 110980 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPKO UNSC SU
SUBJECT: UN MISSION IN SUDAN: USUN TALKING POINTS FOR 
CONSULTATIONS 
 
 ¶1.  This is an action request.  USUN may draw from the 
points in paragraph 2 during consultations before the 
Security Council on the UN Mission in Sudan (UNMIS) scheduled 
for October 28, 2009. 
 
¶2.  I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his 
report and SRSG Qazi for his briefing.  The United States 
also wishes to express condolences to UNMIS, Pakistan, and 
the family of UNMIS Deputy Force Commander Brigadier General 
Moinuddin.  The heinous act that took his life is 
intolerable, and we hope justice will be done. 
 
--Today, I would like to address three key elements for the 
future of UNMIS: first, the 2010 elections; second, 
increasing the capacity of UNMIS to protect civilians; and 
third, preparing UNMIS to deal with further humanitarian 
crisis. 
 
--Last Monday, the United States released its new strategy on 
Sudan, demonstrating our deep commitment to improving the 
lives of the Sudanese people.  This is a carefully considered 
and results-oriented strategy.  Our policy emphasizes three 
strategic objectives: first, to reach a definitive end to 
conflict, gross human rights violations, and genocide in 
Darfur; second, to realize effective implementation of the 
Comprehensive Peace Agreement between the North and South, 
resulting in a peaceful post-2011 Sudan or an orderly path 
toward two separate and viable states at peace with each 
other; and third, to ensure that Sudan does not provide a 
safe haven for international terrorists. 
 
--The United States is prepared to work with all sides to see 
these goals attained.  We will employ incentives as 
appropriate and exert real pressure as needed on any party 
that fails to act to improve the lives of the people of 
Sudan.  We are fully committed to this endeavor, and we urge 
all parties and the international community to support 
efforts to reach these core objectives. 
 
--The United States views credible elections in all of Sudan 
in 2010 as an important step in the process of peace 
building.  We remain concerned about the ability of all 
Sudanese, especially Darfuris, to participate meaningfully in 
elections.  This is not solely a technical issue of 
clarifying registration and identification procedures for 
internally displaced persons, but also a political issue that 
requires tangible actions on the ground demonstrating, 
especially to Darfuris, that it is in their interest to 
participate in elections. 
 
--We also remain concerned that the parties lack the 
necessary political will to guarantee freedom of speech, 
assembly, and the press.  The recently signed Criminal 
Procedures Act allows state governors or district 
commissioners to restrict campaigning by political parties 
and is a far cry from the type of legislation that would 
facilitate political freedom. 
 
--The time before scheduled elections is rapidly approaching, 
and the task remains enormous.  While the primary 
responsibility for conducting the elections lies with the 
Sudanese, the international community also must be ready to 
work quickly with the parties to secure the basic elements 
necessary for credible elections.  The United States has 
already provided substantial elections assistance and will 
continue to do so, provided the parties demonstrate the 
political will that is necessary to resolve remaining issues. 
 
--The United States is deeply disturbed by the escalating and 
pervasive violence in southern Sudan that has resulted in 
substantial death and displacement.  As President Obama has 
noted, the protection of civilians is becoming more difficult 
for peacekeepers; this is true in Sudan.  While the 
Government of Southern Sudan (GOSS) bears primary 
responsibility for protecting its citizens, UNMIS also has an 
invaluable role to play, and we encourage the mission to 
continue refining its concept of operations to reflect the 
importance of civilian protection. 
 
--UNMIS covers a broad territory and cannot be in all places 
at all times.  Developing highly mobile units that can 
rapidly deploy is one part of providing effective civilian 
protection.  Similarly, working to resolve tribal tensions 
and identifying potential hotspots can prevent conflict from 
beginning in the first place.  UNMIS needs a mission-wide 
strategy on the protection of civilians of which these can 
 
STATE 00110980  002 OF 002 
 
 
play a part. 
 
--The deteriorating humanitarian situation in southern Sudan 
caused by inter-tribal violence and attacks by the Lord,s 
Resistance Army is alarming.  The Secretary-General,s report 
estimated that this violence has displaced approximately 
250,000 persons in southern Sudan since January 2009.  The 
violence, along with other factors, may cause as many as 1.5 
million people to face a severe food shortage in the coming 
months.  We recognize UNMIS, efforts in working with the 
humanitarian community in an attempt to avoid another 
humanitarian crisis, and believe such a crisis would only 
lead to further instability in the region.  The United States 
stands ready to assist in relief efforts, and we strongly 
encourage other Member States to contribute the necessary 
assistance in order to avoid the spread of malnutrition and 
possible famine. 
 
--In conclusion, we believe serious work is needed if 
elections are to take place in 2010.  We urge UNMIS to focus 
efforts on a mission-wide approach to the protection of 
civilians, particularly in preparing for elections.  The 
international community must also closely monitor the 
humanitarian situation in southern Sudan and do its utmost to 
assist in avoiding another humanitarian crisis.  We must also 
remain focused on resolving issues related to the Three 
Areas, the north-south border demarcation, and Abyei.  The 
tasks before us are enormous, but they must be completed in 
order to help Sudan secure a permanent peace. 
 
--Thank you. 
CLINTON