09STATE68555
OFFICE OF IRANIAN AFFAIRS JULY 1 IRAN ELECTION
Wed Jul 01 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO4278
OO RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHDIR RUEHKUK RUEHTRO
DE RUEHC #8555/01 1822210
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 012146Z JUL 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO IRAN COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 STATE 068555 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV KDEM PHUMR IR
SUBJECT: OFFICE OF IRANIAN AFFAIRS JULY 1 IRAN ELECTION 
SPOT REPORT 
 
(U). In an effort to improve dissemination, following is the 
unedited Post election spot report prepared by the 
Department's Office of Iranian Affairs.  These reports 
comprise input from all Iran Watchers as well as press 
reports.  Note carefully that much of this information may be 
unconfirmed.  Feedback on these reports is welcome; please 
send to NEA-Iran-DC-DL@state.gov. 
 
July 2: 3:00 AM in Iran: 
 
(U) Mousavi:  Keep Protesting,:  Mir-Hossein Mousavi has 
issued a fresh call to his supporters to maintain peaceful 
protests after the government confirmed the result of the 
disputed election.  Mousavi used a message on his website, 
which also appeared on Facebook, to renew his call for the 
cancellation of the election. "We emphasize the position of 
Mir-Hossein Mousavi which is mentioned in the June 27 
letter," Mousavi's Ghalam News website said. The candidate's 
supporters were urged to continue confronting the regime 
without provoking bloodshed. Among the recommended tactics 
was to continue the call of Allah-u Akbar from rooftops at 
night, writing Mousavi's name on cash bills and hijacking 
official holidays to make protests. 
 
(U) Report: Karroubi Aide Arrested:  Mehdi Karroubi,s 
official website has announced that their website director 
and reporter Mojtaba Tehrani was arrested Saturday night as 
he left his office for his residence.  No one has heard 
anything from him since Saturday, the report says.  According 
to his family, Basij officials made an appearance at hi 
residence the day before his disappearance and confiscated 
his laptop and various files. 
 
(U) Mousavi Not Approved for Future Elections,:  BBC Persian 
reports that Ayatollah Mohammad Yazdi, a conservative cleric 
and member of Iran's Guardian Council, claims the Council 
will not approve Mousavi as a candidate for any future 
presidential race.  If people like me remain in the Guardians 
Council ,He said of a possible Mousavi bid, We will not 
approve him. 
 
(U) Ahmadinejad  Post-Victory, Remarks:  Mahmoud 
Ahmadinejad hailed on Tuesday his re-election as a victory 
for the Iranian people and a defeat for the Islamic 
Republic's enemies. This election was actually a referendum. 
The Iranian nation were the victors and the enemies, despite 
their ... plots of a soft toppling of the system, failed and 
couldn't reach their aims. 
 
(U) Rezai's Spokesman Claims Ballots Had Similar Handwriting: 
 Mohsen Rezai's unofficial spokesman, Omidvar Rasai, charges 
in an interview that "between 70 to 80 percent of the votes 
in some constituencies were written with the same pen and 
with the handwriting of a single individual." 
 
(U) Senior Cleric Releases Statement Supporting Mousavi: 
ILNA reports that Ayatollah Taheri-Esfahani (Esfahan,s 
former Friday Prayer leader) issued a statement in support of 
Mir-Hossein Mousavi.  Taheri-Esfahani condemned "making 
instrumental use" of the Islamic founder's remarks. In his 
statement, he asks: "Is it a case of justice to see that an 
honorable and modest Seyyed (one who is a descendant of the 
prophet Mohammad) who until the last moments of Khomeini's 
life, had been a dear and close companion of that grand 
leader, is now considered to be a rioter and an agent of 
arrogance who must be punished? 
 
(U) Newsweek Journalist Reportedly "Confesses" to Aiding 
Protests:  Fars News reports that imprisoned Newsweek 
reporter Maziar Bahari has "confessed" to "lying" and helping 
the post-election demonstrations.  According to Fars, Mr. 
Bahari admitted that he was part of the huge capitalist 
machinery that sought to bring about a victory for Mr. 
Ahmadinejad,s rival, Mr. Mousavi. 
 
(U) Report: 35 Countries Recognize Ahmadinejad as Winner: 
According to Mahmoud Ahmadinejad,s website, www. 
president.ir, 35 countries have recognized him as the winner 
of the presidential election:  India;  Tunisia;  Malaysia; 
Lebanon;  North Korea;  Kuwait;  Nicaragua; Comoros 
Cambodia;  Senegal;  Cuba;  Belarus;  Sudan;  Syria;  Libya; 
Algeria;  Turkmenistan;  Iraq;  Kazakhstan;  Indonesia; 
Bahrain;  Yemen;  Sri Lanka;  Ecuador;  Russia;  Azerbaijan; 
Qatar;  Tajikistan;  Armenia;  Oman;  Turkey;  Afghanistan; 
Pakistan;  China;  Venezuela 
 
(U) EU States Set to Recall Iran Ambassadors:  Amid 
continuing anger across Europe over the arrests of British 
 
STATE 00068555  002 OF 003 
 
 
embassy employees - linked by Tehran to the opposition 
protests over the disputed outcome of election - senior EU 
diplomats said a coordinated diplomatic protest would take 
place "within days.  "Member states are now very focused on 
the idea of conducting a coordinated withdrawal of 
ambassadors this weekend if there has been no movement on the 
side of the Iranians," said one EU diplomat. "We need to see 
these (four) set free by Friday at the latest." 
 
(U) Khatami Urges  Restoration of Public Trust,:  Press T V 
reports that Former president Mohammad Khatami has called for 
effective measures to be taken to restore public trust and 
safeguard the Islamic establishment.  In a Sunday meeting 
with members of the parliament's National Security and 
Foreign Policy Commission, Khatami said that the breach of 
public confidence could shake the foundation of the Islamic 
establishment.  Khatami said it was inappropriate to slander 
or arrest people in response to what he called "logical 
objection and civil behavior of a large segment of the 
society who protest against the election results."  Khatmi 
suggested that forming an 'impartial panel' to look into the 
issue could remove any ambiguities and restore public trust. 
Citing his adherence to the principles of the Islamic 
Revolution, Khatami stressed the need for taking measures to 
ensure freedom of expression for all and by doing such, the 
establishment will ensure that the people will be present in 
the political scene in the future.  Khatami added that the 
religious and democratic principles integrated into the 
Islamic establishment must be protected by the best possible 
approach. The nation-oriented establishment will become 
vulnerable if its social resources are lost, he warned. 
 
(U) Militant Clerics Association Comments on Election 
Results, Urges Peace:  ILNA reports that that Militant 
Clerics Association (Majma-yi Ruhaniyun-i Mobarez) has issued 
a statement:  In the election which took place, it could have 
been possible for this system to become stronger and deviated 
paths become clear from the right ones. And it (election) 
could have brought peace to the inflamed souls of an awake 
and aware nation. At the beginning of the fourth decade from 
the victory of the Islamic Revolution, the election could 
have shown that the democratic bases, in accordance with 
religion, had become stronger. And make the people feel that 
the outcome of the blood shed by thousands of martyrs, the 
pain and suffering of war veterans, former captives and their 
patient families is blossoming more and more each day. And 
Iran is moving towards progress, and becoming an Iran with 
respect, dignity, and spiritual and material rights. It is 
regrettable that this chance was missed and today, public 
trust, which is the main capital of the country and the 
Revolution, has been undermined. And a group of people, who 
have something to say or criticize as per their rights, are 
not convinced of the results.  We believe that people's 
undermined trust, regarding the election results, cannot be 
mended by the opinion of a source that the majority of its 
members had already announced their clear support for a 
candidate (referring to Ahmadinejad). We are sorry that 
logical and benevolent solutions were not considered. And an 
impartial and professional board was not appointed to study 
(election results) and announce the truth. On the other hand, 
peaceful and graceful protests, in which people had a unique 
presence and proved their maturity just like the bright days 
of the Revolution, were attacked...Now after the high costs 
that have been paid, while we protest the election results, 
and believe in the right to protest, this should not cost the 
dear people any more. We believe that increasing enthusiasm 
and street protests are not the solution.  And we expect the 
officials to make plans for ending the security and military 
atmosphere. And release the prisoners and stop unilateral and 
provoking propagation and officially recognize the right for 
civic protests and freedom of speech. And create an 
atmosphere, where benevolent intellectuals will be able to 
think in a calm atmosphere and find a basic solution to what 
has pushed the society to such an unpleasant state. 
 
(U) MP Says Communication Limitations Should Be Lifted:  Mehr 
News reports that MP Hossein Sobhaninia stated on Tuesday 
that some communication limitations such as the disablement 
of SMS text messaging should be lifted and the country take a 
normal course again.  Sobhaninia, who sits on the Majles 
National Security and Foreign Policy Committee, also said 
Today all political factions and activists should urge people 
to remain calm and maintain unity and consider the election 
dispute as a closed issue.  He noted that the MPs member to 
the Majles security committee should study all the pros and 
cons of the election. He added one of the concerns of the 
committee is to help establish a normal condition in the 
country. 
 
(U) Tehran University Chancellor Denies Inviting 
'Disciplinary Forces' Into Dormitories:   In an interview 
with Mehr News, Farhad Rahbar, the chancellor of Tehran 
University, has denied remarks that during recent riots in 
 
STATE 00068555  003 OF 003 
 
 
Tehran, the disciplinary forces had entered the University's 
dormitory his request.  According to Mehr, the dean of Tehran 
University has said: "I became informed of the arrival of the 
disciplinary forces when they had already entered the 
dormitory and I was there; however I had made no request for 
their coming." 
 
(U) NIAC calls on Iranian Government to End Political 
Detentions and Violence Against Protesters:  The National 
Iranian American Council remains deeply concerned about the 
deteriorating human rights situation in Iran since the 
country,s disputed elections on June 12. Disturbing accounts 
of continued violence and widespread intimidation and 
harassment of Iranian citizens by the Basij militia and other 
elements of Iran,s security forces continue to be received 
from inside the country. 
 
NIAC is deeply concerned about the fate of hundreds of people 
detained in the post-election crisis, including opposition 
figures, human rights defenders, journalists, and protesters. 
Iranian authorities have carried out hundreds of 
politically-motivated arrests according to human rights 
organizations. Those detained are understood to be at a high 
risk for torture. 
 
NIAC calls on Iranian authorities to: 
 
--Immediately release opposition figures, human rights 
defenders, and all other persons arrested for contesting the 
election results. 
 
--Ensure those currently in detention are treated humanely. 
Provide detainees immediate access to their families, 
lawyers, and any medical treatment that may be needed. 
 
--Immediately halt state-sanctioned violence against the 
Iranian people. Ensure the public,s free movement, as well 
as the physical safety of Iranians in their homes. 
 
--Immediately restore communications and access to 
information, including cell phones and internet. Halt 
surveillance of private communications and retribution for 
participation in demonstrations. 
 
--NIAC calls on Iranian authorities to resolve its political 
crisis through free democratic debate and the recognition of 
the rights of Iranians to free speech and free assembly. 
 
--NIAC also calls on Iran,s trading partners to demand an 
end to government sponsored violence. 
 
--NIAC will continue to monitor the human rights situation in 
Iran as a major concern for the Iranian-American community. 
NIAC will work with governmental and nongovernmental actors 
in the United States and around the world to elevate this 
issue as a priority for the world community. 
 
( 
CLINTON