09TELAVIV717
WELCOME TO ISRAEL
Fri Mar 27 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0004
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #0717/01 0860758
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 270758Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 1164UNCLAS TEL AVIV 000717 
 
 
Note - PII Data Removed 
 
HR/CDA/AD - KATHRYN CHELSEN, PLEASE PASS TO BARRY W. RICE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: APER IS
SUBJECT: WELCOME TO ISRAEL 
 
¶1.  The Embassy Community is very happy to welcome you to Tel Aviv. 
This is one of three information cables that will be sent to you 
from post.  The three cables are (1) Welcome to Israel, (2) TMTHREE 
- Welcome to Post, and (3) Shipping Instructions.  The following 
information should help make your transition to Israel smoother and 
answer some of the questions you may have. 
 
¶2.  About the post 
 
Embassy Tel Aviv is one of the most exciting, high profile, 
Embassies in the world.  It hosts frequent visits by the President, 
Secretary of State, other Cabinet Members, Congressional 
Delegations, Flag Officers, and Naval Ship Visits.  The ongoing 
peace process provides numerous opportunities to witness history in 
the making. 
 
The address of the Embassy is 71 Hayarkon Street, Tel Aviv 63903, 
Israel.  The Embassy Phone number is 972 (3) 519-7575.  Most mission 
employees work in the Chancery, but employees of USAID and Public 
Diplomacy work in separate facilities near the Embassy.  The Embassy 
warehouse and most of the GSO section, along with the Defense 
Contract Management Agency (DCMA), United States Army Corps of 
Engineers (USACE) and The Open Source Center (formerly the Foreign 
Broadcast Information Service) are located in Herzliya Pituach. 
These offices are approximately 10 miles north of Tel Aviv.  The 
Embassy hours are 8:00 a.m. - 4:30 p.m., Monday to Friday, except 
for DCMA, which operates on the regular Israeli workweek of Sunday 
to Thursday. 
 
¶3. Visas 
 
Israel requires visas for holders of diplomatic and official 
passports.  All personnel posted to Tel Aviv must obtain Israeli 
visas from the nearest Israeli Embassy or Consulate prior to arrival 
in Israel. 
 
¶4. In-processing at post 
 
Human Resources Assistant Ms. Lyndall Leitman (LEITMANLL@STATE.GOV) 
will arrange with your office sponsor to check you and your family 
in upon your arrival.  This normally happens the first workday after 
your arrival.  All employees are requested to bring four (4) 
passport-size photos with, for yourself and your dependents over the 
age of 16. 
 
¶5. Pre-Arrival Information & Sponsorship 
 
Post's pre-arrival kit, includes useful information on Embassy 
services, the city of Tel Aviv and Israel in general. You can 
request a copy of the most recent embassy newsletter, "The Tel Aviv 
Star", by providing the CLO with your preferred email address at 
CLOtelaviv@state.gov. In addition, the video "Welcome to Tel Aviv", 
is available at the Overseas Briefing Center and on the post 
intranet site. It will give you a visual tour of the mission, 
housing, schools, city and country. You may also access the CLO 
website at www.tlvstar.com to get additional information about life 
at post. This is a password protected site so please contact the CLO 
for the user name and password. 
 
When Post receives information of your pending arrival, your 
agency/section head will assign an office sponsor, who is 
responsible for many of the administrative details prior to your 
arrival. 
 
The CLO will make every effort to assign a community sponsor for you 
once your housing assignment is made.  The community sponsor serves 
in a voluntary capacity and will introduce you to the neighborhood 
and general surroundings following your arrival.  A "good neighbor 
alert" is also initiated by informing all of your closest neighbors 
of your arrival and location. 
 
Prior to your arrival at post, please consider the CLO office as 
your primary point of contact for any questions related to 
day-to-day living in Israel. 
 
¶6.  Medical 
 
The Embassy maintains a Health Unit at the Embassy, with a branch 
office open sually once a week in Herzliya Pituach, the northen 
suburb where many families live.  A Foreign Service Health 
Practitioner (FSHP), a locally hired RN and Administrative Assistant 
staff the units, treating acute illnesses, chronic medical problems 
and providing immunizations and preventive health. 
 
Israel has excellent medical facilities, and standards are generally 
very high, but the health care system is often confusing to 
newcomers. The Health Unit is there to provide guidance in 
navigating a system where language and local norms may seem strange. 
 Most prescription medications are available locally, but some 
common medications are unavailable.  The FSHP can write 
prescriptions for medications from U.S. pharmacies and insurance 
plans.  Over-the-counter medications are available in Israel.  Some 
areas of Israel do not have adequate fluoride in the water, and the 
health unit staff can provide you with information and fluoride 
supplements as needed for your children.  The tap water in major 
cities in Israel is safe to drink, though may have a bad taste due 
to high mineral content. 
 
If you work for a Foreign Service Agency you are required to obtain 
your updated Medical Clearance from MED Washington prior to arriving 
at Post.  If you have special needs or concerns please contact the 
health unit (972-3-519-7323) or the Office of Medical Services in 
Washington, prior to arrival. 
 
¶7. Shipping 
 
Complete information on shipping your personal effects and POV can 
be found in the shipping instruction cable (septel).  All 
information regarding vehicles can be found in paragraphs eight, 
nine, and ten of the shipping instructions cable.  If you did not 
receive it, please notify us as soon as possible, as the shipping 
instructions are vital to ensure a smooth shipment of your HHE, UAB 
and POV.  Be sure to check with post to ensure your vehicle conforms 
to Israeli import regulations, which differ from American vehicle 
specifications.  Comprehensive shipping information can be found on 
Embassy Tel Aviv's intranet web site under the GSO Shipping 
heading. 
 
One reminder: Please remember to hand carry your packing lists for 
both HHE and UAB to Tel Aviv as well as your POV registration/title 
so we can institute customs clearance without delay. These can also 
be faxed to GSO at 972 (9) 955-8656. 
 
Special Note: Food & Drink Contents: Please contact GSO Shipping 
before sending such items in your shipments. 
 
¶8.  Pets 
 
Information on shipping your pet can be found in paragraph 12 of the 
shipping instruction cable. More detailed information can also be 
found on Tel Aviv's Intranet site at http://10.193.128.11. Go to the 
GSO/Shipping section for information. Pet food and kitty litter are 
readily available at the employee association co-op and on the local 
economy.  There are several qualified veterinarians in Israel. 
 
¶9. Firearms 
 
Government of Israel (GOI) prohibits the importation of and/or 
possession of firearms for other than official purposes. Personal 
weapons cannot be shipped to post. For information on importing 
official use weapons or for further information please contact the 
RSO office. 
 
¶10. Mail 
 
Tel Aviv is an APO post. Please contact your office sponsor for your 
correct office mailbox number prior to making arrangements to 
forward mail items to post. Please check in with the APO mailroom 
staff immediately upon arrival to ensure your mail has been arriving 
and is addressed correctly.  The correct address format for personal 
and official mail is: 
 
Personal:   (Your Name) 
    PSC 98, Box (see comment above) 
    APO AE  09830 
 
Official:   (Your Section) 
    Attn: (Name of official representing that section) 
    Unit 7228, Box (see comments above) 
    APO AE  09830 
 
NOTE:  Never include "Tel Aviv" or "Israel" in your personal or 
official addresses. Indicating either of the above could 
significantly delay mail transit times. 
 
¶11.  International courier 
 
Sending any items other than documents through an international 
courier service is not recommended.  From Post's experience, sending 
goods through such services has proven costly to the individual due 
to airport storage and paperwork fees.  Use of APO is both faster 
and less expensive. 
 
¶12. Travel plans 
 
Please advise your agency/section representative ASAP of your firm 
travel plans including flight number, date and time of arrival. 
Post will arrange for your sponsor to meet and greet you at the 
airport and escort you to your home. 
 
¶13.  Embassy Recreation Center 
 
The Recreation Center is located in Kfar Shmaryahu, which is 
approximately 10 miles north of Tel Aviv near Embassy housing.  The 
indoor recreation center includes a small gym, media room, game and 
meeting rooms. The outdoor recreation center includes a tennis 
court, adult and children pools, and a snack bar for personal use. 
Games and social events scheduled there, primarily during spring, 
summer, and fall by the CLO. 
 
¶14. School 
 
Most Mission children attend the Walworth Barbour American 
International School (AIS) in Israel. Requests for enrollment 
applications and specific questions about the program should be 
directed to the school at: 
 
P.O. Box 484 
64 Hashomron Street 
Even Yehuda 
40500, Israel 
Tel: 972 (9) 890-1000 or 972 (9) 890-1001 
Email: aisrael@wbais.org 
Or 
Elementary program (fifth grade): pisraels@wbais.org 
 
In addition to contacting the school, please contact the CLO by 
email or fax with the names, birth dates and grades your 
child/children will be entering upon arrival as soon as your 
assignment is confirmed. Since a large number of diplomatic children 
in Israel attend AIS, CLO will ensure that the school is notified of 
your child/children's arrival. CLOTELAVIV@STATE.GOV 
Fax: 972 (3) 510-4415 
 
Note that enrollment at AIS is contingent upon the student's ability 
to meet the academic standards set forth by AIS. 
 
If you have a child with special needs, please understand that the 
school has limited capabilities for handling either mentally or 
physically challenged children. If AIS is unable to accommodate a 
child, there are few, if any, outside educational options available 
in English. It is in your best interest to contact the school in 
advance and have a thorough diagnostic work-up prior to arrival, and 
to hand carry all records with you. 
 
Upon arrival all students are required to make an appointment with 
the school for placement testing. 
 
Preschool 
AIS offers a preschool in Kfar Shmaryahu as well, with half-day 
classes for children, ages 2-5, an After School Care Program, and a 
Mommy, Daddy, and Me Program for ages 1-2. 
 
AIS offers three classes with an enrollment of 10-16 students per 
class; the Ducklings, ages 2-3 (maximum class size: 10), the Teddy 
Bears, ages 3-4 (maximum class size: 12) and the Stars, ages 4-5 
(maximum class size 16).  AEIP employs qualified and experienced 
teachers and maintains an excellent student/teacher ratio under the 
guidance by the National Association of Education for Young Children 
(NAEYC).  Space is limited so early enrollment is recommended. 
 
The After School Care Program runs from 12:30 p.m. - 4 p.m., Monday 
through Thursday, and 12:30 p.m. - 2:30 p.m. on Friday. The program 
is supervised by an adult After School Program teacher.  Activities 
include swimming, games, cooking, reading and learning fun. 
 
The Mommy, Daddy and Me program is a two hour interactive program 
offered twice a week at AEIP. The program is led by a certified 
teacher who specializes in early childhood education. 
 
¶15. Family Member Employment 
 
The Bilateral Work Agreement between Israel and the United States 
allows spouses to obtain unrestricted work permits which allow the 
bearer to work for any employer in Israel.  The work permit 
application process is initiated at post and takes 2-4 weeks to 
obtain and is issued for one year at a time and can be extended up 
to 63 months.   Dependents interested in working on the local 
economy are encouraged to contact Devorie Friedman, GEI/SNAP Global 
Employment Advisor, at FriedmanDR@state.gov.  The Global Employment 
Advisor provides an array of services, such as culturally 
appropriate resume preparation and interviewing techniques, 
briefings on cross-cultural issues, networking assistance, job 
listings, workshops, work permit applications, and one-on-one career 
counseling. 
Although many positions in Israel require Hebrew fluency, Israel's 
large hi-tech industry offers numerous job opportunities, in 
positions such as IT, marketing, sales/customer service, technical 
writing, business consultancy, and more.  There is a large demand 
for computer programmers and engineers, as many multinational 
corporations have established research centers in Israel, including 
Intel, HP, and IBM.  There is also a demand for English teachers, 
particularly in international schools, such as the American 
International School, and private language institutes, such as 
Berlitz or The Wall Street Institute.  Although lawyers and 
accountants will encounter steep competition in Israel, there are 
private firms and international organizations that seek 
professionals with US training.  Salaries in Israel are generally 
lower than in the United States, particularly for entry-level 
positions.  Local taxes will be deducted from the salary.  All open 
positions within the Mission and through GEI/SNAP are advertised in 
the GEI/SNAP newsletter and on Embassy bulletin boards. 
There are a variety of EFM positions within the Embassy, including 
Consular Associate positions, HR Assistant, ESTH Assistant, IT 
Assistant and OMS rover positions. 
 
 
¶16. Domestic employees 
 
Domestic employees can be hired locally or from abroad.  In either 
case a sponsor must fill out an undertaking and visa application, 
and provide national and work accident insurance, which can be 
obtained from the Human Resources Office.  The Israeli Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs approves all requests for domestic hire.  If you are 
interested in bringing domestic help with you to Israel please 
contact Human Resources Assistant Avivit (Vivi) Martziel at 
MARTZIELAX@STATE.GOV. 
 
¶17. Living in Israel 
 
Many Israelis speak English but knowledge of Hebrew is an asset. 
The Embassy has some language classes and language programs are 
readily available for family members both through the Embassy and on 
the local market funds permitting.  It is also possible to enroll in 
"Ulpan", intensive language programs on the local economy. 
 
Dress in Israel is casual for most occasions.  Formal attire is 
rarely used.  Normal street-wear and sports jackets prove to be 
useful year round, reserving a suit and tie for the winter and 
special occasions.  If you have high-schoolers, they too will need 
attire for the winter ball and prom, both sponsored by the American 
International School. 
 
While Tel Aviv is a metropolitan post, security concerns restrict 
employees from using most forms of public transportation. Although 
transportation to/from work can usually be arranged, most employees 
find it useful to have at least one POV at post. 
 
Please note: A second duty-free car/motorcycle may only be imported 
or purchased if the employee is accompanied to post by a dependent 
with a valid drivers license and that the dependant is not an 
Israeli citizen.  I.e. Local MFA regulations state that a dependent 
holding dual US/Israeli citizenship that enters Israel as the 
dependent of a U.S. diplomat will be considered a local citizen and 
will not be afforded any diplomatic right.  (Please see the separate 
Shipping cable for more information). 
 
Summers are hot and humid in the coastal areas and very hot and dry 
in the desert.  By contrast, the winters are quite chilly and damp. 
Snow falls in the northern regions and even in Jerusalem.  December 
through March is the rainy season, during which time there will be 
considerable temperature variations between the highlands and the 
coastal areas.  Jerusalem is considerably cooler than Tel Aviv 
throughout the year.  You will need light winter clothing, and 
dressing in layers is the norm.  Due to both its religious 
atmosphere and cooler climate, dress in Jerusalem tends to be more 
conservative than in Tel Aviv.  Each season offers its own unique 
sporting activity; you can even snow ski at Mount Hermon on the 
Golan Heights.  There is no shortage of activities in this country; 
it is all dependent upon your interests and budget. 
 
While most consumer items are available in Israel, you may wish to 
include a supply of your "favorites" in your HHE.  Israel produces 
many items, resulting in fewer imports and fewer American products 
on the shelves. 
 
Please consider your holiday needs when packing your HHE. Christmas 
ornaments and decorations are difficult to obtain on the local 
market.  Although the Foreign Ministry provides a cut tree to each 
household upon request, the selection is very limited, and 
artificial trees are not available locally. Decorations for other 
American holidays are similarly lacking. 
 
It may seem there is a lot to absorb in coming to Tel Aviv, but we 
can assure you that post will respond to any questions you may have 
as soon as possible.  E-mail is widely available at this post, and 
we strongly urge you to use it.  Keep the CLO informed of any 
changes and provide us with any pertinent information so your 
arrival and settling-in will be as easy as possible. 
 
Credit card services are readily available in Israel.  MasterCard, 
Visa and American Express are widely accepted as well as the 
IsraCard, EuroCard, and Barclaycard. 
 
We look forward to your arrival.  We wish you a pleasant trip and a 
rewarding tour in Israel. 
 
¶18. Preparing your OpenNet and Class Net computer account for 
migration. 
 
For State Department employees, in order to have your existing 
OpenNet plus and classified ClassNet user accounts migrated to Tel 
Aviv, you will need to do the following: 
 
Provide your current OpenNet plus and ClassNet systems 
administrators with the following information before you leave: 
 
a. Departure date 
b. Onward assignment 
c. Reporting date 
d. State Department email addresses (example: 
doejx@state.govmailto:doejx@state.gov and 
doejx@state.sgov.gov) 
 
Ask them to open tickets with the info center 
(INFOCENTER@STATE.GOV MAILTO:INFOCENTER@STATE.GOV) in order to 
coordinate your account moves. Once this is completed, notify your 
new supervisor or section that you will be arriving and request that 
they submit an OpenNet access request to the Tel Aviv ISC and a 
ClassNet CableExpress access request to the IPC. 
 
¶19. Contact points 
 
If you should have questions or are in need of further information, 
the following offices can assist you by email or at the following 
numbers: 
 
Brent R. Bohne, 
Management Counselor 
972 (3)519-7313 
E-mail: BOHNEBR@STATE.GOV 
 
Elizabeth E. Moore, 
Deputy Management Counselor 
972 (3) 519-7316 
E-mail: MOOREEE@STATE.GOV 
 
Vincent Romero, 
S/General Service Officer 
972(3)519-7310 
E-mail: ROMEROV3@STATE.GOV 
 
Grant Ludwig, FS Health Practitioner (FSHP) 
Health Unit 
972(3)519-7323 
E-mail: LUDWIGG@STATE.GOV 
 
Daniel J. Power 
Regional Security Officer 
972(3)519-7400 
E-mail: POWERDJ@STATE.GOV 
 
Information Management Officer 
William K. Curry 
972-(3) 519-7575 
E-mail: CURRYMK@STATE.GOV 
 
Financial Management Officer 
Lynn m. Ferenc 
972-(3) 519-7516 
E-mail: FERENCLM@STATE.GOV 
 
Community Liaison Coordinator 
Matthew K. Moore and Robert G. Posner 
972(3)519-7389/7682 
E-mail: CLOTELAVIV@STATE.GOV 
 
Main Embassy fax no. 
972(3)517-3227 
 
CUNNINGHAM