09USUNNEWYORK608
SRSG DE MISTURA BRIEFS THE SECURITY COUNCIL IN A
Sat Jun 20 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO4680
OO RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHDH RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUCNDT #0608 1710128
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 200128Z JUN 09
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6748
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS USUN NEW YORK 000608 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV UNSC IZ
SUBJECT: SRSG DE MISTURA BRIEFS THE SECURITY COUNCIL IN A 
FINAL ADDRESS 
 
¶1. (U) Summary: On June 18, the Security Council held a 
quarterly debate on UNAMI/Iraq.  Turkish FM Davutoglu chaired 
the meeting, which included interventions by all Council 
members, Iraqi PR Bayati and SRSG Staffan de Mistura in his 
last address before the Council.  De Mistura praised the work 
of UNAMI over the last two years, emphasized Iraq,s progress 
and concluded that Iraq,s future "looks moderately bright." 
Following the conclusion of the meeting, Council members 
adopted a Presidential Statement that commends the Iraqi 
government,s efforts to strengthen democracy and the rule of 
law, and to improve security and public order.  The 
Presidential Statement emphasizes the crucial role of UNAMI 
and encourages its continued work.  End summary. 
 
DE MISTURA, IRAQ PR SPEAK 
 
¶2. (U) Staffan de Mistura, who served as head of UNAMI for 
the last eighteen months, addressed the Council for a last 
time in his capacity as SRSG.  He reviewed UNAMI,s 
achievements over the last two years and said they were 
possible because of an expanded UNAMI mandate, UNAMI,s 
expanded footprint in Iraq and a new approach by the UNAMI 
team.  He said he was proud of what UNAMI had achieved, and 
proud that UNAMI had helped turn the page on the perception 
of the UN in Iraq.  He noted a recent uptick in insecurity, 
but said these events were isolated and would not destabilize 
the country.  De Mistura said UNAMI was particularly focused 
on upcoming elections, disputed internal boundaries and 
assistance to Iraqi refugees/IDPs. 
 
¶3. (U) Turning to the region,s relations with Iraq, de 
Mistura said Iraq,s relations with Turkey, Syria, Jordan and 
Iran had improved significantly.  Regarding Iraq,s relations 
with Kuwait, de Mistura said these were absolutely crucial to 
reintegrate Iraq into the region.  Iraq has shown increasing 
signs of cooperation with Kuwait.  He alluded to "creative 
options" currently being considered to improve Iraq/Kuwait 
relations, and he urged the Security Council to address this 
issue as soon as possible.  De Mistura closed with a poignant 
reference to Sergio Vieira de Mello.  During tough months in 
the beginning of his tenure as SRSG, de Mistura said he and 
the UNAMI staff soldiered on, knowing that by their work, the 
deaths of de Mello and the other UN staff killed in the Canal 
Hotel bombing would not be in vain. 
 
¶4. (U) Iraqi PR Bayati thanked de Mistura for his 
intervention and warmly welcomed the presence of Turkish FM 
Davutoglu.  He presented a lengthy review of Iraq,s 
political, security, social, economic and foreign policy 
achievements.  He noted that national reconciliation remains 
a top priority for the Iraqi government, and underscored the 
dedication of the Iraqi people to the democratic process. 
Bayati closed by declaring that Iraq has "fulfilled all of 
its obligations" related to Security Council resolutions 
involving Iraq.  He noted further that "Iraq recognized the 
State of Kuwait and its borders in accordance with the 
relevant Security Council resolutions" and asked the 
Secretary-General and the Security Council to "assist Iraq in 
returning to the international status it held before the 
invasion of Kuwait in 1990, an invasion which was one of the 
most atrocious crimes committed by Saddam Hussein and that 
the Iraqi people continue to pay a heavy price for." 
 
INTERVENTIONS BY COUNCIL MEMBERS 
 
¶5. (U) Council members uniformly praised de Mistura for his 
work, and thanked the staff of UNAMI for their efforts. 
Ambassador Rice thanked de Mistura for his reference to 
Sergio de Mello, and said it was an important reminder of the 
enormous contributions and sacrifices that so many have made 
on behalf of the UN.  She emphasized that U.S. combat troops 
would leave civilian populated areas by the end of the month, 
but added that this would in no way diminish the long-term 
relationship between the U.S. and Iraq.  France welcomed the 
role of UNAMI in elections and disputed internal boundaries, 
and saluted the substantial progress Iraq has made in 
establishing stability.  Russia and China praised Iraqi 
progress, but noted the continuing need for progress in 
national reconciliation.  Several countries - Costa Rica, 
Mexico, Austria and the United Kingdom - urged Iraq to 
redouble its efforts on human rights, to quickly institute 
the Independent High Commission for Human Rights, and to 
reconsider its decision to legalize capital punishment. 
Mexico praised the announcement that U.S. combat troops would 
leave Iraqi population centers by the end of the month. 
Libya reiterated its position that only the full withdrawal 
of foreign troops would lead to true national reconciliation. 
RICE