09VIENNA1524
AUSTRIA: NOMINEES FOR PRESIDENTIAL ENTREPRENEURSHIP SUMMIT
Mon Nov 30 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Vienna
VZCZCXRO2854
RR RUEHIK
DE RUEHVI #1524/01 3341451
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 301451Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY VIENNA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3764
INFO RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATESUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 VIENNA 001524 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR S/P (BEHRMAN) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EAID PREL SOCI XF XI ZR ZP CN PU MV SO AU
SUBJECT: AUSTRIA: NOMINEES FOR PRESIDENTIAL ENTREPRENEURSHIP SUMMIT 
 
REF: STATE 112468 
 
VIENNA 00001524  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. In response to reftel, Post submits the following nominees for 
the Presidential Entrepreneurship Summit: 
 
¶2. Yavuz Kuscu.  Kuscu is the current owner of TVG Consulting GmbH & 
TVG European Air Alliance.  He is also the President of the 
Austro-Turkish Trade Association.  TVG was established in 1974 and 
has focused its services on international investment consultations. 
The company has strived to promote cooperation in investment 
opportunities between Austria and foreign partners for many years, 
especially in the emerging markets of Turkey and Russia. 
 
¶3. Kenan Gungor.  Gungor has become an international expert on 
integration and diversity, as well as an advisor to the Austrian 
Federal Government and several Austrian state governments.  He began 
his involvement in the field of immigration in 1981.  In 2000, he 
founded the Health Networks of Turkish Migrants research division at 
the Swiss Tropical Institute in Basel.  At Basel, he conducted 
studies, professional coaching, and innovative pilot projects in the 
priority areas of integration, participation, and urban development 
in German speaking countries.  In 2002, he became the manager of the 
integration development model for the Upper Tyrol region of Austria. 
 In 2007, he became the head of the social analysis firm Difference. 
 The firm focuses on diversity management in the city of Vienna, 
specifically in the areas of integration, participation, urban 
sociology, conflict, and violence analysis.  The organization 
specializes in social transformation processes within societies 
which are increasingly influenced by immigration, integration, and 
diversity. 
 
¶4. Mouddar Khouja.  Khouja studied computer science at the Technical 
University in Vienna, and has lived in Austria since 1985.  He is 
now the personal adviser to Anas Schakfeh, president of the official 
Islamic Faith Community of Austria.  He is the co-founder of the 
Initiative of Muslim Austrians.  He has represented the Islamic 
Faith Community in the Austrian Parliament and has worked with the 
political parties in Austria and the Federal Government on issues 
related to legal equality for Muslims.  He has also lectured on 
subjects involving integration, migration, and racism.  Khouja also 
co-founded a platform for inter-religious meetings in Vienna and a 
forum of Abrahamic religions in Austria. 
 
¶5. Attila Dogudan.  Dogudan is the most prominent entrepreneur in 
Austria with a Turkish background.  He was born in Istanbul in 1959 
and is the son of a Turkish restaurant owner and a Viennese mother. 
At the age of ten, he moved to Vienna.  In 1981, he established the 
catering company Do&Co, three gourmet restaurants and a party 
catering service.  Since 1987 his company has catered for LaudaAir 
and since 1992 for major events such as the Formula 1 race.  The 
company went public in 1998 and opened logistics centers in New York 
in 1999 and in Miami in 2000. 
 
¶6. Semih Caliskan.  From 2004-2009, Caliskan was the head of 
wholesale operations of Colt Telecom Austria.  Since Nov 2009, he 
has taken over as the new CEO of the Austrian subsidiary of Colt 
Telecom.  COLT is an award winning and leading provider of data, 
voice and managed services to business and government in Europe. 
 
¶7. Hikmet Ersek.  Ersek, born in Istanbul, earned a degree in 
Economics and Business Administration from the University of 
Economics, Vienna, Austria.  He began his career at 
Europay/MasterCard from 1986 until 1996, after ending his 
professional career as a basketball player.  Before joining Western 
Union in 1999, Ersek worked at GE Capital from 1996 - 1999.  Then, 
in 1999, he joined First Data Corporation, the former parent company 
of Western Union, as the regional vice president of the Southern 
Europe region, later taking on the Central and Eastern Europe 
regions as well.  Since 2004, Ersek has worked in Vienna as Western 
Union's executive vice president and managing director for Europe, 
the Middle East, Africa, and the Asia Pacific Region.  He was 
recently appointed as Global CEO of Western Union and will soon be 
moving to the Western Union headquarters in Denver, CO. 
 
¶8. Huseyin Tutuncu.  Tutuncu is the owner of Kent Restaurant, a 
thriving and expanding Turkish restaurant in Vienna (Website: 
http://www.kent-restaurant.at/bg/page/index.h tml). 
 
¶9. Mehmet Kocak.  Kocak is the owner of Etap, one of the most 
popular Turkish restaurants in Austria, which hosts numerous events 
and caters to many businesses.  Since 1999, Etap has expanded to 
four additional locations, including the Etap Event Center with a 
600-seat VIP area. 
 
¶10. Gursel Erel.  Eres is the owner of Bentour Austria, a branch of 
Bentour International.  Bentour Austria is a leading tourism company 
connecting Austria to Turkey, Egypt, Tunisia, and Greece.  Erel 
began his business career modestly with the help of his father's 
small pension, and now runs a highly successful operation.  He 
founded Bentour Austria, which employs 23, in 2003. 
 
 
VIENNA 00001524  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶11. Atil Kutoglu.  Kutoglu has become an internationally recognized, 
high-end clothing designer.  Based in Vienna, the "Atilkutoglu" 
label has been a status symbol in Austria for almost two decades. 
Kutoglu's clothing company began as a small operation in rural 
Turkey.  In the early 1990s, his designs became popular in the U.S. 
and Europe, and he later moved to Austria.