10ADANA5
SE TURKEY SECURITY INCIDENTS: JANUARY 11-19, 2010
Fri Jan 22 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
VZCZCXRO4873
RR RUEHDA
DE RUEHDA #0005/01 0220847
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 220847Z JAN 10
FM AMCONSUL ADANA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4839
INFO RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 1382
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 1145
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 1449UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 ADANA 000005 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR DS/IP/EUR, DS/IP/ITA, INR AND EUR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PTER PINR CASC TU
SUBJECT: SE TURKEY SECURITY INCIDENTS: JANUARY 11-19, 2010 
 
¶1.  (U) The following security incidents for the period of 
January 11-19, 2010 were compiled by the security assistant at 
Consulate Adana from RSO sources, to include Turkish security 
contacts, government officials and media. The RSO uses the 
information to determine the security situation and trends of 
violence and crime throughout Turkey. The RSO shares the 
information with the country team and visas viper coordinator. 
 
¶2.  (U) Military operations against the Kurdistan Workers' Party 
(PKK) as reported by the Turkish General Staff: 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
-------- 
¶A.  Weapons, ammunition, and equipment seized: 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
-------- 
 
Hakkari - 01.16.10: 105 kilograms of food and logistical and 
medical equipment. 
 
Siirt - 01.15.10: 3 Kalashnikovs, 13 magazines, 417 rounds of 
ammunition, 1 rifle, 22 rounds of pistol ammunition. 
 
Sirnak - 01.12.10: 1 round of RPG-7. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
¶B.  PKK members captured or surrendered: 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
01.13.10 through 01.19.10: Security forces captured 5 PKK 
members alive. 
 
Hakkari - 01.16.10: Iranian troops handed over 2 PKK members at 
the Esendere Border Gate. 
 
Hatay - 1.15.10: 1 PKK member was captured. 
 
Sirnak - 01.12.10: Security forces captured 2 PKK members. 
 
--------------------- 
¶C. PKK attacks: 
--------------------- 
 
Mardin - 01.12.10: 1 civilian was wounded in an IED blast. 
 
Batman - 01.17.10: 1 soldier wounded and 1 killed in a clash. 
 
 
¶3. (U) Media reports related to PKK and pro-Kurdish 
organizations. 
 
--------------------------------- 
¶A.  Anti-PKK operations: 
--------------------------------- 
 
Turkish Armed Forces (TAF) anti-PKK operations in SE Turkey 
continued in Tunceli, Sirnak, Batman, Hatay, Siirt, Hakkari and 
Bingol. 
 
01.19.10 - Tunceli and Bingol: TAF launched anti-terror 
operations based on information that PKK members may protest 
Ocalan's prison conditions. 
 
¶N. Iraq - 01.15.10: TAF artillery teams bombed mountainous 
terrain of Semdinli. 
 
---------------- 
¶B.  Arrests: 
---------------- 
 
Mardin - 01.19.10: BDP's (Peace and Democracy Party) Provincial 
Chairman is on trial on the charge of "making propaganda for the 
PKK." 
 
Van - 01.19.10: Security forces arrested 1 person on the charge 
of "making propaganda for the PKK." 
 
Bitlis - 01.19.10: Security forces detained 9 people on the 
suspicion of terrorism. 
 
Mus - 01.19.10: Security forces detained 2 people on the 
suspicion of terrorism. 
 
Sirnak - 01.19.10: Security forces detained 2 members of the 
pro-Kurdish Azadiya Welat (Free Country) newspaper on the 
suspicion of terrorism. 
 
Sanliurfa - 01.19.10: Security forces detained 1 person on the 
suspicion of terrorism. 
 
 
ADANA 00000005  002 OF 005 
 
 
Malatya - 01.19.10: Security forces detained 1 student on the 
suspicion of terrorism. 
 
Hakkari - 01.19.10: Security forces detained 3 people on the 
suspicion of terrorism. 
 
Sirnak - 01.18.10: Security forces detained 23 people in 
anti-KCK operation on the suspicion of terrorism. 
 
Van - 01.17.10: Security forces detained 3 people who threw 
stones at police on the suspicion of terrorism. Security forces 
also arrested a singer of the pro-Kurdish Koma Gulistan music 
group on the charge of "making propaganda for the PKK." 
 
Malatya - 01.17.10: A clash erupted between Kurdish and Turkish 
students at Inonu University. One student was injured and 
security forces detained at least 10. 
 
Bitlis - 01.16.10: Security forces arrested 12 people on the 
charges of "assisting and harboring the PKK." 
 
Mersin - 01.16.10: Security forces detained 1 person on the 
suspicion of terrorism. 
 
Bingol - 01.15.10: Security forces arrested 2 people on the 
charges of "assisting and harboring the PKK." 
 
Sanliurfa - 01.15.10: 24 people, including former DTP members, 
are on trial on the charge of "violating restrictions on marches 
and demonstrations." 
 
Batman - 01.15.10: Security forces arrested 1 person on the 
charge of "joining un illegal actions on behalf of the PKK." 
 
Van - 01.14.10: Security forces arrested 2 people on the charge 
of "damaging public property." 
 
Batman - 01.14.10: Security forces detained 2 people on the 
suspicion of terrorism. 
 
Hatay - 01.14.10: Security forces detained 15 people on the 
charge of "chanting illegal slogans in favor of the PKK and 
Ocalan." Four were arrested on the charges of "making propaganda 
for the PKK," and "joining in illegal actions in favor of the 
PKK." 
 
Sanliurfa - 01.14.10: Security forces detained 4 people on the 
suspicion of terrorism and arrested 1 person on the charge of 
"membership in the PKK." Security forces also detained 4 minors 
on the charge of "making propaganda for the PKK." 
 
Siirt - 01.14.10: Twenty-two members of the pro-Kurdish YDGM 
(PKK's youth wing) are on trial on the charges of "membership in 
the PKK," and "joining in illegal actions on behalf of the PKK." 
 
 
Hakkari - 01.14.10: Security forces arrested 3 people on the 
charge of "making propaganda for the PKK." 
 
Bitlis - 01.14.10: Security forces arrested 20 people on the 
charge of "making propaganda for the PKK." 
 
Malatya - 01.14.10: Twenty-seven people, including an employee 
of the Dicle News Agency, were sentenced for a cumulative 170 
years in prison on the charge of "membership in PKK." Three 
people were acquitted. 
 
Batman - 01.14.10: Security forces arrested 2 members of the BDP 
women's branch on the charge of "membership in the PKK."  In a 
separate operation, security forces detained 3 people on the 
suspicion of terrorism. 
 
Bingol - 01.14.10: Three people arrested in a police operation 
targeting Kurdish Communities Union (KCK) members. The 6 
suspects had been detained on charges that they were involved in 
Molotov cocktail attacks and for promoting the PKK. 
 
Hakkari - 01.13.10: Security forces arrested 3 people on the 
charge of "making propaganda for the PKK." 
 
Bingol - 01.13.10: Security forces arrested 3 people on the 
charge of "making propaganda for the PKK." 
 
Adana - 01.13.10: Security forces arrested 2 people on the 
charges of "membership in the PKK," and "making propaganda for 
the PKK." 
 
Mersin - 01.13.10: Security forces detained 19 people on the 
suspicion of terrorism. Mersin police detained over 100 people 
in recent weeks in anti-KCK operations. 
 
ADANA 00000005  003 OF 005 
 
 
 
Sirnak - 01.13.10: Security forces arrested 7 people on the 
charge of "making propaganda for the PKK," and detained 2 people 
on the suspicion of terrorism. 
 
Bitlis - 01.13.10: Security forces detained 28 people on the 
suspicion of terrorism. Seven were later arrested on the charges 
of "chanting illegal slogans in favor of PKK and Ocalan," and 
"making propaganda for the PKK." 
 
Sanliurfa: 01.13.10: Security forces arrested 1 person on the 
charge of "making propaganda for the PKK." 
 
Diyarbakir - 01.13.10: Security forces detained 2 members of the 
BDP on the suspicion of terrorism. 
 
Hakkari - 01.13.10: Security forces detained a member of the 
YDG-M (PKK's youth wing) on the suspicion of terrorism. 
 
Mardin - 01.13.10: Security forces arrested an employee of 
Azadiya Welat Newspaper on the charge of "making propaganda for 
the PKK." 
 
Diyarbakir - 01.12.10: Public prosecutors questioned Mayor Osman 
Baydemir for 4 hours as part of the recent anti-KCK operation. 
His travel from Turkey has been restricted by court order. 
 
Adana - 01.12.10: Security forces detained 20 people, including 
DTP's former district chairman, on the charges of "chanting 
illegal slogans in favor of PKK and Ocalan," and "joining in 
illegal actions on behalf of the PKK." Organizational documents, 
magazines, and pictures related to the PKK were seized in the 
operation. 
 
Bitlis - 01.12.10: Security forces arrested 11 people on the 
charges of "making propaganda for the PKK," and "chanting 
illegal slogans in favor of PKK and Ocalan." Protesters 
subsequently gathered at the courthouse, where security forces 
later intervened with batons and tear gas. Police detained over 
70 people including BDP's provincial mayor, district mayors, and 
municipality council members. 
 
Hakkari - 01.12.10: Security forces arrested three people in an 
anti-terror operation on the charges of "destroying public 
property," and "making propaganda for the PKK." 
 
Diyarbakir - 01.12.10: Security forces detained two members of 
the BDP women's branch. 
 
Adana - 01.12.10: Security forces arrested three people on the 
charges of "membership in the PKK," and "carrying out illegal 
actions on behalf of the PKK." 
 
Sirnak - 01.12.10: Security forces detained 39 people on the 
suspicion of terrorism in. 
 
Mardin - 01.12.10: Security forces detained an employee of 
Azadiya Welat Newspaper on the suspicion of terrorism. 
 
Sirnak - 01.12.10: Security forces detained 8 people on the 
suspicion of terrorism. 
 
Adana - 01.11.10: Security forces detained 6 people, including 3 
minors, on the charge of "joining in illegal street actions on 
behalf of the PKK." 
 
Gaziantep - 01.11.10: Security forces detained 10 people on the 
suspicion of terrorism. 
 
Van - 01.11.10: 2 people, who threw Molotov cocktails at police, 
were sentenced cumulatively to 23 years in prison on the charge 
of "joining in illegal street actions on behalf of the PKK." 
 
Mus - 01.11.10: Two village guards are on trial for killing two 
at a demonstration protesting DTP's closure. 
 
Diyarbakir - 01.11.10: Fifteen members of the Kandil Peace Group 
are under investigation on the charge of "making propaganda for 
the PKK." 
 
Van - 01.11.10: Twenty-one students were detained for recruiting 
other students to participate in demonstrations in support of 
the PKK after a two-month police operation. Eleven students were 
later arrested on the charges of "membership in the PKK," and 
"making propaganda for the PKK." 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
¶C.  Other media stories about the PKK: 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
 
ADANA 00000005  004 OF 005 
 
 
Diyarbakir - 01.19.10: Unidentified people attacked a 
supermarket with Molotov cocktails. Pro-PKK Aydin Erdem Revenge 
Brigade has claimed the responsibility of the attack. 
 
Hakkari - 01.19.10: Pro-PKK web Site ANF reported that a minor 
was beaten by 3 or 4 plainclothes police officers. 
 
Adiyaman - 01.18.10: Unidentified people attacked BDP social 
facilities with stones. 
 
Van - 01.18.10: BDP members have started a hunger strike to 
protest anti-KCK operations. 
 
Hakkari - 01.17.10 and 01.18.10: Security forces intervened in a 
pro-PKK demonstration with tear gas, pressurized water and 
batons. PKK supporters responded with stones and Molotov 
cocktails; no injuries reported. 
 
Siirt - 01.17.10: Members of the Peace Mothers held a sit-in to 
protest anti-KCK operations. 
 
Diyarbakir and Batman - 01.17.10: A senior sergeant was killed 
in a clash with the PKK and one other was injured. An 
investigation is underway, focusing on the possible involvement 
of village guards. 
 
Batman - 01.14.10: The pro-Kurdish Democracy Platform has 
started a signature campaign to protest anti-KCK operations. 
 
Sirnak - 01.14.10: Employees of Sirnak Municipality staged a 
sit-in to protest recent anti-KCK operations. 
 
Diyarbakir - 01.13.09: Security forces caught 5 PKK members who 
were in preparations to carryout terrorist actions. Two hand 
grenades, one Kalashnikov, one pistol, 157 rounds of bullet, six 
magazines, and organizational documents were seized in the 
operation. 
 
Adana - 01.13.10: A protest of recent anti-KCK operations was 
held in front of the BDP building. 
 
Bitlis - 01.13.10: Hundreds of people gathered in front of the 
BDP building to protest recent anti-KCK operations and 
detentions. 
 
Van - 01.13.10 and 01.12.10: YODER (PKK's University Structure) 
held marches and press statements to protest the detention of 
its members and recent anti-KCK operations. No clash or arrest 
occurred. 
 
Hakkari - 01.11.10: A group of PKK sympathizers gathered to 
protest recent anti-KCK operation, chanting slogans in favor of 
PKK and Ocalan. 
 
Sanliurfa - 01.11.10: BDP (Peace and Democracy Party) has 
started a signature campaign to protest recent anti-KCK 
operations. 
 
¶4.  (U) Media reports on significant crime or security incidents: 
 
Adiyaman - 01.19.10: Security forces confiscated 2 Kalashnikovs 
and many historical artifacts. 2 people were detained in the 
operations. 
 
Mersin - 01.18.10: Security forces detained 4 people in an 
anti-smuggling operation. 
 
Sanliurfa - 01.18.10: Security forces detained 13 people in an 
anti-weapons-smuggling operation. 
 
 
Sanliurfa - 01.16.10: Security forces confiscated 24 anti-tank 
mines and 70 detonation fuses. One person was arrested in the 
operation. 
 
Hakkari - 01.14.10: Security forces found a corpse of a child in 
a rural area. 
 
Sirnak - 01.14.10: The police department in Cizre district is 
paying 1-3 Turkish Lira to children for disposed tires in order 
to prevent them being set on fire during demonstrations to 
barricade the streets. 
 
Hakkari - 01.14.10: AKP's regional head of youth programs was 
targeted with a car bomb. No injuries reported, and police are 
investigating. 
 
Mersin - 01.13.10: Human Rights Union (IHD) branch of Tarsus 
held a march to protest recent attacks on ethnic minorities 
across Turkey. 
 
ADANA 00000005  005 OF 005 
 
 
 
Diyarbakir - 01.13.10: Six people, including four village 
guards, were sentenced to life sentence in prison for killing a 
man almost 10 years ago over a land dispute. 
 
Kilis - 01.11.10: Ten hand grenades were found near an abandoned 
swimming pool. 
 
Sanliurfa - 01.12.10: Security forces detained 5 people after a 
firefight erupted last week in waiting line. 
 
01.12.10: The Interior Ministry has established a Border Control 
Agency to include 70,000 officers from the gendarmerie, coast 
guard commands and the National Police Department. 
 
Sanliurfa - 01.13.10: An explosion on the BOTAS pipeline has 
prompted a criminal investigation. 
 
Elazig - 01.13.10: Security forces detained 7 people in an 
anti-organized-crime operation. 
 
Diyarbakir - 01.13.10: Security forces detained 4 people in an 
anti-organized-crime operation. 
 
¶5. (U) Illegal immigrant arrests: 
 
01.11.10 through 01.17.10: Security forces captured and deported 
316 illegal immigrants from: Mugla, Canakkale, Sirnak, Edirne, 
Agri, Artvin, Hakkari, Aydin, and the borders of Iran, Iraq, 
Syria and Greece. Four Turks assisting the illegal immigrants 
were also detained in the operations. 
 
¶6. (U) Counter-narcotic operations: 
 
Mardin - 01.15.10: Security forces confiscated 4 kilograms of 
hashish and detained 1 person. 
 
Van - 01.13.10: Security forces confiscated 63 kilograms of 
heroin and detained 1 person. 
 
Van - 01.11.10: Security forces seized 145 kilograms of heroin 
and 40 kilograms of hashish. 3 people were arrested in the 
operation. 
 
Diyarbakir - 01.11.10: Security forces seized 6 kilograms of 
hashish and 6 unregistered pistols. 
 
Van - 01.12.10: Security forces detained 28 people in an 
anti-organized-crime and smuggling operation. Five of them, 
including two police officers, were later arrested. 
 
¶7. (U) Anti-Al-Qaeda Operation in Adana: 
 
Security forces captured 20 Al-Qaeda members in the Yuregir and 
Seyhan Districts of Adana. Almost 300 policemen joined in the 
operations and 25 separate points were stormed. The alleged head 
of Al-Qaeda in Turkey, Serdar Elbasa, who is also known by the 
codename Abu Zer, was captured in the operations. Elbasa was 
reportedly recruiting new members and collecting money on behalf 
of the organization. Three pistols, instructions for making 
bombs, two pairs of binoculars (including one with night-vision 
capability), and fake identity cards and passports were seized 
in the operations. 
DARNELL