10CASABLANCA20
MOROCCO: 2010 ANNUAL TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS
Tue Feb 16 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Casablanca
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHCL #0020/01 0470901
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 160901Z FEB 10
FM AMCONSUL CASABLANCA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8631
INFO RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDC
RUEAHLC/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RUEBWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDC
RUCNMGH/MAGHREB COLLECTIVE
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI 0001
RUEHUJA/AMEMBASSY ABUJA 0001
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 1016
RUEHMK/AMEMBASSY MANAMA 0579
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME 0365
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 0014UNCLAS CASABLANCA 000020 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR G/TIP, G - PENA, G/IWI AND DRL/NESCA 
STATE ALSO FOR INL/AAE, NEA/MAG, NEA/RA AND PRM 
STATE PLEASE PASS AID/W AND USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM KTIP PREF ELAB SMIG KCRM KFRD
ASEC, KMCA, KWMN, MO 
SUBJECT: MOROCCO: 2010 ANNUAL TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS 
REPORT 
 
REF: A. 09 STATE 2094 
 ¶B. 08 CASABALANCA 0255 
 
¶1.  (U) This cable responds to action request (Ref 
A) for updated information on the Moroccan 
government's efforts to combat trafficking in 
persons from April 2009 to February 2010. 
 
OVERVIEW 
-------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) The Government of Morocco (GOM) has taken 
a number of steps in 2009 that indicate it is poised 
to make substantive changes to strengthen its 
legislation, as well as enforcement and protection 
policies, for trafficking in persons (TIP) crimes. 
The GOM announced in May 2009 its intention to 
ratify the United Nations' 2000 Palermo Protocol to 
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons. 
In February 2010, the GOM validated the first ever 
Trafficking In Persons report in Morocco conducted 
by the International Organization for Migration 
(IOM) in cooperation with government ministries. 
The report, which is due to be made public shortly, 
includes a comprehensive overview of the GOM's 
strengths and weaknesses on TIP issues and includes 
recommendations for legislative and policy reform. 
The GOM intends to either pass comprehensive TIP 
legislation or amend the penal code to create a 
category of TIP crimes.  Moreover, two separate 
ministries have submitted draft legislation that 
seeks to bring greater enforcement and stiffer 
penalties against individuals who employ child 
domestics. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) In 2009 the GOM dismantled 130 trafficking 
networks.  However, it continued to conflate migrant 
smuggling and human trafficking.  The GOM 
prioritized law enforcement activities intended to 
investigate, prosecute and deter trafficking rings. 
The Ministry of Interior (MOI) reported that in 2009 
it successfully thwarted the attempted illegal 
migration of 5,549 people of which 2,672 were 
Moroccans and 2,877 were non-Moroccans.  The Royal 
Moroccan Navy intercepted 131 sub-Saharan migrants 
attempting illegal crossings on wooden boats. In 
spite of USG demarches at the ministerial-chief of 
mission level, the GOM has not yet implemented 
screening procedures or protections for victims of 
international trafficking and has taken few steps to 
prevent its own nationals from becoming victims of 
international trafficking. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) On the domestic front, Morocco continued 
to wrestle with internal trafficking problems, 
specifically the widespread issue of child labor, 
unaccompanied minors trafficked to Europe, and the 
sexual exploitation of children, particularly in 
tourist areas.  The GOM reported that in the first 
six months of 2009, labor inspectors issued 94 
warnings and 39 fines to businesses for employing 
children under 15 years of age.  In addition, the 
inspectors issued 616 warnings and 19 fines to 
businesses for employing children between the age of 
15 and 18.  The GOM also took measures against child 
sexual exploitation and reported that in 2008 (the 
most recent statistics available) it successfully 
prosecuted 25 cases of homosexual sex against a 
child, 138 cases of exploitation of a child for 
begging, 73 cases of exploitation of children in 
drugs, 25 cases of facilitating the illegal 
immigration of a minor, 203 cases of facilitating 
the prostitution of a minor, 504 cases of sexual 
assault of a minor, and 1,122 cases of aggravated 
 
sexual assault of a minor.  The GOM also reported 
that in 2009 10 foreigners were prosecuted for 
homosexuality, encouraging a minor to engage in 
prostitution, facilitating the exploitation of a 
minor and violent rape of a minor; their sentences 
ranged from one month to two years in prison.  The 
political will exists at the highest levels of the 
Moroccan Government to solve these problems; 
however, prioritizing budgets and reforms and the 
implementation of existing laws continue to be a 
challenge. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The GOM treats domestic trafficking issues 
primarily as a development issue.  For example, most 
anti-child labor programs in Morocco focus on 
providing financial support and education to the 
targeted family to ensure that children stay in 
school for as long as possible.  For fiscal year 
2009, the GOM and the International Labor 
Organization contributed the equivalent of USD 
337,758 to ten Moroccan NGOs to implement programs 
on combating child labor, raising awareness and 
rescuing children.  We note that the GOM has made a 
concerted effort to respond to USG requests for 
information on TIP developments, but it lacks the 
bureaucratic infrastructure to report requested 
statistics accurately. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Due to its geographic location, Morocco is 
a source for trafficked people, a destination 
country, and a place of transit.  Morocco faces a 
number of substantial socio-economic challenges 
including poverty, high levels of illiteracy, 
unemployment and clandestine migration, all of which 
contribute to the problem of trafficking.  Spain has 
increased funding for and cooperation with Moroccan 
border security forces to prevent clandestine 
migration.  Clandestine sub-Saharan migrants, who 
are especially vulnerable to trafficking, have 
increasingly taken up residence in Morocco because 
of the success of the Spanish-Moroccan border 
security measures.  END OVERVIEW. 
 
Response to Reporting Questions 
------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) PARAGRAPH 25: Morocco's TIP Situation. 
 
-- 25/A.  Sources for information on Trafficking in 
Persons (TIP) include the Moroccan Ministry of 
Justice (MOJ); the Ministry of Interior (MOI), in 
particular the Directorate of Borders and Migration; 
the Ministry of Social Development, the Family, and 
Solidarity (MOSD); the Ministry of Employment and 
Professional Training (MOEPT), and the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation (MFA).  In addition, 
international organizations such as IOM, UNHCR, 
UNDP, UNIFEM and UNICEF have provided information. 
International NGOs such as Caritas, Medecins sans 
Frontieres (MSF), and Christian churches that 
provide assistance directly to the migrant community 
are well placed to provide insight into their 
situations.  National NGOs, especially those 
focusing on women and children, such as Bayti, 
INSAF, Solidarite Feminine, Fondation Occidental 
Oriental, the Moroccan Association of Women's 
Rights, the Democratic League Defending Women's 
Rights, the anti-pedophilia organization Hands Off 
My Child, and others were able to provide a picture 
of the situation of exploited women and children. 
 
-- In February 2010 the GOM validated an IOM study 
detailing trafficking in Morocco.  The report 
provides a comprehensive picture of the types of 
 
trafficking in Morocco but focuses exclusively on 
victims trafficked across international borders, 
principally Moroccans trafficked for sexual 
exploitation or forced labor to Europe and the 
Middle East and sub-Saharans trafficked through 
Morocco to Europe.  The report entitled 
"Transnational Trafficking of Persons: Situation and 
Analysis of the Moroccan Response" is scheduled to 
be publicly available in February or March 2010 and 
includes a list of legislative and policy 
recommendations for the GOM to improve its response 
to trafficking in persons. 
 
-- The IOM report did not address the issue of 
internal trafficking or child labor, especially the 
widespread problem of "petites bonnes" (i.e., young 
rural girls brought to urban areas to work as 
domestic servants).  GOM and UN officials reported 
UNICEF and UNIFEM, with the cooperation of the GOM, 
plan to undertake a second study that will deal with 
internal trafficking; that is scheduled to begin 
this year. 
 
-- 25/B.  Morocco is a country of origin, transit 
and for men, women, and children subjected to 
conditions of commercial sexual exploitation and 
forced labor.  Domestic trafficking generally 
involves young rural children recruited to work as 
child maids or laborers in urban centers.  Morocco 
is also a country of transit and destination for 
internationally trafficked men, women and children, 
principally from sub-Saharan Africa and Asia.  It is 
a country of origin for men, women and children 
trafficked to European countries and the Middle 
East. 
 
-- Both Moroccan boys and girls were at risk of 
being trafficked internally for labor.  Young girls 
were trafficked from the countryside to work as 
domestic laborers in larger cities.  These young 
girls were especially vulnerable to abuse.  They are 
paid a minimal wage, which is frequently sent 
directly to their parents; they do not attend 
school; and they are susceptible to physical and 
sexual abuse by their employers.  The phenomenon is 
so widespread in part due to the pervasive mentality 
of urban people who view having a young maid to be a 
form of charity.  These employers believe they are 
helping a rural family financially, providing a 
place for the young girls to live, and giving them 
job training.  Boys were farmed out as apprentices 
in the artisanal sector, construction field or in 
mechanic shops where they worked carrying supplies 
and performing menial tasks. 
 
-- Up-to-date and accurate information on the number 
of children trafficked for labor is not available. 
A 2003 study by UNICEF entitled "Understanding 
Children's Work" (UCW) estimated that 600,000 
children between the ages of 7 and 14 worked.  A 
2001 study by Save the Children estimated that at 
that time between 66,000 and 88,000 children were 
employed as child domestics.  That represented 2.3 
percent to 3 percent of the total child population 
in the 7 to 15 age group (total of 2.87 million). 
 
-- The employment of non-Moroccan nationals as 
domestic workers is very uncommon though there is a 
small community of Filipinos and other nationalities 
from Asia working in Morocco.  The IOM TIP report 
found four cases of Filipino women recruited in 
their homeland for employment as domestic servants 
who then became trafficking victims in Morocco. 
Upon arrival the women were made to work long hours; 
 
received low or no salaries; were made to repay the 
price incurred for their travel and hiring fees; had 
their travel documents confiscated; saw their 
freedom of movement limited; and were threatened 
with arrest by the police if they attempted to 
leave. 
 
-- The phenomenon of children trafficked to Europe, 
often with the assistance and encouragement of their 
families, continued to be a problem.  Families 
typically sent these unaccompanied minors with the 
expectation that at the age of 18 they would be able 
to normalize their situation and work to support 
their families in Morocco.  In 2007, the GOM and 
Spain signed an agreement to facilitate the 
repatriation of the over 6,000 minors living in 
Spain.  To date, these repatriations have not 
occurred and MOI officials reported that minors, 
albeit in low numbers, continued to be found among 
the clandestine migrants.  In September 2009 the 
Moroccan and Spanish media reported on the 
interception of six minors aboard a smuggling ship 
along the coast of Tarifa, Spain.  The children 
ranged in age from 10 to 16 years old.  Spain via 
its international aid agency and Italy via IOM- 
funded programs in 2009 assisted in the community 
development of areas that are a source for 
unaccompanied minors. 
 
-- Sub-Saharan women, who often began their journeys 
as voluntary migrants, were forced into prostitution 
to pay off debts on arrival in Morocco or while 
still en route to Europe.  The IOM TIP report, NGOs 
and Christian charitable organizations that work 
with these women reported that criminal gangs of 
Nigerians are responsible for running such 
trafficking rings to Europe and frequently run 
brothels in Morocco to exploit the women while in 
transit.  According to a report issued by MSF in 
2007 and confirmed by NGOs that work with migrants, 
these Nigerian criminal gangs are well organized and 
keep sub-Saharan women in captivity in houses in 
Casablanca, Rabat and Nador for prostitution.  The 
women reportedly suffer from terrible treatment 
including beatings, torture and sexual violence. 
 
-- In addition, Moroccan women were trafficked to 
Syria, Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, the U.A.E. and other 
Arab Gulf countries with the promise of high 
salaries working in hotels, restaurants or as 
domestic workers and forced upon arrival to work in 
bars and brothels.  According to media reports, in 
January 2010 a criminal court in Abu Dhabi, the 
United Arab Emirates, sentenced seven men to life in 
prison and six others, including one Moroccan woman, 
to ten year sentences for their role in a human 
trafficking ring.  The 18 victims were all Moroccan 
women brought to the Gulf through a Moroccan 
recruiter and promised high salaries working in 
hotels.  Upon their arrival they were forced into 
prostitution, locked in apartments, threatened and 
beaten.  The Moroccan daily newspaper Al Misaa (The 
Evening) reported in January 2010 that 500 Moroccan 
women, licensed as "artists and dancers" but working 
as prostitutes in upscale hotels, were expelled from 
Bahrain during the summer of 2009.  GOM officials 
acknowledged the trafficking problem in Bahrain but 
were skeptical of Al Misaa's sourcing and expressed 
doubts about as to the alleged large numbers. 
 
-- The Hassan II Foundation for Moroccans Resident 
Abroad (MREs or Marocains Residents a l'Etranger) 
published a report in 2007, noting that MRE 
employment in the Gulf was comprised largely of 
 
female workers (70 percent) and that in most cases 
the work performed once in country did not 
accurately correspond to their contracts.  The 
report also stressed that many of the women, 
especially those employed under "artist contracts," 
were engaged in prostitution.  According to 
statistics from the Moroccan Ministry of Employment 
and Professional Training (MOEPT), between the years 
2000 and 2006 there were 2,046 Moroccans with "art 
and music" contracts in the Gulf Council Cooperation 
(GCC) countries.  This number included 1,519 in 
Bahrain, 387 in Oman, and 125 in the U.A.E.  The 
report also noted that while not all contracts are 
fraudulent, MREs are also employed in other fields 
and then trafficked into prostitution.  The report 
also indicated that for the same time period, the 
MOEPT reported 1,759 Moroccans were employed in 
hotel management, 888 as hairdressers, 414 as 
domestics, 447 as beauticians, 364 as tailors, and 
in numerous other professions. 
 
-- Neither the GOM nor NGOs could provide accurate 
statistics on the numbers of children and/or women 
trafficked for sexual exploitation though all 
parties acknowledged that the problem existed.  A 
2008 study of prostitution in Morocco by the NGO 
Pan-African Organization Fighting against AIDS 
(OPALS) found that children under the age of 15 were 
exploited principally in the following areas and 
towns:  Azrou (Ain Louh), Beni Mellal and the region 
of Meknes (El Hajeb).  The NGO Touche Pas a Mon 
Enfant (TPME or Hands Off My Child), which works 
with victims of pedophilia and child sexual 
exploitation, especially in Marrakesh and Agadir, 
published an annual report in 2009.  The report 
recorded 306 cases of sexual abuse in 2008 and noted 
that the true number of cases is unknown.  TPME 
reported direct involvement in 166 cases while 140 
others were gleamed from press reports.  These cases 
of sexual abuse included a wide range of crimes 
including incest, rape of a minor and other crimes 
that are not considered trafficking crimes. 
 
-- TPME and other NGOs report that sex tourism is a 
problem especially in popular tourist destinations 
such as Tangier, Agadir, and Marrakesh.  The clients 
are typically from the Arab Gulf countries and from 
Europe.  The Moroccan media reported that in May 
2009, 16 Saudi nationals and 2 Libyans were arrested 
for their participation in an upscale prostitution 
ring in Casablanca.  According to the press, the 
foreign nationals, who were accused of operating a 
human trafficking ring and debauchery of minors, 
were sentenced to prison terms ranging from six 
months to five years and fines up to 20,000 Dirham 
(USD 2,500) in June 2009.  The Moroccan owner of the 
apartment and doormen were sentenced to three and 
half years in prison. 
 
-- The IOM's TIP report noted a limited number of 
alleged cases of Moroccan adults trafficked to 
Europe.  In one alleged case a group of youth from 
Beni Mellal and Khouribga purchased a contract to 
work legally in Spain for 5,000 Euros.  Upon 
arrival, the youth discovered the employing company 
was fictitious and the Moroccan intermediary 
demanded they begin work as drug dealers lest they 
be deported.  In another case reported on by the 
newspaper Ash Sharq Alawsat in February 2009, a 
group of Moroccan women were forced into 
prostitution in the Spanish enclave of Ceuta to pay 
the debts incurred by smuggling them to Europe. 
 
-- While there are no accurate statistics on the 
 
numbers of internationally trafficked victims in 
Morocco, the Directorate of the Border and Migration 
in the MOI reported that the GOM dismantled 130 
trafficking and smuggling networks in 2009.  The 
IOM, with the cooperation of the GOM, voluntarily 
repatriated 1,258 illegal migrants in 2009.  The MOI 
successfully thwarted the attempted illegal 
migration of 5,549 people of which 2,672 were 
Moroccans and 2,877 were non-Moroccans.  The Royal 
Moroccan Navy intercepted 131 sub-Saharan migrants 
on wooden boats attmpting illegal crossings in 
¶2009.  These numbersare significantly lower than in 
previous years. The MOI attributed the decrease to 
its strong coperation with the Spanish Government 
and MOI's increased efficiency in monitoring its 
borders.  UNHCR, IOM and NGOs that work with the 
migrant population estimate there are between ten 
and twenty thousand sub-Saharan migrants in Morocco 
at any given time. 
 
-- 25/C:  Women and children trafficked for sexual 
exploitation both internally and abroad are 
frequently misled as to the nature of their work. 
According to media reports of these women they are 
frequently approached by someone who offers them a 
high-paying job as a waitress or dancer in a hotel 
or work as a maid in Gulf countries.  Upon arrival 
the women are met by a new party who confiscates 
travel documents and reveals to them the true nature 
of their work.  Reports about individual cases show 
that many of these women are locked into hotels or 
apartments, threatened, beaten, starved and suffer 
psychological trauma.  The women are often told they 
need to pay off debts incurred to bring them to the 
country.  The costs demanded are sometimes 
exorbitant and impossible to repay.  Sub-Saharan 
women and children who illegally migrated to Morocco 
are also at greater risk for being trafficked and 
sexually exploited.  NGOs reported that sub-Saharan 
women suffer horrific treatment including beatings, 
torture and sexual violence. 
 
-- Families are frequently complicit in the 
trafficking of their children to be domestics 
servants and apprentices since the family is 
typically the recipient of the child's wages. 
Domestic servants are exclusively young girls who 
start working as young as seven years of age. 
Reports by UNICEF and by the Municipality of 
Casablanca found that these domestic servants or 
"petites bonnes" work an average of 67 hours per 
week, are illiterate in over 80 percent of the 
cases, do not attend school and receive an average 
monthly salary of USD 50.  Child domestics are 
especially vulnerable to physical, emotional and 
sexual abuse by their employers.  Non-governmental 
organizations such as Bayti, which works with street 
children, and INSAF and Solidarite Feminine, which 
works with unwed mothers, reported that the 
overwhelming majority of their beneficiaries are 
former child domestics who have fled from abusive 
households. 
 
-- Young boys who work in artisan workshops, 
construction, garages and factories face conditions 
that are often dangerous and hazardous to their 
health.  The 2003 UNICEF UCW report found that over 
half of all working children faced serious or very 
serious work risks and that only three percent faced 
no risks. 
 
-- 25/D:  Children living in remote rural areas, 
with large impoverished families, and who have 
parents with little or no formal education, are more 
 
likely to be targeted by traffickers for work in 
urban areas.  A 2001 study of child maids by the 
Municipality of Casablanca in Casablanca found that 
87 percent were born in rural areas, 83 percent were 
illiterate, 45 percent were from families of 8-10 
people, and in 70 percent of the cases the child's 
father was dead.  Typically children from northern 
regions such as Tetouan, Nador, El Hoceima and Oujda 
are more likely to be trafficked to Europe.  Middle 
Atlas and High Atlas children supply labor to the 
artisanal shops in Fes, Meknes, Marrakesh and 
Casablanca.  Sub-Saharan women often are forced to 
prostitution to support themselves and are 
particularly vulnerable to robbery, violence and 
rape.  They are unlikely to report crimes for fear 
of being deported. 
 
TRAFFICKERS 
 
-- 25/E:  Traffickers of child labor, known as 
"simsars" or middlemen, typically visit remote 
villages in search of destitute families in order to 
place the children as either domestics or 
apprentices in urban areas.  The middlemen 
negotiate, for a fee, the salary that the family 
will be paid for the child's work.  According to the 
IOM TIP report, the Nigerian criminal gangs that 
prey on sub-Saharan migrants are organized along 
ethnic lines into "houses" which have a chief based 
in Oujda, even if there are subsidiary branches in 
Morocco's larger cities.  These gangs compete for 
control of the trafficking of sub-Saharan migrants. 
The gangs are allegedly involved in diverse criminal 
activities including drug trafficking, human 
smuggling and prostitution.  There are also Moroccan 
criminal gangs with international ties that are 
involved in the smuggling of drugs and contraband as 
well as people.  Traffickers working as 
intermediaries for networks in the GCC countries are 
typically found in Morocco's larger cities.  Though 
some are reported to work out of travel agencies, 
most intermediaries operate by referral and also 
look for recruits in the hotels and nightclubs in 
the cities. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) PARAGRAPH 26 A-B:  The GOM acknowledges 
that trafficking is a problem.  While the MOJ is 
designated as the coordinating ministry for 
trafficking issues, the MOI is the primary ministry 
dealing with prevention, enforcement and protection 
issues.  Within the MOI, the Directorate of 
Migration and Border Security dealt with clandestine 
immigration while prostitution and sexual 
exploitation fall under the police.  Three other 
ministries were chiefly responsible for child labor 
issues:  The Ministry of Employment and Professional 
Training is responsible for enforcing the Labor 
Code; the Ministry of Social Development, the 
Family, and Solidarity oversees the National Action 
Plan for Children; and the Ministry of National 
Education, specifically its Department of non-Formal 
Education, tries to provide remedial education and 
job training to child workers.  Prosecution of 
individuals charged with trafficking or violations 
of labor laws fell to the Ministry of Justice. 
 
--26/C:  The Government is limited in its ability 
to address trafficking problems in some areas, 
principally in providing sufficient resources, human 
and otherwise, to deal with the problem.  For 
example, the MOEPT employs 421 inspectors for the 
entire country, 45 of which are designated as child 
labor focal points.  The number of inspectors is 
inadequate to deal fully with the scope of the 
 
problem or child labor.  In addition, the inspectors 
do not have the legal authority to check homes, 
preventing them from enforcing the question of child 
labor.  Morocco is also very limited in the social 
services it is able to offer victims and relies 
principally on NGOs and charitable organizations to 
provide services. 
 
-- Corruption and impunity remained problems and 
reduced police effectiveness and respect for the 
rule of law.  Petty corruption is widespread among 
the police and the Gendarmerie, and broader, 
systemic corruption undermined both law enforcement 
and the effectiveness of the judicial system.  The 
MOI increased investigations of abuse, human rights 
violations and corruption.  As a result, in 2009 the 
Government reported that it prosecuted a total of 
282 security officials for various crimes ranging 
from "assault and battery leading to death" to petty 
bribery throughout Morocco and Western Sahara. 
There were prosecutions against approximately 191 
employees of the Judicial Police, the Royal 
Gendarmerie, the Auxiliary Forces, the Royal Navy, 
and prison guards for bribery and influence misuse; 
most other cases were for physical abuse or 
mistreatment.  Despite these investigations and 
prosecutions, many other investigations rarely 
resulted in disciplinary action or judicial 
proceedings, and a great many more incidents of 
corruption never were investigated. 
 
-- 26/D:  The Government does not systematically 
monitor anti-TIP efforts and is unable to provide 
information on the number of victims trafficked or 
the prosecution of traffickers.  The GOM was able to 
provide some limited information on the number of 
smugglings rings intercepted, employers fined for 
employing underage workers, and prosecutions for 
child sexual exploitation.  In February 2010 the 
IOM, with the cooperation of the GOM, published the 
first ever assessment of the trafficking situation 
in Morocco and the GOM's response to the problem. 
 
-- 26/E:  The GOM provides birth certificates for 
all Moroccan nationals and issues a national 
identity card for all citizens on their 18th 
birthday. 
 
-- 26/F:  The Ministry of Justice (MOJ) is 
responsible for gathering and recording statics on 
the prosecution and sentencing of crimes.  The MOJ's 
ability to accurately report this information is 
limited by the rudimentary reporting system used in 
the Moroccan judiciary.  All court cases, 
testimonies, decisions and sentences are recorded by 
hand and compiled at the end of the year by the 
Ministry.  The most up-to-date information at the 
beginning of 2010 comes from 2008.  The GOM has 
announced ambitious plans to reform the judiciary, 
but the Mission anticipates change will be slow in 
coming. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION OF 
TRAFFICKERS: 
 
-- 27.  PARAGRAPH A-D:  No new legislation regarding 
trafficking has been enacted since the last TIP 
report. 
 
-- Please refer to the Post's 2008 TIP report (Ref 
B) for detailed information on the specific codes 
and penalties for trafficking and sexual and labor 
exploitation.  There have been no changes to the 
laws since the 2008 report.  The 2003 Immigration 
 
Act covers the codes and prescribed punishments for 
trafficking, the Penal Code for rape, prostitution 
and sexual exploitation, and the Labor Code for 
child labor and forced labor. 
 
-- In May 2009 the Secretary General of the 
Government announced the GOM's intention to sign and 
ratify the UN's 2000 Palermo Protocol to Prevent, 
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, though 
to date it has not done so.  The IOM's report on 
Trafficking in Persons in Morocco received final 
validation from the GOM in February 2010 and is 
scheduled for public distribution shortly.  This 
report highlights many aspects of the TIP problems 
in Morocco and includes recommendations for 
legislative and operational improvements, among 
which is the passage of a TIP-specific law.  The 
Ministry of Justice's (MOJ's) senior coordinator for 
TIP issues told PolOff that Morocco intends to 
incorporate many of the report's recommendations and 
will either amend the current Penal Code to include 
specific anti-TIP crimes or draft a comprehensive 
TIP law.  The MOJ representative was unable to 
provide a timeline for action. 
 
-- At the end of 2009 the Ministry of Employment and 
Professional Training (MOEPT) and the Ministry of 
Social Development, the Family and Solidarity (MOSD) 
each submitted separate draft legislation to the 
Secretary General of the Government to address the 
problem of child domestics.  The MOSD proposal would 
create stiff penalties including mandatory prison 
time for anyone who employs child domestics, their 
traffickers, the families that send the children, 
and those, such as neighbors, who are aware of the 
situation and fail to report it.  Enforcement would 
be the responsibility of the police.  The MOEPT 
proposal would ensure that all domestic workers are 
covered by the labor code; that a written contract 
is registered with the authorities; and that labor 
inspectors would have responsibility for enforcement 
of the code.  The fact that two separate ministries 
have submitted draft legislation on the issue is an 
indication of how serious the GOM is in addressing 
the issue of child domestics. 
 
-- 27/E:  According to the MOI, the GOM broke up 130 
trafficking/smuggling rings in 2009 and 220 rings in 
¶2008.  The GOM does not distinguish between rings 
that are engaged in human trafficking and in human 
smuggling.  The GOM did not provide any further 
specifics on the number of individuals, the laws 
under which they were prosecuted and the length of 
these sentences. 
 
-- The GOM reported on fines and warnings directed 
against employers and companies for using child 
labor.  The Ministry of Employment and Professional 
Development (MOEPT) through its office of labor 
inspectors reported that in the first six months of 
2009, labor inspectors issued 94 warnings and 39 
fines to businesses for employing children under 15 
years of age.  In addition, the inspectors issued 
616 warnings and 19 fines to businesses for 
employing children between the age of 15 and 18. 
There are 421 labor inspectors charged with 
enforcing the labor code.  However, the inspectors 
are limited in number, resources and investigative 
power, which affects their ability to fulfill their 
enforcement function. 
 
-- The lack of a specific trafficking law makes it 
difficult to know whether a crime actually involved 
a trafficking offense and hence is punished 
 
appropriately.  The IOM TIP Report gave the example 
of a case in 2006 in Rabat in which a woman, who had 
been trafficked into prostitution to one of the GCC 
countries returned to Morocco and lodged a complaint 
against the recruiter.  The man was tried for fraud 
and inciting a person to debauchery and sentenced to 
one and half years in prison.  The prosecutor has 
appealed the decision, arguing that the penalty did 
not accurately reflect the gravity of the crime 
committed. 
 
-- Labor inspectors do not have the authority to 
inspect private residences for underage domestic 
servants.  As in previous years, neither the MOJ nor 
the MOEPT was able to point to any cases of fines or 
sanctions levied against individuals for the illegal 
employment of child domestics or the prosecution of 
middle-men or "simsars" who traffic children from 
rural to urban areas.  In cases of high profile 
physical or sexual abuse of child domestics, the GOM 
took action to prosecute the perpetrator.  In one 
highly publicized incident, a 13-year-old child 
domestic in the city of Oujda fled her employer 
after being allegedly beaten and burned with a metal 
iron.  The courts prosecuted the employer, the wife 
of a judge, and sentenced her to three and half 
years in prison in October 2009 for committing 
intentional assault and battery on a minor under 15, 
as well as for the use of a weapon with malicious 
intent.  In a previous case in November 2007 a woman 
in the city of Mohammedia was sentenced to four 
years of prison for beating and injuring a minor 
under 15 years of age who worked as her domestic 
servant. 
 
-- The MOJ provided statistics related to sexual 
exploitation and violence against minors but was 
unable to identify which cases involved trafficking 
victims or to provide sentencing information.  The 
MOJ reported that in 2008 there 25 cases of 
homosexual sex against a child, 138 cases of 
exploitation of a child for begging, 73 cases of 
exploitation of children in drugs, 25 cases of 
facilitating the illegal immigration of a minor, 203 
cases of facilitating the prostitution of a minor, 
504 cases of sexual assault of a minor, and 1,122 
cases of aggravated sexual assault of a minor.  The 
MOJ also reported that in 2009 10 foreigners were 
prosecuted for homosexuality, encouraging a minor to 
engage in prostitution, facilitating the 
exploitation of a minor and violent rape of a minor; 
their sentences ranged from one month to two years 
in prison. 
 
-- The anti-pedophilia NGO Hands off My Child (TPME) 
issued a report in 2009 attacking the GOM's alleged 
weak prosecution and sentencing of those involved in 
the sexual abuse of children.  The report alleged 
that of the 166 cases of sex abuse the NGO worked 
on, the average prison term ranged from between four 
and six months with a fine ranging between 9,000 and 
60,000 Dirham (USD 1,125 and 7,500).  The report did 
not distinguish between the types of sex crimes or 
indicate which might involve trafficking victims. 
The report also drew attention to the case of two 
foreign tourists involved in child sexual 
exploitation and the GOM's alleged failure to 
properly prosecute or to enforce their sentence.  In 
the first case, in 2004 the Moroccan authorities 
arrested a French national, Earvey Legloinick, 
allegedly in possession of 17,000 photos of child 
pornography and 140,000 videos of child pornography. 
He was initially sentenced to four years in prison, 
which was subsequently reduced to two years.  He was 
 
then pardoned and released from prison in 2006 
before completing his two-year sentence.  In the 
second case in 2006, a 59-year old French national, 
Jack-Henri Soumere, was caught by the police while 
having sex with a 16-year old boy.  Soumere, a well- 
known artistic director of a Paris theater, was 
charged only with committing homosexual acts and not 
for having sex with a minor.  He was sentenced to a 
suspended sentence of two months in prison.   A 
lawyer for TPME in Marrkesh told PolOff that the 
GOM's leniency towards prosecuting foreign tourists 
continues to the present and cited the recent 
example of an unnamed French national sentenced to 
only six months in prison after being found guilty 
of sex with a minor. 
 
-- 27/F.  The MOJ reported that judges and public 
prosecutors receive training specific to TIP issues 
during their initial training program.  In addition, 
each of the 20 tribunals in Morocco has assigned to 
it a women and children's cell that has received 
specialized training on TIP related issues.  The MOI 
also reported that the territorial police and border 
security officials have received training through a 
TIP module.  In April 2009, the MOJ conducted an 
awareness raising course for magistrates about 
victim protection and working with victims who have 
been affected by violence or sexual exploitation. 
There were 80 magistrates, 10 judicial police, and 
10 Ministry of Health representatives present at the 
course.  Training programs for the Royal 
Gendarmerie, the Auxiliary Forces, and the police 
include modules on trafficking in persons.  The U.S. 
Department of Homeland Security held a conference in 
June 2009 in Casablanca on trafficking in persons 
that was attended by GOM customs officials.  All 
security force training since 2006 includes training 
modules on fighting migrant smuggling (17 to 30 
hours according to the grade of the officer).  The 
module covers national and international laws, the 
migratory situation in Morocco, migratory movement, 
control of borders and methods for preventing 
illegal immigration.  In addition, UNHCR sponsored a 
two-week training course in July 2008 for 200 judges 
and public prosecutors on refugee law that also 
included a section on trafficking in persons. 
 
-- The labor inspectors appointed as child labor 
"focal points" in each of the 45 inspector offices 
received specialized training on the issue of child 
labor, forced labor and the worst forms child labor. 
 
-- 25/G:  The GOM actively cooperates with Spanish 
authorities to prevent the smuggling of people and 
goods across the Strait of Gibraltar and to the 
Canary Islands.  However, the GOM could not provide 
information specific to the prosecution or 
investigation of instances of trafficking.  The GOM 
has limited relations with Algeria and the land 
border has been closed since 1997.  The overwhelming 
majority of illegal sub-Saharan migrants enter from 
Algeria or Mauritania and are likewise expelled back 
across the border. 
 
-- 25/H:  Morocco was party to several bilateral and 
multilateral conventions on judicial cooperation and 
extradition of criminals with European, Arab, Asian 
and other African countries.  Morocco has ratified 
the 2000 United Nations Convention on Transnational 
Organized Crime (CTO).  Article 18 of the CTO 
stipulates mutual legal assistance in the 
prosecution and investigation of crimes covered by 
the convention.  In addition, the GOM has a Mutual 
Legal Assistance Treaty (MLAT) with the United 
 
States, but it does not include provisions for 
extradition.  The Mission is not aware of the GOM 
extraditing any individuals charged with trafficking 
and in 2009 the GOM did not have any pending or 
concluded cases of extraditing trafficking offenders 
to the United States. 
 
-- 25/I:  There was no evidence of national 
government involvement in, or tolerance for, 
trafficking.  On a local level, however, press 
reports, anecdotal information and information from 
local NGOs indicated that corruption is a problem 
among Morocco's security forces.  Trafficking of 
persons to Europe is integrally connected to the 
trafficking of migrants, drugs and other contraband. 
 
-- 27/J:  The MOI was unable to provide post with 
statistics for the prosecution of GOM officials 
specific to TIP related crimes. 
 
-- The MOI did provide general information on the 
prosecution of security officials for bribery and 
corruption.  In 2009 the GOM reported that it 
prosecuted 191 employees of the Judicial Police, the 
Royal Gendarmerie, the Auxiliary Forces, the Royal 
Navy, men in power and prison guards for bribery and 
abuse of power.  44 people were sentenced to terms 
of prison ranging from one-month suspended sentence 
to 4 years imprisonment, while the remaining cases 
are still under adjudication.  The GOM also 
indicated that 68 of the cases involved officers of 
the Royal Gendarme and principally involved petty 
bribes exhorted from motorists.  The GOM was not 
able to provide information on which, if any, of 
these cases involved TIP-related bribery or 
corruption. 
 
-- 25/K:  In recent years the GOM has contributed 
troops to UNOCI and UNMIK.  There were no incidents 
or accusations of trafficking or sexual abuse 
against Moroccan troops in 2009.  The UN 
investigated accusations of sexual abuse against GOM 
forces participating in a peacekeeping mission in 
Cote d'Ivoire in 2007 and concluded that there was 
insufficient evidence to charge any of the 
personnel.  All Moroccan soldiers participating in 
UN peacekeeping missions receive training on the 
issue of sexual exploitation. 
 
-- 27/L:  Morocco has a problem with sex tourism. 
European, especially French and Spanish men, as well 
as Arabs from the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) 
countries, are the principal countries of origin for 
sex tourists.  In 2009, the MOJ reported that 10 
foreigners were prosecuted for homosexuality, 
encouraging a minor to engage in prostitution, 
facilitating the exploitation of a minor and violent 
rape of a minor; they received sentences that ranged 
from one month to two years in prison.  The MOJ was 
not able to provide information on the nationality 
of the individuals.  The MOJ was not able to provide 
information on how many foreigners were prosecuted 
or expelled for their involvement in sex tourism. 
According to media reports, 16 Saudi nationals and 2 
Libyan nationals were given sentences ranging from 
six months to five years in prison for their 
involvement in a prostitution ring.  We are not 
aware of Moroccan nationals traveling abroad to 
engage in sex tourism, and Moroccan law does not 
include child sexual abuse laws with 
extraterritorial coverage similar to the U.S. 
PROTECT law. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS: 
 
 
-- 28/A:  The GOM in general does not have a 
formalized system to provide protection to victims 
and witnesses.  The security forces can and will 
intervene to ensure the safety of a victim in the 
short-term. 
 
-- 28 B:  The GOM did not have assistance services 
that were specifically targeted at victims of 
trafficking and relied on the NGO community to 
provide most services to victims of trafficking. 
Child victims of abuse are, in most cases, placed 
into the care of a suitable NGO.  The GOM has two 
Child Protection Units operating in Marrakesh and 
Rabat, which are centers that provide medical, legal 
and social services to children who are the victims 
of violence or sexual abuse.  The GOM also has 
established an emergency telephone hotline known as 
the "green line" for people to report incidents of 
abuse against women or children and for referral 
services.  The GOM has recently also undertaken a 
mobile assistance program in Casablanca called SAMU 
which provides medical care and social services to 
vulnerable women and children.  The GOM has created 
"women and children" focal points at certain courts 
in Rabat and Casablanca that assist victims with 
legal services and help them to navigate the 
judicial proceedings.  The Foundation Hassan II for 
Moroccans Resident Abroad has a budget to assist 
Moroccan citizens in situations of distress while 
abroad.  Morocco's Center for Migrant Rights 
provided counseling services, including an 
explanation of one's legal and civil rights, to 
Moroccan migrants; however, legal representation was 
not offered, nor was shelter, medical or 
psychological services. 
 
-- 28/C:  Legal residents of Morocco who are the 
victims of violence or sexual abuse are able to 
access the GOM's health services, including 
psychological care, typically by first consulting 
with a primary care physician.  The GOM, as a 
general rule, does not provide medical and 
psychological care for illegal migrants.  Charitable 
organizations such as Caritas, Medecins sans 
Frontiers (MSF) and others provide limited and basic 
medical care to the migrant population and in some 
individual cases have been able to arrange for the 
emergency care of non-resident foreigners. 
 
--28/D:  The GOM does not have procedures in place 
to provide government assistance, including 
temporary to permanent residency status, for victims 
of trafficking. 
 
-- 28/E:  The GOM does not provide longer-term 
shelter or housing benefits or other resources to 
victims of trafficking. 
 
-- 28/F:  The GOM does not have a referral process 
to transfer TIP victims detained, arrested or placed 
in protective custody by law enforcement 
authorities. 
 
-- 28/G:  The GOM was unable to provide information 
on the number of victims trafficked.  Morocco did 
not differentiate between victims of trafficking and 
smuggled migrants.  Foreign trafficking victims were 
generally treated as illegal migrants.  They were 
often arrested and deported along with other 
migrants.  Morocco routinely rounded up illegal sub- 
Saharan migrants and left them at the Algerian 
border, often without food or water.  Migrants left 
at this "no man's land" between the Algerian and 
 
Moroccan authorities were particularly susceptible 
to robbery, violence and extortion at the hands of 
criminal gangs that control the smuggling of 
contraband in the area. 
 
-- 28/H:  The GOM does not have a formal system to 
proactively identify victims of trafficking among 
high-risk persons with whom they come in contact. 
 
-- 28/I:  Sub-Saharan victims of trafficking, while 
they may participate in the judicial proceedings 
prosecuting traffickers, are usually deported.  An 
MOJ official informed PolOff that judges have the 
discretion to ignore a TIP victim's illegal presence 
when confronted with a case of trafficking. 
However, there are not formal procedures in place to 
protect the victim and ensure he or she is not 
deported. 
 
-- For domestic victims of trafficking, in 2003 
Parliament changed the Penal Code so that runaway 
child maids may be administratively returned to 
their families instead of being arrested for 
vagrancy.  If returning them to their parents was 
not possible or feasible, they would be placed in 
separate youth centers, not mixed in with juvenile 
delinquents. 
 
-- 28/J:  While victims were not encouraged to file 
civil suits against traffickers, they often 
testified on behalf of the GOM when it sought to 
prosecute trafficking cases.  Specific numbers of 
victims who testified were not available. 
 
-- 28/K:  The GOM provides training to its consular 
officials on TIP issues.  The GOM did assist 
trafficking victims, principally women in Gulf and 
Arab countries, to return to Morocco and provided 
assistance with travel documents and transport home. 
The GOM was not able to provide the number of TIP 
victims that were assisted in 2008. 
 
-- 28/L:  The Mission is not aware of any financial 
or medical assistance provided to Moroccans who are 
repatriated as victims of trafficking. 
 
-- 28/M:  The IOM and UNHCR are the primary 
organizations that provide assistance to trafficking 
victims.  UNHCR has a range of health, education and 
financial services that are available only to those 
with recognized refugee claims.  IOM is able to 
provide voluntary repatriation and a reintegration 
program to migrants seeking to return home.  In 2009 
the IOM assisted in the voluntary return of 130 
migrants from Morocco.  In addition, the IOM in 
conjunction with the Moroccan, Spanish and Italian 
Governments worked to establish shelters and a 
system to assist Moroccan minors who have been the 
victims of trafficking abroad.  International NGOs 
such as Medicins sans Frontieres (MSF), Caritas and 
several Christian charitable organizations provided 
basic medical care and limited financial assistance 
to clandestine migrants in Casablanca, Rabat and 
northern areas such as Oujda, Nador, and Tangier. 
These NGOs did not receive funding from the Moroccan 
Government. 
 
¶10.  (SBU) PREVENTION: 
 
-- 29/A:  The Government has periodically undertaken 
awareness-raising campaigns related to the abuse of 
children, child labor and sexual exploitation.  In 
2007 the GOM ran an anti-child labor awareness- 
raising campaign that included billboards, 
 
advertisements on buses and radio spots.  The 
Ministry of Employment and Professional Training 
(MOEPT) has prepared a new anti-child labor campaign 
for 2010.  The MOEPT shared details of the campaign 
and campaign material with PolOff.  The campaign is 
scheduled to begin in April 2010 and will include 
radio, print and other media advertisements to raise 
awareness about the dangers and the legal 
ramifications of employing child maids. 
 
-- 29/B:  The GOM closely monitors and attempts to 
combat clandestine migration though it does not 
differentiate between illegal migration and 
trafficking.  The GOM does not have procedures in 
place to identify or screen for victims of 
trafficking along its borders. 
 
-- 29/C:  The Ministry of Justice has the lead in 
coordinating GOM policy on trafficking.  In 
practice, the MOI is responsible for preventing and 
enforcing trafficking related statues. 
 
-- 29/D:  The GOM has produced a document entitled, 
"The National Strategy to Combat Human Trafficking," 
which was formulated in 2007 by the Ministry of 
Interior under the supervision of the Directorate of 
Migration and Border Control along with an inter- 
ministerial committee of coordination.  The plan 
describes the GOM's strategy in terms of prevention, 
combating trafficking and protection.  The plan is 
largely an overview of past democratization and 
human rights reforms and current efforts to control 
the borders and stem illegal migration and 
smuggling.  The plan does not address in a concrete 
fashion current anti-TIP efforts or intended 
reforms.  NGOs were not consulted in its 
development. 
 
-- In 2006 the GOM launched its "National Plan of 
Action for Children," outlining the government's 
strategy for 2006-2015 and headed by the king's 
sister, Princess Lalla Meryem.  The plan's four 
goals are to improve children's health and 
education; protect children from abuse, violence, 
and exploitation; and combat HIV/AIDs.  As part of 
plan and the GOM's anti-child labor efforts, the 
Ministry of Employment and Professional Training 
(MOEPT) led by the Office of the Director of Work, 
in conjunction with ILO-IPEC and local NGO partners, 
oversaw a number of anti-child labor programs. 
There are currently 10 anti-child labor programs 
being funded, some of which began in 2007 and which 
will continue up to 2010.  For fiscal year 2009, the 
GOM and IPEC contributed the equivalent of USD 
337,758 to the NGOs to implement programs on 
combating child labor, raising awareness and 
rescuing children. 
 
-- 29/E:  The Ministry of Justice informed the 
Mission that, in conjunction with the Ministry of 
Tourism, an anti-sex tourism plan of action was 
under discussion.  The Mission is not aware of any 
new steps taken by the Government on this issue. 
 
-- 29/F:  We are not aware of any steps taken by the 
GOM to reduce the participation of Moroccan 
nationals in international child sex tourism. 
 
-- 29/G:  Post reported in 2008 in detail about 
steps that Morocco has taken to enforce a "zero 
tolerance" standard for its troops involved in UN 
peacekeeping missions in 2005 and 2007 (Ref B). 
Morocco provides training to all of its UN 
peacekeepers to sensitize them to the issue of 
 
sexual exploitation. 
 
¶11.  (U) Mission POC on TIP issues is Matthew W. 
Lehrfeld, Political/Labor Officer, ConGen 
Casablanca, tel.:  212-522-26-50, ext. 4151; fax: 
212-22-20-80-96; mail:  Unit 9400, Box 24, DPO, AE 
09718; pouch:  6280 Casablanca Place, Washington, DC 
20521-6280; email:  lehrfeldmw@state.gov. 
 
¶12.  (U) Embassy Rabat cleared this message. 
 
MILLARD