10FRANKFURT100
Baden-Wuerttemberg's Younger Political Leadership Sets New
Mon Jan 11 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Frankfurt
VZCZCXRO4561
RR RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHLZ
DE RUEHFT #0100/01 0110848
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 110848Z JAN 10
FM AMCONSUL FRANKFURT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3125
INFO RUCNFRG/FRG COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 000100 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/CE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O.  12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV GM
SUBJECT:  Baden-Wuerttemberg's Younger Political Leadership Sets New 
Dynamic 
 
Sensitive but unclassified; not for internet distribution 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: Baden-Wuerttemberg's four primary political 
parties have all in the last six months elected new and younger 
party leaders, setting in motion new political dynamics in the 
state.  The trend began in June of 2009 when the FDP surprisingly 
chose Hans-Ulrich Ruelke (48) as caucus chief.  Following the 
September 27 national elections, the Social Democratic Party (SPD) 
and the Green party also turned their leadership over to younger 
politicians, while the new, younger CDU head rose to power following 
the nomination of Minister-President Oettinger to the EU Commission. 
 These new political leaders will guide the parties into the 2011 
Baden-Wuerttemberg state election, with campaigns beginning this 
year.  While all ramifications are not yet clear, the CDU will 
likely turn more conservative and become more closely aligned with 
the FDP, with whom it has already governed Baden-Wuerttemberg for 13 
years, while the Greens and SPD may move more to the left to attract 
voters.  END SUMMARY 
 
 
CDU Likely Will Become more Conservative With Mappus 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Stefan Mappus (43), whom B-W CDU members already elected 
as the new CDU state chair and lead candidate for the 2011 state 
election with 90 percent of the vote, is set to become 
Baden-Wuerttemberg's next Minister-President later this month when 
M-P Oettinger leaves office.  Oettinger and Mappus differ both in 
their political perspectives, centrist vs. conservative, and in 
their personalities, consensus-oriented vs. direct/confrontational. 
Mappus earned his conservative reputation by identifying with the 
small-town CDU base in Baden-Wuerttemberg, due to his allegiance to 
traditional family and religious values, and his public objections 
to Oettinger's coalition discussions with the Green party.  Since 
becoming M-P designate, Mappus has said that the CDU should return 
to their roots as a "Volkspartei."   Although he has said that he 
plans to continue some of Oettinger's "social" programs, such as the 
expansion of day-care programs, he has also publicly said that he 
wants to reintroduce conservative ideas into the political debate. 
With regard to personal style, Hans-Georg Koch, chief of the policy 
section in the B-W state chancellery, described Mappus as a 
"go-getter" and Olaf Bentlage, former FDP General Manager for B-W, 
praised Mappus's "clear, direct leadership style." 
 
 
FDP Kicks Off Generational Change 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The B-W FDP kicked off the wave of political change in 
June 2009 when FDP members surprisingly dropped long-time incumbent 
Ulrich Noll (63) and installed Ruelke as the new caucus chief. 
Continued discontent with the leadership style of Noll, who many 
found to be authoritarian and occasionally confrontational, brought 
on the change.  Ruelke is known to be a close personal friend of 
designated M-P Mappus.  They both come from Pforzheim.  Ruelke and 
Mappus have already demonstrated their close relationship by jointly 
requesting further tax cuts -- openly opposing departing M-P 
Oettinger on this issue.  According to Heiderose Berroth, FDP state 
parliament member, had Ruelke not become caucus chief, the future 
alliance between the CDU and FDP would have suffered as Mappus and 
former FDP chief Noll "hated each other."  Another high level B-W 
FDP source told Poloff and Polspec that FDP state party chair and 
Bundestag floor leader Birgit Homburger (44) is also close with 
Mappus and has already worked with him around Oettinger, such as in 
pressing for the recent ousting of the LBBW chair, Jaschinski.  A 
more conservative CDU, our source explained, will also benefit the 
FDP as it will yield the center back to the Liberals, giving them a 
strong position for the 2011 election. 
 
 
New SPD Leader Faces Tough Job Ahead 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The new SPD leader, Nils Schmid, took over the 
Baden-Wuerttemberg party on November 21 after winning an internal 
party referendum of the SPD's rank and file.  Schmid is 36 years old 
and has served in the State Parliament since the age of 23, being 
one of the youngest representatives ever.  Schmid's election 
reflected the SPD's desire for new blood and a regeneration 
following the disastrous national election when the B-W SPD won only 
19.3% of the vote, within one percentage point of the B-W FDP's 
returns.  Schmid faces the difficult task of reviving his 
demoralized party.  Despite his youth, he is an experienced 
politician, the financial expert of the state party and an outspoken 
supporter of Agenda 2010.  Schmid hopes to increase the 
attractiveness of the B-W SPD by including the rank and file in the 
future decision-making process, something that the SPD's new 
national chair, Sigmar Gabriel, has also stressed.  He is married to 
 
FRANKFURT 00000100  002 OF 002 
 
 
a German of Turkish decent and also wants to attract more immigrant 
voters to the SPD. 
 
 
Greens Chose Young Team 
------------------------ 
 
¶5.  (SBU) At their November 21 annual state convention in Biberach, 
the B-W Greens also elected a new leadership team.  Chris Kuehn (30) 
represents the party's left wing while Silke Krebs (43) stands for 
the pragmatic part of the Greens.  The B-W Greens did well in the 
last federal election earning 13.9% percent of the vote, which was 
the highest amount ever in the state.  However, the Greens still 
fell behind the FDP and new team leaders Krebs and Kuehn now face 
the challenge of increasing the party's visibility and standing up 
to a very confident B-W FDP.  Furthermore, with conservative 
Mappus's election as B-W Minister-president designate, Greens' 
prospects for participation in a 2011 government are minimal. 
Although M-P Oettinger once held coalition discussions with the 
Greens, Mappus opposes this option.  The new Greens party leaders 
have similarly stated that they will not work with him.  The 
impossibility of a CDU-Greens coalition may lead to a strengthening 
of left-wing positions within the Greens and is a set-back for 
Greens politicians who had openly argued that the Greens should keep 
the door open for cooperating with the CDU. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) COMMENT: A new and younger generation of politicians has 
taken charge in Baden-Wuerttemberg and is setting out to shape the 
future of the state.  Under designated M-P Mappus, the tone will get 
tougher and more conservative.  Under FDP chief Ruelke's leadership, 
the coalition between the CDU and FDP looks ready to continue and 
even grow closer.  This might be a chance for the battered B-W SPD 
to set itself apart from a Conservative/Liberal coalition and help 
to motivate the SPD's rank and file.  A more conservative CDU might 
also help to bring Greens and SPD in the southwest, who have been 
more rivals than allies, closer together again.  END COMMENT. 
 
 
ALFORD