10HAVANA85
GOC REJECTS OFFICIAL EXCHANGES;SCHOLARSHIP PROGRAM
Wed Feb 10 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
US Interests Section Havana
VZCZCXYZ0006
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHUB #0085/01 0411647
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 101647Z FEB 10 ZFF4
FM USINT HAVANA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5182
INFO RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS HAVANA 000085 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CCA AND WHA/PD 
STATE FOR DRL CNEWLING 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CU PHUM PREL
SUBJECT: GOC REJECTS OFFICIAL EXCHANGES;SCHOLARSHIP PROGRAM 
POSTPONED 
 
¶1.    (SBU) SUMMARY:  During a January 15, 2010 meeting with 
USINT representatives, Cuban Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
Representatives emphatically declined to support USG-funded 
exchange programs.  USINT subsequently learned that students 
and professors were being threatened by University of Havana 
officials if any students applied for an Institute of 
International Education (IIE) scholarship program supported 
by the State Department.  As a result, the IIE scholarship 
program has been postponed and alternative distance learning 
options are being explored.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.    (SBU) On January 15, 2010 the USINT COM, PAO, and 
POL/ECON officer met with Josefina Vidal Ferreiro, Director, 
and Eduardo Martinez Borbonet, Counselor, of the North 
America Desk, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, to discuss a wide 
ranging agenda, including educational and cultural exchanges. 
 The PAO specifically raised a January 8, 2010 USINT 
Diplomatic note informing the GOC, and inviting facilitation, 
of an IIE scholarship program for 50 Cuban university level 
students to study for one semester at the University of the 
Americas, Puebla, Mexico, or at the Institute of Technology 
at Monterrey, Mexico City Campus.  The IIE scholarship 
program receives State Department funding and was scheduled 
to begin in July 2010.  Citing the tighter restrictions 
imposed in 2003 on Department of Treasury licensing 
requirements for visiting American academics, students, and 
cultural figures, and visa denials for Cuban academics and 
cultural figures which she described as arbitrary and 
offensive, Ms. Vidal categorically rejected the possibility 
of GoC support of USG-funded exchange programs until these 
restrictions are lifted. 
 
¶3.    (SBU) On January 29, the PAO, DPAO, and PAS Media 
Assistant met with university age Cubans interested in 
applying for the IIE scholarship program.  Several reported 
that the University of Havana is administering warnings to 
all students that they will be instantly expelled should they 
even apply for the IIE scholarship program.  Professors are 
also reportedly being warned that they will face expulsion if 
they support students, applications to the IIE program. 
 
¶4.    (SBU) Background:   All Cubans must receive an exit 
permit from the Cuban government to travel off the island. 
Additionally, Cuban university students must obtain 
permission from their university rector as part of the exit 
permit application (and to be absent from their academic 
program).  Consequently, GOC and university approval is 
essential for Cuban students to participate transparently in 
a scholarship program abroad.  The GoC,s refusal to support 
USG-funded exchange programs, in this case the IIE program, 
means scholarship winners will not be allowed to travel to 
participate in the scholarship program. 
 
¶5.    (SBU) Comment:   We believe the GOC warnings to the 
students and professors are dead serious.  Last year, some of 
the Cuban students who were accepted to USG-funded 
scholarship programs in the U.S. suffered harassment and loss 
of academic standing, and in the end none received their exit 
permits to participate in the scholarship program.  Although 
we fully informed the GOC about the IIE scholarship 
opportunity and invited official facilitation, this gesture 
of transparency and cooperation clearly did not change the 
equation.  The GOC remains hypersensitive about tighter 
restrictions imposed in 2003 on Treasury Department licensing 
and State Department visa requirements, and what it sees as 
interference in its control over the education of Cuba,s 
youth.  It is steadfast in its refusal to discuss or engage 
in progressive steps to achieve greater educational exchange 
flexibility in the near term.   We believe we should continue 
to seek expanded dialogue and common ground with the GoC on 
education and cultural exchange issues, and that we should 
continue to support educational and professional exchange and 
learning opportunities for Cuban students and other Cuban 
contacts.  At this moment in the relationship, however, it is 
clear that off-island scholarship opportunities are not 
feasible. 
 
¶6.    (SBU) Next Steps:  Given the real and serious risks 
posed to students and professors related to the IIE 
scholarship program, IIE has put the scholarship program on 
hold.  We recommend that IIE explore converting the 
scholarship program to a distance learning program that can 
be offered through USINT,s new Distance Learning Center.  If 
the current climate shifts positively, and before the program 
funding expires, we recommend that IIE revisit the concept of 
an off-island scholarship opportunity.  Although the program 
 
concept is excellent, the current climate is not.  In the 
meantime, post will prepare a response to February 8 GOC 
dipnote conveying complaints that our Distance Learning 
Center violates the Vienna Convention of 1961. FARRAR 
 
.FARRAR