10KABUL554
OPERATION MOSHTARAK - SITUATIONAL UPDATE FOR FEBRUARY 13,
Sun Feb 14 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO3918
RR RUEHDBU RUEHPW RUEHSL
DE RUEHBUL #0554/01 0450852
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 140852Z FEB 10 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5583
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KABUL 000554 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SRAP, SCA/FO, SCA/A, EUR/RPM 
STATE PASS TO AID FOR ASIA/SCAA 
USFOR-A FOR POLAD 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KDEM MOPS PGOV EAID AF
SUBJECT: OPERATION MOSHTARAK - SITUATIONAL UPDATE FOR FEBRUARY 13, 
2010 
 
REF: (A) KABUL 543, (B) KABUL466, (C) KABUL 115, (D) 09 KABUL 4187 
 
KABUL 00000554  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary. Following the blessing by President Karzai on the 
evening of 12 February, the operations in Nad Ali (Operation 
Moshtarak) started at 0200 on the morning of 13 February.  Most of 
the day's activity took place in the northern half of the district, 
and although not yet secure, Marjah is quiet.  Afghan officials have 
shown active leadership throughout the planning and execution of all 
political and military aspects of this operation.  Helmand Governor 
Mangal and many other provincial and district officials have been 
extremely upbeat about the operations, and they look forward to the 
ministerial visits and shuras that are scheduled to take place over 
the coming days to further bolster good governance in Nad Ali 
district.  Following a security assessment by PRT Helmand security 
staff, the civilian-led District Support Team (DST) for Nad 
Ali/Marjah -- which includes both U.S. and U.K. civilian development 
and stabilization personnel -- plans to move into the operational 
areas within the coming days.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) This is a situational update for Operation Moshtarak from 
PRT Lashkar Gah. 
 
Political Update 
---------------- 
 
Provincial: 
 
¶3.  (SBU) As of late February 13, across the province, Afghan 
officials, including the Governor and Haji Zahir (the Deputy 
District Governor for Nad Ali covering Marjah), were extremely 
positive about Operation Moshtarak, with many believing that the 
fighting is over.  Local reports indicate various neighborhoods 
throughout Marjah are celebrating in the streets over the positive 
outcome thus far, including no major reports of civilian casualties. 
 In Showal, in northern Nad Ali, a shura was held for the first 
time, with plans for a second in the near future. 
 
¶4. (SBU) On Feburary 13, Regional Command - South (RC-S) Senior 
Civilian Representative Frank Ruggiero and RC-S Commander Major 
General Nick Carter (UK) met with Governor Mangal to discuss the 
opening of the operations prior to the Governor's press conference. 
MG Carter reported that the insertion was successful, with no battle 
casualties or resistance from enemy forces.  He continued that all 
the troops, both ISAF and ANSF, understood their rules of engagement 
as requested by President Karzai.  Mangal said that he had heard 
from Minister Jelani Popal, Director of the Independent Directorate 
of Local Governance (IDLG), who was satisfied with the current level 
of consultation going into this operation. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Both civilian and military personnel at the Regimental 
Combat Team (RCT) at Camp Dwyer briefed Zahir on the events for the 
next few days, and he told the RCT that he was thoroughly impressed 
with the significant level of detail that has gone into the 
planning, particularly for his initial visit to the affected area 
and the upcoming VIP visits over the next few days. 
 
National: 
 
¶6. (SBU) Governor Mangal, who has exhibited strong leadership 
throughout this operation, is fully prepared to receive the 
ministerial delegation from Kabul, which is currently expected to 
include Interior Minister Atmar and Defense Minister Wardak, for a 
high level shura on February 14-16.  Ministers will conduct a series 
of meetings in and around the operational area and will possibly 
participate in the District Development Plan (DDP) rollout for Nad 
Ali planned for 16 February. 
 
Media 
----- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Governor Mangal had a successful press conference the 
morning of 13 February, which was picked up by international media 
outlets.  Additionally, he did interviews with Sky News, the BBC, 
and CNN.  Initial news reports following the insertion were very 
positive, reflecting the degree of cooperation between the Afghans 
and the international community, and the lack of casualties suffered 
by civilians, ANSF and coalition forces.  The New York Times 
characterized the offensive as a "new war model" in its plan to 
immediately insert Afghan governance and police following clearing 
operations. 
 
Forward Deployment of DST 
------------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) USAID and DOS personnel are pre-positioned with the Marine 
Command and will deploy into Marjah when the Marines deem it safe. 
In addition, a UK Civilian Security Assessment Team will deploy 
 
KABUL 00000554  002 OF 002 
 
 
shortly in order to facilitate deployment of UK personnel into 
Marjah.  Together, these U.S., UK and Marine units will form the 
District Support Team (DST).  The DST is already planning a 
flag-raising ceremony and immediate support for Deputy District 
Governor Haji Zahir. 
 
Development 
----------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) Civil Service Training - On 12 February, the Helmand Civil 
Service Institute opened in Lashkar Gah and started its first 
session of training for existing and soon-to-be civil servants for 
Helmand province.  This was a joint DFID/USAID effort in that DFID 
was responsible for providing the equipment and refurbishment of the 
building while USAID provided the trainers and curriculum.  As the 
PRT looks to assist the Nad Ali district government with the 
establishment of effective governance in Marjah, this training falls 
in line with the multi-national development plan for Operation 
Moshtarak. 
 
¶9. (SBU) DDP Rollout for Nad Ali - As it stands now, Governor Mangal 
has agreed on the District Delivery Program Rollout for Nad Ali 
District to take place on 16 February.  We understand from our 
British colleagues that this is a strategic communications event to 
highlight the agreed plan to deploy Afghan governance to Marjah (and 
improve it elsewhere in the rest of Nad Ali district) in the coming 
weeks and months.  The Governor will also host a Budget Conference, 
during which participants plan to discuss and finalize the hard 
numbers necessary for the full DDP rollout.  (Note: USAID and the UK 
Department for International Development (DFID) are preparing a 
joint cable to fully explain the PRT thoughts on the DDP process. 
End note.) 
 
Reintegration 
------------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) The PRT has received reports that low-level fighters are 
seeking to reintegrate, and this reintegration will likely be 
informally done and take place at the local level.  The PRT will 
continue to track this situation with Task Forces Leatherneck and 
Helmand and our civilian personnel at the RCT.  Zahir and RCT 
personnel discussed at length the plans and way forward across major 
and minor level "reintegrees," but with the new military order 
(FRAGO) from RC-S in place which directs that reintegrees be 
transported to Lashkar Gah for review, RCT personnel will need to 
review the current reintegration plan.  A VTC is scheduled for 14 
February to discuss where the process stands following review of the 
FRAGO.  The key question for discussion is what the process will be 
for detainees who claim that they want to reintegrate, especially 
those who are mid-level insurgents. 
 
Internally Displaced Persons 
---------------------------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) According to the Helmand Department of Refugees, 866 
families have registered in Lashkar Gah at this point, with roughly 
100 additional families being registered each day.  However, only 35 
families at this point have actually declared that they need 
assistance and are not staying with family or friends, as the other 
registrants are doing.  (Note: Families must be registered with the 
Department of Refugees and verified by the UN as being from Marjah 
in order to qualify for the immediate emergency assistance.  Once 
determined to be from Marjah, ration cards are given to each family 
in order to obtain tents, plastic sheets, food stuffs and other 
supplies. End note.) 
 
¶12. (SBU) Reports have surfaced that there are families escaping the 
fighting and moving to the desert, with no supplies, but the numbers 
cannot be verified.  The Nad Ali shura in advance of the operation 
strongly discouraged this kind of movement and continues to 
encourage people to stay within the district.  USAID and DFID remain 
engaged with UNAMA and local Afghan leadership to continue 
monitoring this situation closely. 
 
¶13. (U) This cable was drafted by the U.S. civilian personnel based 
in Helmand.