10KABUL246
THIRTEENTH MEETING OF THE AFGHAN JOINT COORDINATION AND
Mon Jan 25 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXYZ0002
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBUL #0246/01 0251537
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 251537Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4981UNCLAS KABUL 000246 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR S/SRAP, SCA/FO, SCA/RA, SCA/A, 
 
E.O. 12958 N/A 
TAGS: ECON EAID PGOV AF
SUBJECT: THIRTEENTH MEETING OF THE AFGHAN JOINT COORDINATION AND 
MONITORING BOARD (JCMB) 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY: The Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board (JCMB) 
is the central platform for strategic coordination, joint policy 
formulation, problem solving and mutual accountability between the 
Government of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan (GIRoA) and the 
international community (IC).  The agenda for the thirteenth meeting 
of the JCMB included the presentation of a series of papers focused 
on setting clear security, governance, and development priorities in 
preparation for the January 28, 2010 London conference and a 
subsequent spring Kabul conference. 
 
¶2. (U) JCMB-XIII decided to endorse: i) three GIRoA policy papers in 
preparation for the London and Kabul Conferences: An Integrated Plan 
for Economic Development (a.k.a. the cluster paper); More Effective 
Afghan Aid; and the Afghan Peace and Reintegration Program; ii) an 
Afghan National Army (ANA) increase up to 171,600 by October 2011; 
and iii) an Afghan National Police (ANP) increase up to 134,000 by 
October 2011.  Both ii) and iii) also called for international 
support to train and equip these levels.  The GIRoA requested 
comments from the international community on the Afghan National 
Police Strategy and Anti-Corruption and Governance (Rule of Law and 
Human Rights) papers for donor endorsement prior to the London 
Conference.  During the JCMB session, the GIRoA and IC repeatedly 
stressed the importance of translating the London discussions and 
broad frameworks into action plans including specific benchmarks for 
the Kabul conference tentatively slated for the Spring.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
¶3. (U) JCMB-XIII convened January 20, 2010 in Kabul, co-chaired by 
Finance Minister Omar Zakhilwal and UN SRSG Kai Eide.  The U.S. was 
represented by Ambassador Karl Eikenberry, Ambassador Anthony Wayne, 
Coordinating Director for Development and Economic Affairs, and 
William Frej, USAID Director. 
 
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND AID EFFECTIVENESS 
 
¶4. (U) The Integrated Plan for Economic Development (a.k.a. Cluster 
paper) and More Effective Afghan Aid papers presented by Finance 
Minister Zakhilwal were well received by the IC.  The plans focus on 
building Afghan capacity, improving budget execution rates in key 
spending ministries, tackling corruption, and creating an enabling 
environment for donors to channel more resources on budget. 
Specifically, the Cluster approach aims to consolidate coordination 
within the GIRoA.  The previous 17 Inter-Ministerial Committees were 
excessive - with too many focal points for donors. The new proposed 
clusters are: 
 
i.   Agriculture and Rural Development 
ii.  Human Resource Development 
iii. Infrastructure and Economic Development. 
 
The JCMB approved plans to add a Governance cluster. Finance 
Minister Zakhilwal also proposed that donors utilize the Civilian 
Technical Assistance Program to coordinate their efforts to improve 
the capacity of government departments to boost their low budget 
execution rates for national programs. 
 
¶5. (U) In terms of aid effectiveness, Finance Minister Zakhilwal 
requested that the IC increase the percentage of aid channeled 
through the budget, highlighting significant progress made in the 
area of Public Financial Management.  GIRoA committed to working 
with donors to strengthen its efforts to improve the transparency of 
public expenditures, including internal and independent audit 
functions, and increasing the capacity and accountability of its 
management systems at sub-national levels.  Ambassador Eikenberry 
indicated that the U.S. plans to channel significantly more 
assistance through the government's budget, compared to the past 
year (Note: The U.S. aim is to increase the percentage of U.S. 
assistance that flows directly through GIRoA institutions to 40 
percent by FY 2011.  End note.). 
 
THE AFGHAN PEACE AND REINTEGRATION PLAN 
 
¶6. (U) Special Advisor to the President on Internal Security, 
Mohammad Massoom Stanekzai presented the Afghan-led Peace and 
Re-integration program.  The aim of this Program is to promote peace 
through a political process and encourage Taliban fighters and 
leaders to renounce violence.  The program mirrors President 
Karzai's vision outlined in his second inauguration speech, and is 
split into two broad categories: a) the tactical and operational 
level; and b) the strategic reconciliation level. 
 
¶7. (U) Key points made on the Peace and Reintegration program 
included the need for: i) a communications strategy; ii) a  donor 
funding mechanism approved in London; iii) clear identification of a 
lead agency/individual; and iv) further engagement with regional 
neighbors.  The GIRoA committed to publicly announce the program 
prior to the London Conference as a signal of Afghan-ownership and 
to help mobilize financial and political support in donor capitals. 
 
 
AFGHAN NATIONAL ARMY AND AFGHAN NATIONAL POLICE GROWTH RATES AND 
 
REFORMS 
 
¶8. (U) Minister of Defense, General Abdul Raheem Wardak and Minister 
of Interior, Hanif Atmar presented the growth rates and reform 
agenda of the ANA and ANP, respectively.  JCMB endorsed the 
following growth rates: i) the ANA reaching 134,000 and the ANP 
109,000 by October 2010; and ii) the ANA growing to 171,600 and the 
ANP to 134,000 by Oct 2011.  It is important to note that JCMB 
approval will enable ISAF/NTM-A to plan and acquire the necessary 
equipment and infrastructure to support the forces as they grow. 
The IC requested additional time for comments on the overall 
strategy and frameworks, particularly concerning the ANP strategy. 
 
 
¶9. (U) Key points on ANA and ANP growth rates and reforms included: 
i) establishing a timeline for transition; ii) the importance of 
linking the ANP strategy to the rubric of an overall National 
Security Strategy with a long term vision for securing Afghanistan; 
iii) strengthening police capability in COIN; iv) developing a 
robust civilian policing capacity; and v) linking initiatives to 
national development programs.  The JCMB also noted positive signals 
in Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF) progress, highlighting the 
effective ANSF-led responses to the January 18 attacks in Kabul - 
quelled within a five-hour timeframe. 
 
GOVERNANCE, RULE OF LAW AND HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
¶10. (U) General Director of IDLG, Jelani Popal presented a revised 
governance paper.   The paper prioritized five areas of governance: 
i) national governance and policy coordination; ii) civil service 
reform; iii) sub-national governance, iv) rule of law; and v) human 
rights.  The IC broadly welcomed the revised governance paper. 
Ambassador Wayne expressed strong support for the follow-on London 
discussion of these topics, followed by the development of specific 
action plans, commitments and realistic benchmarks for the Kabul 
Conference.  Key recommendations made during the governance 
presentation included: i) additional review of international 
treaties to avoid potential conflicting legislation; ii) 
consultations with GIRoA on projects and programs, as opposed to 
having all projects and programs jointly approved; and iii) the 
incorporation of additional language related to women and vulnerable 
groups, specifically in terms of implementation of the National 
Action Plan for Women. 
 
REGIONAL COOPERATION 
 
¶11. (U) The JCMB took note of the regional cooperation concept paper 
presented by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Enayatullah Nabiel. 
The paper addresses regional challenges including terrorism, 
extremism, militancy, narcotics production and trafficking and 
organized crime.  The IC welcomed a focus on regional economic 
cooperation, specifically the government's commitment to sign the 
Afghanistan Pakistan Trade and Transit Agreement (APTTA) before the 
up-coming Kabul Conference. A notable comment was made by Iran, 
typically silent at past JCMBs, seeking clarification on what role 
NATO/ISAF and the EU play in regional interventions. 
 
THE GOVERNMENT'S ANTI-CORRUPTION REFORM AGENDA 
 
¶12. (U) Dr. Ashraf Ghani Ahmadzai outlined steps to combat 
corruption, noting four key principles that will guide the process 
of reform: i)  the cabinet will be relied upon as the key 
organization for ensuring the collective responsibility of the 
executive branch; ii) the GIRoA will work closely with Parliament to 
create the legal foundation of a system of governance committed to 
accountability and transparency; iii) the GIRoA will work closely 
with the Supreme Court to transform the judiciary into the trusted 
instrument for delivery of justice and the ultimate national organ 
for upholding and enforcing the rule of law; iv) all three branches 
of the state will reach out to Afghan citizens to provide them with 
meaningful channels and mechanism for voicing their grievances and 
to participate in government. 
 
¶13. (U) The anti-corruption plan calls for the President to create 
an Independent Oversight Board by decree to oversee the functions of 
the HOO.  The President will order that the special anti-corruption 
offices in the Attorney General's Office, the Auditor General's 
office, and the Major Crimes Task Force are transferred to HOO to 
ensure coordinated action.  The GIRoA will assign priority during 
2010 to legislating law on an Anti-Corruption Penal Code for the 
purpose of expanding provisions related to asset declaration by 
public officials.  The GIRoA's anti-corruption paper was well 
received by donors.   Co-chairs Eide and Zakhilwal requested 
comments and endorsement of the overall anti-corruption framework 
prior to the London conference, with specific actions, benchmarks, 
and commitments to be fleshed out before the Kabul conference. 
 
 
EIKENBERRY