10KYIV199
TYMOSHENKO DOES BETTER THAN EXPECTED BUT FALLS
Mon Feb 08 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kyiv
VZCZCXRO9096
OO RUEHIK
DE RUEHKV #0199/01 0391648
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 081648Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY KYIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9288
INFO RUCNCIS/CIS COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHZG/NATO EU COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KYIV 000199 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL UP
SUBJECT: TYMOSHENKO DOES BETTER THAN EXPECTED BUT FALLS 
SHORT; NGOS DECLARE ELECTION FREE AND FAIR 
 
REF: KYIV 192 
 
KYIV 00000199  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) PM Yuliya Tymoshenko exceeded expectations by 
narrowing a ten percent post-first round gap with rival 
Viktor Yanukovych to a surprisingly close 2.86 percent (with 
98.8% of the vote counted) in the February 7 presidential 
runoff.  Higher than expected turnout in western Ukraine 
accounted for much of Tymoshenko's surge.  International and 
domestic observers -- including ODIHR, IRI, OPORA, ENEMO and 
the OSCE Parliamentary Assembly -- characterized the election 
as essentially free and fair.  None reported systematic fraud 
that could have undermined the result.  PM Tymoshenko has 
neither conceded defeat nor announced whether she plans to 
contest the result in court --  or convoke street protests. 
Twice on February 8 Tymoshenko canceled press conferences; 
she may announce her intentions February 9.  Yanukovych's 
team has asked her to concede and is seeking recognition for 
Yanukovych as President elect.  End Summary. 
 
Tymoshenko Exceeds Expectations But Falls Short 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶2. (SBU) As of 1700 local February 8, with 98.8% of precincts 
processed, the Central Election Commission of Ukraine (CEC) 
reported that Party of Regions (Regions) candidate Viktor 
Yanukovych had received 48.65%, PM Yuliya Tymoshenko had 
received 45.77%, and 4.38% of voters had voted "against all." 
 Voters cast over twenty five million ballots.  The 2.88% gap 
between Yanukovych and Tymoshenko surprised many political 
experts, including those in the Yanukovych campaign. 
Yanukovych advisors had expected a ten percent or more 
margin.  Turnout in western Ukraine was about ten percent 
higher than they anticipated. 
 
ODIHR and Parliamentary Assemblies: "Professional, 
 Transparent and Honest" 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶3. (SBU) On the eve of election day, OSCE/ODIHR responded on 
February 5 to PM Tymoshenko's concerns about the February 4 
changes to the Presidential Election Law (reftel).  In her 
letter, ODIHR Ambassador Heidi Tagliavini conceded that "it 
is not good practice to make last-minute amendments to the 
election law shortly before election day, in particular not 
between two rounds of an election."  Tagliavini added, 
however, that ODIHR did not conclude from its analysis of the 
amendments that their adoption undermined the electoral 
process in Ukraine.  ODIHR emphasized that the changes to the 
law would not take effect if all members of the Precinct 
Election Commissions (PECs) and District Election Commissions 
(DECs) showed up for work.  Tagliavini's response placed the 
integrity of the elections firmly in the hands of the two 
candidates and their supporters, and reiterated ODIHR's view 
that Ukraine's amended Presidential Election Law could 
provide the basis for an orderly and democratic election, 
something, she added, that Ukraine wanted and needed. 
 
¶4. (U) In a joint statement on February 8, representatives of 
ODIHR, the European Parliament, and the Parliamentary 
Assemblies of the Council of Europe, NATO, and the OSCE 
stated that most OSCE and Council of Europe commitments were 
met during the second round of elections.  They characterized 
the voting as "professional, transparent and honest" and "a 
solid foundation for a peaceful transition of power." 
President of the OSCE Parliamentary Assembly and Special 
Coordinator of the OSCE short-term observers, Joao Soares, 
described the elections as "an impressive display of 
democratic elections" and a victory for everyone in Ukraine. 
 
OPORA: "No Systematic Violations" 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) Local NGO OPORA, which had 1003 short-term observers 
(STOs) stationed throughout Ukraine, said in its press 
statement on February 8 that it had not recorded "any 
systematic violations of the election legislation" that would 
have had a significant impact on the voting results.  OPORA 
anticipates that both candidates will challenge the results 
of specific precincts in court, but added that there did not 
appear to be a legitimate legal basis for doing so.  OPORA 
representatives also observed that many of the procedural 
problems and organizational confusion experienced during the 
January 17 first round were not present during the second 
round. 
 
¶6. (SBU) OPORA also found that the February 4 changes to the 
Presidential election law had "no impact" on the outcome, but 
 
KYIV 00000199  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
rather "apparently mobilized commissioners from both 
candidates to participate in PECs and DECs."  While during 
the January 17 first round of voting, OPORA documented 12% of 
polling stations that did not have a quorum in the morning in 
order to open for voting, OPORA documented only 2.8% of such 
precincts during the February 7 second round.  OPORA also 
performed a Parallel Vote Tabulation (PVT) on election night 
and recorded a gap of 3.7% between Yanukovych (who according 
to the PVT received 49.6%) and Tymoshenko (45.9%), with a 
2.6% margin of error. 
 
ENEMO:  "Superior to the First Round" 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) The European Network of Election Monitoring 
Organizations (ENEMO), which fielded about 450 observers, 
characterized the February 7 second round as proceeding 
"without any reports of systematic fraud," and as being 
"generally viewed as superior to the first round."  It noted, 
however, that procedural and organizational problems 
pinpointed during the first round "continued hampering the 
work of many commissions, leading to unequal enforcement of 
the law across oblasts." 
 
IRI:  "Generally In Accordance with International Standards" 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) In its February 8 statement the International 
Republican Institute (IRI) monitoring team, lead by former 
Assistant Secretary David Kramer, described the election as 
mostly open and transparent and "generally in accordance with 
international standards."  IRI commented on the "unfortunate 
controversy" caused by the last-minute changes to the 
Presidential Election Law, but emphasized that these changes 
had "no appreciable effect on the results of the February 7 
voting." 
 
European Parliament:  "No Widespread Violations" 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶9. (SBU) Head of the European Parliament monitoring 
delegation Pavel Koval stated on February 8 that based on 
reports from its STOs, PACE feels confident that "no 
large-scale violations" occurred during the February 7 second 
round of voting that would have a significant impact on the 
results of the election.  PACE officials continued to collect 
information from their STO teams in the field.  Koval also 
commented, in apparent reference to PM Tymoshenko, that 
"adherence to democratic standards means not just the fair 
vote, but also the voluntary transfer of power in case of 
defeat." 
 
CVU:  "While Complicated, No Systemic Fraud" 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) The NGO "Committee of Voters of Ukraine" (CVU) 
criticized the behavior of the candidates and characterized 
the mood of the second round as more conflictual and tense 
than the first round of elections.  Despite this, however, 
CVU stated that it did not find massive or systemic fraud 
that could have impacted the results of the elections or 
distorted the will of the citizens. 
 
CIS Countries:  "Meets Democratic Standards" 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) The CIS Parliamentary Assembly and the CIS Election 
Monitoring Organizations (CIS EMO) released statements that 
the election met democratic standards and proceeded without 
K5hQzQ8\-Qampaign manager) Turchynov has alleged irregularities in 
Donetsk.  He also declared that a internal count from the 
party's observers, with over 80 percent of the vote 
represented, indicated a 46-46 percent tie.  Yanukovych's 
team has called on Tymoshenko to concede and has said there 
will be no witch hunt against the opposing side.  They are 
seeking recognition of Yanukovych as President elect. 
 
Comment 
------ 
 
¶12. (SBU) With domestic and international observers declaring 
 
KYIV 00000199  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
the election essentially free and fair, Tymoshenko and 
advisers are weighing her options.  While a fighter by 
nature, she is down about 735,000 votes with the tally nearly 
final.  While the conduct of the voting appears to have been 
up to international standards, how the loser exits -- by 
concession or via a drawn out struggle -- will speak volumes 
about the state of Ukraine's democracy. 
TEFFT