10NAIROBI374
SOMALIA - S/GWI Project Proposals
Mon Feb 22 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Nairobi
VZCZCXRO9372
RR RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHNR #0374/01 0530919
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 220914Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY NAIROBI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0911
INFO SOMALIA COLLECTIVE
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC
RHMFISS/CDR USAFRICOM STUTTGART GE
RHMFIUU/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEILB/NCTC WASHINGTON DC
RUEPADJ/CJTF-HOA J2X CAMP LEMONIER DJUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 14 NAIROBI 000374 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV SO KWMN KPAO PHUM
SUBJECT: SOMALIA - S/GWI Project Proposals 
 
REF: STATE 12531; 09 STATE 132094; FEB 19 DAVIS BA - BIGIO EMAIL 
 
¶1.  Post appreciates the opportunity to submit five proposals from 
women's organizations in Somalia's South-Central, Somaliland, and 
Puntland regions to the Secretary's Office of Global Women's 
Issues.  In response to a call for proposals, post received over 85 
submissions from non-governmental organizations across Somalia in 
all of the thematic areas listed in reftel a and b.  All of the 
proposals we selected are for activities in locations where there 
is relative calm,  not controlled by violent extremist groups, and 
where it will be possible to conduct monitoring and evaluation.  We 
gained input from our implementing partners on the capacity and 
financial management control standards of all the organizations 
that submitted proposals.  We have only included proposals from 
those organizations that meet basic U.S. government standards. This 
cable outlines the most outstanding projects, in rank order, from 
each of the three regions, which emerged after deliberations by a 
technical committee composed of State and USAID officers. 
 
 
 
¶2.  The U.S. Government does not have a permanent diplomatic 
presence in Somalia, but we have developed innovative ways to carry 
out project monitoring and evaluation.  Working through our local 
partners, we have been able to effectively monitor small grants we 
have awarded using public diplomacy program funds.  These small 
grants have had major impact by allowing us to partner directly 
with Somali organizations to work within their communities to raise 
public awareness, initiate economic development projects, and 
engage youth in sports, drama, and other activities.  We intend to 
use a similar method to ensure transparency in the  management of 
grants awarded through S/GWI.  In all three regions of Somalia 
there are women's umbrella organizations: Coalition for Grassroots 
Women's Organizations (COGWO) in South-Central Region, We Are Women 
Activists (WAWA) in Puntland, and Nagaad (a Somali word meaning 
after hardship and difficulties, we have come to rest in peace) 
Women Umbrella Organization in Somaliland who are willing to advise 
the recipient organization and work with us to monitor and evaluate 
their projects, at no additional cost. 
 
 
 
¶3.  All of the projects proposed in this cable would be managed by 
the Somalia Affairs Unit.  Each of these projects fills a need in 
the regions and sectors they target.  The submissions are focused 
on providing economic opportunities for women and empowering 
women's participation in Somalia's democratic and political 
development.  With new opportunities to earn income and make their 
voices heard, Somali women beneficiaries would advance their 
political, economic and social rights.  Empowered at the community, 
regional, and national level, these women will become more equal 
partners in creating the conditions necessary for improved security 
- the highest priority for U.S. policy in Somalia.  There are no 
current U.S. funded projects that support women to achieve these 
goals and women are rarely the direct beneficiaries of non-food 
U.S. government assistance in Somalia.  A grant from S/GWI would 
enable us to work directly with the dynamic women who have been the 
lifeline of Somalia through two decades of conflict. 
 
 
 
 
 
Microcredit for Victims of Terrorist Attack 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
 
 
¶4.  The following project is our number one ranked submission. 
 
 
 
-- Project title:  Waberi Women Bomb Blast Survivors Support 
Program 
 
NAIROBI 00000374  002 OF 014 
 
 
-- Region:  Mogadishu 
 
 
 
-- Problem to be addressed: Lack of income generating activities, 
vocational training, and start-up capital for victims of conflict 
in Mogadishu.  With few economic opportunities in Somalia's 
capital, food-for-work programs offered women small incomes and 
food in exchange for public works projects.  On August 3, 2008, a 
group of women street cleaners took a break and gathered for tea. 
A remote-controlled roadside bomb exploded and seventeen women and 
two men (who were filling in their wives) were killed immediately. 
There were 37 survivors, many with significant injuries.  Today, 
the survivors continue to suffer physically, psychologically and 
economically.  The trauma of the attack has left many of the 
survivors handicapped and children of those who perished are now 
orphans.  The women want to start over, yet they are still without 
economic opportunities, remain marginalized and lack the support to 
enable them to sustain   alternative livelihoods.  The proposed 
beneficiaries have received no direct assistance since becoming 
victims of this terrorist attack. 
 
 
 
-- Summary of proposed program: This proposal targets a small group 
of vulnerable women who were victims of a targeted terrorist attack 
in Mogadishu.  The project will provide counseling for the victims 
while providing them with skills to sustain alternative 
livelihoods, initiate vocational training and provide the survivors 
with capital to start their own businesses.  By focusing on a small 
group of women and their families, this project can become a 
successful model for training and microcredit that can eventually 
be extended to the multitude of victims of terrorist attacks in 
Mogadishu. 
 
 
 
-- Project description: For a period of 18 months this project will 
target 37 women survivors of the Waberi bomb explosion and their 
families and 90 orphaned children of women who were killed.  Most 
of the beneficiaries live as internally displaced persons (IDPs) in 
the Waberi district of Mogadishu.  Key project objectives are to 
offer counseling to 37 survivors, initiate a literacy and business 
skills training program, provide start-up capital for the women to 
start their own businesses.  It will provide the orphans with 
school uniforms, learning materials, and school fees, while provide 
victim's families with cash incentives to enable the women to 
complete the training program and bring their businesses to 
profitability.  With a holistic approach supporting the network of 
victims and their families, who all still live in the same 
community, the project will strengthen the support structures to 
enable the beneficiaries to gain self-sustaining livelihoods. 
 
 
 
The specific project activities would begin with psycho-social 
counseling to help the survivors work through the trauma of the 
attack.  Dr. Maryam Awes, a qualified Mogadishu-based counselor 
will lead the counseling sessions which will run concurrently with 
literacy and entrepreneurial training.  The training will equip 
beneficiaries with basic arithmetic and business skills to enable 
them to effectively manage their own businesses.  For all the 
proposed training, qualified and experienced trainers in the 
various training fields will prepare manuals that will be provided 
to all beneficiaries.  The women will learn basic concepts of good 
business management, simple book-keeping, and diversifying their 
small businesses.  They will also be taught cooperative trading 
such as purchasing goods in bulk and then sharing the profits. 
 
 
 
The vocational training will be concentrated in areas that the 
beneficiaries can immediately use and that will enable them to 
easily earn income thereafter.  The beneficiaries will be guided in 
their selection of their activities but will have the option to 
learn traditional weaving, basket making, and cloth weaving to make 
mats, baskets, clothes and other items used daily in the markets 
where they will sell their goods.  They will also have the 
opportunity to learn tie dye techniques, tailoring, shop-keeping, 
grocery, and butchering skills. 
 
NAIROBI 00000374  003 OF 014 
 
 
Considering that the 37 target beneficiaries and their families are 
extremely poor and currently have no sustainable income, the 
project will provide them with monthly cash incentives to enable 
them to complete their training.  The stipends will cover their 
transport, sustain their families, and motivate them.  After 
completing their training, the beneficiaries will be encouraged to 
utilize the skills they learned to earn sustainable incomes.  To 
this end, they will be provided with grants to have start-up 
capital to launch their small businesses, based on their vocational 
skills training. 
 
 
 
In order to ensure that the 90 orphans of the women killed in the 
attack also receive immediate benefits, the project will provide 
school sponsorship, uniforms, and learning materials.  These 
orphans will also be offered counseling and will have the 
opportunity to participate in selected training sessions offered to 
the women.  The project will also prepare the children for 
entrepreneurship opportunities in their future. 
 
 
 
-- The budget for this project is $99,730 over 18 months.  Detailed 
budget figures are available for additional review. 
 
 
 
-- Recipient organization: Women Education and Voicing 
Entrepreneurship (WEAVE) was founded in 2008 and works towards 
building the capacity of Somalia's women and vulnerable groups, 
especially children.  WEAVE is headquartered in Mogadishu and the 
organization's founder, Asli Duale, has a wealth of experience in 
education and health sectors and has worked with a range of our 
international partners in South Central Somalia.  In 2009, the 
organization managed a baseline survey to identify the needs of 
Somali Women within Mogadishu.  The organization and its founder 
are well known to the Somalia Unit and has demonstrated the 
technical and management capacity to implement this project. 
 
 
 
 
 
Establishing Micro-enterprises for Vulnerable Women 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------------------- 
---- 
 
 
 
¶5.  The following project is our second ranked submission. 
 
 
 
-- Project title: Promotion and Establishment of Micro-enterprises 
for Women 
 
 
 
-- Region: Borama, Lugaya, Saylac and Baki districts in Awdal 
Region, Somaliland 
 
 
 
-- Problem to be addressed: In Somaliland, rural communities rely 
on subsistence agriculture and livestock production as their 
principal source of livelihood.  This sector is important for rural 
women even though it is vulnerable to low productivity, inadequate 
market facilities and irregular income.  In urban areas, women 
engage in small scale micro enterprise activities for a few basic 
commodities such as livestock, milk, meat, grain staples, 
fruits/vegetables and other locally made handicrafts.  The women 
petty traders manage their small scale business and have control 
over their resources but they lack training, expertise and relevant 
skills and knowledge to properly run and manage their businesses. 
 
NAIROBI 00000374  004 OF 014 
 
 
Due to relative peace in Awdal region, large number of Awdalian 
refugees in refugee camps in eastern Ethiopia, are returning to 
Somaliland.  Having adapted the refugee camp lifestyle, returnee 
women in general and female- headed household families in 
particular live in environments not conductive to entrepreneurship. 
A micro-credit project would enable these women to access small 
loans and begin their own businesses.  This project is intended to 
help 200 women in Borama, Lugaya, Saylac and Baki districts improve 
their small businesses, increase income and promote family 
livelihoods. 
 
 
 
-- Summary of proposed program:  This project would target 200 
women in four districts of Somaliland to help them increase their 
income through the provision of micro-credit loans.  The 200 women 
beneficiaries will be organized in 40 cells of five women per cell. 
Project activities include training in business skills and access 
to loan credit.  The objectives are to improve family livelihoods 
by empowering women to become entrepreneurs.  Another key objective 
is to expand the skills of cell leaders to manage the credit 
program for its members. 
 
 
 
-- Project description:  The project beneficiaries are 200 women. 
Eligible borrowers will be  returnees or IDPs in the Borama, 
Lugaya, Saylac and Baki districts aged between 20-60 years.  The 
women must have a guarantor at individual and cell levels for 
repayment of the loan and saving.  She must engage in legal 
business within the target area and willing to accept mandatory 
saving and a cell (group) approach system.  She must be honest and 
have a solid reputation in the community. 
 
 
 
Women beneficiaries will be organized into cells of 5 persons. 
Cells in a particular community can form a company which will have 
access to higher levels of financing.  This strategy creates a 
culture of mutual group cooperation in which the women can assist 
each other at all levels. 
 
 
 
Security for loans - Established through a cell guarantee system 
through co-guarantor among cell members (to pay defaulter assets) 
i.e. a peer group approach system.  There must be an external 
guarantor for every cell member in which the savings of each member 
and her other cell member can be tapped to cover the outstanding 
loan of the defaulter. 
 
 
 
Loan maturity - In general, loans will be classified as short term, 
with a maturity period of six months. 
 
 
 
Loan ceiling - The amount of loan that a cell may be entitled to 
borrow will depend on the total membership of the cell.  Loans 
extended to the cell shall be in the form of group loans for 
individual projects. In our case, 40 cells of 5 members each are 
identified in 20 target locations in Borama, Lugaya, Saylac and 
Baki districts. Every member of the cell group will receive a start 
up loan of USD 110.00. 
 
 
 
Service charges - The purpose of service charge is to increase the 
amount of cash in the fund.  It is the only way that the revolving 
fund can increase its capitalization funds to be able to give out 
more money to new beneficiaries. It is not possible to run a credit 
program without administrative fee. Therefore, the women borrower 
must pay service charge.  Service charge will be charged at flat 
rate of 10% of the amount received and duration of repayment of the 
loan will be four months.  Service charges will cover 
administration and training costs. 
 
NAIROBI 00000374  005 OF 014 
 
 
New members will benefit from the money repaid by existing cell 
members. The program will give examples of how to calculate service 
charges using different assumptions.  Service charges are intended 
to cover program costs and is payable at the time of loan 
disbursement. 
 
 
 
Savings - The project will inculcate the value of savings for 
productive purposes. Saving will be in the form of capital 
building-up fund. This encourages borrowers to save for increasing 
initial capital. 
 
 
 
Loan management committee - The project administrator will nominate 
a management committee with the required expertise and technical 
competency for the efficient implementation of the project and 
shall comprise of a project manager, loan officer, field extension 
officer, project accountant, and a community leader and/or local 
authority. 
 
 
 
Loan repayment - A systematic collection process of loan repayment 
by the cell leader and the company treasurer will ease the 
collection work for the loan officer by adopting a process to make 
each borrower and cell responsible or both loan repayment and 
savings. 
 
 
 
Loan processing and disbursement - The project will establish 
specific guidelines to assess prospective applicants.  This will 
ensure quality service, a positive impact on the program.  All 
prospective applicants will receive orientation, training, and 
information about the loan program and must have an endorsement 
letter to be considered.  A specific disbursement procedure will 
also be endorsed by each cell. 
 
 
 
Training program - The business skill training and loan management 
will be offered to all participants and topics will address 
specifically in training sessions including: group organization and 
dynamics, income generating ideas, accountability and cash control, 
planning, costing and pricing, book keeping and records, credit 
management/service charge /saving, loan monitoring and evaluation. 
The training will also include marketing, feasibility, and credit 
management. The training is divided into two parts: training of the 
cell leaders (loan committee) and training for the whole group. 
Under the guidance of the project, the credit officer and trainer 
will plan and organize at least four week training sessions 
depending on the needs and skill level of the selected group. The 
training will be conducted once per week in each group's village or 
in a community building such as school or a maternal child health 
care center.  This will consist of five training sessions for each 
of the target locations. 
 
 
 
After the training sessions, appropriate tests will be administered 
and participatory methods will be used to ensure that information 
is being disseminated effectively and all participants understand 
the concept further training will be provided as necessary during 
the loan monitoring and follow up activities.  The project manager, 
with the other members of the loan committee, will prepare monthly 
quarterly and final project reports.  The project administrator 
will conduct ongoing monitoring and evaluation. 
 
 
 
-- Budget: A total of USD 88,685 is requested to support this 
project over a period of 12 months.  Detailed budget figures are 
available for additional review. 
 
 
 
-- Recipient Organization: The Somaliland Humanitarian Relief 
Organization (SOHURA0 has implemented many projects on agriculture, 
 
NAIROBI 00000374  006 OF 014 
 
 
environment education, health, livestock, human right, and credit. 
SOHURA is currently implementing a project to promote advocacy for 
law and policy on sexual and gender based violence (SGBV) in Awdal 
region. The project includes research, mapping 
stakeholders/resources, workshop planning, and drafting a policy 
proposal on SGBV and disability law/policies, funded by Oxfam 
Novib.  SOHURA also implemented a loan revolving fund project 
financed by Somali Protection Foundation. This micro credit project 
was implemented in Habaas, Tulli and Osoli villages of Awdal 
region. 
 
 
 
 
 
Encouraging Political Participation in Puntland 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------------- 
 
 
 
¶6.  The following project is our third ranked submission. 
 
 
 
-- Project title: Democracy and Political Empowerment for Puntland 
Women 
 
 
 
-- Region: All five regions of Puntland 
 
 
 
-- Problem to be addressed: There is an underrepresentation of 
women in all of Puntland's political and public institutions. 
Puntland's first charter, ratified and implemented in 1998, 
specified seats for five women in the 66 seat parliament.  The 
first parliament met this requirement.  Over time, however, the 
female parliamentarians were gradually removed from the seats by 
substituting them with men representing their regions.  At present 
there are only two female parliamentarians, from the Mudug and 
Sanaag regions, who serve in the house of legislators. 
 
 
 
In the 2004-2005 presidential elections, Puntland had its first 
woman candidate.  Though she withdrew her candidacy in the final 
stage, she was chosen to become the first Minister for Women 
Development and Family affairs.  While parliament became less 
representative, the number of women in the council of ministers 
increased from zero to four (one minister and three deputy 
ministers).  Women have also become more visible in the current 
political environment. 
 
 
 
Puntland introduced its decentralization program in 2005 and 20 
district councils were successfully formed.  While the number of 
the councilors ranged from 25 to 45 in each district, women's 
representation on these councils was less than 5%.  Less than 10 
percent of Puntland's civil service are women, leading to a severe 
paucity of employment opportunities for women.  At the same time, 
the number of female headed households is drastically increasing. 
There is a critical need to push for increased women's 
representation in all of Puntland's public institutions. 
 
 
 
-- Summary of the proposed program: This project will empower women 
to advocate for increasing the number of women representatives in 
the parliament, council of ministers, district councils, and 
Puntland's civil service.  By training women in advocacy techniques 
and concerted lobbying of Puntland's elected and traditional 
leaders, the project will encourage increased women's participation 
in political decision-making and equal opportunity for employment 
in governmental jobs. 
 
NAIROBI 00000374  007 OF 014 
 
 
-- Project description: This project will empower women to 
participate in political decision making processes.  Through civic 
education, women will be encouraged to make their voices heard in 
Puntland's democratization program.  The project will help women 
prepare for the next phase of presidential elections in 2013. 
Women will be trained and organized to lobby the top traditional 
leaders and other concerned stakeholders to re-install women in the 
five parliamentarian seats reserved for them.  The project will 
also encourage increased representation by women in all of 
Puntland's public institutions.  The outcome of this project  will 
be enhanced women's status of political, economic and social, which 
will contribute to the lasting peace, economic recovery and 
consolidation of social stability in Puntland. 
 
 
 
To empowering women's political participation, the project will 
engage traditional elders and  key stakeholders, such as the 
prominent business persons, youth groups and other key professional 
organizations to ensure equitable representation in the political 
arena.  A comprehensive public diplomacy campaign will influence 
key stakeholders.  The Nagal Women's Network will design, produce 
and stage a package of awareness raising activities encouraging 
women's political participation.  Specific deliverables include 
slogans printed on t-shirts, stickers, banners, and billboards in 
the main areas of Garowe, the regional capital.  The Network will 
launch a series of media programs, including televised debates, 
focusing on women's political participation and equal opportunity 
within government institutions. 
 
 
 
Specific project outputs include: 
 
- Three 2-day workshops to teach advocacy strategies to 120 women 
participants 
 
- Development of slogans to be printed on 1000 shirts, at least 
5000 stickers and 2000 banners which will be distributed across 
Garowe and other major towns in Puntland 
 
- Produce at least 24 radio and TV programs and debates which will 
be broadcast on Radio Garowe, Daljir FM, and ETN TV 
 
- Direct collaboration with the Ministry of Women Development and 
Family Affairs 
 
 
 
-- Budget: The total project cost over a period of six months is 
USD 48,850.  Detailed budget figures are available for additional 
review. 
 
 
 
-- Recipient organization: Nugal Women's Network (NWN) was founded 
in January 2007, in Garowe, Puntland.  The network unites 14 
different women's organizations which all focus on  improving 
women's socio-eco-political status in the Nugal region.  NWN was 
formed to unify the scattered efforts of the various individual 
women entities which share common goal, to strengthen cooperation 
and create better joint actions to ease the attainment of the 
shared long-term goals. Nugal women network is an active member of 
the Puntland Non-state Actors Association (PUNSAA).  NWN 
facilitates the exchange, production and provision of information 
among its members.  It has created a space in Puntland's political 
landscape for member organizations to advocate for women.  The 
Network implemented campaigns against the practice of female 
genital cutting in Garowe, reaching 300 women and girls.  NWN 
participated the girls' education program with the Puntland 
Ministry of Education, and had a leading role in the 16 days 
activism to prevent violence against women. 
 
 
 
 
 
Training Women for Secretarial Employment 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
NAIROBI 00000374  008 OF 014 
 
 
¶7.  The following project is our fourth ranked submission. 
 
 
 
-- Project title: Secretarial Training for Somali Women 
 
 
 
-- Region: Hargeisa, Somaliland 
 
 
 
-- Problem to be addressed: The challenges that face Somali women 
and girls go beyond health, and often arise from a combination of 
poverty and illiteracy.  Many women are educated, but are unskilled 
in areas for them to become gainfully employed.  Women who are 
engaged in the workforce can often be found in the market selling 
vegetables and meat, or along the streets behind green kiosks 
selling the narcotic khat. Some will be found in stores and places 
of business even though they can hardly read or write. The 
professional arena is still dominated by men and therefore is 
biased towards offering jobs to men only.  When girls cannot find 
employment in this already tight market, many marry early or go 
through unsuitable marriages purely for economic security.  By 
offering job training, this project supports activities to increase 
the economic opportunities for women by targeting a group of 
beneficiaries with adult literacy classes and secretarial training 
to make them immediately employable. 
 
 
 
-- Summary of proposed program:  This project will offer training 
and job opportunities for 60 women who have had formal schooling 
but who do not have skills to help them find jobs.  This project 
will be Somaliland's first training of secretaries and office 
assistants.  After this six month training course, the 
beneficiaries will have the knowledge and skills to become 
gainfully employed, achieve economic independence and have the 
means to support themselves and their families. It will enable 
women to become professional office managers who will also improve 
the poor standard of clerical work that currently characterizes 
Somalia. 
 
 
 
-- Project description: This initiative will take 60 women, who 
have passed the entrance examination and who demonstrate drive and 
determination, to pioneer professional and efficient secretarial 
and clerical training in Somaliland.  The students will also be 
taught about their rights in the workplace, and how to get the best 
treatment during working hours. The training will be conducted over 
a period of six months in a classroom setting.  It will include 
internship placements in the offices of the UN and International 
NGOs where the beneficiaries will gain good experience in the real 
working environment. A syllabus will be developed and provided to 
the students and each new skill will be tested. 
 
 
 
By training them as secretaries, women from economically challenged 
households will learn a useful skill and gain a means to a 
livelihood.  This project will empower women, hone leadership 
skills, and provide a forum to discuss important human rights 
issues. This is the arena to foster tomorrow's leaders, preparing 
them for professional jobs that are better paid and offer better 
working conditions. Women have difficulty competing for these jobs 
because they do not have the necessary skills. This project aims to 
give women a chance at better jobs by teaching them secretarial 
skills. 
 
 
 
This initial investment will equip and start up a secretarial 
training department that will be able to sustain itself thereafter 
by charging a small fee to students. This fee will be used to pay 
rent, utilities and instructors' salary.  In Somaliland there are 
many small private institutions that profess to teach subjects 
 
NAIROBI 00000374  009 OF 014 
 
 
ranging from nursing to English and computer skills. The quality of 
most of these institutions is very poor, but they are nevertheless 
crowded. They charge fees ranging from $10-$200 a month. People 
readily pay for these courses despite the poor quality of the 
training being offered.  There is a strong demand for skills 
training and this project will provide quality training for women 
who otherwise could not afford the standard training fees. 
 
 
 
For this 6 month pilot project we propose not to charge any fees. 
At the conclusion of the project, Edna Adan Hospital will determine 
an affordable fee structure at the conclusion of this 6 month pilot 
course, after gaining an accurate picture of expenses.  This 
reasoning comes from a need draw women to this new training and to 
encourage women who may shy away from enrolling due to financial 
constraints.  The project will offer an allowance of $30/month for 
each student, to cover travel expenses. 
 
 
 
After this initial project investment, the recipient organization 
will be able to continuously produce female secretaries who are 
well trained and highly sought after in the market. This 
opportunity will ensure employment for them and income for their 
families, confirming the sustainability of the project. 
 
 
 
Participant selection criteria - Project beneficiaries must be 
female, 18 years or older, hold a 
 
high school diploma, successfully pass the entrance interview, 
successfully pass the written entrance examination in the areas of 
math and English, have basic computer skills, and demonstrate 
evidence of drive and determination. 
 
 
 
The project will be conducted over a 6 month period. One group of 
30 students will attend in the mornings, and the other group of 30 
will attend in the afternoon, for a total of 60 students. 
 
 
 
The women will participate in several modules which include 
training in the following areas: 
 
 
 
- Computer skills (typing and word processing, desktop publishing, 
and database management) 
 
- Electronic and paper filing 
 
- Telephone etiquette 
 
- Correspondence 
 
- Arranging meetings and appointments 
 
- Making travel plans 
 
- Preparing programs and schedules for planned activities 
 
- Taking meeting minutes 
 
- Photocopying, laminating, binding and other office tasks 
 
- Coordinating office activities and staying on top of work in 
progress and developments 
 
- Working with supervisors 
 
- Dealing with emergencies 
 
Outcome: 60 women with secretarial, clerical skills, and office 
management skills 
 
NAIROBI 00000374  010 OF 014 
 
 
- Building a resume 
 
- Job hunting 
 
- Preparing for a job interview 
 
- Professional dress and manners 
 
Outcome: Completed CV and two job interviews scheduled 
 
 
 
- Rights in the workplace 
 
- Dealing with harassment 
 
- Equal pay for equal work 
 
Outcome: Awareness about labor rights, including harassment issues 
 
 
 
- Basic health and hygiene 
 
- Child care and nutrition 
 
- Prevention and treatment of HIV/AIDS and sexually transmitted 
diseases 
 
- Abandoning female genital cutting 
 
- First aid 
 
Outcome: Improved knowledge about the issues that concern the 
health of women and children 
 
 
 
- English language skills throughout the secretarial course 
 
Outcome: Improved oral and written English 
 
 
 
In each of these training areas, learning will be measured with 
written tests, role playing, and presentations 
 
 
 
-- Budget:  The total budget for this six month project is $42,295. 
Detailed budget figures are available for additional review. 
 
 
 
-- Recipient Organization:  Edna Adan University Hospital has been 
working tirelessly to tackle many of the challenges that face 
Somali women and which also affect their children.  It has  worked 
successfully with a range of partners and enjoys a stellar 
reputation in Somaliland and with international donors.  The 
hospital has taken the lead in reducing the maternal mortality rate 
of Somali women by training qualified midwives, nurses, laboratory, 
and pharmacy technicians.  It offers one of the best maternal and 
medical hospital services in Somalia, especially for emergency 
obstetric care and fistula repair.  The founder was a minister in 
the Somaliland government and is one of Somalia's strongest civil 
society leaders and has implemented a wide range of projects to 
empower women.  The hospital has extensive experience in carrying 
out long term and short term trainings for both women and men and 
takes a rigorous approach toward its educational activities. 
 
 
 
 
 
Building a Women's Caucus in the Transitional Federal Parliament 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------------------- 
------------------- 
 
NAIROBI 00000374  011 OF 014 
 
 
¶8. The following project is our fifth ranked submission. 
 
 
 
-- Project title: Increasing Women's Political Participation in 
Somalia 
 
 
 
-- Region: Mogadishu 
 
 
 
-- Problem to be addressed: Women's participation in Somali 
politics and public service is one of the lowest in the world. If 
this situation persists, women's voices will continue to be unheard 
and many women will continue to be victimized in society, without 
equal opportunities and rights. The Somali Women Parliamentary 
Association (SOWPA) formed a women's caucus to address the low 
levels of women's political participation in the executive and 
legislative arms of government.   In the past, many workshops were 
held on the issue of women's political participation, but very few 
involved Members of the Parliament.  To increase the space to allow 
women to participate in Somalia's political processes, a 
multidimensional approach in necessary, which includes legislation 
that provides for affirmative action for women, constitutional 
provisions that guarantee women's rights, strategies for economic 
empowerment of women, and strengthening women's education. 
 
 
 
Women are severely underrepresented in Somalia political and 
government institutions.  Although the Transitional Federal Charter 
requires that a minimum of 12% of the members of Transitional 
Federal Parliament shall be women, there are only 37 women out of 
550 members - about 6.7% of the legislative body.  In the current 
cabinet of 45, only two positions are held by women. The lack of 
representation is equally poor in the civil service. These trends 
and negative patterns must  be reversed. 
 
 
 
Greater women's participation in politics and public institutions 
will help improve representation of women's views and play a 
positive role in the process of peace and reconciliation. Women in 
general are instinctively against war and conflicts; in Somalia 
they often have a multi-clan identity since they are born in one 
clan and may be married into another. Therefore, a lack of women in 
political and institutional life is causing missed opportunities to 
mitigate the conflict in Somalia. 
 
 
 
-- Summary of proposed program: SOWPA will conduct a series of 
thematic workshops to empower women, within a period of nine 
months. Through these workshops SOWPA will reach out to different 
sectors of Somali society to identify barriers to women's political 
participation and develop strategies to tackle those barriers. 
SOWPA will launch an inclusive process to engage in dialogue with 
civil society organizations, academics, religious leaders, business 
owners, government officials, and media representatives to support 
Somali women's participation. 
 
 
 
SOWPA members will be trained to sponsor legislation in the 
parliament and monitor its implementation.  In parliament, SOWPA 
members have the ability to raise questions and initiate debates 
issues that concern women and seek specific action from the 
government. Thus, the association will take the lead in educating 
and mobilizing Somali women and men to work for increased women's 
political participation.  This project that will help bridge the 
gap between legislators and the pubic by facilitating different 
sectors of Somali society to engage in active exchanges.  Like 
their male counterparts, women legislators have not been in close 
contact with their constituencies, including women. This project 
will help bridge this divide. 
 
NAIROBI 00000374  012 OF 014 
 
 
-- Project description: A key goal of this project is to create a 
comprehensive strategy to empower Somalia's women parliamentarians 
to achieve an increased women political participation in Somalia. 
In particular, the project will identify barriers and strategies to 
increase women's political participation, and bridge the gap 
between SOWPA members and the Somali public including civil society 
organizations, academics, and religious leaders, and identify 
potential allies in carrying our its mission. 
 
 
 
Phase 1: Setting up the office - In the first month of the project 
SOWPA will focus on recruiting support staff, to identify an 
office, and purchase the necessary equipment and basic office 
furniture. A company will also be identified to construct the 
website, which will be used for the purpose of the project and 
thereafter. 
 
 
 
Phase 2: Public outreach - During this phase, SOWPA members will 
conduct six thematic workshops on the barriers of political 
participation to identify comprehensive strategies to tackle them. 
At the beginning of Phase 2, the Association will organize at least 
two radio programs to reach out to Somali public, informing them 
about SOWPA's goals and invite the public to engage contribute 
their perspectives. The website will continuously be used as a 
compliment to exchange with the public. 
 
 
 
Phase 3: Public discussion on the draft strategy - During the third 
phase, the draft strategy document will be finalized and SOWPA will 
utilize the website to gather public feedback. This process will 
hopefully help verify the viability of the strategies and will give 
ownership to others. It will build a broader consensus on 
additional joint activities. The public feedback will inform the 
final changes in the strategy, which will be printed and posted on 
the website and disseminated to different stakeholders. 
 
 
 
Phase 4: Public outreach through radio - After adoption of the 
final strategy, SOWPA members will use radio to inform the public 
about the process it intends to follow to promote women's political 
participation, and call for their support. 
 
 
 
Thematic workshops - The Caucus will organize six thematic 
workshops with representatives from civil society organizations, 
academics, business owners, government officials (including 
Ministers, Members of Parliament, senior public officials), members 
of independent bodies (such as the Independent Constitutional 
Commission and Civil Service Commission), media representatives and 
journalists.  Each workshop will last two days and will be designed 
to gain buy in on strategies to increase women's political 
participation. Since the workshops will be thematic, the 
participants will be predominantly from a group with common 
interests.  The six workshops will be conducted in two locations: 
Mogadishu (4) and Galkayo (2). 
 
 
 
The workshop participants will be carefully selected to represent 
all geographic areas of 
 
Somalia.  In each workshop, an average of 15 SOWPA members and 20 
members representing other organizations will take part in each 
program.  Guest speakers will also be invited. 
 
 
 
Themes of the workshops will include: 
 
 
 
- Political Barriers and Strategies for Women Participation: This 
 
NAIROBI 00000374  013 OF 014 
 
 
workshop will cover the actual political barriers in Somalia.  It 
will also identify the strategies to help increase women political 
participation including passing legislation, constitutional 
provisions, civil service regulations, and working with independent 
bodies such as IFCC and the Civil Service Commission. 
 
 
 
- Somali Culture, Religion and Women Participation: This workshop 
will identify cultural and religious barriers to women's 
participation. A special focus will be given to identifying areas 
where religion is misinterpreted and strategies to address these 
problems. 
 
 
 
- Economic Empowerment and Women's Participation: Participants will 
address economic aspects of women's participation and strategies to 
increase economic development opportunities. 
 
 
 
- Education and Women Participation: Participants will discuss 
problems that affect women's education and strategies to enhance 
formal and informal education. Awareness campaigns to help 
increasing women participation will also be discussed. 
 
 
 
- Role of the Somali Women in the Peace and Reconciliation Process: 
To encourage proactive engagement in the peace and reconciliation 
initiatives.  Women's successful engagement in the reconciliation 
process would challenge the existing cultural patterns and enable 
more successful collaboration among competing factions. 
 
 
 
- Media and Women Participation: Participants will discuss the role 
the media can play in supporting the cause of increased women's 
participation and strategies in achieving that goal. 
 
 
 
Project deliverables include: 
 
- Construction of the Website. A website will be constructed to 
facilitate communication between the legislators and the Somali 
public. The strategy will be posted to the website to collect 
feedback from the general public and different organizations. 
 
- Radio shows.  SOWPA will organize radio shows to inform the 
public about its initiative and invite them to give their inputs on 
the problems and strategies regarding political participation of 
women.  When the final version of the strategy document is adopted, 
another series of radio shows will be organized. The shows will 
inform the public about the strategies that SOWPA will adopt and 
call for support from the public. 
 
 
 
SOWPA will hire an experienced team to help implement the project. 
A project manager and project advisor will focus on management and 
administrative responsibilities while helping to establish contacts 
with the individuals and organizations to participate in workshops 
and implement other project activities.  The manager will draft 
written reports on project activities and expenditures.  A project 
accountant will be hired to keep the accounts of the project and 
maintain financial documents and will ensure transparency. 
 
 
 
-- Budget: The total budget for this nine month project is USD 
55,000.  Detailed budget figures are available for additional 
review. 
 
 
 
-- Recipient Organization: The Somali Women Parliamentary 
Association (SOWPA) is the women's caucus of the Transitional 
Federal Parliament (TFP).  SOWPA was founded by 23 women members of 
 
NAIROBI 00000374  014 OF 014 
 
 
the TFP on January 19, 2010. While it is a new organization, 
 
SOWPA has a number of members who have extensive experience in 
managing and implementing projects with different non-governmental 
organizations. 
 
 
 
SOWPA's vision is to promote peace and security; equal 
representation of women in all decision-making forums; and the full 
participation of women in all aspects of the social, political, 
economic and cultural life in Somalia.  The mission of the Women's 
Caucus is to provide a forum for women legislators and their 
constituents to meet, discuss and share experiences to develop a 
united voice to achieve sustainable peace in Somalia.  By acting as 
the voice for women in Somalia, advocating on their behalf, and 
through collaboration with others in and outside of Parliament, 
SOWPA ensures the development and empowerment of women in all 
aspects of life in Somalia, including security, education, 
politics, health, human rights, and social development. 
RANNEBERGER