10PRETORIA224
WORLD CUP ANTI-TIP INITIATIVES BY SOUTH AFRICAN
Tue Feb 02 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Pretoria
VZCZCXRO4227
RR RUEHDU RUEHJO
DE RUEHSA #0224/01 0331446
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 021446Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY PRETORIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1092
INFO RUEHTO/AMEMBASSY MAPUTO 6232
RUEHMB/AMEMBASSY MBABANE 4615
RUEHTN/AMCONSUL CAPE TOWN 7538
RUEHDU/AMCONSUL DURBAN 1603
RUEHJO/AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG 9893UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PRETORIA 000224 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PREF PHUM KTIP SF
SUBJECT: WORLD CUP ANTI-TIP INITIATIVES BY SOUTH AFRICAN 
NGOS 
 
REF: A. 09 PRETORIA 2578 
     ¶B. 09 PRETORIA 2229 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  At a January 25-27 "train the trainers" workshop on 
trafficking in persons (TIP), organized by World Hope South 
Africa (WHSA) under a grant from State/GTIP (ref A), 
participants from a dozen civil society groups prepared to 
step up their anti-TIP outreach in advance of the mid-2010 
World Cup in South Africa.  Initiatives ranged from poster 
campaigns and ongoing school visits, to programs to occupy 
children safely during the games, volunteer supervision of 
public fan parks, and even a new victim hotline.  As this 
partial sampling from one province demonstrates, South 
African NGOs are gearing up to protect the potentially 
vulnerable, in a wide array of localized initiatives.  End 
Summary. 
 
--------------------- 
2010-Focused Outreach 
--------------------- 
 
¶2.  Anthony Ambrose of World Vision South Africa (WVSA) said 
his organization was active in six of the country's nine 
provinces, mainly in rural areas.  WVSA was involved in an 
array of multi-level partnerships, such as a children's 
sector network (SANTAC) and the Child Protection Committee 
chaired by the Department of Social Development (DSD) which 
had formulated the official plan for child protection during 
World Cup.  Ambrose noted that while the SAG had undertaken 
to provide security at stadia hosting the games, the informal 
fan parks were left to NGOs to protect.  (Note: post security 
officer confirmed that while he expected a visible police 
presence at any large events for general security and crowd 
control, the police had never made mention of anti-TIP 
measures at those arenas.  End note.)  A consortium of civil 
society groups -- UNICEF, National Association of Child Care 
Workers (NACCW), Childline, Child Welfare, Nelson Mandela 
Children's Fund (NMCF), and one or two others -- had formed 
to prepare plans for "child friendly spaces" during the 
soccer games.  Each of the soccer cities was assigned to an 
NGO as the lead agency to coordinate protection efforts (e.g. 
Polokwane to Childline, Soweto to World Vision, etc.).  WVSA 
would link this World Cup plan to its ongoing neighborhood 
watch work, wherein community committees monitor the 
wellbeing and whereabouts of orphan headed households and 
other children considered vulnerable. 
 
¶3.  Robin Davis of the Tshwane Leadership Foundation (TLF) 
described how TLF had led the formation of an 
anti-trafficking coalition in the province of Gauteng (whose 
main cities are Johannesburg and Pretoria), launched last 
August to emulate those like Mpulimo (see below) and its 
peers in Western Cape (Cape Town) and Kwa Zulu Natal 
(Durban).  The coalition's first focus was on the 2010 World 
Cup.  It had laid out an implementation plan to raise 
awareness throughout downtown Pretoria, walking the city grid 
block by block to target caretakers of buildings, budget 
hotels, hair salons, taverns, and shopping centers.  The 
group was flagging suspicious activities (e.g. persons 
milling around entries to ostensibly unused buildings), had 
befriended street prostitutes for information, and had 
identified locations which could be hotspots during the games. 
 
¶4.  "Captain" Magdeline Phore told how the Salvation Army had 
sent priests and volunteers to Germany to learn lessons from 
World Cup 2006, and those emissaries had returned to share 
the information in South Africa.  The group was planning to 
mount big-screen football broadcasts in churches, where 
Qmount big-screen football broadcasts in churches, where 
teachers would also conduct classes over the extended school 
break during the games, and lay people were being trained to 
supervise kids' clubs and youth programs.  Having identified 
particular "party streets" where youth might fall prey to 
traffickers, volunteers would be present to keep a watchful 
eye, talk to youth, and try to keep girls and boys safe. 
Since last year the Salvation Army had expanded its HIV/AIDS 
peer education to include TIP, especially in rural areas 
where the young could be especially vulnerable to fake job 
offers.  The group also offered support to such job seekers, 
helping them to screen employers to ensure jobs were 
legitimate.  TIP was now a theme in all of the group's 
outreach events, with a focus on prevention. 
 
¶5.  On January 27, while the workshop was ongoing, the 
Salvation Army launched a new hotline number, 0800-RESCUE, to 
 
PRETORIA 00000224  002 OF 002 
 
 
assist TIP victims and receive tip-offs on trafficking.  The 
line would be staffed by speakers of all 11 South African 
national languages.  (Note: The line is currently not/not 
staffed in Portuguese, French, or native languages of 
adjacent countries for foreign victims.  End note.)  Contact 
was possible visa phone, fax, mail, or mobile phone text 
messaging.  The number would be added to South African Police 
posters and materials. 
 
¶6.  Collette Bezuidenhout of the Girl Guides (local 
equivalent of U.S. Girl Scouts) described how its 8,000 
members nationwide were engaged in anti-TIP education, to the 
extent that a new anti-trafficking badge had been created for 
significant achievement.  Outreach was age-tailored, ranging 
from teddy bear talks and "stranger danger" lessons with 
small kids to peer education among teens by guides over 17 
years of age.  The group's networks spanned urban, suburban, 
and rural communities.  The organization was working on 
designing anti-TIP posters and games. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Ongoing Anti-TIP Efforts (2010 and Beyond) 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶7.  Given Lekhuleni of Amazing Grace had recently moved from 
its well-known shelter in Mpumalanga near Mozambique (ref B) 
to assist with a sister shelter in Johannesburg.  Since 2005, 
Amazing Grace has been engaged in victims' assistance, 
awareness raising, and lobbying for the rights of women and 
children.  Last year it launched a "Red Light" anti-TIP 
campaign in partnership with a group called Junior Citizens. 
Amazing Grace is an anchor member of the 'Mpumlimo' 
(Mpumalanga-Limpopo-Mozambique) task team of regional NGOs 
against TIP -- a model of cross-border collaboration in an 
area especially prone to trafficking.  Mpumlimo was in the 
process of expanding to include counterparts from Swaziland. 
It was working closely with the DSD on provincial anti-TIP 
planning for 2010 and beyond, and with the Human Sciences 
Research Council (HSRC) on their EC-funded research for the 
National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) which leads the 
government's anti-TIP efforts. 
 
¶8.  Babalwa Makawula was from the New Life center in the 
difficult Johannesburg districts of Hillbrow and Berea, which 
opened in April 2005 as a drop-in and rehabilitation center 
for "women in trouble" and to help sex workers find a way out 
of prostitution.  Working with the ILO, New Life was 
conducting "day and night" outreach with psychosocial 
support; with the SAG's Department of Health it was holding 
peer education seminars on HIV/AIDS.  New Life was looking to 
weave anti-TIP messages into these programs. 
 
¶9.  Xenia Swanepoel represented Open Mind, a ministry-based 
organization initially working with the homeless and later 
expanding to assisting prostitutes and lately TIP victims. 
Security concerns had caused it to suspend its direct brothel 
contacts, but it continued it public advocacy role, speaking 
at conferences and public fora. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Networking, More than Curriculum 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶10.  Comment: Overall, the workshop was more impressive as a 
networking platform than for the training itself.  WHSA will 
forward to G/TIP its training material.  Poloff observed 
breakout group presentations on root causes of TIP and TIP's 
effects on individuals, families, communities, and countries 
-- fairly predictable discussions, so not reported here. 
(Note: G/TIP will be gratified that its tier ranking system 
Q(Note: G/TIP will be gratified that its tier ranking system 
has an impact: without mentioning the TIP Report by name, 
NGOs included among the country effects the negative image of 
being "poorly graded" by the rest of the world.  End Note.) 
In another session, participants discussed a "walkabout" 
exercise in which they had taken note of risks and threats in 
their neighborhoods, as well as resources for safety and 
help.  There were about 15 participants in the workshop, 
which WHSA said it would have to duplicate because of being 
doubly oversubscribed.  End Comment. 
GIPS