10USUNNEWYORK97
UNSC: MONTHLY MIDDLE EAST DISCUSSION - MEMBERS
Mon Feb 22 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO0130
OO RUEHROV
DE RUCNDT #0097/01 0531949
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 221949Z FEB 10
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8211
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 USUN NEW YORK 000097 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPAL KWBG UNSC IS LE SY
SUBJECT: UNSC: MONTHLY MIDDLE EAST DISCUSSION - MEMBERS 
URGE START OF NEGOTIATIONS, EVEN IF INDIRECT 
 
REF: STATE 14003 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: UN Under Secretary-General for Political 
Affairs Pascoe briefed the Security Council during its 
monthly meeting on the Middle East on February 18.  He 
emphasized that the two parties were seriously considering 
Special Envoy Mitchell's proposal to move to proximity talks 
and said he hoped President Abbas would agree.  He called for 
an extension of the settlements moratorium and noted a slight 
improvement of the situation in East Jerusalem and Gaza.  He 
called on the PA to continue to meet its Roadmap obligations 
and for the Palestinian leadership to speak out against 
incitement.  He highlighted the continuing violence directed 
from Gaza at Israel and the IED attack on an ICRC convoy in 
Gaza but urged that more goods be allowed into Gaza through 
the crossings.  He deplored the heightened rhetoric and 
called for a return to the Israeli-Syrian track.  The 
majority of Security Council members during consultations 
stressed the need for the parties to return to negotiations, 
even if indirect at first.  A number of Council members 
shared their efforts to encourage the parties back to the 
table and pressed for what else could be done to which 
Ambassador Rice responded by encouraging financial 
contributions to and capacity building for the PA; urging 
members to be mindful of what is said and done by the Council 
since it can have a negative impact in the region; and 
pressing all to urge the parties to return to direct 
negotiations.  A number of members called on the parties to 
comply with their Roadmap obligations, especially in calling 
on Israel to cease settlement activity.  A number also 
highlighted the need to improve the situation in Gaza, though 
taking into consideration Israel's security concerns. 
Several noted the need for Palestinian reconciliation, of 
which Pascoe noted the UN was not optimistic.  Several member 
states, including the U.S., referred to the issues related to 
the Goldstone report, and none called for action on it in the 
Council.  End summary. 
 
Secretariat Briefing 
-------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Under Secretary-General for Political Affairs Lynn 
Pascoe briefed the Security Council on February 18 during its 
monthly meeting on the Middle East.  While deeply concerned 
at the continuing stalemate with peace efforts, he emphasized 
that the two parties have undertaken serious consideration of 
the Special Envoy Mitchell's proposal to move to proximity 
talks.  He specifically noted President Netanyahu's 
commitment to a two-state solution and said that he hoped 
President Abbas would agree to start negotiations, even if 
they begin as proximity talks.  He underscored that the 
Quartet would work actively to support the process.  He 
stressed that clear progress through negotiations needs to be 
made on Jerusalem, borders, water, security and refugees.  He 
highlighted the GOI's issuance of violations of work 
restraint orders with regard to the settlements moratorium 
and urged further measures to enforce the moratorium. 
Nevertheless, he underscored the continuing illegality of 
settlements and urged an extension of the ten-month 
moratorium.  He noted that there had been no home demolitions 
during the reporting period.  He called for the reopening of 
Palestinian institutions in East Jerusalem. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Pascoe said the Palestinian Authority continued to 
work to meet its Roadmap obligations and urged the 
Palestinian leadership to speak out against incitement.  He 
referred to the February 10 knife attack by a Palestinian 
that led to the death of an Israeli soldier and noted that 
Prime Minister Fayyad had condemned the attack.  He also 
referred to IDF raids in Ramallah against non-violent 
protesters, as well as the February 9 shooting of a 
Palestinian teenager by settlers.  He underscored the need 
for "full respect for legitimate non-violent protest."  He 
said that 550 obstacles to movement remain in the West Bank, 
of which 89 are permanently or partially staffed checkpoints. 
 Pascoe lauded the recent Israeli decision to permit tourist 
buses to access the West Bank through the Jalameh crossing, 
thereby improving tourism to the northern West Bank.  Pascoe 
highlighted the PA decision to hold municipal elections. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) On Gaza, Pascoe referred to the continued launching 
of rockets at Israel, though none had led to injury or 
property damage during the reporting period; the three 
barrels of explosives that had washed up on Israeli shores 
north of Gaza, while two had detonated at sea; and the IED 
attack on the ICRC convoy in Gaza.  He urged that calm be 
maintained.  He highlighted that sufficient amounts of 
materials are still not transiting through the Gaza crossings 
from Israel and noted the continued lack of an Israeli 
response to the UN pilot project proposal. 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000097  002 OF 004 
 
 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Turning to the region, Pascoe deplored the 
heightened rhetoric and called for a return to the 
Israeli-Syrian track.  He noted the February 14 rally in 
Beirut to commemorate the five-year anniversary of the 
assassination of Prime Minister Rafic Hariri and Prime 
Minister Saad Hariri's emphasis on the importance of national 
unity and intra-Arab reconciliation and reaffirmation of the 
Special Tribunal for Lebanon.  Pascoe noted the recent 
clashes in the Ein el-Hilweh Palestinian refugee camp and 
called for the international community to renew its financial 
support for the reconstruction of the Nahr el-Bared refugee 
camp.  He said UNIFIL's investigation continues regarding the 
IDF detention and then release of a Lebanese shepherd who 
allegedly crossed the Blue Line.  He highlighted that Israeli 
overflights increased in early February. 
 
Consultations - parties should start 
negotiations, even if indirect 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶6.  (SBU) The Council then moved to consultations, with the 
French Security Council President for the month of February 
trying to encourage a very informal, interactive tone. 
(Note: Ambassador Rice spoke first and drew from the talking 
points in reftel.  End note.)  The majority of members shared 
concerns about the absence of tangible progress on 
negotiations and stressed the need for the parties to return 
to negotiations.  Most voiced support for Special Envoy 
Mitchell's efforts, even if negotiations are only resumed 
indirectly at first.  The Turkish Perm Rep called the absence 
of a functioning peace process "precarious" and called for a 
return on all tracks.  The Chinese Deputy Perm Rep said a new 
dynamism is needed to relaunch peace efforts and noted the 
efforts to date, hoped they would succeed, but called for a 
greater role for the Security Council.  The Austrian Perm Rep 
said that Austria is ready to support a new process.  The 
Nigerian Perm Rep said that no effort should be spared to 
rally the talks.  The Brazilian Perm Rep voiced concern with 
the continuing stalemate, said it undermines the PA and feeds 
extremism, and called for an arrangement to bring the PA back 
to the table with popular support.  She noted that Israeli 
policies designed to prejudge negotiations make it difficult 
for the PA to engage.  The Bosnian Perm Rep said that only 
direct negotiations can bring about a lasting resolution. 
The Mexican Perm Rep said that the Security Council has a 
responsibility to urge the PA to renew peace talks as soon as 
possible, per previous arrangements and modalities. 
 
International community 
wants to do its part 
----------------------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) The Russian Perm Rep stressed his government's 
efforts with the parties, noting Israeli, PA, and Hamas 
visits to Moscow.  He said that Russia values the efforts by 
Senator Mitchell to find a formula to get the parties back to 
the negotiating table, even if not directly initially, and 
said Russia looked forward to actively supporting such 
efforts through continued discussion at the forthcoming 
Quartet meeting in Moscow.  He said his government is looking 
closely at what needs to be done to convene the international 
conference in Moscow.  The Japanese Perm Rep noted President 
Abbas' visit to Japan last week and stressed Japan's hope 
that both sides will take the necessary steps to return to 
the negotiating table. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) The UK Perm Rep called proximity talks the "only 
game in town" and said they should be supported fully since 
they are a means to a return to direct negotiations.  He 
asked Ambassador Rice how the international community could 
support U.S. efforts.  The French Perm Rep followed up on 
this in his request and asked about next steps beyond 
proximity talks and what the international community could do 
to be helpful, noting that President Sarkozy has proposed a 
Summit for Peace.  He also asked what concrete proposals the 
Secretary-General plans to bring to the next Quartet meeting 
to which Under Secretary-General Pascoe responded that he 
would have to defer an answer.  Pascoe did confirm that there 
would be an upcoming Quartet meeting in Moscow and that there 
has been an up-tick in Quartet activity with regular meetings 
of the Quartet envoys and more phone calls between Quartet 
principals in order to actively promote the proximity talks 
process.  In response to the UK question, Ambassador Rice 
said that (1) members could provide concrete and tangible 
support, especially financial support to PA Prime Minister 
Fayyad's plan; (2) all should be mindful that what is said 
and done in the Council does have an impact in the region and 
that when the Council is used for grandstanding it is 
distracting and unhelpful; and (3) all members need to be 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000097  003 OF 004 
 
 
relentless in urging the parties to resume negotiations on 
final status issues since there is no alternative but direct 
talks. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) The Lebanese Deputy Perm Rep also voiced support 
for a comprehensive solution but placed the blame for a lack 
of progress towards negotiations on Israel for resisting the 
efforts of the U.S. and always trying to change the situation 
on the ground.  She alleged that the Israeli settlement 
moratorium was only an attempt to divert the attention of the 
international community while settlement activity actually 
intensifies and the demographic make-up of East Jerusalem is 
altered.  She urged that negotiations deal with the final 
settlement issues of borders, refugees, and ending 
settlements, all within a specific timeline. 
 
Roadmap obligations 
------------------- 
 
¶10.  (SBU) A number of members called on the parties to 
comply with their Roadmap obligations.  The vast majority of 
members called on Israel to cease its settlement activity and 
its actions in East Jerusalem.  The Russian Perm Rep called 
Israeli steps on the settlement moratorium inadequate.  In 
response to a question from the Japanese Perm Rep on whether 
there had been improvement in Gaza and in East Jerusalem 
during the reporting period, Under Secretary-General Pascoe 
confirmed that they did have the slight impression of an 
improvement in both areas.  Several members also called on 
the PA to comply with its security commitments. 
 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶11.  (SBU) The Turkish Perm Rep highlighted the need to 
improve the situation in Gaza in order to make progress 
elsewhere.  The Brazilian Perm Rep called for measures to be 
taken to reconcile Israel's security concerns and the need to 
re-open the crossings.  The Austrian Perm Rep called on 
Israel to allow for the full supply of Gaza and for its 
reconstruction but also recognized the continuing rocket 
launches, barrel bombings, and the targeting of an ICRC 
convoy in Gaza.  He said Austria was pleased that Israel had 
paid the UN in response to the Board of Inquiries' findings 
and asked if there had been any progress on repairs to UN 
facilities.  Under Secretary-General Pascoe responded that 
the Secretary-General would soon meet with Israeli Defense 
Minister Barak to continue discussing the issue, as well as 
to request that more building supplies be allowed into Gaza 
for a broader humanitarian program.  The Lebanese Deputy Perm 
Rep called for Israel to end the collective punishment and 
allow the flow of aid into Gaza. 
 
Palestinian reconciliation 
--------------------------- 
 
¶12.  (SBU) The Turkish Perm Rep said that they would continue 
to urge the Palestinian factions to resolve their 
differences.  The Russian Perm Rep underscored that Hamas 
must be part of a dialogue between Palestinian factions.  The 
Chinese Deputy Perm Rep expressed concern with continuing 
Palestinian disunity and said the continuing impasse is not 
conducive to a resolution of the conflict.  In response to a 
UK request for an update on Palestinian reconciliation 
efforts, Under Secretary-General Pascoe noted that the 
Egyptian proposal has been on the table for a number of 
months and Hamas continues to have reservations.  While Egypt 
continues to persevere, he said that regional developments 
could play a positive role.  Nevertheless, he said that, in 
terms of a bottom line, the UN is not optimistic. 
 
Goldstone 
--------- 
 
¶13.  (SBU) While the Lebanese Deputy Perm Rep did not 
specifically refer to the Goldstone report, she called for an 
end to impunity for human rights violations and called for 
the release of "more than 10,000" Palestinian prisoners in 
Israeli jails, just like others call for the release of Gilad 
Shalit.  The Nigerian Perm Rep called for credible domestic 
investigations by both sides.  The Bosnian Perm Rep condemned 
all violations of international humanitarian law.  The 
Mexican Perm Rep noted that the parties have begun their 
investigations and stressed that those investigations should 
be done in a credible manner and that there should be no 
impunity so that future violators will be deterred.  He also 
noted that the issue is a General Assembly issue and should 
not be moved to the Security Council at this time.  The UK 
Perm Rep called for full and credible investigations and 
emphasized that the matter should be handled at the United 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000097  004 OF 004 
 
 
Nations since there can be no allowance for impunity. 
 
Lebanon/Golan/Syria 
------------------- 
 
¶14.  (SBU) The Lebanese Deputy Perm Rep said her government 
rejected the threats made by Israel against Lebanon and said 
that her government continues to support the implementation 
of UNSCR 1701 and the need for Israel to withdraw from the 
Sheb'a Farms, Kfar Shouba, and Ghajar, and stop violating 
Lebanese sovereignty with overflights, mines, and other 
violations.  She also called for an Israeli withdrawal to the 
1967 line in the Golan.  The Mexican Perm Rep referred to the 
announcement of a new U.S. Ambassador to Syria and said he 
hoped it would strengthen communication between the U.S. and 
Syria and help increase confidence within the region. 
RICE