09KABUL3894
SUBJECT:  HELMAND:  A REINTEGRATION ASSESSMENT
Sun Dec 06 00:00:00 +0100 2009
SECRET
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO8818
OO RUEHDBU RUEHPW RUEHSL
DE RUEHBUL #3894/01 3401329
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
O 061329Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3779
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATES E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 KABUL 003894 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR SRAP HOLBROOKE, SCA/A, SCA/FO 
STATE PASS USAID ASIA/SCAA 
USFOR-A FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/03/2019 
TAGS: PREL PGOV AF
SUBJECT: SUBJECT:  HELMAND:  A REINTEGRATION ASSESSMENT 
 
Classified By: Acting IPA Coordinator Hoyt B. Yee, Reasons 1.4 (b) and 
(d) 
 
¶1. (S/REL to USA, ISAF, NATO) Summary:  Helmand Province, 
particularly in parts of the south, is already undergoing de 
facto reintegration of some Taliban forces on an informal 
basis, with no involvement from coalition forces or GIRoA. 
Both Nawa and Garmsir Districts have community councils, 
composed of a large percentage of former Taliban.  In a 
low-key informal manner, the District Governors of each area 
have accepted certain mid-level community leaders, thought to 
be former Taliban, into the local governance process.  The 
areas where informal reintegration are taking place have two 
things in common:  (1) a robust military presence by the 
Marines or the British Army, with good relationships with the 
community; and (2) the consequential establishment of 
sub-national governance under GIRoA leadership.  A formal 
reintegration process, using the local community to hold 
reintegration shuras, will likely be successful in Nawa and 
possible Shin Kolay in the British Area of Operations (AO). 
A survey of village elders along the corridor between Nawa 
and Garmsir also indicates strong support to welcoming those 
Taliban willing to reintegrate.  Garmsir needs more time, as 
kinetic activities still take place within 10 kilometers. 
Once Marjah has been cleared, it is anticipated more areas in 
Garmsir may be ready for reintegration as that operation, 
along with an additional Afghan National Army (ANA) Kandak 
(battalion) tentatively scheduled to arrive in Garmsir in 
December, may well serve as the added impetus to achieve 
formal reintegration in Garmsir. End Summary. 
 
----- 
BACKGROUND TO THE ASSESSMENT 
----- 
 
¶2. (S/REL to USA, ISAF, NATO) In Helmand Province data 
suggests that reintegration efforts may be moving forward. 
On October 23, 2009, the Human Terrain Team at US Marine 
Regional Combat Team 7 conducted site surveys with village 
elders along the Route 605 corridor between Nawa and Garmsir. 
A sampling consisting of 57 village elders were interviewed 
and four questions were asked: 
- What does the local population think about reintegration of 
former Taliban? 
- Who should deliver the message of reintegration: ISAF, 
GIRoA, Provincial Governor, District Governor, local village 
elders, mullahs? 
- What would the community accept as proper measures to 
accept Taliban into the community? 
- What programs and policies would entice the Taliban to 
reintegrate? 
 
¶3.  (S/REL to USA, ISAF, NATO) Eighty percent of the 
respondents "expressed a willingness to welcome back former 
Taliban members.  All but ten respondents cited the village 
elder as the key participant for the local shura.  Although 
the Human Terrain Team's report had different opinions 
expressed in response to the last two questions, including 
some commentary that Taliban members might be loathe to 
appear at a public shura, the majority view favored a 
reintegration shura, albeit with lots of caveats. 
 
¶4.  (S/REL to USA, ISAF, NATO) These responses correlated 
exactly with the sentiments expressed to Regional 
Platform/South and DST officers by the District Governor of 
Nawa, the Deputy District Governor of Garmsir, and numerous 
local elders and mullahs.  These views clearly indicated that 
the focus should be on the local village leaders to conduct 
reintegration shuras, as they alone have the connections and 
credibility with local Taliban members in their villages. 
 
----------------- 
THE BRITISH PERSPECTIVE 
----------------------- 
 
¶5.  (S/REL to USA, ISAF, NATO) Our discussions  with our 
British military and civilian colleagues suggest they are 
keen to join the reintegration effort but due to the fact 
that an Irish national and a British UNAMA employee were 
declared persona non grata by President Karzai two years ago 
for perceived negotiations with the Taliban, they are averse 
to conducting formal reintegration shuras without clear 
guidance from the Karzai regime.  To some extent this has 
already been accomplished by Karzai's inaugural speech, in 
which he mentioned his commitment to the reintegration 
process.  Further, more explicit directives to his Governors 
are anticipated in the near future.  The District Governors 
will need follow on guidance from their Governor on this 
issue.  With this in mind, the British contingent agreed, at 
 
KABUL 00003894  002 OF 002 
 
 
a meeting in September with the Marines, to form a 
reintegration cell at the Helmand PRT for the purpose of 
vetting reintegrating Taliban members.  This will be done 
with the Provincial head of the National Directorate of 
Security (NDS) as well as the other stakeholders.  A further 
plus favoring British involvement is that their long presence 
in Helmand has resulted in relationships with those who have 
ties with the Taliban on an informal basis and these can be 
exploited when formal reintegration occurs. 
 
---- 
NAWA 
---- 
 
¶6.  (S/REL to USA, ISAF, NATO) Deputy Governor Abdul Manaf is 
enthusiastic about the notion of holding a  reintegration 
shura, claiming the people are ready.  He attributes this 
latter  to the Marine presence in his district, which has 
allowed people to feel secure.  He further reported that 
there are four Taliban commanders from his district, all of 
whom are in Marjah, and once that area is cleared, security 
will be further improved.  Two factors mitigate this 
enthusiasm, however: the Marine battalion in his district 
will be replaced in a few weeks; and there is a need for the 
replacement battalion to get its feet on the ground and 
establish its own relationships with the locals.  Further, as 
an indication of the fragile nature of security in Nawa, the 
District Governor reported that the majority of the members 
of the community council have been sleeping in his compound, 
due to the recent assassinations of three other council 
members.  Reintegration in Nawa will almost certainly result 
in an increased security threat against those who reintegrate 
as well as those who participate in the shura.  The targets 
will most likely be the reintegrees, as a lesson to active 
Taliban members. The reintegration shura in Nawa may well 
benefit by being timed to coincide with the Marjah operation 
and would also benefit from a coordinated information 
operation (IO) campaign beforehand. 
 
------- 
GARMSIR 
------- 
 
¶7.  (S/REL to USA, ISAF, NATO) Garmsir presents a somewhat 
different political dynamic than Nawa in that it is larger, 
closer to kinetic activities just ten kilometers south and 
the security situation will require additional time, perhaps 
several more months, before there's a local Afghan consensus 
concerning the viability of a formal reintegration shura. 
Discussions with the Deputy District Governor (the District 
Governor was out of town during this assessment), village 
elders and community council members made clear that 
reintegration is wanted and needed, but security improvements 
need to be made first.  All pointed out that reintegration 
was already taking place on an informal basis, with perhaps a 
majority of the community council having former Taliban ties. 
 The Marine civil affairs team in Garmsir pointed out the 
expected arrival of an ANA Kandak in December.  This, coupled 
with the anticipated Marjah clearing operation, may well 
provide the impetus needed for formal reintegration to occur. 
 
 
¶8.  (S/REL to USA, ISAF, NATO) COMMENT:  Helmand Province is 
ready to start formal reintegration shuras within the next 
two months, one in the British AO and one in Nawa.  In 
Garmsir, outreaches by village locals are taking place and 
these may well result in a successful shura some months from 
now.  This assessment revealed the critical importance of 
both the appearance of security as well as the reality of a 
security presence on the ground.  On a related note, there 
have been continuing requests for Afghan bodyguards from 
members of the community councils.  Once this is dealt with, 
either as a force connected to the ANP or some other GIRoA 
entity to alleviate fears of setting up a private militia, 
the improved security environment will greatly enhance the 
prospects for reintegration.  Helmand PRT, through its 
personnel in the field, will remain in close contact remain 
in close contact with village elders and encourage Afghan-led 
reintegration.  PRT will also urge Afghan security forces and 
NDS to work toward establishment of a more visible and 
effective security presence in the area. End Comment. 
RICCIARDONE