09STATE76155
S) FOLLOWING UP WITH CHINA ON CASES OF
Tue Jul 21 00:00:00 +0200 2009
SECRET
Secretary of State
P 212230Z JUL 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY BEIJING PRIORITY
INFO MISSILE TECHNOLOGY CONTROL REGIME COLLECTIVE PRIORITYS E C R E T STATE 076155 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/21/2034 
TAGS: MTCRE PARM PREL MNUC ETTC KSCA CH IR PK
 
SUBJECT: (S) FOLLOWING UP WITH CHINA ON CASES OF 
PROLIFERATION CONCERN 
 
REF: A. STATE 30007 (BEIJING TIANLIANXING SCIENTIFIC) 
     ¶B. BEIJING 861 (BEIJING TIANLIANXING 
        SCIENTIFIC/SUZHOU) 
     ¶C. STATE 30001 (SUZHOU TESTING INSTRUMENT FACTORY) 
     ¶D. STATE 25689 (DALIAN SUNNY INDUSTRIES/LIMMT) 
     ¶E. BEIJING 728 (DALIAN SUNNY INDUSTRIES/LIMMT) 
     ¶F. STATE 4104 (SHANGHAI YUANSHAN INDUSTRY & TRADE 
        COMPANY) 
     ¶G. BEIJING 202 (SHANGHAI YUANSHAN INDUSTRY & TRADE 
        COMPANY) 
     ¶H. 08 STATE 113768 (CPMIEC AND CAAA) 
     ¶I. 08 BEIJING 4064 (CPMIEC AND CAAA) 
     ¶J. 08 STATE 105597 (POLYTECHNOLOGIES INC.) 
     ¶K. 08 BEIJING 3854 (POLYTECHNOLOGIES INC.) 
     ¶L. 08 STATE 129610 (JFMMRI CNNMIEC BMIEC AND BAMTRI) 
     ¶M. 08 BEIJING 4610 (JFMMRI CNNMIEC BMIEC AND BAMTRI) 
     ¶N. STATE 4341 (SHENYANG HUALI ECONOMIC TRADING 
        COMPANY) 
     ¶O. BEIJING 201 (SHENYANG HUALI ECONOMIC TRADING 
        COMPANY) 
     ¶P. 08 STATE 29703 (HONG KONG MOST GROUP CO. LTD.) 
     ¶Q. 08 BEIJING 1209 (HONG KONG MOST GROUP CO. LTD.) 
     ¶R. 08 STATE 130673 (HONG KONG MOST GROUP CO. LTD.) 
     ¶S. 08 BEIJING 4609 (HONG KONG MOST GROUP CO. LTD.) 
 
Classified By: ISN/MTR DIRECTOR PAM DURHAM, REASON: 1.4 (C). 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action request.  Embassy Beijing, please 
see paragraph 3. 
 
¶2.  (S) Since March 2008, the U.S. has provided Chinese 
officials with information regarding a number of cases of 
missile-related proliferation concern (Refs).  In the cases 
described below, we have received little or no response from 
China on the status of its investigations or on steps it is 
taking to address the concerns we have outlined.  We 
therefore want to follow-up with Chinese authorities and 
request an update on these cases at the earliest possible 
time. 
 
¶3.  (S) Action Request:  Request Embassy Beijing approach 
appropriate host government officials to deliver talking 
points/non-paper in paragraph 4 below and report response. 
Talking points also may be provided as a non-paper. 
 
¶4.  (S) Begin talking points/non-paper: 
 
(SECRET//REL CHINA) 
 
--Over the past year as well as in the context of our 
nonproliferation dialogue, we have raised numerous cases of 
proliferation concern involving Chinese entities.  However, 
we remain concerned as we have not received any substantive 
response from you on your efforts to investigate these 
activities. 
 
--We therefore request an update on the status of your 
investigations or on the steps you have taken to address our 
concerns in the following cases. 
 
 
¶A.    Beijing Tianlianxing Scientific Ltd. 
 
-- In March 2009, the U.S. raised with you our concerns that 
China's Beijing Tianlianxing Scientific Ltd. had offered 
1,000 kilograms of specialty steel to Pakistan's Aginel 
Enterprises, an entity associated with Pakistan's nuclear 
weapons and missile programs. 
 
--Though not controlled, we noted that this steel has been 
used to produce components in Pakistan's Ghaznavi short-range 
ballistic missile, a Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR) 
Category I system. 
 
 
¶B.    Suzhou Testing Instrument Factory 
 
-- In March 2009, the U.S. raised with you our concerns that 
Pakistan's Intralink Incorporated had sought a quote from the 
Chinese firm Suzhou Testing Instrument Factory for a 
vibration test system.  Intralink Incorporated appears to be 
closely associated with the Project Management Organization 
(PMO), the developer of Pakistan's Ghaznavi short-range 
ballistic missile. 
 
--As we indicated in our March 2009 demarche, this vibration 
test system is likely controlled by the MTCR and can be used 
to simulate the flight vibrations and shocks that rockets and 
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) experience during launch, 
stage separation, and normal flight. 
 
 
¶C.    Dalian Sunny Industries/LIMMT 
 
-- In March 2009, the U.S. reiterated its long-standing 
serious concerns regarding the proliferation-related trading 
activities of the Chinese firm Dalian Sunny Industries. 
 
-- As you are aware, for several years we have provided your 
government information related to Dalian Sunny Industries' 
supply of components and materials to entities and front 
companies associated with Iran's ballistic missile programs. 
In June 2008, the MFA Arms Control and Disarmament Department 
provided no new information on actions taken against LIMMT, 
stating only that investigations were "ongoing" and asserting 
that LIMMT no longer existed as a business entity. 
 
 
¶D.    Shanghai Yuanshan Industry and Trade Company 
 
-- In January 2009, the U.S. raised with you our concerns 
that the Syrian entity Industrial Solutions ordered a 
consignment of 2024-T6 aluminum from the Chinese company 
Shanghai Yuanshan Industry and Trade Company. 
 
--Industrial Solutions is a cover for the Scientific Studies 
and Research Center (SSRC), the entity responsible for 
overseeing Syria's ballistic missile program. 
 
--2024-T6 aluminum can be used to produce structural 
components in ballistic missiles and in some forms is 
controlled by the Nuclear Suppliers Group and Wassenaar 
Arrangement. 
 
 
¶E.    China Precision Machinery Import/Export Corporation 
(CPMIEC) and China Academy of Aerospace Aerodynamics (CAAA) 
 
-- In October 2008, the U.S. raised with you our concerns 
that the China Precision Machinery Import/Export Corporation 
(CPMIEC) and China Academy of Aerospace Aerodynamics (CAAA) 
had concluded a contract to supply the Pakistani government 
with a trisonic wind tunnel. 
 
-- We believe Pakistan may intend to use this wind tunnel, 
which is controlled by the MTCR, to support missile-related 
research and development in Pakistan. 
 
 
¶F.    Polytechnologies Inc. 
 
-- In October 2008, the U.S. raised with you our concerns 
that the Chinese firm Polytechnologies Inc. had concluded 
contracts - and used false documentation - to supply a coil 
winding machine and integrated optical chips to Pakistan's 
Advanced Engineering and Research Organization (AERO). 
 
-- AERO is a procurement agent and alias for Pakistan's Air 
Weapons Complex (AWC), which has participated in Pakistan's 
efforts to develop nuclear weapons delivery systems, cruise 
missiles, and UAVs. 
 
--We believe this equipment will likely be used by AERO to 
support missile-related projects in Pakistan. 
 
 
¶G.    JFMMRI Metal Forming Machinery Engineering Company, 
Ltd. (JFMMRI), China National Nonferrous Metals Import Export 
Company (CNNMIEC), Beijing Machinery Import-Export 
Corporation (BMIEC), and Beijing Aeronautical Manufacturing 
Technology Research Institute (BAMTRI) Technology and 
Development Company. 
 
-- Since 2006, the U.S. has raised with China our concerns 
regarding attempts by Pakistan's missile program to procure 
ring-rolling and flow forming machines from entities in 
China. 
 
--These machines may ultimately be destined for Pakistan's 
National Development Complex (NDC), which is responsible for 
developing Pakistan's Shaheen series of ballistic missiles. 
 
--In December 2008, we requested an update on activities 
related to this case, and have not received any response. 
 
 
¶H.    Shenyang Huali Economic Trading Company 
 
-- In April 2008, the U.S. raised with you our concerns that 
China-based firm Shenyang Huali Economic Trading Company, 
working through North Korean intermediaries, was acting as a 
key source of raw materials and technology for a North Korean 
ballistic missile development project in Syria. 
 
--In January 2009, we followed up with additional information 
related to this case. 
 
 
¶I.    Hong Kong Most Group Co. Ltd. 
 
-- On 24 March 2008, the U.S. raised with you our concerns 
that the Hong Kong Most Group Co. Ltd. finalized a sales 
contract to supply the Iranian firm Aluminat Co. with 
Chinese-origin aluminum plates that can be used to produce a 
variety of structural components in Scud missiles. 
 
--The specific aluminum being supplied by Hong Kong Most 
Group to Iran is controlled by the Wassenaar Arrangement.  We 
provided further information to Chinese officials regarding 
this case in December 2008. 
 
--We appreciate your interest in advancing our mutual 
nonproliferation goals and look forward to hearing your 
responses regarding these proliferation cases at the earliest 
possible time. 
 
 
End talking points/non-paper 
 
¶5.  (U) Washington POC is ISN/MTR Mike Kennedy (Phone: 
202-647-3176).  Please slug any reporting on this issue for 
ISN/MTR and EAP/CM. 
 
¶6.  (U) A word version of this document will be posted at 
www.state.sgov.gov/demarche. 
CLINTON 
 
 
NNNN 
 



End Cable Text 

=======================CABLE ENDS============================