04MANAMA1622
BAHRAIN:  COSTA RICA CLONING RESOLUTION, UNGA
Mon Oct 25 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Manama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MANAMA 001622 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR NEA/ARPI, IO/UNP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL BA UNGA
SUBJECT: BAHRAIN:  COSTA RICA CLONING RESOLUTION, UNGA 
PRESIDENCY 
 
REF: WILLIAMSON-MONROE E-MAILS OF 10/7/04 
 
Sensitive but unclassified (deliberative process); please 
protect accordingly.  Not for Internet distribution. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Pol/Econ chief met with MFA Director for 
International Organizations Ghassan Shaikho October 12 to 
discuss the Costa Rica resolution on human cloning and 
Bahrain's bid for the UNGA presidency for the 2006-07 
session.  Shaikho said that the GOB opposes human cloning, 
but had requested an opinion (fatwa) from Bahrain's religious 
scholars on the narrow issue of human cloning for the sake of 
medical research.  The scholars had not yet delivered their 
position.  Shaikho noted that representatives of the 
Organization of Islamic Conferences member states were 
consulting in New York on the Costa Rica resolution to 
develop a common position.  He was surprised to learn that 
the European Parliament had voted strongly in favor of a 
resolution supporting the Costa Rica resolution (reftels), 
but commented that the European Parliament did not 
necessarily represent the views of the EU countries.  He 
understood that many EU governments supported Germany's 
proposal on human cloning. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Shaikho stated that Bahrain had announced its 
candidacy for the UNGA presidency for the 61st session, from 
September 2006-2007.  Bahrain had received many expressions 
of support and, following Cambodia's withdrawal of its 
nomination, was the only candidate for the position.  He 
noted that the UNGA presidency for the 61st session would go 
to an Asian country.  Shaikho requested the support of the 
United States for Bahrain's candidacy, suggesting that there 
would be many new avenues for bilateral cooperation with 
Bahrain in the position. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Shaikho said that Bahrain was interested in hosting 
a regional office/training center for the UN Commission on 
Human Rights.  Bahrain had submitted a proposal to the UNGA 
and UNCHR, and it may soon go to the Fifth Committee for 
consideration, and he requested U.S. support.  The regional 
office would likely cost $1 million for the first year and 
less for following years.  He recognized that the U.S. is 
wary of the UN taking on additional financial burdens, but 
stressed that the office would play an important role and 
would help achieve U.S. policy objectives in the region. 
 
MONROE