04MANAMA1360
RECEIPT OF DIPLOMATIC NOTE REQUESTING VISIT TO
Tue Aug 31 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Manama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MANAMA 001360 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/ARPI 
ALSO FOR S/WCI - AMB PROSPER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MARR ASEC PREL PTER BA
SUBJECT: RECEIPT OF DIPLOMATIC NOTE REQUESTING VISIT TO 
BAHRAINI DETAINEES IN GUANTANAMO 
 
Sensitive but unclassified; please protect accordingly.  Not 
for Internet distribution. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) As mentioned during the Ambassador's August 30 
meeting with Minister of State for Foreign Affairs Dr. 
Mohammed Abdul Ghaffar (septel), the Embassy received the 
following diplomatic note August 30. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Begin Text of Diplomatic Note MOS-140 Dated August 
30, 2004: 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of Bahrain 
presents its compliments to the Embassy of the United States 
of America and has the honour to refer to the ongoing 
discussions between the two governments concerning the status 
of six Bahraini detainees held by the United States at 
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. 
 
In this regard, the Ministry requests that a team from 
Bahrain's Ministry of the Interior and National Security 
Agency be permitted to undertake a further visit to the six 
Bahraini detainees to determine their continued health and 
welfare, and that parents and/or nominated close family 
members be permitted to accompany the delegation and to visit 
their relatives.  The Ministry understands that certain 
detainees of other nationalities have met with family members 
and requests that, on humanitarian grounds, the Bahraini 
detainees be afforded the same opportunity. 
 
Finally, and in light of recent decisions of, and proceedings 
in, the United States Courts, the Ministry requests that the 
United States Government take expeditious steps towards 
releasing the detainees, and assures the Embassy that the 
Government of Bahrain stands ready to make the necessary 
arrangements for the release and repatriation of the 
detainees. 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of Bahrain 
avails itself of this opportunity to renew to the Embassy of 
the United States of America the assurances of its highest 
consideration. 
 
End Text of Diplomatic Note. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Abdul Ghaffar stated that Bahrain's Ambassador in 
Washington Shaikh Khalifa bin Ali Al Khalifa would follow up 
on the diplomatic note at State and DOD. 
 
MONROE