04MANAMA319
MALIAT DEMARCHE RECEIVED POSITIVELY IN BAHRAIN
Wed Mar 10 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Manama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MANAMA 000319 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EB/TRA/AN:BMGRIMM AND LPFAUX-GABLE AND 
NEA/ARP:PHEFFERNAN 
AMMAN FOR JFLOWERS 
DOT FOR A/S BHATIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR BA
SUBJECT: MALIAT DEMARCHE RECEIVED POSITIVELY IN BAHRAIN 
 
REF: A. STATE 40155 
 
     ¶B. FEBRUARY 25 GRIMM E-MAIL 
 
¶1. ECONOFF delivered reftel demarche and passed e-mailed 
MALIAT texts and tables March 9 to Bahrain's Civil Aviation 
Affairs (CAA) Director of Air Transport Ahmed Nemat Ali and 
Air Transport Advisor Kamal Hefny Riyadh.  By way of 
background, Nemat Ali told ECONOFF that Bahrain already has 
Open Skies agreements with Singapore and Brunei, but that 
when Bahrain approached New Zealand to propose an Open Skies 
agreement, New Zealand suggested that Bahrain join the 
Multilateral Agreement on the Liberalization of International 
Air Transport (MALIAT) instead.  The message to join MALIAT 
was reinforced by his discussions with U.S. A/S for Aviation 
and International Affairs Karan Bhatia during the February 
Regional Summit on Aviation Safety and Security. 
 
¶2.  Nemat Ali said that Bahrain's CAA is very favorably 
disposed to joining MALIAT, since liberalization increases 
efficiency, and would carefully study the documents 
presented.  Once CAA comes to a formal decision to join 
MALIAT, they will pass the documents to the Cabinet Ministry 
Legal Affairs Directorate for review. Nemat Ali further 
intends to propose to his BGC Beirut counterparts that 
Lebanon join MALIAT, too.  If they agree, the two countries 
can together begin recruiting other Arab countries to join as 
well, Nemay Ali said.  (NOTE: To facilitate approval and 
regional recruitment, ECONOFF subsequently forwarded 
documents electronically.  END NOTE). 
 
¶3. Director Nemat Ali told ECONOFF March 9 that the Bahraini 
delegation to the Regional Summit on Aviation Safety and 
Security in Amman in February found the summit so useful that 
Bahrain would like to host the next regional summit. 
FORD