05MANAMA691
SUPPORT FOR REGIONAL ESTH HUB IN OMAN
Sat May 14 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Manama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MANAMA 000691 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR OES/PCI, NEA/EX, NEA/RA, AND NEA/ARPI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV TBIO BA KSCI
SUBJECT: SUPPORT FOR REGIONAL ESTH HUB IN OMAN 
 
REF: 04 MUSCAT 274 
 
¶1.  Embassy Manama strongly supports the establishment of a 
regional Environment, Science, Technology, and Health (ESTH) 
hub in Oman to support ESTH efforts in Bahrain and the 
greater Gulf region.  Embassy ESTH officer is the post's sole 
economic/commercial officer, and has a full plate of issues 
(e.g. FTA implementation, MEPI programming, and economic 
reporting).  An ESTH officer dedicated to Gulf environmental 
issues would provide much needed support to Embassy ESTH 
efforts. 
 
¶2.  Director of Environmental Assessment and Planning Zahwah 
Al Kuwari told EconOff May 9 that ESTH priorities in Bahrain 
are (1) health policies in relation to sustainable 
development, (2) water resources, and (3) defining the value 
of environmental parameters for economic growth.  She noted 
that Bahrain's first environmental law was passed in 1996 and 
much work is needed in the areas of education, awareness, and 
enforcement.  The experience and expertise of a regional hub 
office located in the Gulf could greatly assist Bahrain with 
its environmental needs as well as encourage greater regional 
cooperation in these areas. 
 
¶3.  Health and Sustainable Development:  Al Kawari said 
Bahraini decision makers do not take health considerations 
into account when developing policies for sustainable 
development.  This can be seen, she said, in a recent case of 
residents of a village being harmed by gas emissions from a 
nearby industrial plant.  She said Bahrain needs to create a 
statistical database that links health with the environment. 
Bahrain also has one of the highest percentages of diabetes 
around the world.  Joslin Diabetes center (affiliate of 
Harvard Medical Center) has a center in Manama.  There is a 
need for additional research in this area. 
 
¶4.  Water Resources:  Al Kawari said Bahrainis are surrounded 
by water on all sides and believe they do not have to concern 
themselves with water consumption, as long as the 
desalination plants are running.  She said the population 
needs to be educated on water use and water conservation. 
Bahrain is also aggressively reclaiming land with estimates 
of 12-50 percent total land mass growth.  The native 
ecological systems now face severe distress due to these 
efforts. 
 
¶5.  Value of Environmental Perimeters:  Al Kawari noted that 
Bahrain does not have a system to account for the value of 
environmental parameters when calculating economic growth and 
development.  It is just not thought of, she said.  Bahrain 
needs technical assistance to better estimate environmental 
factors in evaluating a project's costs and benefits. 
MONROE