05MANAMA357
PRE-LICENSE CHECK - BAHRAIN DEFENSE FORCE LICENSE
Mon Mar 14 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Manama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MANAMA 000357 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR PM/DTCC TIM WATKINS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KOMC ETTC BA
SUBJECT: PRE-LICENSE CHECK - BAHRAIN DEFENSE FORCE LICENSE 
05-951007 
 
REF: STATE 21962 
 
¶1.  Reftel requested a pre-license check to determine the 
legitimacy of the Bahrain Defense Force (BDF) as a recipient 
of sensitive U.S.-origin technology.  The BDF was listed on 
U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security 
application 05-951007 as the proposed end-user of one servo 
cylinder and five cap ring seals for use in an AH-1 
helicopter.  The application was submitted by Textron Inc. of 
Santa Clarita, CA.  Hawker Pacific Airservices LTD of the 
United Arab Emirates is the foreign consignee and Aston 
Aviation Supplies PTE LT of Singapore is the foreign 
intermediate consignee. 
 
¶2.  Econ/Comm Officer, accompanied by a representative of the 
Embassy's Office of Military Cooperation, conducted a 
pre-license check at BDF headquarters in Issa Town on March 
¶13.  Major Farooq Salim Nazmi, Director of Maintenance and 
Logistics, explained that the BDF has owned and operated AH-1 
helicopters since the 1990's and has purchased parts through 
Hawker Pacific Airservices for at least fifteen years (Note: 
The period that Nazmi has been working for the BDF.  End 
Note.)  Post confirms that the BDF received its first AH-1 
helicopter in 1993.  Nazmi was open to discuss all aspects of 
the spare parts acquisition.  He was not familiar, however, 
with U.S. Export Administration regulations and expressed his 
surprise that after twelve years of owning, operating, and 
repairing AH-1 helicopters, this was the first time he had 
encountered a pre-license check. 
 
¶3.  Recommendation:  Based on visit by post, the Bahrain 
Defense Force appears to be a reliable recipient of 
U.S.-origin commodities for this transaction.  The BDF has a 
long-established working relationship with Hawker Pacific 
Airservices LTD and a proven record of responsibly owning and 
operating AH-1 helicopters.  Post is not in a position to 
verify the legitimacy of foreign intermediate consignee Aston 
Aviation Supplies PTE LT and recommends that, should there be 
any outstanding questions, PM/DTCC contact the Blue Lantern 
coordinator in Singapore. 
MONROE