09MANAMA85
WELCOME CODEL PINGREE (FEB 16-17)
Thu Feb 12 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Manama
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMK #0085/01 0431433
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 121433Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY MANAMA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 8436UNCLAS MANAMA 000085 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OREP AMGT ASEC AFIN BA
SUBJECT: WELCOME CODEL PINGREE (FEB 16-17) 
 
REF: STATE 12103 
 
¶1. Embassy Manama warmly welcomes the visit of Congresswoman 
Chellie Pingree and her delegation to Bahrain from February 
16 - February 17, 2009. 
 
¶2. Control Officer for the visit is Political Officer Steve 
Jacob.  His office telephone number is (973) 1724-2834; cell 
phone (973) 3940-7397; home (973) 1769-3425.  Email: 
jacobsj@state.gov.  The Embassy's after hours number is (973) 
1727-5126. 
 
¶3. Hotel arrangements have been made at the Gulf Hotel under 
the following confirmation numbers: Pingree - 846627, Bright 
- 846628, Hunter - 846629, Cohen - 846630, Rohrabacher - 
846631, Diaz-Balart - 846632, Bush - 846633, Bingen - 846634, 
Elkowitz - 846635, Kouparakis - 846636 control room - 847217 
and 847218. The hotel phone number is (973) 1771-3000 and fax 
number is (973) 1771-3040.  Control Officer will be at the 
airport to assist with entry formalities.  Post will provide 
transportation for the duration of the visit. 
 
¶4. The use of digital cameras and laptops in non-CAA areas 
must be cleared by the RSO's office before being brought into 
the Embassy. 
 
¶5. Please consider the following in-country administrative 
notes for Manama, Bahrain: 
 
    a)  VISAS: A visa is required for Bahrain.  U.S. 
diplomatic and official passport holders can obtain a gratis 
72-hours or a 7-day visa at the airport immigration 
authority.  If traveler is required to stay longer, the visa 
can be extended.  Significant penalties are charged if the 
visa is not extended prior to expiry.  Visitors staying 
beyond the time limit of the visa should submit their 
passport for visa processing by the Embassy at least two days 
prior to the visa's expiration date. 
 
      b)  LODGING and TRANSPORTATION: Visitors must bring 
adequate funds to cover hotel tariffs and expenses.  Hotels 
accept major credit cards (Amex, Visa, MasterCard).  Embassy 
will arrange for airport expediting and transportation upon 
request. 
 
      c)  BAGGAGE: All luggage is subject to x-ray and hand 
inspection by Bahraini customs officials.  Among items that 
may not be brought into Bahrain are: firearms, large knives, 
swords, videos of any type, and pornography. 
 
      d)  DRESS: Modest dress is more appropriate in Bahrain. 
 Both men and women should avoid shorts and sleeveless attire 
in public, although bathing suits and shorts are acceptable 
at hotel facilities. 
 
      e)  PHOTOGRAPHY: Photographing military, religious, and 
government installations is forbidden, and one should ask 
permission before photographing Bahraini Nationals. 
 
      f)  LOCAL TIME: The time difference from Washington 
D.C. is 8 hours.  The official Embassy workweek is Sunday 
through Thursday, 0800 to 1700. 
 
¶6.  Please consider the following in-country threat 
assessment notes for Manama Bahrain: 
 
      a) Terrorism: After the September 11 terrorist attacks 
in the United States, and the subsequent declaration of a new 
war on terrorism and countries that support it, the need for 
keen situational awareness is more necessary than ever. 
There have been no attacks against either Americans or 
Westerners in general in Bahrain.  However, the current 
regional situation dictates caution.  Visitors must be alert 
to their surroundings and to the possibility of hostile 
surveillance.  Keep hotel rooms locked.  Do not open unlocked 
doors to visitors without verifying who they are.  Vary times 
of departure and arrivals at the hotel and be alert to 
individuals lingering in lobby areas or entrances.  Once 
familiar with the area and routes, take charge in taxis and 
direct the driver to change routes to and from the Embassy. 
Keep windows up and doors locked when traveling in vehicles. 
Report any suspicious activity to the RSO immediately.  Be 
prepared to provide identifying information such as license 
numbers, descrip 
tions, etc.  As tensions are currently elevated throughout 
the region, it is very important for visitors to maintain a 
low profile and avoid confrontations.  Shirts, jackets, or 
sweaters covered with Americana are not appropriate. 
 
      b) Crime: Incidents of common crime in Bahrain are very 
low by Western standards.  Unlocked doors, open windows, 
bulging wallets, or purses slung over the back, may invite 
crimes of opportunity.  Common sense precautions that an 
experienced traveler would take in any major metropolitan 
area will suffice in Bahrain. 
 
Americans should note this information when traveling to 
Bahrain. 
 
********************************************* ******** 
Visit Embassy Manama's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/manama/ 
********************************************* ******** 
HENZEL