10MAPUTO51
BIOTECHNOLOGY IN MOZAMBIQUE
Thu Jan 14 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Maputo
VZCZCXRO8212
RR RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHJO RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHTO #0051/01 0141630
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 141630Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY MAPUTO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1188
INFO RUCNSAD/SOUTHERN AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY
RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA 0001
RUCLRFA/USDA FAS WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 000051 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EB/TPP/ABT, OES/PCI, AND AF/S 
USDA FAS FOR OSTA/NTPMB, OCBD AND OCRA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR ECON ETRD KPAO PREL SENV SF TBIO MZ
SUBJECT: BIOTECHNOLOGY IN MOZAMBIQUE 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY: A signatory of the Cartagena Protocol on 
Biosafety, Mozambique is eager to leverage biotechnology to 
improve its agricultural productivity; however there has been 
little or no investment in biotech research thus far.  The 
government of Mozambique (GRM) is calling for a second green 
revolution and biotechnology is a tool to advance the 
agricultural sector.  This cable was developed by 
FAS/Pretoria in coordination with Embassy Maputo.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------- 
Biotechnology in Mozambique 
--------------------------- 
 
¶2.  Mozambique has signed and ratified the Cartagena Protocol 
on Biosafety, and the Convention on Biological Diversity.  A 
National Biosafety Framework was drafted to help guide 
further development of biotechnology activities.  These 
regulatory framework efforts were largely due to the presence 
of a UNEP/GEF program for 18 months that helped prepare the 
National Biosafety 
Frameworks "in agreement with the provisions of Cartagena 
Protocol" and help Mozambique ratify the Protocol.  Thus, 
there are regulators with some training and understanding of 
biosafety issues such as assessment of food safety, 
environmental risk evaluation, LMO detection, etc. 
 
¶3.  Mozambique is eager to improve its agricultural 
productivity and recognizes that biotechnology can be a 
valuable tool to enhance the efficiency of its farming sector 
and help in reducing dependence on inputs while improving the 
quality of food.  However, there has been little or no 
investment so far in biotechnology research although some 
strides have been made with biosafety regulation. 
 
¶4.  Due to the potential of the agriculture sector in 
Mozambique, and the lack of investment/advancement in that 
sector, the Government of Mozambique made a call for a second 
green revolution for Mozambique.  One of the tools that will 
be a leading factor in bringing change and advancement in the 
agriculture sector in Mozambique will be the promotion and 
use of biotechnology. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
NATIONAL BIOSECURITY REGULATION ON GMO'S 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  Identified as a cross-cutting technology in Mozambique's 
Science, Technology and Innovation Strategy, due to the 
enormous potential this technology has to impact various 
sectors of the economy, biotechnology policy development is 
moving more rapidly in Mozambique than in Madagascar.  A 
National Biosecurity Regulation on Genetically Modified 
Organisms was published in the GOM official bulletin on April 
25, 2007. 
 
¶6.  This regulation was formulated by the Inter-Institutional 
Group on Biosecurity (GIIBS).  The GIIBS is tasked to 
co-ordinate biosafety activities in Mozambique.  It is an 
inter-institutional and multi-disciplinary group with the 
task of coordinating the process to establish the National 
Biosafety Framework including the development of biosafety 
policy, regulatory regime, and administration based on the 
Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety, which Mozambique ratified in 
December 2001. 
 
¶7.  The Ministry of Science and Technology is the national 
competent authority and presides over the GIIBS. The GIIBS 
consists of representatives from each of the following 
Ministries: Science and Technology, Agriculture, Environment, 
Health, Industry and Commerce, Fisheries, Planning and 
Development, and academic and research institutions. 
Additionally, representatives and specialists from public and 
private entities may be invited to participate in GIIBS 
meetings.  (Note: Mozambique's biosafety policy appears to be 
largely risk-averse, and rooted in the 'precautionary 
principle' and thus more similar to the policies of European 
countries and that of EU.  End Note) 
 
¶8.  Mozambique has experience with biotech-related 
controversies and issues as it is a receiving/shipping point 
for donated corn from the United States for famine 
stricken-regions in Southern Africa (Zambia, Zimbabwe etc). 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Previous Biotech Outreach in Mozambique 
--------------------------------------- 
 
 
MAPUTO 00000051  002 OF 002 
 
 
¶9.  Using USDA Emerging Markets Program funding, FAS/Pretoria 
included three Mozambicans in an agricultural biotechnology 
informational tour of the United States in November 2009.  In 
FY2008, FAS/Pretoria secured funding from USDA's Emerging 
Markets Programs to host a workshop on basic biotechnology 
and regulations.  The workshop provided an opening to further 
advance biotechnology and biosafety policies in Mozambique. 
The meeting featured lectures by two invited experts from 
overseas, Dr. C. S. Prakash, Tuskegee University, and Dr. 
Martin Lema, biosafety regulator from Argentina, along with 
some very high-level policy experts from various local 
ministries -- Science and Technology, Agriculture, 
Environment, Health, and Trade; along with university 
scientists and also representatives from CGIAR centers. 
 
¶10.  As a result of this workshop and the relationships 
developed during those two days, FAS/Pretoria was invited to 
participate in a biotechnology regulations conference 
sponsored by the GRM and the Spanish Embassy in Maputo. 
FAS/Pretoria provided for the participation of a 
biotechnology researcher from South Africa's Council for 
Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), who is also an 
active member of AfricaBio, Dr. Eugenia Barros.  Dr. Barros 
was a speaker and moderator at the conference.  She provided 
an excellent overview of biotechnology in South Africa and 
lessons learned through the development of its biosafety 
policy.  Dr. Barros is a native Portuguese speaker, which 
lent more credibility and audience acceptance to her 
participation.  Since the conference, Dr. Barros' has 
remained in contact with the legislators and regulators in 
Mozambique and has consulted with them on various issues 
relating to biotechnology regulation implementation. 
 
¶11.  Also in the past year, the Embassy hosted an Embassy 
Science Fellow to work with the GRM to prepare a report of 
the status of biotechnology in Mozambique and an 
implementation plan for advancement of biotechnology in 
Mozambique.  An important observation made throughout the 
biotechnology outreach efforts over the past year was the 
important need for capacity building to implement the 
biosafety regulation in their countries, especially in the 
development of specialists in food safety, environmental risk 
assessment, and intellectual property rights issues. 
 
¶12.  The GRM has requested assistance in planning and 
implementing producer outreach strategies, including the 
development of educational materials in Portuguese. 
AfricaBio is working with contacts in Mozambique in 
developing these materials but are looking for assistance in 
funding the publication of said materials. 
 
¶13.  COMMENT:  There is serious potential for growth and 
investment in the agricultural sector in Mozambique.  Clear 
rules and better understanding on the part of the GRM will 
attract greater foreign investment.  The USG can continue to 
support the agricultural sector by supporting the 
implementation of sensible biosafety regulations and 
increased domestic research and capacity building.  END 
COMMENT. 
CHAPMAN