10PHNOMPENH31
CODEL FALEOMAVAEGA DISCUSSES DEBT, TRADE AND
Tue Jan 19 00:00:00 +0100 2010
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXRO1607
PP RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM RUEHNH
DE RUEHPF #0031/01 0190915
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 190915Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING PRIORITY 2602
RUEATRS/TREASURY DEPT WASHDC PRIORITY 0045C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 PHNOM PENH 000031 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/MLS AND EEB/IFD/OMA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/15/2020 
TAGS: PREL EFIN ETRD PHUM SCUL KJUS KDEM EAID CH CB
SUBJECT: CODEL FALEOMAVAEGA DISCUSSES DEBT, TRADE AND 
FUTURE RELATIONS WITH CAMBODIAN LEADERSHIP 
 
Classified By: DCM Theodore Allegra for Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary: Following a day in Siem Reap and after 
attending festivities to mark the 31st anniversary of the 
January 7 Khmer Rouge "victory" commemoration, Congressman 
Eni Faleomavaega met with Cambodian Prime Minister Hun Sen 
and later with Deputy Prime Ministers Hor Namhong and Keat 
Chhon to discuss U.S.-Cambodia relations.  Affirming that 
relations have strengthened over the years, both sides 
acknowledged that challenges and misunderstandings remain. 
PM Hun Sen described Cambodia's USD 162 million debt to the 
U.S. (approximately USD 352 million with arrears) as a 
sensitive political topic in Cambodia, and urged the United 
States to "take a humanitarian view of the issue."  Both 
Deputy Prime Ministers reiterated the request on debt 
recycling, with DPM Keat Chhon noting public opinion favored 
debt forgiveness.  Commerce Minister Cham Prasidh made a 
pitch for duty-free access to the U.S. for Cambodian garments 
made under a good labor regime.  Faleomavaega stated that he 
is committed to looking into the debt further, and indicated 
that he would emphasize to his colleagues in Washington the 
need to reinvest the debt into areas such as education and 
child welfare.  The CODEL also acknowledged that there is 
merit to Cambodia being considered on the same footing as 
AGOA countries on garments.  PM Hun Sen stated that President 
Obama's participation at the ASEAN summit was positive for 
regional relations.  Bilaterally, Hun Sen expressed 
appreciation for American assistance in the areas of health, 
demining, the Khmer Rouge Tribunal (KRT), and education, 
specifically praising the Peace Corps program.  Noting that 
there is no stopping China, DPM Hor Namhong stressed the 
importance of the U.S. presence in Asia and praised President 
Obama's new vision and enhanced engagement in the region. 
End Summary. 
 
PM Hun Sen Requests Debt Assistance 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C) Acknowledging that the debt to the U.S. is a "state 
inheritance which we have to recognize," PM Hun Sen indicated 
that the debt incurred by the Lon Nol regime in the 1970's is 
not only about money, but is also a sensitive political 
issue.  PM Hun Sen compared the Cambodian government's 
predicament to that of being "squeezed by pliers - on the one 
side is the U.S. (the owner of the debt), and on the other 
side are the victims of a coup supported by the U.S."  Had 
the money been used to build bridges, PM Hun Sen stated he 
could rationalize to the people the need to repay it. 
However, since it was used to "support a regime with 
disastrous results," asking approval from the National 
Assembly and the people to repay it would be a "real 
political risk."  Instead, he requested that the U.S. 
consider the debt repayment be returned to Cambodia through 
development aid as "medicine to heal the wound rather than a 
stick to stir it."  Congressmen Faleomavaega and accompanying 
Representatives Mike Honda and Joseph Cao agreed to discuss 
the issue with their colleagues in Washington and stated that 
they believe the best outcome would be one in which the money 
is used to benefit Cambodians, especially the youth, in areas 
such as education and global warming. 
 
Challenges and Successes 
------------------------ 
 
¶3.  (C) Indicating that he intended to "not speak 
diplomatically" but to "speak the truth," PM Hun Sen asked, 
"Why is it so hard to be a friend to America?"  He stated 
that it is not Cambodians who misunderstand the U.S., but 
that some politicians in America wear "glasses that distort 
the picture" of Cambodia.  Although America previously 
dropped bombs on Cambodia, PM Hun Sen pointed out that 
Cambodia has provided assistance to the U.S. in the area of 
accounting for MIA soldiers since 1983, before diplomatic 
relations were established.  Congressman Honda agreed that 
the U.S. has an obligation to clear explosive remnants of 
war, and indicated he will push for and support programs 
which will leave the land free from danger. 
 
¶4.  (C) PM Hun Sen praised the recent improvement in SE 
Asia-U.S. relations, indicating that President Obama's first 
participation in ASEAN was a "very positive sign" for the 
region.  He stated that he respects the new policy toward 
Burma, which previously had been an obstacle to improved 
relations.  PM Hun Sen then expressed his pleasure at the 
growth in relations between the U.S. and Cambodia over the 
past decade in the areas of health, education, support for 
the Khmer Rouge Tribunal (KRT), and demining.  He highlighted 
the good work of the Peace Corps volunteers, a program which 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000031  002 OF 003 
 
 
both Congressman Faleomavaega and Honda stated they would 
like to see increased.  PM Hun Sen relayed that five of his 
children (including spouses), and five of his grandchildren 
have been educated in the U.S. and believed relations could 
be strengthened even further if more Cambodians could be 
educated in the United States.  The meeting ended on a high 
note, with PM Hun Sen and the Congressmen agreeing that the 
focus should be on the youth - to rely on the younger 
generation of Americans and Cambodians to study together and 
know one another so they are "not conservative like us." 
 
Hor Namhong Hosts Lunch with Commerce, Finance Ministers 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Chairman Faleomavaega summarized the delegation's 
discussion of the bilateral debt with the Prime Minister 
during a luncheon hosted by Deputy Prime Minister and 
Minister of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation Hor 
Namhong, which also included Deputy Prime Minister and 
Minister of Economy and Finance Keat Chhon, and Senior 
Minister and Minister of Commerce Cham Prasidh among others. 
DPM Keat Chhon explained that Cambodian public opinion used 
to support the idea of recycling debt payments for assistance 
programs in Cambodia but had changed recently in favor of 
debt forgiveness.  DPM Hor Namhong informed the delegation 
that Cambodia's other creditors, including China and the IMF, 
have written off its debts -- only the U.S. and Russia have 
yet to do so.  All three officials stressed that Cambodia has 
not made an issue of the millions of tons of U.S. bombs 
dropped on Cambodian during the U.S. war with Vietnam nor 
ever requested war repatriations from any country.  The 
delegation noted the need to think of comprehensive and 
complex solutions to resolve the long-standing debt issue and 
reiterated their willingness to work with their colleagues in 
Congress and with the administration to take measures to find 
a solution. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Senior Minister Cham Prasidh highlighted the 
importance of trade with the U.S., particularly garment 
exports, to the growth of the country's economy and appealed 
to the delegation to support the TRADE Act to place Asian 
Least Developed Counties (LDCs) on the same footing as their 
African counterparts.  (NOTE:  The TRADE ACT would extend 
preferential market access enjoyed by the African Growth and 
Opportunity Act (AGOA) countries to 14 non-African LDCs by 
eliminating tariffs on a range of products, including 
garments and apparel.  End Note.)  Cham Prasidh complained 
about the disproportionate tax burden on Cambodian exports to 
the U.S., explaining that the roughly USD 450 million per 
year in duty assessed on USD 2.5 billion in garment exports 
is the equivalent amount paid by both the UK and France (the 
latter enjoys USD 6 billion in trade volume).  He noted that 
despite his years of lobbying to gain support for the bill 
and for expansion of the Generalized System of Preferences 
(GSP) to include garments and textiles, strong opposition to 
the bill came from the AGOA countries -- which he averred 
lobbied the Black Caucus in Congress -- together which, he 
surmised, fear that duty free access for additional LDCs 
might erode AGOA countries' market share, and from the unions 
in the U.S. who fear such preferential treatment would affect 
U.S. jobs.  Chairman Faleomavaega suggested that the Asia 
Pacific Caucus in Congress could engage the Black Caucus to 
educate its members on the limited impact on the AGOA 
beneficiaries of extending duty free access to other LDC's. 
Representative Honda suggested that in addition to lobbying 
members of Congress on the bill, the RGC should engage the 
unions in the U.S. to educate them on the improbability of 
the bill's impact on U.S. jobs. 
 
¶7.  (C) When asked by Chairmen Faleomavaega about the rising 
influence of China in the region, DPM Hor Namhong replied 
that China's rise is inevitable and that the best way to cope 
with this future is to cooperate with China.  He noted that 
China benefits from a large population, a robust economy, a 
strong army, and significant foreign reserves.  He stated 
that once China acquires superior technology, particularly in 
the area of advanced military technology, it could become the 
first superpower; "no one can stop China" he concluded. 
Senior Minister Cham Prasidh said not to blame Cambodia if 
they accept assistance from China, "if there is only one big 
guy offering support, we'll take it," and quipped that if 
China provides Cambodia with USD 200 million, the U.S. should 
match funds.  But Hor Namhong also stressed the need for the 
presence of the U.S. in the Asia region to balance China's 
growing influence and expressed his appreciation of President 
Obama's new vision and enhanced engagement in the region. 
The Chairman replied that the U.S. views China as a partner, 
not a threat, with whom we share common issues that require 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000031  003 OF 003 
 
 
joint cooperation to resolve.  Representative Cao stressed 
the need for the U.S. to be more involved in Asia. 
 
Treatment of Uighur Deportees 
----------------------------- 
 
¶8. (C) Congressman Faleomavaega raised with DPM Hor Namhong 
the summary deportation of 20 Uighur asylum seekers to China 
under apparent Chinese pressure, including what appeared to 
some to be the possible withholding of $1.2 billion in 
assistance.  Noting the potential for some of these deportees 
to be tortured or executed in China, he urged the Royal 
Cambodian Government take steps to ensure with China the 
deported Uighurs would be treated humanely.  During this 
brief aside near the conclusion of the meeting there was no 
Cambodian response. 
 
Meeting with Opposition Party Leaders 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) In a brief meeting with opposition leaders, all 
three members of the CODEL expressed their desire to see the 
Human Rights Party and the Sam Rainsy Party join together in 
a unified opposition coalition.  Chairman Faleomavaega 
asserted that if the combined opposition controlled 30 
percent of the vote it was detrimental to "splinter" because 
that made it difficult for the people to know what the 
opposition stood for.  HRP President Kem Sokha welcomed the 
delegation to Cambodia noting that they could now see for 
themselves the challenges in Cambodia with "power in the 
hands of one group."  The CODEL reminded the veteran 
opposition politicians that in any competitive democratic 
environment the party in power always had advantages, which 
the minority party tried to overcome.  MP's Tioulong Saumura 
and Yim Sovann spoke for the SRP, noting Cambodia's heavy 
corruption and violations of human rights.  Noting lack of 
media access, Representative Honda said that challengers 
often had the same complaint in the U.S. system but they 
still went out to educate the electorate, to "get in touch," 
and ultimately to increase their electoral share and triumph. 
 While the CODEL members recognized Cambodia's political 
flaws and the challenges faced by opposition parties, they 
agreed with Representative Cao's earnest appeal to the 
opposition to formulate a coherent plan and act on it with 
the goal of increasing the electoral base and representing 
their constituents in the government. 
 
U.S. Presence in Siem Reap Projects 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶10.  (SBU) During their first stop in Siem Reap, the CODEL 
visited the Phnom Bakheng preservation project which is 
funded by a $1.5 million grant through the Ambassador's Fund 
for Cultural Preservation.  The World Monuments Fund is 
managing the project, a complex stone-by-stone waterproofing 
and rebuilding exercise, and its local representatives 
briefed the Congressmen on the status of these efforts, the 
history of the temple and its significance to Khmer history. 
The delegation dined with Siem Reap Governor Sou Phirin and 
MFA Secretary of State Ouch Borith and discussed Siem Reap's 
tourism based economy.  The governor noted the strongly 
cyclical nature of the tourism economy and presented the 
challenges he faced in raising one of Cambodia's most 
impoverished provinces to a higher level.  The group also 
toured other U.S. funded initiatives at the Angkor Wat 
complex before departing for Phnom Penh. 
 
¶11.  (C) COMMENT: The CODEL's candid and engaging style and 
its composition, according to Chairman Faleomavaega, as "the 
first CODEL composed entirely of Asian American congressmen," 
reflected its very personal approach to the Cambodian 
leadership.  The fact that Chairman Faleomavaega had 
previously visited Cambodia was a plus in this context, as 
many of his interlocutors warmly welcomed his return.  The 
CODEL was also open to candid and compelling discussions on 
debt and trade, two core issues for the Cambodians which 
require U.S. Congressional consideration.  The CODEL left 
with more concrete ideas about the desires of the Cambodian 
leadership on both debt and trade, and how the Congress might 
work with the Department to meet those needs while serving 
U.S. national interests.  And the Cambodians were left with 
high expectations that the CODEL would seek to deliver on 
debt in 2010. 
 
¶12.   (U)  CODEL Faleomavaega did not have the opportunity to 
clear this cable. 
RODLEY