10PRETORIA199
SOUTH AFRICA POLITICAL NEWSLETTER JANUARY 25-JANUARY 29
Fri Jan 29 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Pretoria
VZCZCXRO1663
RR RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHJO RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHSA #0199/01 0291618
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 291618Z JAN 10 //ZDS//
FM AMEMBASSY PRETORIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1049
RUCNSAD/SOUTHERN AF DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY COLLECTIVE
RUEHTN/AMCONSUL CAPE TOWN 7528
RUEHDU/AMCONSUL DURBAN 1593
RUEHJO/AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG 9883UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 PRETORIA 000199 
 
C O R R E C T E D   C O P Y TEXT PARA 2, para numbering) 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KDEM ASEC SF
SUBJECT: SOUTH AFRICA POLITICAL NEWSLETTER JANUARY 25-JANUARY 29 
 
REF: Pretoria 0080 
 
PRETORIA 00000199  001.4 OF 004 
 
 
¶1. (SBU)  This was written in partnership with the Open Source 
Center's Pretoria Bureau.  The newsletter is open to contributions 
from officers in the Embassy or in the Consulates who wish to 
highlight political trends.  Contact Madeline Seidenstricker or 
Jonathan Smallridge for more information, or to make contributions. 
The newsletter also is available on the Political Section's blog, "A 
View from South Africa," found on intelink.gov. 
 
------------- 
Domestic News 
------------- 
 
ANC Wins Big in By-Elections 
 
¶2. (SBU)  The ANC won all 12 contested seats in municipal 
by-elections in Mpumalanga, Free State, Northwest and Eastern Cape 
provinces, according to results tabulated by the Independent 
Electoral Commission (IEC).  "Voter turnout varied between 60.45 
percent and 16.24 percent with an average of 30.34 percent," the IEC 
said in a statement.  The ANC said it was pleased to have retained 
every ward with a "decisive majority" in the by-elections 
Spokesperson Jackson Mthembu said, "The lowest vote for the ANC was 
61 percent, and in all the rest  the majority was over 70%, and in 
five wards in the 90s."  He said a ward in Lekwa, Mpumalanga, was 
unopposed.  In Eastern Cape, the ANC retained Ndlambe (Port Alfred); 
in Free State it won two wards in Letsemeng (Koffiefontein); in 
Mpumalanga it retained Mkhondo (Piet Retief), Steve Tshwete 
(Middelburg), Thaba Chweu (Sabie), Umjindi (Barberton), and four 
wards in Lekwa (Standerton).  In Northwest, it retained Ramotshere 
Moiloa (Zeerust).  The ANC said it was "happy with the people's vote 
of confidence in the ANC."  (News24, January 29, 2010) 
 
South African Cricket Board Fires Manager to Quicken "Transformation" 
 
¶3. (SBU)  The South African Cricket Board forced the resignation of 
the national team's coach as well as the country's board of 
selectors reportedly because the team has not achieved racial 
transformation quickly enough.  The Board, in conjunction with the 
government, decided in recent years that at least four black players 
should be included on South Africa's national team to promote South 
African diversity.  However, the team featured no black players 
following their latest Test series against England and there are few 
black players in the national system ready to compete 
internationally.  Coach Mickey Arthur resigned and the entire 
selection committee for the national team was removed on January 26. 
 Although the South African Cricket Board did not say lack of 
transformation was the reason for the changes, most sports analysts 
and commentators, as well as several of the sacked members of the 
board of selectors say it was.  (Mail and Guardian, January 26-28, 
2010) 
 
What's in a name?  Pretoria vs. Tshwane Issue Resurfaces 
 
¶4. (SBU)  The Afrikaans press reported early in the week that the 
government planned to push ahead prior to the start of the World Cup 
in June with officially changing the name of Pretoria to Tshwane. 
The story broke in the Beeld newspaper on January 27 and was quickly 
picked up by all major media outlets.  (Note: the proposal to change 
the city's name was first mooted in 2005, and has been debated ever 
since.  The metropolitan area which includes Pretoria is already 
officially known as Tshwane.  End note.) The Freedom Front Plus 
(FFP), most of whose supporters are white Afrikaners, vowed to fight 
any change of the name and AfriForum officials said they would 
Qany change of the name and AfriForum officials said they would 
 
PRETORIA 00000199  002.4 OF 004 
 
 
challenge any move to officially rename the city in court.  On 
January 28, at the last minute, Deputy Arts and Culture Minister 
Paul Mashatile canceled a briefing to address the government's 
plans, reportedly because he faced pressure from the FFP.  FFP 
leader (and Deputy Agriculture Minister) Pieter Mulder argued that a 
change in Pretoria's name would split South Africans at a time when 
the government was hoping for increased patriotism and unity.  He 
also said, "Because Pretoria's name is internationally known there 
will be huge confusion with foreign soccer fans who now suddenly 
will be attending games in Tshwane."  (Beeld, Sowetan, Business Day, 
Sunday Times, January 27-29, 2010) 
 
Congress of the People's Problems Continue 
 
¶5. (SBU)  Internal squabbles in the Congress of the People (COPE) 
opposition party (founded in 2009 by breakaway ANC members who 
opposed the ruling party's decision to sack president Thabo Mbeki) 
are continuing to plague the organization.  The COPE youth league on 
January 25 passed a vote of no confidence in the party's national 
leadership and called for the immediate dissolution of the national 
committee.  The youth leaders, who are aligned to party leader 
Mbhazima Shilowa, proposed that an early election and policy 
conference be held at the end of May in place of an elective 
conference already set for August.  Following the youth league's 
announcement, COPE's current national leadership said publicly they 
have no plans to step down before the party's elective conference. 
Shilowa and other COPE officials say they will only respond to calls 
by the youth movement once they have studied a report detailing the 
reasons for the youth's move.  In a separate development, on January 
28, a faction of the youth league who support rival party leader 
Mosiuoa Lekota accused Shilowa publicly of hijacking the party and 
circulated its list of preferred candidates for the elective 
conference.  Unsurprisingly, Shilowa and his allies are not on the 
list of preferred candidates.  (SABCNews, January 26, 2010 and Mail 
and Guardian, January 29, 2010) 
 
Calls from the Left to Nationalize the Reserve Bank 
 
¶6. (SBU)  There are growing calls in the tripartite alliance to 
explore the nationalization of the South African Reserve Bank.  The 
National Union of Metalworkers of South Africa said on January 25 
the proposal would lead to prosperity for the poor.  African 
National Congress (ANC) General Secretary (and South African 
Communist Party Chairman) Gwede Mantashe has called on the party to 
consider a state takeover of the central bank.  Mantashe tabled the 
proposal at the ANC's recent national executive committee meeting, 
but party spokesperson Jackson Mthembu said the proposal had not yet 
been discussed by the ANC's top brass.  The proposal is expected to 
be on the agenda of the next summit of the ruling Triple Alliance 
(ANC, SACP, Cosatu) when the review of the mandate of the Reserve 
Bank would be discussed further.  The Bank currently is privately 
owned by 630 shareholders. (Sowetan, January 25, 2010) 
 
ANC Leaders Say They Will Prioritize Service Delivery 
 
¶7. (SBU)  The delivery of government services, particularly to 
disadvantaged areas, continues to be a major challenge to the SAG. 
According to the ANC's parliamentary caucus, problems with service 
delivery remain a huge obstacle that will only be sorted out with 
time.  Livhuwani Ndou, who serves in the office of the ANC chief 
Qtime.  Livhuwani Ndou, who serves in the office of the ANC chief 
whip, spoke to reporters about the caucus's oversight visit to 
Diepsloot and Kya Sands in Johannesburg and said the visits to both 
areas formed part of the ruling party's campaign titled, "Taking 
Caucus to the People."  According to Ndou, the government is serious 
about improving delivery and the main objective of the current 
campaign, which is spearheaded by the Johannesburg City Council, is 
to interact with residents in the two communities and publicize the 
government's service delivery programs.  Ndou said, "Service 
delivery is not an event but a process and these visits are to 
ensure that promises contained in our elective manifesto are carried 
out."  (The Citizen, January 24, 2010) 
 
Democratic Alliance Expels Non-Paying Members 
 
¶8. (SBU)  Senior Democratic Alliance (DA) leaders expelled four DA 
councilors in Limpopo for failing to pay the party's monthly 
membership fee.  The four have since accused the party of firing 
them because they questioned the cost of the monthly contribution, 
which is roughly 20 dollars.  The party's provincial leader, Desiree 
van der Walt, confirmed the councilors' expulsion and told reporters 
that the DA will not tolerate uncommitted members.  (Sowetan, 
January 25, 2010) 
 
Change Coming for Medical Parole Law 
 
¶9. (SBU)  The country's laws on medical parole may change following 
the controversial parole of President Jacob Zuma's former business 
partner Schabir Shaik.  A team led by legal expert Judge Siraj Desai 
released its first draft report recommending that certain changes be 
 
PRETORIA 00000199  003.4 OF 004 
 
 
made to parts of Section 79 of the Correctional Services Act.  The 
report recommends, among other things, that medical parole be 
reviewed should an offender's health improve while they are out on 
medical parole.  Correctional Services Minister Nosiviwe 
Mapisa-Nqakula appointed the task team after loopholes were spotted 
in the Act following the release of Shaik last year after he had 
served only two years of his 15-year prison term.  "A number of 
questions have been asked about the decisions we have made as the 
Department in releasing people on medical parole, and we felt a task 
team can clarify some of the questions" said Mapisa-Nqakula.  The 
recommendations will be sent to Parliament once all the stakeholders 
have had an opportunity to air their views.  Parliament would have 
to any recommendations.   (Buanews, January 27, 2010) 
 
 
State Security Minister's Wife Arrested 
 
¶10. (SBU)  After months of speculation over her involvement in a 
high profile drug smuggling case, Sheryl Cwele, the wife of the 
State Security Minister, was arrested at her South Coast home early 
this morning and was due to appear in court on January 29, the 
National Prosecuting Authority confirmed.  The arrest by "The Hawks" 
crime fighting unit was timed for the day after she returned to her 
job as the director of health and community services in the Hibiscus 
Coast Municipality, according to press releases.  (News24, January 
29, 2010) 
 
------------------ 
International News 
------------------ 
 
Australian, South African Foreign Ministers Hold Talks, Announce 
Plan to Assist Zimbabwe 
 
¶11. (SBU) Business Day Online reported on January 27 that the 
Australian government, a vocal critic of the Zimbabwe government, 
and one of the governments instrumental in getting it kicked out of 
the Commonwealth, has softened its approach and will now provide 
assistance to Harare.  "We have agreed on projects to help Zimbabwe 
with taxation laws as well as water and sanitation technical 
expertise," Australian Foreign Minister Stephen Smith told reporters 
January 26.  He said Zimbabwe needed technical expertise to reform 
its tax laws and build the economy. Smith said Australia's 
longstanding view about Zimbabwe's President Robert Mugabe was that 
he ought to leave office.  But he said that political developments 
in the country were encouraging.  He announced a further commitment 
of up to 6 million Australian dollars to co-operate with South 
Africa in supporting the recovery of the Zimbabwean economy and 
basic services. [Description of Source: Johannesburg Business Day 
Online in English -- Website of privately owned regional newspaper; 
URL: 
http://www.bday.co.za/] 
 
Zuma Attends World Economic Forum . . . 
 
¶12. (SBU) President Zuma is in Davos, Switzerland from January 27 to 
31 to attend the 40th Annual Meeting of the World Economic Forum. 
Zuma led the South African delegation and was accompanied by 
National Planning Commission Minister Trevor Manuel, Finance 
Minister Pravin Gordhan, Economic Development Minister Ebrahim 
Patel, Trade and Industry Minister Rob Davies, Water and 
Environmental Affairs Minister Buyelwa Sonjica and Tourism Minister 
Marthinus van Schalkwyk.  There was a strong focus throughout the 
early sessions of the Forum on the promotion of the 2010 FIFA World 
Cup.  (The Presidency, January 25) 
 
. . . Then Off to Ethiopia 
 
¶13. (SBU)  Zuma is scheduled to attend the 14th Ordinary Session of 
Q13. (SBU)  Zuma is scheduled to attend the 14th Ordinary Session of 
the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the African Union 
in Ethiopia following the World Economic Forum.  Minister of 
International Relations and Cooperation Maite Nkoana-Mashabae is 
already in Addis Abba for the ministerial sessions which precede the 
summit.  (The Presidency, January 25) 
 
Legal Efforts Underway to Force Publication of Report on Zimbabwe 
 
¶14. (SBU)  The South African History Archive and the Southern 
African Center for the Survivors of Torture will ask the Pretoria 
High Court to force the South African Government to release a 
potentially explosive report on post-election violence in Zimbabwe 
following that country's 2008 elections.  In May 2008, former 
President Thabo Mbeki commissioned retired South African generals to 
visit Zimbabwe and report back on the violence which erupted after 
the March 2008 polls.  The generals, including retired Lieutenant 
General Gilbert Romano, retired Brigadier-General Ray Moerane and 
retired Lieutenant General Lambert Moloi, entered Zimbabwe in May 
2008 and returned for a second mission in June 2008. The exercise 
had at the time cost taxpayers roughly US$75,000, yet no report has 
 
PRETORIA 00000199  004.4 OF 004 
 
 
been forthcoming.  Although the government has denied the existence 
of any report, both the South African History Archive and the 
Southern African Center for the Survivors of Torture believe it does 
exist.  The government has yet to indicate whether it will oppose 
the application.  (IOL, January 25) 
 
GIPS