10STATE7462
UN MISSION IN SUDAN: TALKING POINTS FOR
Mon Jan 25 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO7437
OO RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHC #7462/01 0252201
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 252154Z JAN 10
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 9615
INFO DARFUR COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 STATE 007462 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPKO UNSC SU
SUBJECT: UN MISSION IN SUDAN: TALKING POINTS FOR 
CONSULTATIONS 
 
 ¶1.  This is an action request.  USUN may draw from the 
points in paragraph 2 during consultations before the 
Security Council on the UN Mission in Sudan (UNMIS) scheduled 
for January 26, 2010. 
 
¶2.  I would like to thank Under Secretary-General Le Roy for 
his briefing today.  Sudan is now entering a critical period 
) one which will determine its future.  We must continue to 
urge the parties to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) 
to keep the focus on the remaining implementation tasks, and 
to begin planning for the post-referendum period, regardless 
of outcome.  Today, I would like to address key elements for 
the future of UNMIS: the April 2010 elections and 2011 
referenda, and the increasingly fragile security situation in 
southern Sudan. 
 
--The United States views elections in Sudan as critical in 
the peace process.  We remain concerned that voters 
throughout Sudan be free to exercise their political rights 
without intimidation and fear of reprisals.  Voter 
registration was largely peaceful, and we hope this indicates 
that elections can also be conducted peacefully. 
Unfortunately, the December 7 arrest of key opposition 
figures gathered for a peaceful demonstration, and the 
ensuing violence, illustrates the tenuous nature of 
maintaining security during elections, and how quickly 
security can deteriorate.  We encourage UNMIS to continue 
working with Sudanese election authorities and security 
officials to ensure voters can freely exercise their vote, 
and we urge Sudanese election authorities to implement a plan 
that would allow observers to witness all aspects of the 
electoral process. 
 
--We acknowledge the recent positive accomplishments in CPA 
implementation:  legislation governing the referenda in the 
South and Abyei was passed, as well as the law concerning 
popular consultations in the Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan 
states.  These are significant developments; however, hard 
tasks lie ahead, including the appointment of referendum 
commissioners, resolving the dispute over census results, 
agreement on eligible voters in Abyei, and suspension of laws 
that infringe on civil liberties in the run-up to elections. 
While we are pleased UNMIS has started recruiting a team to 
assist the parties with referendum planning, this planning is 
already behind and must begin immediately.  UNMIS assistance 
to the parties is critical to ensure that adequate 
preparations are made for the 2011 referenda, and we would 
like to see greater detail and action plans describing the 
preparations in upcoming reports.  The Council also needs to 
begin focusing on the nature of the UN presence in Sudan 
during the post-referendum period.  We would like to know if 
the Secretariat has begun to consider this issue, and would 
welcome receiving the Under-Secretary General,s 
recommendations. 
 
--While we acknowledge the recent CPA successes, we remain 
concerned about other aspects of implementation.  We are 
particularly troubled by the lack of progress in implementing 
the decision of the Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA) on 
Abyei, especially the reports that armed tribal groups have 
prevented border demarcation.  Tensions in the area are 
rising as communities have been unable to cross into and 
beyond Abyei this migration season, and the issue of voter 
eligibility in the Abyei referendum remains unresolved and 
left to the Abyei Referendum Commission.  These factors 
signal that Abyei remains a potential flashpoint for 
violence, and we urge UNMIS to assist the parties where 
possible in implementing the PCA decision and to closely 
monitor the situation. 
 
--The United States continues to be deeply disturbed by the 
escalating and pervasive violence in southern Sudan.   Armed 
tribal conflicts and criminal activity continues to produce 
violence in the south.  We acknowledge that southern Sudan 
security forces are responsible for establishing security, 
but UNMIS must play a critical role in the protection of 
vulnerable civilians.   We also believe that UNMIS, utilizing 
its authority under its Chapter VII mandate, should continue 
to develop and implement coordinated civilian protection 
strategies.  Given the potential for increased violence in 
the next 12 months due to the elections and referenda, and 
the current violence caused by ethnic conflict, we would like 
to know when UNMIS will complete development of its 
mission-wide civilian protection strategy.   We urge UNMIS to 
complete this strategy for the protection of civilians and 
share the key aspects of the strategy with the Council. 
 
STATE 00007462  002 OF 002 
 
 
--While some progress toward implementation of the CPA has 
occurred, much remains to be done.  The citizens of Sudan 
must have a secure environment that will enable them to 
freely exercise their right to vote.  Planning must also 
begin now for the 2011 referenda, and parties must begin to 
address and resolve difficult post-referenda issues.  Action 
must also be taken to address the growing violence and 
insecurity in the south.  We must all work together to help 
Sudan secure a future of peace and prosperity for its 
citizens. 
 
--Thank you. 
CLINTON