08GENEVA319
ICRC DONOR SUPPORT GROUP VISIT TO SRI LANKA
Tue Apr 29 00:00:00 +0200 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
US Mission Geneva
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHGV #0319/01 1201420
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 291420Z APR 08
FM USMISSION GENEVA
TO RUEHLM/AMEMBASSY COLOMBO 0528
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6410
INFO RUEHBK/AMEMBASSY BANGKOK 1946
RUEHDL/AMEMBASSY DUBLIN 1900
RUEHKT/AMEMBASSY KATHMANDU 0496
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 2776
RUEHNE/AMEMBASSY NEW DELHI 3002
RUEHOT/AMEMBASSY OTTAWA 5631
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS 0799
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2716
RHEHNSC/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L GENEVA 000319 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR SCA/INS 
DEPT FOR PRM/ANE/MPITOTTI AND PRM/MCE/ICRC/AREYNOLDS 
DEPARTMENT FOR USAID/OFDA/RTHAYER 
USAID/FFP/KSCHEIN AND USAID/ZSUDA 
TUNIS FOR PMULREAN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/10/2018 
TAGS: PREF PHUM PGOV EAID CE
SUBJECT: ICRC DONOR SUPPORT GROUP VISIT TO SRI LANKA 
 
REF: COLOMBO 82 
 
Classified By: RMA DEPUTY COUNSELOR KATHERINE PERKINS FOR 1.4 B & D. 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary:  Geneva-based Refugee Officer (RefOff) Nick 
Hilgert traveled to Sri Lanka from March 31 to April 5 with 
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) Donor 
Support Group (DSG) to visit ICRC project sites.  The DSG is 
made up of donors who contribute more than $10 million 
annually to ICRC.  RefOff visited sites in eastern Sri Lanka 
(Batticaloa and Trincomalee) and the Terrorism Investigative 
Division (TID), a detention facility for conflict related 
detainees in Colombo.  ICRC does not believe the current 
fighting will lead to significant displacement in the 
short-term and that it will remain contained in the Vanni. 
ICRC's work in IDP camps in the east is decreasing as more 
than 170,000 IDPs have already returned home and some 24,000 
remain.  However, livelihood projects for returnees are still 
important and many returnees face a number of obstacles 
restarting economic activities to support themselves.  ICRC's 
incident statistics in eastern Sri Lanka are mixed, with the 
number of killings down since January and claymore mine 
attacks remaining steady since December 2008.  ICRC is 
coordinating well with UN organizations and non-governmental 
organizations (NGOs).  The ongoing conflict in northern Sri 
Lanka has significantly restricted access to the Vanni 
region, and ICRC believes the overall number of persons held 
in detention will increase in 2008.  ICRC will soon submit a 
report to the government it says proves the government has a 
facility holding "high-level" detainees and will request 
access to that facility.  RefOff assisted ICRC distribute 
letters and personal hygiene supplies to detainees in the TID 
and met several persons recently arrested for suspected ties 
to the LTTE.  The Director of the TID announced he has 
received authorization to hold a UK citizen for an additional 
three months under the terms of the Protection Against 
Terrorism Act (PTA), the first such case since the 
government's withdrawal from the cease-fire agreement. 
RefOff also met an Irish and Canadian citizen being held in 
the TID.  Other members of the DSG also traveled to Jaffna 
and were equally impressed with ICRC's ability to access 
difficult areas and visited the government's detention 
facility for "surrenderees."  Members of the DSG will raise 
concerns at the DSG Meeting in May over ICRC's capacity to 
retain qualified expatriate translators.  End Summary. 
 
Visit to Sri Lanka and PRM Support to ICRC 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶2.  (U) Geneva-based Refugee Officer (RefOff) Nick Hilgert 
traveled to Sri Lanka from March 31 to April 5 with the 
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) Donor Support 
Group (DSG) to visit ICRC project sites.  Other participating 
donors included Australia, Canada, the European Commission 
(ECHO), France, Germany, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, and the 
United Kingdom.  The DSG visited ICRC project sites in 
Colombo, eastern Sri Lanka (Batticaloa and Trincomalee), and 
northern Sri Lanka (Jaffna).  This included visits to IDP 
camps, livelihood and emergency shelter projects in areas of 
return, protection activities and visits to detention 
facilities.  The DSG also met government officials, including 
Basil Rajapakse, Senior Advisor to the President, Mr. 
Jayantha Palipana, Acting Secretary at the MFA, and Mr. 
Mahinda Samarasinghe, Minister of Human Rights and Disaster 
Management.  The DSG is made up of donors who contribute more 
than $10 million annually to ICRC.  In 2007, the State 
Department's Bureau of Population, Refugees, and Migration 
(PRM) contributed $20 million to ICRC's operations in South 
Asia and earmarked an additional $3.84 million to ICRC in Sri 
Lanka.  PRM has just announced a contribution of $22.1 
million to ICRC's South Asia operations for 2008. 
 
ICRC Presence in Sri Lanka 
-------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (C) ICRC has been in Sri Lanka since 1989.  ICRC 
currently has 521 national staff (83% male) and 70 
international staff (53% female) working in 10 offices 
throughout the country (Jaffna, Kilinochi, Puthukkudiyiripu, 
Batticaloa, Trincomalee, Muthur, Ampara, Vavunya, Mannar, and 
Colombo) with a budget roughly equivalent to $27 million. 
ICRC staff represent 28 different nationalities, although 
Swiss (17) and French nationals (12) represent 41% of all 
staff.  There are no U.S. nationals working with ICRC in Sri 
Lanka.  ICRC works in both the government-controlled areas of 
Sri Lanka and in the conflict zone, currently the region of 
the Vanni in northern Sri Lanka.  ICRC's project activities 
focus on the protection of civilians, (including recruitment 
of minors and family tracing), assistance (including water, 
sanitation, and shelter to IDPs and returnees) visits to 
conflict related detainees, treating the wounded and sick, 
and training of public authorities and the armed forces on 
international humanitarian law (IHL).  ICRC reports that in 
2007 it provided food items and non-food items to more than 
300,000 IDPs and returnees, provided access to water to more 
than 83,000 persons (52,000 IDPs and 31,000 host-community 
residents), cared for more than 400 patients in the Jaffna 
Jaipur Center for Disability and Rehabilitation, and provided 
more than 260 training sessions to more than 5,000 
combatants, including government security forces and armed 
members of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE). 
 
ICRC's View of the Current Conflict 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (C) Toon Vandenhoove, ICRC Head of Delegation, told the 
DSG that the conflict has moved north and is now focused in 
the area of the Vanni.  Vandenhoove believes that it is 
unlikely there will be massive displacement from the Vanni in 
2008 due to heavy bombing along the front defensive lines and 
tight LTTE control over movement of the local populations in 
the conflict area. (Note:  ICRC staff characterized the LTTE 
of using the local population as "human shields."  End note.) 
 Vandenhoove said there has been some displacement out of the 
Vanni, but he believes these numbers will remain below ICRC's 
planning figure of a possible 120,000 IDPs in 2008 (Note: 
ICRC's figures refer to maximum number of persons they would 
likely assist, not the number of potential IDPs). 
Vandenhoove said a number of persons have left the Vanni by 
boat and that the government is holding a small number of 
persons who escaped the Vanni in a camp-like facility in 
Mannar.  ICRC has been able to negotiate concessions from the 
government to allow persons in this facility greater freedom 
of movement.  ICRC is preparing an assessment of health 
conditions in the Vanni and indicated some supplies might not 
be getting in due to the limited access.  Another ICRC staff 
member working in the Vanni believes that the government's 
"state of siege" may break the LTTE before the end of 2008. 
 
¶5.  (C) Vandenhoove said the current conflict has restricted 
ICRC's access to the Vanni (there is now only one access 
point at Omanthai) and led to an increase in disappearances, 
detentions, and casualties.  Vandehoove believes the number 
of conflict-detainees will increase in 2008 compared to 2007 
and explained there is growing mistrust between the 
government and the international community.  He said the 
government often charges ICRC and other organizations 
publicly as LTTE collaborators and this has caused tension 
with local populations.  ICRC (and other organizations) is 
also experiencing long delays getting visas issued to its 
staff working in the north.  Vandenhoove did say there has 
been an overall decline in the number of known child soldiers 
and ICRC is working closely with UNICEF and ILO to ensure 
these children are assisted after their release.  According 
to ICRC, child soldiers are almost exclusively attributable 
to the LTTE and the LTTE breakaway paramilitary/political 
party in eastern Sri Lanka, the Tamil Makkal Viduthalai 
Puligal (TMVP).  Figures provided by UNICEF to Embassy 
Colombo seem to indicate that there is still some 
underreporting of child soldiers and that some of the decline 
in known cases can also be attributed either to "runaways" or 
a small number of children released by the TMVP directly to 
their parents rather than to the UN. 
Coordination 
------------ 
 
¶6.  (C) The DSG had the opportunity to meet with a variety of 
UN agencies and NGOs working in coordination with ICRC, 
including a larger discussion with the Inter-Agency Standing 
Committee (IASC) Country Team (CT) in Colombo.  The CT 
explained that the UN's Cluster Approach was not adopted in 
Sri Lanka and that they had decided to maintain a Sectoral 
Approach (which divides responsibilities in a similar way as 
the Clusters).  Neil Buehne, UNDP Resident Coordination, 
however, acknowledged that the Sectoral Approach in Sri Lanka 
does not rely on the "agency of last resort" concept as 
called for in the Cluster Approach, but he noted that most 
agencies have been able to raise required resources when 
needed.  Parallel to the IASC Sectoral Approach, agencies 
also established the Coordinating Committee on Humanitarian 
Affairs (CCHA) in 2006 with the participation of the Ministry 
of Human Rights and the Ministry of Defense, several 
Embassies, Sri Lankan NGOs, the Government Agents (GA) based 
in the various Districts as well as most members of the CT. 
ICRC appears to have coordinated quite closely with the CT in 
preparation of its Emergency Appeal and the UN humanitarian 
appeal for Sri Lanka (CHAP) in order to avoid overalap.  The 
Sectoral coordination mechanism appears to function quite 
well in the field as well and agencies report close 
collaboration between the different organizations.  An 
increasing number of national Red Cross Societies, such as 
the German and UK Red Cross, are moving away from their 
Tsunami activities and using this money to providing conflict 
 
SIPDIS 
assistance. 
 
IDP and Refugee Numbers 
----------------------- 
 
¶7.  (U) UNHCR divides figures for Internally Displaced 
Persons (IDPs) into two categories: those who fled before 
2002, or "old caseload" IDPs (312,712), and those who fled 
since April 2006, or "new caseload" IDPs (358,330).  The old 
caseload IDPs were initially registered by the government. 
However, no verification exercise of this caseload has been 
done recently and most live in host communities where they 
receive very little assistance.  According to UNHCR's 
official statistics, approximately 97,000 IDPs are currently 
located in "Welfare Centers" where they do receive 
assistance.  A Welfare Center in this context is basically an 
IDP camp.  This figure includes both old caseload IDPs 
(67,000) and new caseload IDPs (30,000). 
 
¶8.  (C) UNHCR Representative, Amin Awad, told RefOff that the 
number of IDP camps in eastern Sri Lanka has declined 
recently from approximately 100 to just around 18.  Awad said 
the government has already returned some 170,000 IDPs, thus 
leaving approximately 186,000 still displaced.  Awad added 
that around 100,000 of those IDPs are in the Vanni alone 
where the conflict is ongoing.  ICRC Batticaloa reported some 
24,000 IDPs present in its District, more than half of whom 
are in host communities (16,190) and the rest in camps 
(9,848).  Of those still in camps, approximately 6,500 are 
from Trincomalee District and the rest from Batticaloa 
District (3,258).  ICRC reported that return movements are 
organized almost weekly and that IDP numbers in the camps 
continue to decline.  RefOff visited the Kiran IDP Camp where 
ICRC carries out shelter and Water and Habitat activities. 
This is the largest remaining IDP camp in the area with only 
about 150 families.  ICRC said they are also taking care of 
about 10,000 IDPs in the Vanni conflict zone.  Awad said that 
the number of Sri Lankan refugees who entered India since 
2006 has remained steady at around 20,000, but noted that 
recently UNHCR has received reports that some refugees are 
returning to eastern Sri Lanka after hearing that peace has 
returned to that region. 
 
Fear of Return 
-------------- 
 
¶9.  (C) Basil Rajepakse, Member of Parliament and Special 
Advisor to the President (Note: he is also the President's 
younger brother.  End note.), told the DSG delegation that 
the main issues confronting IDPs who still have to return 
include demining and livelihoods.  Indeed, the DSG passed 
many areas still closed off for demining during our visit. 
Rear Admiral H.R. Amaraweera, Coordinating Director for the 
Ministry of Resettlement and Disaster Relief Services in 
Trincomalee, informed the DSG that the main hurdles for IDP 
return to Trincomalee included pro-LTTE elements in the IDP 
camps who are advising IDPs against return, a lack of 
awareness among the IDP population with regard to support 
services available, a need for livelihood assistance, and 
what he called the "wild boar and elephant menace" that is 
destroying gardens and damaging homes.  The government is 
providing return transport for IDPs and in some areas has 
built homes for returnees, although the vast majority of 
shelter projects is carried out by NGOs such as the Dutch NGO 
- ZOA, or international organizations such as ICRC. 
 
¶10.  (C) At the Kiran IDP camp, RefOff spoke to Jayamahan, 
the Camp Community Leader, about why some IDPs have not 
returned.  Jayamahan recounted several stories of 
pro-government elements abducting or even killing persons 
they suspect of having either supported the LTTE or as having 
pro-LTTE sentiment in the return areas.  He said young men in 
particular are targeted.  He explained that he does not want 
to even ask for his identification card because the "man 
working there" (in Trincomalee) is Sinhalese.  He also said 
the TMVP (the TMVP won a majority in the recent local 
elections in the Batticaloa District), which has an office 
just outside the camp, had asked how many families did not 
want to return to their former homes.  Apparently 22 families 
indicated they did not want to return.  Jayamahan said he is 
not sure if the TMVP will be able to help any of the families 
remain in Batticaloa District, but affirmed that he was 
definitely not going to return to his former home. 
 
High Security Zone in Trincomalee 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶11.  (C) The government's decision to mark off a High 
Security Zone (HSZ) in the Muttur Division of Trincomalee, 
along the Koddiyar Bay, presents a number of problems for 
potential returnees.  According to ICRC, this area was 
previously controlled by the LTTE and used as a base to 
attack Trincomalee town on the other side of the bay.  ICRC 
said the Government does not want returning Tamil fishermen 
to begin plying the waters again and has declared several 
areas off-limits to return, mainly Sampoor West, Sampoor 
East, and Koonitivu.  According to ICRC, non-combatant Tamil 
citizens often came under strong pressure from the LTTE to 
support "the cause" during the war and even now, particularly 
in the Vanni, Tamil families are still asked to provide one 
child per family to the LTTE.  Thus, it would seem reasonable 
that both the Government and potential returnees may see 
return to this area as a risky endeavor. 
 
¶12.  (C) Nevertheless, Government plans to relocate returnees 
who originate from the now classified HSZ to other areas have 
been criticized as "demographic engineering."  In fact, the 
government is reducing the size of the HSZ and some 6,600 
IDPs will be allowed to return in "phases" to all but the 
most sensitive areas as defined by the government.  Roberto 
Petronio, ICRC's Head of Sub-Office in Trincomalee, said the 
remaining 2,249 families (8,094 persons) originally from the 
HSZ will have to be relocated at some point and that "UN 
agencies are unhappy" with the solutions currently offered by 
the government.  UNHCR is taking a pragmatic approach to the 
return issue, assisting the government according to the terms 
of a general agreement it has with the Ministry of Disaster 
Management and Human Rights and is advocating for just 
compensation for those who are relocated to new areas. 
 
Forced or Voluntary Return? 
--------------------------- 
 
¶13.  (C) Many agencies stated that returnees have been forced 
back and/or that many have been arrested or "disappeared" 
after their return.  In some return movements, the government 
used food ration cards to pressure IDPs to return, taking 
away the ration cards of those who chose to remain in the 
camps.  Others have returned to their villages only to find 
that their homes have been destroyed, they have no water, and 
other public services and infrastructure are lacking.  Jens 
Hesemann, UNHCR's Head of Field Office in Batticaloa, said 
UNHCR recently convinced the Government to organize 
go-and-see visits with returnees to help them decide if 
return is appropriate for them before the government 
organizes the movements.  UNHCR also managed to persuade the 
government to return food ration cards to those who had 
decided to remain in the camps.  During a DSG meeting with 
Mahinda Samarsinghe, the Minister of Human Rights and 
Disaster Management, RefOff asked if the government is 
developing a plan with UNHCR to help those who want to stay 
in the communities where they are currently located rather 
than return.  Samarsinghe discussed problems linked to 
demining and infrastructure development, but did not mention 
what the government will do with the caseload that does not 
return.  Many agencies confirmed the government has no actual 
timeline in mind for completing the return process, although 
UNHCR's agreement with the government refers to a broad phase 
from 2008-2010. 
 
Returnees Still Face Challenges 
------------------------------- 
 
¶14.  (C) The DSG visited Kunjankulam Village, an ICRC 
Economic Security (ECOSEC) project site located in the 
Batticaloa District on the road to Trincomalee.  Their 
situation illustrates well the issues returnees face as 
eastern Sri Lanka transitions to peace.  The 50 families in 
this village have been displaced four different times, with 
the most recent displacement occurring from December 2006 to 
March 2007.  The villagers are inland fishermen and made 
their living from a nearby lake before the war.  The 
government has placed a military camp right next to the 
village and all villagers must have an authorization paper 
from the military to travel outside the village.  This paper 
must be shown at all the military checkpoints in the region. 
Military soldiers are located all along the main roads in the 
area and we passed a military checkpoint nearly every 
half-mile to a mile.  Because the lake has been depopulated 
of fish, villagers must now go to a river located 10 km from 
the villages to fish.  The village itself is located in an 
isolated area and the dirt road used for transport is 
impassable during the rains.  ICRC has worked with the 
villagers to establish contact between them and the Ministry 
of Fisheries, to provide them with nets and other fishing 
supplies, to restock the lake with three types of local fish, 
and to provide them with tractor cars that are able to pass 
through the mud when needed.  Despite all this assistance, 
the presence of military checkpoints and an early curfew 
severely interrupt the villagers from carrying out their 
normal economic activities.  Several agencies pointed to this 
type of livelihood project as vital to recovery in the region 
and the transition to more development activities. 
 
ICRC's Incident Statistics and Concerns 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶15.  (C) ICRC's incident statistics in the Batticaloa 
District reveal a mixed picture, although they do show a 
decline in incidents for the February-March 2008 period when 
compared to the figures for December 2007 and January 2008. 
Overall incidents (killings, injuries, claymore mine attacks, 
and handgrenade attacks) went from 23 in December 2007 to 36 
incidents in January 2008, and then declined to 10 incidents 
in February 2008 and 15 in March 2008.  Within those 
categories, killings declined from 14 in December and 17 in 
January, to 6 in February, and just 2 in March.  However, 
claymore mine attacks have remained more or less steady (1 in 
December, 1 in January, 0 in February, and 2 in March). 
During the same period, ICRC's figures for the area under 
control of the Sri Lankan Army (SLA) show 8 arrests, 12 
disappearances (this includes reported cases and active 
investigations), and 4 cases of underage recruitment.  The 
majority of incidents in SLA territory were committed by the 
LTTE (8) and TMVP (8), followed by Unknown (6), the SDDP (1) 
and the SLA (1).  In the area controlled by the Special Task 
Force (STF), ICRC recorded 31 arrests, 31 disappearance 
cases, and 1 case of underage recruitment.  Of these, the 
perpetrators are Unknown (27) for the majority of cases, 
followed by the STF (16), TMVP (8), the SLA (6) and the LTTE 
(4). 
 
¶16.  (C) ICRC expects the buildup to the May Provincial 
elections now to take center stage and that the security 
presence will double if not triple in eastern Sri Lanka. 
ICRC also expects occasional LTTE hit-and-run incidents and 
plans to follow closely internal Muslim community tensions as 
well as tensions between Muslims and the Tamil community. 
Shootings in the area are still quite common, according to 
ICRC, and it remains to be seen if and when the TMVP will 
disarm.  ICRC believes this will not occur until after the 
elections.  Although ICRC thinks the government will 
intensify IDP return movements in the short-term, they 
believe the government will cease IDP return movements a 
couple weeks before the Provincial elections. 
 
Detention 
--------- 
 
¶17.  (C) ICRC monitored the conditions of more than 2,700 
persons arrested in relation to the conflict in almost 160 
paces of detention in 2007.  ICRC currently visits some 457 
detainees arrested under Sri Lanka's Emergency Regulations. 
These detainees have been arrested for their possible 
connections to the LTTE and involvement in the conflict and 
can be held for up to one year without being charged.  These 
persons are held in mostly temporary facilities that include 
police stations, detention centers, and special units.  ICRC 
also visits 850 persons located in permanent places of 
detention and some 100 persons located in Jaffna that the 
government refers to as "surrenderees."  These are mostly 
families held in houses.  Vandenhoove said ICRC will soon 
submit a report to the government proving that the government 
also has a facility holding "high-level" detainees and will 
request access to that facility.  ICRC indicated they have 
some access to regular detention facilities controlled by the 
LTTE, but that they do not have any access to conflict 
related detainees under LTTE authority.  ICRC provides 
detainees with a registration number, mail exchange service 
with family members, and donates a variety of supplies such 
as books, magazines, personal hygiene supplies, and basic 
clothing.  ICRC depends on the linguistic skills of 
locally-hired expatriate staff (in Sri Lanka and in many 
other countries) to conduct their detention center visits. 
 
Visit to the Terrorism Investigative Division 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶18.  (C) In Colombo, the DSG divided up into different groups 
to visit four separate detention facilities: the Central 
Investigative Division (CID), the Terrorism Investigative 
Division (TID), and two remand prisons.  RefOff joined two 
other DSG members to visit the TID.  The TID is located in a 
building owned by the Sri Lankan Navy in an area called Fort 
in downtown Colombo.  ICRC explained that the Navy was taking 
over offices on the upper floor and, as a result, was 
displacing TID staff to share office space on the lower 
floors where detainees are located.  Immediately upon entry 
to the facility, RefOff noted the ceiling was missing and 
under repair in a small open office space where the 
government is holding about 10 women.  These women were 
watched by one female guard.  The majority were arrested with 
their husbands.  One woman said she had an M.A. in Performing 
Arts she had earned in India and had worked with a professor 
at Manchester University in the UK.  Several women provided 
ICRC with letters to be passed to their husbands being held 
just on the other side of the building.  Prison guards read 
all correspondence before ICRC is allowed to turn over the 
mail to the recipient. 
 
¶19.  (C) We then spoke to the Director of the TID who 
informed our group that he had just received authorization to 
detain a UK citizen (Mr. Gobadis) under the Prevention of 
Terrorism Act (PTA) for an additional three months pending 
the receipt of "international information." (Note:  Mr. 
Gobadis was originally arrested under the "Emergency 
Regulations."  The PTA allows detainees to be held for up to 
18 months without being charged.  End note.)  According to 
ICRC, the government could not invoke the PTA during the 
Cease-fire Agreement (CFA), however, since the government 
withdrew from the CFA restrictions on the use of the PTA no 
longer apply.  The Director confirmed this is the first time 
the PTA is being invoked since the government's withdrawal. 
The Director also showed us the blueprints for a new facility 
they plan to build to hold detainees.  The new facility will 
have more space and will include a court yard where detainees 
can exercise. 
 
¶20.  (C) There are two overcrowded holding cells in the TID, 
both located next to the other.  The smaller of the two cells 
has three rooms.  The heat in this cell was overwhelming and 
it felt like we had walked into a sauna.  The only vent in 
the cell was broken.  Two of the rooms, which would have been 
crowded with just two persons inside, held four detainees and 
the third room held five (Note:  Each room was probably no 
more than seven feet long and four feet wide with one stone 
slab to sleep on.  End note).  Detainees also sleep on floors 
and in the narrow corridor connecting the three rooms.  ICRC 
interviewed several new arrivals.  One had been picked up 
because his phone number appeared in another detainee's cell 
phone list, quite common according to ICRC.  Another 
detainee, an older fisherman, said the LTTE had forced him at 
gunpoint to ship supplies to the LTTE in the north by boat 
and that he was subsequently arrested by police.  He was held 
for one month and a half in the CID before being transferred 
to the TID and he showed us marks on his body where he had 
clearly been beaten.  (Note:  The ICRC official said that 
they had visited the CID while the man had been in detention 
there but that the government had not presented him to ICRC 
at the time.  End note.)  Another gentleman had also been 
accused of shipping supplies by boat to the LTTE when he was 
arrested. 
 
¶21.  (C) The other cell held 40 persons, although detainees 
said there are often more than 70 in the cell.  It was not as 
hot as the first cell, but detainees here also have to sleep 
on floors and in the corridors due to overcrowding.  One 
detainee had a pair of scissors and asked ICRC if they could 
provide sharper scissors to the prison.  RefOff later 
observed the prison guard retrieving the scissors from the 
detainee and placing them in a storage box on the wall in the 
office.  During the ICRC roll call, ICRC learned that several 
former detainees had been sent to the remand prison where 
they will await trial for possible charges that were made 
against them.  According to ICRC, being sent to remand prison 
is often no better as detainees can end up waiting for many 
years before their case ever comes to trial. 
 
¶22.  (C) We also visited the section in the TID where 
"foreigners" are held.  This area is a general office space 
and many detainees were crowded onto benches while TID staff 
worked inside open offices on their cases.  ICRC explained 
that detainees sleep on the floors in the same area where TID 
authorities interrogate them during the day.  The foreigners 
we met were being held in separate office rooms, complete 
with cabinets and chairs.  Mr. Gobadis keeps his passport and 
airline ticket in one cabinet and he retrieved it to show us. 
 Aside from Mr. Gobadis, we spoke to one Irish and Canadian 
citizen.  All three had been arrested during a temporary 
return to Sri Lanka and have Sri Lankan origins.  Mr. Gobadis 
was detained at the airport when he tried to ship electronic 
equipment back to London that he purchased in Colombo.  The 
Irish detainee said he used to operate schools in LTTE areas 
during the cease-fire and was picked up at the airport when 
he returned for a short visit from Singapore where he lives. 
The Canadian, a former Sri Lankan refugee, was arrested while 
visiting family, speculating that he was probably arrested 
bcause he had GPS equipment.  When ICRC informed Mr.Gobadis 
that he would be held for three more monhs under the PTA, he 
and the other detainees wer clearly concerned and asked when 
the PTA had coe into effect and wanted to know what the 
variou provisions of the PTA are.  The Irish detainee 
qestioned whether or not foreigners could even be hld under 
the PTA. 
 
¶23.  (C) The detainees RefOf spoke to referred to IRC as 
their "bridge" tothe outside world and their families and 
readilywelcomed the supplies of books, clothing, and 
peronal hygiene supplies ICRC distributed during our isit. 
They were especially appreciative of the mail they could send 
via CRC to their families.  The other DSG members repoted 
similar overcrowding conditions in the prisos they visited 
and the group visiting the CID reorted widespread signs of 
physical abuse of the etaines they met. 
 
DSG Conclusions 
-------------- 
 
¶24.  (C) The DSG group was favorably impresed with the 
quality and scope of ICRC's activitis in Sri Lanka.  ICRC 
appears to be working wellwith all agencies on the ground 
and has focused n maintaining a clear role for its work in 
areas here it can utilize its profile as a neutral andindependent organiz 
ation.  This allows ICRC to wor in areas 
where most other agencies have difficuty gaining access. 
RefOff did not join the group that traveled to Jaffna, but 
feedback from that group indicates they were equally 
impressed with ICRC's access and the breadth of activities 
being implemented.  The DSG will raise a number of issues at 
the DSG Meeting at the end of May in Paris, but RefOff 
believes the most important issue is ICRC's ability to retain 
local expatriate staff with the required language skills to 
conduct detention visits.  ICRC will most likely lose two 
such staff in Sri Lanka soon and this would have a negative 
impact on ICRC's ability to provide detainees with its unique 
and important service.  According to ICRC staff, this is a 
serious issue throughout South Asia. 
 
Embassy Colombo has cleared this cable. 
TICHENOR