04HELSINKI1468
FINNS AGREE TO EXTENSION OF MOTAPM COORDINATOR AT
Wed Nov 17 00:00:00 +0100 2004
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Helsinki
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L HELSINKI 001468 
 
SIPDIS 
 
GENEVA FOR BARTON AND LIEBOWITZ; AC/ISN FOR MENOLD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/16/2014 
TAGS: MCAP PARM PREL FI
SUBJECT: FINNS AGREE TO EXTENSION OF MOTAPM COORDINATOR AT 
CCW 
 
REF: A. STATE 241542 
 
     ¶B. GENEVA 3123 
     ¶C. HELSINKI 1360 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Earle I. Mack for Reasons 1.4(B) and (D) 
 
¶1. (U) Netherlands Ambassador Engels telephoned U.S. 
Ambassador Mack on November 10 to report that he had received 
instructions from The Hague to deliver a demarche on behalf 
of the EU, requesting that the GoF extend the tenure of 
Ambassador Markku Reimaa as coordinator for the Group of 
Government Experts (GGE) on Mines Other Than Anti-Personnel 
Mines (MOTAPM) in Geneva.  Engels said he had just contacted 
Political Director Markus Lyra to make the case for Reimaa 
staying on.  It is our understanding that a similar demarche 
was made by the Germans to the Finnish embassy in Berlin, on 
behalf of the Western Group. 
 
¶2. (U) Upon receipt of Ref A November 12, POL Chief spoke 
with Pilvi-Sisko Vierros-Villeneuve, who is currently head of 
MFA's Arms Control, Disarmament, and Nonproliferation Unit, 
and who will succeed Lyra as Political Director starting in 
January.  Vierros-Villeneuve said that the MFA had already 
informed the Finnish delegation in Geneva that Ambassador 
Reimaa may continue in his coordinator's role until September 
1, 2005.  "Finland is as interested in the outcome (of the 
MOTAPM process) as you are," said Vierros-Villeneuve, "and is 
not willing to do anything to harm this process."  If 
necessary, she said, Reimaa could continue in his position 
until November 2005 -- but for the period September-November 
he would have to cover the talks from Helsinki. 
 
¶3. (U) Vierros-Villeneuve clarified the issue of resources 
(Ref B), which she said is of real concern to the GoF. 
Finland will hold the EU presidency in the second half of 
¶2006.  The EU's Constitution Treaty is scheduled to take 
effect during that period, so Finland may be the last 
president under the current system.  The Finns are already 
preparing for this, and want to have their presidency team -- 
including Reimaa's successor -- in place far enough in 
advance of July 1, 2006 so that they will be fully 
operational when the presidency begins.  POL Chief said that 
we certainly understand this, but (drawing on Ref B para 3) 
noted the feeling of the Western Group that a negotiated 
agreement on MOTAPM could be achievable within the next year 
if we do not change the chair.  Vierros-Villeneuve -- who has 
been waiting to receive Reimaa's own assessment of where 
matters stand -- said that "this is extremely useful 
information," and "very good to hear."  If there is a chance 
of reaching a negotiated agreement in a year, the Finns 
"really need to put our effort into it." 
 
¶4. (C) Vierros-Villeneuve said that the GoF sees arms control 
as one of the areas where they hope to make a contribution 
during their presidency.  MOTAPM is one example; another is 
the BWC: "One of our major tasks" will be to work with the 
U.S. toward a positive outcome of the BWC Review Conference, 
she said.  "We're very keen on this option -- we want to do 
more than just be in charge of keeping the Protocol alive." 
She said she would be happy to discuss this and other arms 
control priorities with U.S. officials during her upcoming 
visit to Washington. 
MACK