06HELSINKI903
GYMNICH
Fri Sep 08 00:00:00 +0200 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Helsinki
VZCZCXYZ0003
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHHE #0903/01 2510626
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 080626Z SEP 06
FM AMEMBASSY HELSINKI
TO RUEHZG/NATO EU COLLECTIVE
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 0075
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS 0051
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 4676
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 0624
RUEHUNV/USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA 0026C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 HELSINKI 000903 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/06/2016 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PARM FI IR IS RU EU
SUBJECT: GYMNICH 
 
 
Classified By: POLCHIEF GREGORY THOME FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D) 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: EU Foreign Ministers held informal 
consultations in Finland Sept. 1-2, focusing on the 
Middle East, Iran and Russia.  In response to a press 
report that alleged an EU Presidency call for 
increased contacts with Hamas, Finnish FM Tuomioja and 
others made several very strong statements confirming 
that there will be no changes in the current EU policy 
of non-contact unless Hamas fulfills the three key 
demands of the Quartet.  The ministers issued no 
formal conclusions on Iran (in keeping with GYMNICH's 
informal nature), but announced that High Rep Solana 
would travel to Tehran "very soon" to seek 
clarifications on the Iranian regime's response to the 
P5 1's package of incentives and to tell Iran that it 
has "very little time" to stop its uranium enrichment 
program and come to the negotiating table.  On Russia, 
the ministers gave preliminary authorization to the 
Finnish Presidency to begin laying the groundwork for 
a new PCA agreement.  Formal conclusions on Iran and 
other issues can be expected during the GAERC Sept. 
14-15.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) Finland hosted the EU foreign ministers' 
informal consultations (the "GYMNICH" meetings) Sept. 
1-2 in Lappeenranta, 25 km from the Russian border. 
By limiting the agenda to only three topics -- Iran, 
the Middle East, and EU-Russia relations -- the Finns 
hoped to return the GYMNICH to its original purpose: 
that is, an informal brainstorming session designed to 
permit ministers to exchange ideas "off the record," 
without the pressure of adopting formal conclusions. 
High Rep Javier Solana praised the GOF for achieving 
this goal, noting that the frank exchange of views 
that occurred would help the ministers as they seek to 
find consensus and adopt formal conclusions on these 
very tough issues at the upcoming General Affairs and 
External Relations meetings (GAERC) Sept. 14-15. 
Poloffs from Embassy Helsinki and USMission EU 
traveled to Lappeenranta to follow the GYMNICH. 
 
Strong Statements on Hamas 
-------------------------- 
¶3. (U) At a press conference to open the GYMNICH, 
Finnish Foreign Minister Erkki Tuomioja made 
surprisingly strong comments regarding EU policy 
toward Hamas.  Noting that, for the EU, the Roadmap 
and a two state solution remain the only way forward 
for lasting regional peace, Tuomioja emphasized that 
the EU will establish no formal political contacts 
with Hamas until and unless it fully complies with the 
international community's three key demands, as laid 
out by the Quartet: (1) an unqualified renunciation of 
terrorism; (2) full disarmament; and (3) recognition 
of the State of Israel.  He added that "the EU must be 
available to talk to anyone and everyone" who can have 
an impact on the peace process, but took pains to 
explain that in the case of Hamas this would only 
involve -- at most -- informal, low-level exchanges 
and no change from the formal non-contact policy. 
Separately, Tuomioja also said that the EU would 
continue diplomatic contacts with Syria, and that at 
the August 2 extraordinary GAERC High Rep Solana 
(along with Spain, Germany, and the Finnish 
presidency) had been given a clear mandate to 
communicate to Damascus the EU's expectation that 
Syria must play a positive role in the regional peace 
process.  In response to a reporter's question, 
Tuomioja also noted that the idea of sending 
peacekeepers to Gaza was not on the GYMNICH agenda, 
but "more pronounced activities" there could not be 
ruled out if they could positively impact the peace 
process. 
 
¶4. (C) Tuomioja's surprisingly forceful comments on 
Hamas came largely as an effort to clarify press 
accounts (most notably in the Sept. 1 Financial Times) 
alleging that he had earlier called for the EU to 
establish contacts with Hamas.  In addition to the 
Finnish FM's public statements, other Finnish 
officials stressed that in no way was Tuomioja calling 
for such a shift in EU policy.  U/S for Political 
Affairs Markus Lyra assured Poloff that Tuomioja has 
always stressed the need for Hamas to change before 
the EU could consider formal contacts, and that 
Finland fully supported strong EU pressure on Hamas to 
accept the Quartet's three conditions.  Nothing has 
changed within the GoF or the EU on the issue, he 
 
HELSINKI 00000903  002 OF 002 
 
 
added.  Likewise, on the margins of the GYMNICH, 
Finnish Director General for Africa and the Middle 
East Aapo Polho carefully explained that while 
Tuomioja, Solana, and others believe that the EU must 
talk to "anyone and everyone" who can positively 
affect the peace process, there is a clear 
understanding that upgraded relations with Hamas are 
thoroughly out of the question.  The EU will upgrade 
relations with Hamas when it joins the unity 
government that President Abbas has suggested, and "we 
all insist" that Hamas cannot do so until it has fully 
committed to the three requirements, Polho said. 
 
Iran Has "Very Little Time" 
--------------------------- 
¶5. (U) On Iran, Tuomioja, Solana and several other 
ministers expressed deep concerns to the press about 
Iran's poor response to the P5 1's package of 
incentives and apparent unwillingness to negotiate. 
They said that for the EU, diplomacy and negotiation 
remain the preferred way forward, but they 
acknowledged that it is now up to Iran to accept that 
peaceful route, stop enriching uranium, and fulfill 
the other requirements that will allow negotiations to 
begin.  When pressed by journalists as to why the 
ministers had not issued forceful statements -- 
including demands for UN sanctions -- Tuomioja 
explained that, by its very nature, the GYMNICH was an 
informal event that did not involve formal 
conclusions, and as such was "not the time or place to 
take new decisions" regarding sanctions.  However, he 
explained, High Rep Solana would have "one or at the 
most two" meetings in the next several days with 
Iranian nuclear negotiator Larijani.  The purpose of 
these meetings would be not to negotiate or offer the 
Iranians more time, but to seek clarifications 
regarding the Iranian response, including conditions 
for beginning actual negotiations.  For his part, 
Solana clarified that these meetings would not take 
long, and that in terms of meeting the P5 1's demands 
and coming to the negotiating table, Iran had "very 
little time." 
 
¶6. (C) Privately, members of Solana's staff and 
Finnish MFA officials said that -- in addition to the 
informal nature of the GYMNICH -- the ministers did 
not say more on Iran because they did not wish to pre- 
empt UNSYG Kofi Annan's trip to Tehran Sept. 3, or 
Solana's trip the following week.  Solana's 
spokesperson told PolOff that the Sept. 14 GAERC in 
Brussels was very likely the "time and place" at which 
formal conclusions on Iran might be adopted, in light 
especially of the Iranian response (or lack thereof) 
to Annan's and Solana's outreach. 
 
Russia 
------ 
¶7. (C) The discussions on EU-Russia relations were 
much more routine, with the GOF briefing the GYMNICH 
on its efforts to pave the way for launching 
negotiations aimed a forging a new EU-Russia 
Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (PCA) either 
late in the Finnish Presidency or early in the German 
Presidency.  While acknowledging that some tough 
issues needed to be addressed (including "coming to a 
common understanding on energy policy"), Solana told 
reporters that Europe's goal is to see Russia "not 
merely as a problem, but as a partner."  He pointed to 
President Putin's attendance at the EU Informal Heads 
of State and Government Meeting, which Finland will 
host in October, as a positive step in that direction 
and praised Finland's leadership.  Separately, 
Solana's FSU policy advisor Pirkka Tapiola told PolOff 
that the Ministers focused on the question of how to 
engage a more confident Russia.  Three areas of 
particular concern included the risks of Putin-style 
"managed democracy," Russian foreign and security 
policy including toward Iran, the Middle East, and 
"frozen conflicts" and energy security. 
WARE