07HELSINKI255
FINLAND: BLUE LANTERN - 05-050033654 AND
Thu Apr 05 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Helsinki
VZCZCXYZ0002
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHHE #0255/01 0951329
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 051329Z APR 07
FM AMEMBASSY HELSINKI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3219
INFO RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RHMFIUU/FBI WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS HELSINKI 000255 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PM/DTCC - BLUE LANTERN COORDINATOR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KOMC ETTC FI
SUBJECT: FINLAND: BLUE LANTERN - 05-050033654 AND 
05-050020784 
 
REF: SECSTATE 28891 
 
¶1. (SBU) In response to the Department's Blue Lantern 
request, Econoff worked with Mr. Timo Turunen, Sales Director 
and Proprietor of Armoria about recent purchases from U.S. 
firearm manufacturers, specifically pre-license end-use check 
on license 05-050033654 and post-shipment check for license 
05-050020784.  RSO contact Liisa Timonen, Chief 
Superintendent with the Finnish Ministry of the Interior, 
confirmed that Armoria is a legitimate company in good 
standing with the Finnish government and that it has the 
necessary licenses and permits to sell firearms in Finland. 
Armoria independently provided electronic copies of these 
permits that annually require a Police visit to the 
company,s premises, a review of their accounting records, a 
visual inspection of stock on-hand, and that their inventory 
is stored in a secure area.  According to Armoria, their 
storefront is located in a basement without any windows.  The 
storage facility has reinforced double lock doors with four 
pivot bars per door, a security system with video 
surveillance, infrared motion sensors and doors sensors. 
Alarms are sent via landline, with back-up mobile connection, 
directly to a security company as well as the Finnish Police. 
 Armoria has been selling firearms in Finland since September 
2002, with its importation business from the U.S. beginning 
in 2003. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Turunen confirmed the contents of the order it 
placed with RSR Group Inc. under license 05-050033654 with a 
total value of $232,826.00.  Armoria has not yet received any 
of the firearms ordered from Bushmaster Firearms 
International, LLC under license number 05-050020784; 
however, it expects to receive this merchandise during the 
next few weeks. 
 
¶3. (SBU) As required by Finnish law, the Finnish Ministry of 
the Interior controls the importation of all firearms into 
Finland and it mandates that all firearms are only sold 
through licensed firearms dealers to individuals with the 
necessary resident gun permits.  As such, Armoria maintains 
exact records on its customers, all of whom are Finnish 
citizens with the necessary gun permits.  According to 
Turunen, its customers are either in the Finnish Military 
Reserves and/or they belong to practical shooting 
organizations (i.e. IPSC).  Finnish law requires a 
demonstrated "need" for a Finnish citizen to receive a permit 
for any type of firearm.  Specifically, the Finnish law 
states, "a license or permit(may be granted if there is an 
acceptable reason for granting the license or permit, and if 
there is no reason to suspect misuse of the license or permit 
or the objects acquired or possessed under it."  Individuals 
interested in obtaining a firearm must apply in person at the 
Police station in their jurisdiction and provide a written 
statement detailing the purpose for acquiring a firearm and 
the type of firearm they wish to obtain.  Applications are 
reviewed on a case-by-case basis according to the 
demonstrated need as determined by Finnish law.  If an 
application is approved, the Finnish Police initially grants 
an "acquisition permit" (good for up to six months), that 
enables an individual to acquire a specific type of firearm. 
After a firearm is purchased, an individual has 30 days to 
obtain a "possession permit" by applying in person with the 
Police.  The Police then inspect the firearm and check the 
validity of the previously issued "acquisition" permit before 
issuing a "possession permit".  To receive a permit for a 
high-powered rifle such as a semi-automatic AR15, a Finnish 
citizen must be able to demonstrate a clear and specific need 
to the Finnish Police (such as being a member of a practical 
shooting organization), a case which is evidently rarely 
approved. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Finnish legislation does not separate "Military and 
Law Enforcement Markets" from "Commercial Markets".  Hence 
firearms such as AR15 semi-automatic rifles and accessories 
(collapsible stocks, high capacity magazines, muzzle brakes, 
and silencers) are not categorized differently for the two 
markets by the Finnish government.  As a member of the EU, 
all imported firearms must be individually inspected and 
receive a CIP-stamp prior to being delivered to a customer. 
Turunen confirmed that they abide by the restrictions 
attached to U.S.-origin defense articles, such as the 
prohibition on unauthorized re-export or re-transfer to any 
country including EU member states.  Turunen said they have 
never re-exported any U.S.-origin defense articles to any 
country.  Finnish law also requires a special permit for 
re-exporting any firearms. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Turunen stated that "sales on the basis of orders is 
 
not possible as ordering, license processing and all 
necessary import activities altogether may take as long as 6 
months."  Due to the length of the process, Armoria typically 
has buyers for all of the firearms it orders well before the 
firearms actually arrive.  In the case of the AR15 rifles 
from Bushmaster (05-050020784), Armoria has advance payment 
on 10 of the rifles with additional sales queries pending. 
Armoria plans to sell all 50 of the AR15 rifles before June. 
In addition to the firearms Armoria imports directly from the 
U.S., it also purchases firearms from other firearms dealers 
in Finland.  Approximate U.S.-origin firearms sales by year 
are as follows: 2006 -- 270; 2005 -- 200; 2004 ) 90.  In 
2007 Armoria plants to sell 350 U.S.-origin firearms. 
 
¶6.  Armoria has two offices in Finland, one in Jyvaskyla at 
Tapionkatu 20, 40200 and one in Kuopio at Tulliportinkatu 27, 
¶70100.  The company,s principal officers are Mr. Janne 
Tiainen, Managing Director and Proprietor and Mr. Timo 
Turunen, Sales Director and Proprietor.  Other employees 
include Mr. Veli-Matti Iskanium, Co-owner (responsible for 
firearms registration and licensing) and Mr. Jonni Marttila, 
Co-owner. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Comment: Econoff found officials at Armoria to be 
cooperative and helpful with this inquiry.  We have no 
independent reason to doubt Armoria,s compliance with 
Finnish laws and procedures regarding these imported 
firearms.  Armoria is eager to do whatever is necessary to 
make the current licensing procedure quicker.  End comment. 
WARE