09HELSINKI289
FINLAND: MIGRATION IN FINLAND IN FINANCIAL
Thu Jul 30 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Helsinki
VZCZCXRO9796
RR RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHIK RUEHLZ RUEHROV RUEHSL RUEHSR
DE RUEHHE #0289/01 2110510
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 300510Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY HELSINKI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5095
INFO RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HELSINKI 000289 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PINR ECON ELAB SMIG PREL PGOV FI
SUBJECT: FINLAND: MIGRATION IN FINLAND IN FINANCIAL 
UNCERTAINTY RESPONSE(C-RE9-00762) 
 
REF: A) STATE 43864 B) HELSINKI 00239 
 
1.A.1.(SBU)  WHAT EFFORTS, IF ANY, IS THE GOVERNMENT IN YOUR 
COUNTRY TAKING TO FACILITATE THE RETURN OF MIGRANT WORKERS TO 
THEIR HOME COUNTRIES?  WHAT ARE THE MIGRANTS' REACTIONS TO 
THIS AND ARE ANY GROUPS PARTICULARLY RECEPTIVE TO THESE 
EFFORTS? 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
A Finnish Ministry of Interior (MoI) Migration official 
confirmed that no active migrant return effort exists in 
Finland.  The Finnish government relies on active and ongoing 
discussion and consensus between interested employers and 
government to control labor migration.  Migrant workers from 
neighboring countries in Finland voluntarily "circulate" (to 
additional countries for work) or return home after the 
season (berry pickers for example). 
 
 
1.A.2.(SBU)  WHAT STEPS, IF ANY, IS THE GOVERNMENT IN YOUR 
COUNTRY TAKING TO DISCOURAGE CONTINUED INFLUX OF MIGRANT 
WORKERS BY INTRODUCING LAWS TO RESTRICT IMMIGRATION AND 
REDUCE WORK PERMITS FOR THIRD COUNTRY NATIONALS? 
----------------------------------- 
 
In 2008, the Government of Finland (GoF) discussed labor 
importation treaties for third countries, namely from China, 
India, and Viet Nam.  In light of the economic situation, 
this recruitment effort is tabled and will be reviewed in the 
fall (2009).  An employer-driven Finnish program to employ 
temporary workers from Kosovo is also on hold.  However, a 
Finnish official remarked that the EU, including Finland, 
views the Western Balkans as a labor source in the longer 
term. 
 
One MoI Migration official expects Finland's unemployment 
level to continue to climb into next year.  Finland's 
seasonally adjusted unemployment rate rose to 8.8 per cent in 
June 2009, up from 6.3 per cent in the same month a year ago. 
Statistics Finland data confirmed that over the last five 
years immigrant unemployment has been 15 to 20 percent higher 
than the rate for the total population. 
 
 
1.A.3.(SBU)  HAVE MIGRANT WORKERS' HOME COUNTRY GOVERNMENTS 
PUT PRESSURE ON GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS IN YOUR COUNTRY TO ALLOW 
MIGRANT WORKERS TO STAY IN THE HOST COUNTRY? 
----------------------------------- 
 
The MoI Migration official said that the EU is encouraging 
member states to use the migrant labor force from EU 
countries first, before importing outside labor.  Otherwise, 
post found no evidence of pressure on government officials in 
Finland. 
 
 
1.A.4.(SBU)  HOW HAS THE ECONOMIC CRISIS AFFECTED ESTIMATED 
FLOWS OF UNDOCUMENTED MIGRANTS?  CAN THE COUNTRIES OF ORIGIN 
FOR INCOMING OR RETURNING MIGRANTS BE IDENTIFIED? 
----------------------------------- 
 
GoF admits to very few "undocumented" migrants, though admits 
"illegal entry" may occur.  The tax system and the payment 
system in Finland make it difficult for them to work with few 
exceptions (such as restaurants and subcontracting, covered 
in trafficking reporting).  The number of asylum seekers has 
increased but officials believe the increase is coincidental 
to the economic crisis and more likely driven by stricter 
requirements in Sweden. 
 
The Finnish immigration trend is not linear and initial 
statistics show immigration flow in the beginning of 2009 
falling.  In the first quarter of 2009, the number of working 
residency permit applications dropped 37 per cent in 
comparison to the same quarter of the year before.  The 
number of all residency permit applications in the first 
quarter of 2009 declined sixteen per cent.  During the same 
period of time, the number of persons immigrating to Finland 
also declined, yet net immigration to Finland remained still 
positive. 
 
 
1.A.5.(SBU)  IN WHICH ECONOMIC SECTORS OR JOB TYPES ARE 
MIGRANTS USUALLY EMPLOYED IN YOUR COUNTRY?  HAVE THERE BEEN 
ANY NOTICEABLE FLUCTUATIONS IN ONE INDUSTRY BUT NOT IN 
OTHERS?  IF SO, PLEASE DESCRIBE. 
----------------------------------- 
 
Most migration is in agriculture and forestry with only some 
in other industry such as construction, gardening and 
cultivation, metal industry and engineering.  The MoI 
 
HELSINKI 00000289  002 OF 002 
 
 
Migration official said that bus driving, cleaning and health 
care jobs have not been affected by the economic crisis. 
Finland encourages migrants for healthcare professions. 
Finland allows seasonal migrant berry pickers; berry pickers 
work on a self-employed basis.  The most recent study (June 
2009) by the Ministry of Employment and Economy argued that 
temporary foreign labor is recruited primarily in sectors 
with seasonal variation. 
 
Many migrant workers come from the EU and exercise their EU 
citizen's right to freedom of movement.  Nearby Baltic 
countries, such as Poland and Estonia, are most likely to be 
the source countries for migrants.  Among non-EU migrants, 
the most work permit applications during 2008 came from 
Russia (2,115), the Ukraine (629), China (581), Croatia 
(281), Turkey (271), Thailand (261), the former Yugoslavia 
(256), Bosnia and Herzegovina (251), the Philippines (226) 
and Serbia (212). 
 
 
1.A.6.(SBU)  WHAT INCIDENTS, IF ANY, HAVE OCCURRED THAT 
SUGGEST THAT ANTI-IMMIGRANT SENTIMENT HAS INCREASED SINCE THE 
START OF THE FINANCIAL CRISIS?  ARE THESE ACTS TARGETED AT 
PARTICULAR COMMUNITIES OR FOREIGNERS IN GENERAL?  WHAT IS THE 
POLITICAL RESPONSE TO ACTS OF HOSTILITY TOWARD IMMIGRANTS? 
WHAT IS THE LEVEL OF PUBLIC ACCEPTANCE OF ANTI-IMMIGRANT 
ATTITUDES? 
--------------------------------- 
 
National polls, taken often by the media, have tracked an 
increase in anti-immigrant sentiment concurrent with the 
downturn in the economy.  To some extent, the June 2009 
Finnish European Parliamentary elections were driven by 
migration concerns.  Timo Soini of the True Finns received 
the most votes of all newly-elected Finnish Members of the 
European Parliament (MEP) after creating media buzz with an 
"anti-immigrant position" that generated discussion and drove 
other parties to review their positions and suggest 
immigration programs with a broader scope. 
 
Finland's Ministry of Interior Ombudsman for Minorities 
Office and various NGO officials noted that the recession has 
affected the tone of immigration rhetoric, giving rise to 
populist arguments such as that promulgated by Timo Soini. 
The discussion is more muted now after the elections, but may 
intensify again for the anticipated fall parliamentary 
discussion. 
 
Finnish public opinion on immigrants and migrants remains 
divided.  Anti-immigrant feelings do not appear targeted to 
any group based on the financial crisis.  In recent years, 
among immigrants, Somalis have reportedly been most targeted 
in general discrimination; Russian-speakers, the largest 
immigrant group, complain of bullying and name-calling. 
 
BUTLER