05CANBERRA725
GOA CONSIDERING EXTENSION OF INTERNATIONAL POLICE
Fri Apr 22 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Canberra
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS CANBERRA 000725 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL EINGALLS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM KJUS MARR MCAP MOPS PGOV PINR PINS PREL PTER SNAR SOCI AU AS HU IZ
SUBJECT: GOA CONSIDERING EXTENSION OF INTERNATIONAL POLICE 
TRAINERS 
 
REF: SECSTATE 72189 
 
¶1.  (U) In an April 22 meeting, Poloff delivered reftel 
demarche to Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and 
Trade (DFAT) Iraq Task Force Director Jeremy Bruer and 
Australian Agency for International Development (AusAID) Iraq 
Program Manager Katherine Krilov.  Krilov indicated that 
Australia had committed its two police trainers at the Jordan 
International Police Training Center (JIPTC) through March 
2006 and would need to get approval at the ministerial level 
for any increase or extension of the GOA's police instructor 
contribution. 
 
¶2.  (U) Bruer and Krilov emphasized that the GOA was 
committed to reconstruction efforts in Iraq, but that any 
further contribution would need to be balanced with 
Australia's police commitments in Asia and the Pacific. 
(NOTE:  Krilov said the GOA had received recent requests for 
more Australian police in East Timor, Papua New Guinea, and 
the Solomon Islands.  End Note.)  Krilov asked if we could 
provide more information on why Iraq police training at the 
JIPTC had been extended and if the decision was related to 
fulfilling the training goal of 135,000 Iraqi police by 2006. 
 
STANTON