05ISTANBUL1723
UNDER SECRETARY HUGHES' ISTANBUL MEETINGS WITH
Wed Oct 05 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Istanbul
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISTANBUL 001723 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PHUM KPAO TU
SUBJECT: UNDER SECRETARY HUGHES' ISTANBUL MEETINGS WITH 
RELIGIOUS LEADERS 
 
REF: ANKARA 2750 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified -- not for internet distribution. 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Summary: During her 24-hour visit to Istanbul, 
Under Secretary Hughes met with religious leaders 
representing a range of confessions and exchanged views on 
how extremism can most effectively be counteracted.  All 
stressed the need to combat the underlying causes of 
extremism, including poverty and lack of access to education. 
 In a separate call on Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew I, 
Hughes emphasized that religious freedom remains at the 
center of our dialogue with Turkey, and that we continue to 
push the Turkish government to address those issues 
threatening the Patriarchate's future in Istanbul.  End 
Summary. 
 
------------------- 
Interfaith Dialogue 
-------------------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) U/S Hughes met September 28 with religious leaders 
from six different faith communities (Muslim, Armenian 
Orthodox, Jewish, Greek Orthodox, Syrian Orthodox and 
Catholic) to discuss the role religious leaders can play in 
promoting intertaith dialogue and tolerance in the world.  In 
brief opening remarks, the Under Secretary praised Turkey's 
rich cultural mosaic and pointed to tourists she'd seen side 
by side from Texas and Bahrain exploring Istanbul's Topkapi 
Palace as illustrations of the unique opportunity Turkey 
presents in bringing people together from all parts of the 
world.  She highlighted our government's desire to expand 
exchange opportunities between the people of the U.S. and 
Turkey, and asked the faith leaders for their views on other 
ways to promote tolerance and interfaith understanding. 
 
¶2. (SBU)  In their responses, U/S Hughes' interlocutors 
focused on the need to combat poverty and promote access to 
education as the only ways to foster peace and understanding. 
 They argued their efforts to contribute to these goals 
cannot be fruitful if politicians don't play their part by 
developing good policies.  Reverend Father Dositheos, 
representing the Ecumenical Patriarchate, accused politicians 
throughout history of having abused religion to divide 
people, and Istanbul Mufti Cagrici called on faith leaders to 
launch "Holy Peace" rather than a holy war.  Chief Rabbi 
Haleva explained that Turks are a very pious people, who are 
very affected by images they see on television.  In trying to 
understand the minds of those who choose to die by 
perpetrating terrorist attacks, Armenian Patriarch Mesrob 
underlined that when there is no hope to live, suicide is 
easy.  Some choose to die to make a point, he said, so that 
others might live after them.  "What can we do to give these 
people hope?" he asked. 
 
¶3. (SBU) U/S Hughes agreed that combatting poverty is an 
important policy priority and pointed to the U.S. having 
tripled its funding to Africa and leading the fight against 
AIDS as a sign of our common purpose.  She also highlighted 
the meeting she and Deputy U/S Powell held recently with the 
World Food Program officials to discuss how the U.S. can do 
more to combat hunger.  As a government official and as a 
person of faith, she said, her job is not just "public 
relations," but contributing to policies than positively 
affect people's lives. 
 
¶4. (SBU)  In the background of the dialogue was the fact that 
the religious minorities around the table, while able to 
worship freely, face significant property and administrative 
problems in maintaining their communities (reftel).  Only the 
Catholic representative in Istanbul, Monsignor Marovitch, 
alluded directly to these issues.  Comparing Turkey's peoples 
to the bouquet of flowers covering the table, the Monsignor 
observed that "there are many flowers in Turkey and should be 
a place for the small ones as well."  He acknowledged that 
with the EU process change is underway and that the GOT needs 
time to work things out.  Rabbi Haleva said his community's 
problems had largely been solved by the EU process, and that 
his community lived comfortably among the "noble and 
compassionate" Turkish people. 
 
------------------------------------- 
Meeting with the Ecumenical Patriarch 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) In a subsequent call on Ecumenical Patriarch 
Bartholomew on September 29, Under Secretary Hughes thanked 
His All Holiness for sending a representative to the 
interfaith dialogue, and solicited his personal advice for 
combatting the spread of extremism among the younger 
generation, particularly in the Muslim world.  Conveying the 
President's best wishes, U/S Hughes also stressed that 
religious freedom issues remain front and center in our 
dialogue with the Government of Turkey.   Bartholomew 
expressed appreciation for the U.S. government,s 
longstanding support for the Patriarchate and religious 
freedom, and promised to pray for the success of the Under 
Secretary,s mission, terming it critical for the world,s 
 
SIPDIS 
future.  He noted that he has worked extensively on 
interfaith initiatives, and believes the key is to reach out 
to moderate Muslims and to seek to give the young "ideas and 
vision for their future." 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  Regarding the Patriarchate,s future, Bartholomew, 
who was joined by Father Alex Karloutsos from the Orthodox 
Church in America, stressed the critical importance of his 
See, the "first among equals" in the Orthodox world, for the 
Orthodox church as a whole.  Only the Patriarch, he observed, 
is able to coordinate among the different leaders of 
Orthodoxy, and he noted that he had convened his peers 
earlier this year to address the crisis in the Patriarchate 
of Jerusalem   Bartholomew summarized the range of challenges 
facing the Ecumenical Patriarchate, including continued 
closure of Halki Seminary, property issues, and its lack of 
legal standing under Turkish law.  He noted his belief that 
Turkey,s current government is decisively pushing a 
"moderate path" on these and other issues, as was evidenced 
by its support for the holding of last weekend,s conference 
on the Armenian tragedy of 1915.   He argued, however, that 
that other statist elements are impeding a solution to the 
problems confront the Patriarchate.  He expressed 
appreciation for the USG,s strong support of the 
Patriarch,s Ecumenical nature and said it "fortifies us and 
gives us courage."  Hughes pledged that the USG will remain 
dedicated to securing resolution of these issues. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Comment: Under Secretary Hughes' interfaith dialogue 
and her call on the Patriarch highlighted efforts by Turkey's 
diverse communities to find common ground and build mutual 
tolerance and respect, despite significant tensions as they 
struggle to preserve their deeply rooted communities.  End 
Comment. 
JONES