07BASRAH111
EXTREMISTS TARGET WOMEN
Tue Nov 20 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
REO Basrah
VZCZCXRO1378
RR RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHBC #0111/01 3241713
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 201713Z NOV 07
FM REO BASRAH
TO RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD 0227
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0644
RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEPGAB/MNF-I C2X BAGHDAD IZ
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHINGTON DC
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE
RUEHBC/REO BASRAH 0678UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BASRAH 000111 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR G/IWI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWMN PTER IZ
SUBJECT: EXTREMISTS TARGET WOMEN 
 
BASRAH 00000111  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
Over the past few months, there have been reports that several 
women have been murdered in Basrah, with some figures as high as 
51 victims in a 30-day period.  The Regional Embassy Office 
obtained 41 police files on the murders of 45 women (2 males) 
and two children between January and October 2007, about half of 
which occurred in the last three months.  The files, which 
contain photos, depict the brutal nature in which the women were 
executed - most were shot in the head or face, some were 
tortured, and two were beheaded.  None of the files provides a 
specific motive for the crimes.  Police officials believe some 
were killed because of reputed sexual promiscuity; women who 
leave their homes unaccompanied by a male relative are 
considered prostitutes in some circles.  Money was discovered on 
three of the victims, and two were executed along with their 
male companions.  Another woman was killed along with her child, 
who was alleged to be illegitimate.  Another reason proffered by 
police officials is the public wearing of makeup, dresses, or 
skirts in a city where black robes and hijabs have become the 
requisite fashion.  Other motives provided by police officials 
include association with the Coalition and employment outside 
the home.  Basrah was once considered an open and enlightened 
city, and now, women are beginning to speak out against this 
violent imposition of conservative customs. 
 
Below are synopses for each file.  About half of the victims 
were not identifiable.  The names of the remaining victims are 
not provided in order to protect the privacy of the next of kin. 
 
 
¶1. Female, DOB 1977. The victim's body was discovered in her 
house in the Jameat district at 0100 on 10/22/2007.  The 
victim's face and hair were burned.  Case number 3839. 
 
¶2. Female, DOB 1962, occupation housemaid.  At 0200, 10/20/2007, 
three vehicles without license plates opened fire on the victim 
while she was standing by the main gate of her house in Kamsah 
mile area of the Ma'akel Hiteen district.  Case number 3779. 
 
¶3. Unidentified female, estimated age: 50-55. The victim 
suffered gunshot wounds to the mouth, chest and left arm.  Her 
body was discovered at 2330 on 9/20/2007 on al-Qaim Route near 
the Al-Hindea Company.  Case number 653. 
 
¶4. Unidentified female, estimated age: 37-40.  The victim was 
shot in the head and the right arm.  Witnesses reported that 
three unknown males in a pick-up truck dumped the victim's body 
near the Bin Majed Company in the al-Hussien district at 0600 on 
5/10/2007.  Case number 1553. 
 
¶5. Two unidentified females, estimated ages 35-40 and 25-30. 
One female was shot in the face and the back; her left hand and 
left leg were fractured.  The other was shot several times, 
including in the back of her head.  The bodies were discovered 
at 2000 on 9/02/2007 behind the Bin Majed Company in the 
al-Hussien district.  Case number 3148. 
 
¶6. Female, DOB 1970, occupation: nurse at the Sha'at al-Arab 
Clinic.  Masked gunmen, driving two Toyota-make vehicles, raided 
the victim's house near the al-Mash'il school in the Iskan 
al-Mawan'a district and shot her to death.  The crime occurred 
at 1920 on 10/10/2007.  Case number 3688. 
 
¶7. Female, DOB unknown.  The victim suffered multiple gunshot 
wounds, including one on the side of her head and another in the 
back of her head, at 0845 on 10/09/2007 near the al-Jubayla 
market.  Case number 697. 
 
¶8. Female, DOB 1976.  The victim was attacked when unknown 
gunmen raided her residence in the Timaniyah district and opened 
fire on her at 2100 on 02/13/2007.  She was shot three times 
with a 9mm pistol in the abdomen.  Case number 528. 
 
¶9. Female, DOB 1983.  The victim was tortured and then shot 
several times.  The crime occurred in the al-Hussien district 
across from Musaa Al-Kadim Street at 0100, on 10/21/2007.  Case 
number 731. 
 
¶10. Unidentified female, estimated age (20-25).  The victim was 
shot multiple times by unknown gunmen at 2145 on 5/12/2007 in 
the Al-Guwaz district.  No case number. 
 
¶11. Female, no DOB.  At 0800 on 04/15/2007, the victim was shot 
above her right eye by unknown gunmen in the Jameat district. 
Case number 1186. 
 
¶12. Unidentified female, estimated age 25-30.  At 0730 on 
 
BASRAH 00000111  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
8/24/2007, unknown assailants bound her hands and strangled her 
near the Nuwab al-Dibad district school.  Case number 3058. 
 
¶13. Female, estimated age 18 months.  An unknown person cuffed 
the feet of the victim with a peace of fabric and drowned her in 
a plastic barrel of water (capacity 30 liters). A statement was 
provided by the mother of the victim.  There were no signs of 
torture on the body of the victim.  The crime occurred in 
al-Qaim region of al-Qibla district at 1530 on 02/18/2007.  Case 
number 584. 
 
¶14. Unidentified female, estimated age 30 years. The crime was 
conducted by unknown males driving an unknown vehicle, who left 
the remains of the victim, covered by a peace of nylon and 
blanket, on the side road.  The victim was shot several times, 
including in the back of the head.  Police official were 
notified at 1445 in 02/04/2007.  Case number 389. 
 
¶15. Unidentified female, age unknown.  The victim's body was 
found decapitated and covered by a peace of nylon, near the 
Al-Kublah market, at 1115 on 09/08/2007.  Case number 622. 
 
¶16. Female, DOB 1975.  The victim was shot several times in the 
head and face, at 1400 on 7/16/2007 near the al-Fayh'a hospital 
in the Dur al-Dibaat district.  One gold ring, an identity card, 
and 109,000 dinar ($90) were found on the victim's body.  No 
case number. 
 
¶17. Female, estimated age 40-45.  Two unknown males shot the 
victim in the face and neck, at 1600 on 3/16/2007 in the 
al-Ashar district.  Case number 862. 
 
¶18. Unidentified female, estimated age 20-25.  The victim was 
shot four times in the face and head by unknown assailants at 
15:30 on 07/03/2007 in al-Qibla district. Case number 2308. 
 
¶19. Unidentified female, age unknown.  The body was discovered 
near the Naval Academy at 1900 on 1/9/2007.  The victim was shot 
in the back of the head and neck.  55,000 dinar ($50) was found 
on her body.  Case number 7. 
 
¶20. Female and male.  Both of the victims were shot multiple 
times in the face and head.  The bodies were discovered behind 
Shaat al-Arab Hotel, at 1310 on 05/08/2007.  Case number 239. 
 
¶21. Two unindentified females estimated ages 40-50 and 30-35. 
The bodies were recovered in al-Muhandseen at 1300 on 8/14/2007. 
 The victims were handcuffed and strangled with a wire cable. 
Case number 2929. 
 
¶22. Unidentified female, estimated age 40-45.  The victim was 
shot several times, including three times in the head, by 
unknown men at 1800 on 2/6/2007 near the Bin Majed Company in 
the Al-Hussien district.  Case number 429. 
 
¶23. Female, DOB 1955.  The body was discovered at 0715 on 
6/10/2007 behind the former Ministry of Sport in the al Hussein 
district.  The victim was shot in several times, including in 
the back of the head.  No case number. 
 
¶24. Female, DOB unknown.  The body was discovered with gunshot 
wounds to the face and head at 0510 on 7/31/2007 at the 
al-Karbtlea complex in the al-Ashar district.  No case number. 
 
¶25. Unidentified female (25-30) and unknown male (25-30).  At 
1300 on 6/24/2007, the victims, who were bound and blindfolded, 
were dropped out of a Toyota-make vehicle in the al-Qaim 
district and shot in the head and face.  They had both been 
tortured.  Case number 2167. 
 
¶26. Unidentified female, age unknown. The victim's was 
discovered decapitated behind the al-Markzi medical clinic, at 
12:45 on 07/08/2007.  Case number 446. 
 
¶27. Unidentified female, estimated age 25-30.  The victim was 
shot twice in the head; her body was discovered at 0800 on 
9/28/2007 near the university in the Gharmet Ali district.  Case 
number 675. 
 
¶28. Three unidentified females, estimated ages 40-45, 25-30, and 
50-55.  The victims were both shot in the head; their bodies 
were discovered behind the Bin Majed Company, and the third near 
the al-Hindea Company at 2315 on 9/20/2007.  Case number 3397. 
 
¶29. Unidentified female, estimated age 30-40.  Gunmen, driving a 
police vehicle, shot the victim twice in the head at 1500 on 
 
BASRAH 00000111  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
8/24/2007, in near the Department of Electricity in the 
Al-Hussien district.  Case number 3060. 
 
¶30. Unidentified female, age unknown.  The body was discovered 
in the trash area of a hall, buried 50 centimeters underground, 
at 1955 on 10/07/2007, near al-Qaim street in the al-Rubat 
district.  It is estimated that the body was there for at least 
six months.  Case number 3640. 
 
¶31. Unidentified female, estimated age 40-45.  The victim was 
shot several times, including in the head.  The body was 
discovered in the al-Kublah industrial area at 0730 on 
2/14/2007.  Case number 78. 
 
¶32. Female, DOB 1962.  The victim was kidnapped on 6/18/2007. At 
1100 on 6/26/2007, her unclothed, decomposed body was discovered 
in the al-Kafa'at district.  The cause of death is unknown; 
115,000 dinar ($95) and food were found with the body.  Case 
number 2202. 
 
¶33. Female, DOB 1965.  The victim was shot by unknown gunmen 
twice in the right side of the head, near the Naval Academy at 
1345 on 9/2/2007.  Case number 3149. 
 
¶34. Unidentified female, estimated age (30-35).  The victim was 
shot three times in the face by unknown gunmen in the 
al-Muhandseen region of the al-Qibla district, at 0200 on 
01/29/2007.  Case number 316. 
 
¶35. Two unidentified females and one unidentified child, ages 
unknown.  The victims were all shot in the head and chest.  They 
were discovered at 0100 on 8/15/2007 in the Hiyaniyah district. 
Case number 560. 
 
¶36. Female, DOB 1968.  Two unknown males on a motorcycle pulled 
next to her while she was driving her vehicle and shot her in 
the head and chest at 1940 on 3/21/2007 in the Jameat district. 
Case number 907. 
 
¶37. Female, DOB 1969.  The victim was stabbed 14 times with a 
large knife.  Her body was discovered in her house at 0730 on 
1/21/2007.  Case number 29. 
 
¶38. Female, DOB 1961.  According to her husband, the victim was 
shot twice in the head and face by an unknown male at the 
al-Makal train station, while she was on her way to work.  The 
incident occurred at 0630 on 4/16/2007.  Case number 1196. 
 
¶39. Female, age 27.  The victim was shot in the chest, face and 
arm inside her house in the al-Kandaq district.  The crime 
occurred around 0700 on 2/9/2007.  Case number 459. 
 
¶40. Unidentified female, estimated age 25-30.  The victim was 
shot three times in the neck and face by unknown gunmen, near 
Al-Basrah High School for Males in al-Nadran district, at 0300 
on 2/6/2007.  Case number 213. 
 
¶41. Unidentified female, estimated age 35-40.  The victim was 
shot three times in the face and neck by unknown gunmen, in the 
Jameat district, around 0930 on 5/30/2007.  Case number 307. 
BONO