08BEIJING2876
JULY 24 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: Nepal, Six-Party Talks,
Thu Jul 24 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO4901
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #2876/01 2060948
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 240948Z JUL 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8777
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 002876 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM KOLY CH RS NP
SUBJECT: JULY 24 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: Nepal, Six-Party Talks, 
Olympics, Visas. 
 
¶1. Key points at the July 24 MFA Press Briefing: 
 
-- China rejects the accusation that it pressured the Government of 
Nepal to arrest Tibetan protestors. 
 
-- Much progress has been made towards the denuclearization of North 
Korea.  All parties involved laud China's positive efforts in the 
Six-Party Talks. A formal Ministerial meeting will be held in 
Beijing "once the time is mature." 
 
-- More than 80 dignitaries will attend the opening ceremonies of 
the Beijing Olympic Games.  Invitations to the event are extended by 
the respective National Olympic Committees, and not by the Chinese 
Government. 
 
-- For the sake of pre-Olympics security, China has adjusted its 
visa policies.  These adjustments will not affect travelers coming 
to China for normal business, however. 
 
-- China is still studying the draft safeguards presented to the 
IAEA regarding the Indo-U.S. nuclear deal. 
 
-- China has will appoint a new ambassador to ASEAN, but it is not 
yet confirmed who the new ambassador will be. 
 
 
 
-- A resolution in the U.S. House of Representatives regarding 
China's human rights situation and interactions with the Government 
of Sudan is interference in China's internal affairs and is "against 
the Olympic Games." 
 
-- VISITS: At the invitation of Vice-Premier Wang Qishan, Russian 
Deputy Prime Minister Igor Ivanovich Sechin will visit China July 
26-27, for discussions on Sino-Russian energy cooperation. 
 
 
Nepal and Tibetan Protesters 
---------------------------- 
 
¶2. China rejects the accusation that it has pressured the Nepalese 
Government to arrest Tibetan protesters in Nepal and that China's 
Ambassador to Nepal has made multiple representations to the 
Nepalese Government requesting such arrests, MFA Spokesman Liu 
Jianchao said at the regular bi-weekly MFA press conference July 24. 
 Nepal is a friendly neighboring country, and China does not 
pressure its friendly neighbors, Liu said.  Regarding Tibet, he 
added that China will not allow any actions that harm its interests, 
nor will its friendly neighbors allow any such actions within their 
territory.  China will also not allow the separation of Tibet or any 
attacks on its diplomatic missions abroad, and China supports some 
countries taking necessary actions to prevent such incidents. 
 
Six-Party Talks 
--------------- 
 
¶3. The spokesman was unable to comment on the recent informal 
Six-Party Talks ministerial held on the margins of the ASEAN 
Regional Forum meeting in Singapore, as he had no heard the reports. 
 Asked if China's policies towards North Korea and denuclearization 
are a failure, Liu responded that the policies are not a failure and 
that all Six Parties "realized consensus" that there has been much 
progress in promoting denuclearization.  All parties reconfirmed 
their willingness to honor their commitments, and all parties 
applaud the positive role that China has played in the Six-Party 
Talks.  In response to a follow up on the possibility of an formal 
Six-Party Ministerial meeting, Liu noted that the informal meeting 
in Singapore was historic, as the Foreign Ministers of all six 
nations had not met before.  A formal Ministerial will be held in 
Beijing "once the time is mature," but more consultations are 
necessary. 
 
Olympics 
-------- 
 
¶4. Regarding dignitaries invited to the Olympics, Liu said that 
heads of state and government and ministers of sports are invited by 
their relevant national Olympic Committees and not by the Chinese 
Government. More than 80 such dignitaries are expected to attend. On 
follow-up, Liu said that China would welcome a potential bilateral 
meeting between Chinese President Hu Jintao and Japanese Prime 
Minister Fukuda, if Fukuda is interested. China is "studying the 
possibility" of holding bilateral meetings with other world leaders 
as well. 
 
¶5. Asked to confirm that five Olympic cities, including Beijing and 
Shanghai, are no longer issuing letters of invitation to business 
travelers during the Olympics, Liu responded that in advance of the 
Olympics China is working to strengthen its security, and as such 
has adjusted its visa policies.  These adjustments will not affect 
foreigners coming to China for normal work, but the new applications 
procedures are more complicated and will take more time, he said. 
 
BEIJING 00002876  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
¶6. Asked about rumors that 500 Tibetans were caught after 
infiltrating the ranks of Olympics volunteers, Liu said that he had 
not heard of it.  He added that some foreign journalists make up 
news that does not exist, and while the Chinese Government denies 
such rumors, journalists do not heed its concerns.  Such behavior is 
unethical, and these journalists should be condemned and their 
reputations ruined, he said. 
 
¶7. Asked two questions regarding the establishment of protest parks 
for use during the Olympics and the process by which said protests 
will be approved, the spokesperson twice referred the questioner to 
the State Council's Protest and Demonstration Law. 
 
Chinese views on U.S.-India nuclear agreement 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶8. Asked if China, in its position as a member of both the IAEA and 
the Nuclear Suppliers Group, would support the U.S.-India nuclear 
agreement, Liu responded that China is still studying the draft 
safeguards between India and the IAEA. 
 
ASEAN Ambassador 
---------------- 
 
¶9. China has recently appointed an ambassador to ASEAN, which is 
another sign of the progress of Sino-ASEAN relations, Liu said.  The 
mission of the ambassador will be to further improve the strategic 
partnership of cooperation that already exists.  It is not yet 
confirmed who the new ambassador will be. 
 
U.S. House of Representatives Resolution on Sudan 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶10. Asked a question regarding a resolution in the U.S. House of 
Representatives calling on China to address human rights abuses and 
stop supporting the Government of Sudan, Liu responded that such a 
resolution is "against the Olympic Games" as well as against the 
shared aspirations of all those who oppose the politicization of the 
Olympics.  He noted that the resolution is also interference in 
China's internal affairs. 
 
Kunming bombing, Sino-Japan Cooperation 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶11. Asked for additional information on the recent bus bombings in 
Kunming, Yunnan Province, the spokesman responded that the incident 
is still under investigation, and the police in Kunming are 
providing updates to the media there. 
 
 
¶12. Sino-Japanese cooperation in the field of earthquake prevention 
is important, as both countries are earthquake-prone, Liu said. 
This was a topic which Hu Jintao discussed during the G-8 meeting, 
he said.  The Japanese provided large amounts of support following 
the Sichuan earthquake, for which the Chinese people express their 
heartfelt thanks to the Japanese Government and people. 
 
 
Visit: Russian Deputy Prime Minister Sechin 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶13. VISITS:  At the invitation of Vice-Premier Wang Qishan, Russian 
Deputy Prime Minister Igor Ivanovich Sechin will visit China July 
26-27, for discussions on Sino-Russian energy Cooperation. 
 
RANDT