08KUALALUMPUR644
MALAYSIA'S POLITICAL CRISIS
Tue Jul 22 00:00:00 +0200 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Kuala Lumpur
VZCZCXRO2974
OO RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM RUEHNH
DE RUEHKL #0644/01 2040829
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 220829Z JUL 08
FM AMEMBASSY KUALA LUMPUR
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1398
INFO RUEHGP/AMEMBASSY SINGAPORE IMMEDIATE 4554
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 0123
RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA PRIORITY 2590
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 0454
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO PRIORITY 2547
RUEHWL/AMEMBASSY WELLINGTON PRIORITY 0565
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RHHMUNA/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HI PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 KUALA LUMPUR 000644 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR EAP AND INR 
SINGAPORE - PASS TO ASSISTANT SECRETARY HILL 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/22/2028 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PHUM KDEM KJUS MY
SUBJECT: MALAYSIA'S POLITICAL CRISIS 
 
REF: A. KUALA LUMPUR 609 - UMNO RESISTS REFORM 
     ¶B. KUALA LUMPUR 160 - ELECTION SHOCK 
 
Classified By: AMBASSADOR JAMES R. KEITH, FOR REASON 1.4 (B AND D). 
 
Summary and Introduction 
------------------------ 
 
¶1.  (C) The next four weeks will be a telling period in the 
history of the United Malays National Organization (UMNO) 
rule in Malaysia. For the first time in its fifty-year 
dominance, UMNO is faced with a multi-racial opposition 
alliance that has some credible prospect for forming the next 
government. To date, it appears the ruling party finds this 
situation intolerable. UMNO leaders, united behind but also 
in a sense using Prime Minister (PM) Abdullah, have made it 
clear that they are willing to blacken Malaysia's reputation 
to ensure the end to opposition leader Anwar Ibrahim's 
political challenge. The coming Parliamentary session in the 
latter half of August is the next likely setting for a 
showdown, and could precipitate another arrest of Anwar if he 
is deemed to be doing to well politically between now and 
then. Conversely, if the ruling party concludes it has him 
boxed in UMNO may be content to use short-term measures such 
as judicial restraining orders and the like to prevent him 
from addressing and attracting a national audience. 
 
¶2.  (C) We should continue to speak out publicly in support 
of the rule of law, taking care not to undermine our 
principled position by being perceived to be too close to the 
opposition. If the authorities escalate their rhetoric in 
anticipation of another arrest of Anwar, we will need to 
adjust accordingly. If, on the other hand, the ruling party 
restrains itself from arresting Anwar again in August, we 
will want to consider our longer-term approach to a period of 
prolonged uncertainty. For the time being, we should continue 
to press hard the bilateral initiatives currently underway as 
these are tied directly to profound U.S. interests and 
support the development of a more transparent and accountable 
set of systems in Malaysian government and society. As we 
begin to develop our public diplomacy programs for the coming 
fiscal year, we will seek to give pride of place to the rule 
of law.  End Summary and Introduction. 
 
What does UMNO want? 
-------------------- 
 
¶3.  (C) The ruling party wants to stay in power indefinitely, 
and that means Anwar and the multi-racial opposition front he 
is leading must fail. At least so far, there is scant 
evidence of a more thoughtful and forward-looking analysis 
within UMNO. In fact, the ruling party could find some common 
ground with the opposition if it were willing to countenance 
gradual development of a two-party system of checks and 
balances.  Instead, the ruling party defines national 
security primarily as a matter of protecting UMNO's 
superiority and ensuring that "people power," or a level 
electoral playing field, cannot become the opposition's means 
of toppling the ruling party. 
 
How is UMNO getting what it wants? 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (C) The ruling party is relying primarily on its own 
party structure and the embedded system of carrots and sticks 
to keep party membership in line. As in other one-party 
states, the party is seen opportunistically as a mechanism 
for personal advancement and enrichment. There is an 
ideological component, in terms of Malay supremacy, but that 
is in practice a matter of institutionalized opportunism. In 
good times UMNO can maintain control by distributing power 
and money to get what it wants. In bad times, it uses the 
stick, and for now that means intimidation. The ruling elite 
maintains control over the security apparatus through party 
stalwarts who run the security institutions, mainly the 
police but also the military. We believe the military will 
remain loyal to legitimate leadership and is not a likely 
tool to overturn an elected, royally-approved and Malay-led 
government from either the ruling or opposition side. The 
police, on the other hand, follow orders from the ruling 
party. The "commando-style" arrest of Anwar last week, the 
roadblocks and security checks throughout the city of Kuala 
Lumpur, the recent arrest of blogger Raja Petra, intimidation 
of Sabah politicians, and the authorities' strident rhetoric 
are all part of a broad message to the Malaysian people that 
they had better not stand in UMNO's path. In today's 
Malaysia, one can get along by going along (and of course one 
can go farther as a Malay rather than a Chinese or Indian), 
but it is also true that one can be run over. We only have 
anecdotal evidence for this, but the sad spiral into past 
patterns may have become the predicate for some middle and 
upper class Malaysians who have the option of emigrating. 
Rather than wait to be run over, it is far preferable to get 
out of the game. 
 
What happened to post-election reforms? 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (C) It is deja vu all over again. Just as in Abdullah's 
first term, characterized by lofty rhetoric in support of 
political reform but virtually no action, after the March 
elections Abdullah's prominent reform initiatives seem to 
have evaporated into nothing (ref A). Despite strong popular 
support for political reform, there is evidently even 
stronger opposition to reform within the ruling party. Those 
who have the most to lose through reform are the same ruling 
elites, including Abdullah's own circle, who must be 
persuaded to allow reform to happen. It would take strong 
leadership to push that sort of initiative through the party 
structure, perhaps going over the heads of party elites and 
enlisting the support of the masses. Abdullah doesn't seem to 
have that kind of leadership in him, even if that were his 
goal. 
 
¶6.  (C) Instead, the ruling party seems intent on sustaining 
the patina of reform without actually undertaking any step 
that might genuinely involve systemic change or weakening of 
executive power. For example, against the backdrop of 
opposition leader Anwar Ibrahim's arrest, last week the 
government arrested a number of immigration officials for 
corruption. These men are to be forgiven for wondering, "why 
me?" Of all who might be prosecuted, including the most 
senior leaders or their families, why these relative small 
fry? Through their sacrifice UMNO can claim action against 
corruption without actually doing much of anything. 
 
What does Anwar want? 
--------------------- 
 
¶7.  (C) This question is not as easily answered as one might 
think. For the short term, he wants to be Prime Minister. 
First and foremost Anwar is a pragmatist, as evidenced by his 
ability to yoke together in an opposition front the Islamist 
party (PAS) and the Chinese. What are his firm guiding 
principles? What are the limits of his ability to compromise 
or accommodate? We are not sure. It was clear, for example, 
that he tolerated PAS's use of America as a political foil 
during the recent campaign season, and opposition foreign 
policy announcements on Mideast issues since the election 
have tended to follow PAS lines. But broadly speaking, he 
wants political liberalization and he can be expected to be 
an ardent supporter of the rule of law and a market economy, 
given his personal history. Malaysian foreign policy might 
not change as much as we would like to think under and Anwar 
government, especially in areas relating to Islam and the 
Middle East in which PAS will have an important say. 
 
¶8.  (C) For now, we may have to content ourselves with 
identifying what Anwar does not want. He does not want to be 
boxed in and made irrelevant by UMNO, or jailed.  Anwar 
currently speaks in terms of "becoming Prime Minister or 
going to jail," as an either/or proposition.  At age 61, he 
does not want to let slip what may be his last, best chance 
to lead the Malaysian government.  He also does not want 
arch-nemesis DPM Najib Tun Razak to become Prime Minister, as 
Anwar believes Najib is much more likely than Abdullah to use 
harsh authoritarian measures to stop him and the Opposition. 

What will happen in the months ahead and what should we do? 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
¶9.  (C) UMNO will try to keep Anwar on the defensive and 
prevent him from winning defections to his opposition front 
from the ruling party's coalition. The loose coalition of 
UMNO loyalists who seem to have banded together around 
Abdullah will likely try to limit the cost of each step they 
feel they must take to contain and eventually eradicate 
Anwar's influence. If they can preserve the status quo 
without putting Anwar in jail on the sodomy charge perhaps 
they will do so, content to keep it as a ready tactic to 
deploy against him whenever necessary. If Anwar is unwilling 
to remain boxed in by that tactic, and history suggests 
precisely this outcome, the authorities seem entirely 
prepared to put him in jail for a longer period of time. The 
government has taken a strong stand against popular street 
demonstrations, hoping to prevent Anwar from developing the 
kind of national popular response that will be necessary to 
create an environment in which he can win converts from the 
ruling party coalition. 
 
¶10.  (C) The skirmishing around these objectives will 
continue throughout July and August, and we can expect the 
opposition to seek to up the ante the closer we get to the 
Parliamentary session in the latter half of August. The 
initiative rests with Anwar. If he goes quiet, his political 
hopes fade and his personal freedom is more secure in the 
coming weeks; over a longer period Anwar sees himself as 
vulnerable to jailing or government action unless he removes 
himself from politics. The greater his political success, the 
greater a threat he is to UMNO, and the more his personal 
freedom becomes problematic. 
 
¶11.  (C) We need to continue to speak with authority from 
Washington and this Embassy in support of the broad 
principles underlying the debate in Malaysia. We should avoid 
undermining our principled position, and the opposition 
parties themselves, by appearing too close to the 
personalities involved, especially Anwar. Publicly, our words 
should continue to revolve around universal values, the 
criticality of the rule of law to every dimension of our 
bilateral relationship and Malaysia's political and economic 
success. 
 
¶12.  (C) Privately, we will want to underline the futility of 
the Malaysian effort to deny the political nature of the 
crisis before them. Whatever they believe about the "facts" 
of the sodomy case, at this point the ruling party has no 
chance of success in conveying to the Malaysian or 
international audience that this is merely a case of one 
citizen's charge against another. The authorities themselves 
betray that fiction on a daily basis in the pages of the 
domestic press, and barely one in ten Malaysians are buying 
into the party line a survey tells us. UMNO leaders may fail 
to grasp the consequences of upping the ante; they hear what 
we are saying, but do not understand sufficiently well how 
difficult it will be for them to overcome the shadows they 
are casting on the country. They no doubt thought they were 
choosing the more palatable path in using the criminal law, 
and thus the sodomy charge, rather than detaining Anwar as a 
matter of national security under the Internal Security Act. 
But contrary to their intent, many in the international 
community will take this as escalation. Now the criminal law 
is laid bare as a political tool, just as useful to the 
ruling party as the national security law. 
 
What is the long-term horizon for bilateral ties? 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶13.  (C) Most of our relationship already hews tightly to the 
principle of mutual benefit. Our liaison, law enforcement, 
military, and commercial ties are well developed and tied 
directly to key national interests on both sides. Regardless 
of the heat of the rhetoric between us, I would expect 
Malaysia to seek to preserve the core relationships it has 
with us. With regard to the political dimension of our 
policy, Malaysia already has a less than inspiring record at 
the UN and is keen to preserve its options with the likes of 
the Nonaligned Movement. It may not be possible for Malaysia 
to become less helpful in international political areas 
identified with the United States, and it is unlikely to 
retreat in areas that are primarily multilateral 
(peacekeeping, for example). The biggest costs to us over the 
long term if Malaysia continues to undermine its own legal 
system are precisely in the domestic legal arena. 
 
¶14.  (C) Much of the promise of our bilateral ties is rooted 
in the notion of a transition towards a thriving civil 
society and robust rule of law in Malaysia. We wish to expand 
our export control and non-proliferation cooperation with 
Malaysia, for example. It is neither in our interest nor 
Malaysia's for this country to become increasingly a place 
where smugglers can do good business. Thwarting such a 
development (or rolling it back) requires a sophisticated set 
of export control laws and robust enforcement by a strong and 
secure government, not one struggling to justify itself to 
its citizens. Despite the local paranoia about U.S. 
intervention in internal affairs, our influence is actually 
being brought to bear to support and promote precisely those 
objectives that most Malaysians want for their own benefit. 
 
¶15.  (C) If the authorities are able to get through the next 
several months without doing fatal damage to the rule of law 
in Malaysia, I hope the public diplomacy dimension of our 
bilateral ties will take on a decidedly more legal and 
judicial cast. We should push ahead with our FTA talks if 
possible because that serves both our own economic interests 
as well as the broader goal of establishing more transparent 
and accountable systems in this country. In addition, to try 
to bring public focus to the centrality of the rule of law in 
our ties, we might want to organize visits in the short and 
medium term by a Supreme Court Justice, the Attorney General, 
and representatives of the American Bar Association. We will 
also review our international visitor program and other 
people-to-people exchanges in the coming fiscal year to 
ensure a central focus on the rule of law. My speeches and 
those of my staff will put the rule of law at the center. 
 
¶16.  (C) We will continue to monitor closely the situation 
for signs that more robust policy responses are needed. In 
the meantime, we should continue to exploit every opportunity 
for authoritative bilateral exchange to ensure we have done 
all we can to open Malaysian leaders' eyes to the 
international costs of efforts that diminish the rule of law. 

KEITH