08STATE79841
INSTRUCTIONS TO TABLE UNAMI RENEWAL RESOLUTION
Thu Jul 24 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0012
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #9841 2061751
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 241746Z JUL 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD IMMEDIATE 0000UNCLAS STATE 079841 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL UNSC IZ
SUBJECT: INSTRUCTIONS TO TABLE UNAMI RENEWAL RESOLUTION 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY AND ACTION REQUEST:  The mandate of the 
United Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq (UNAMI) was 
reauthorized by UNSC resolution 1770 on August 10, 2007 
and will expire on August 10, 2008.  USUN is authorized to 
table the text of the draft resolution in paragraph 2 to 
renew UNAMI's mandate as contained in resolution 1770 for 
another twelve months.  USUN should begin consultations on 
the draft text with the UK mission to the UN, followed by 
consultations with other Security Council members and the 
Iraqi mission as appropriate.  USUN should keep Washington 
informed on the progress of discussions and seek further 
guidance as needed. 
 
¶2. Begin text: 
 
The Security Council, 
 
Recalling all its previous relevant resolutions on Iraq, 
in particular 1500 (2003) of 14 August 2003, 1546 (2004) 
 
of 8 June 2004, 1557 (2004) of 12 August 2004, 1619 (2005) 
of 11 August 2005, 1700 (2006) of 10 August 2006 and 1770 
(2007) of 10 August 2007, 
 
Reaffirming the independence, sovereignty, unity and 
territorial integrity of Iraq, 
 
Emphasizing the importance of the stability and security 
of Iraq for the people of Iraq, the region, and the 
international community, 
 
Acknowledging that a democratically elected and 
constitutionally based Government of Iraq is now in place, 
 
Underscoring the need for all communities in Iraq to 
reject sectarianism, participate in the political process, 
and engage in an inclusive political dialogue and national 
reconciliation for the sake of Iraq's political stability 
and unity, 
 
Reaffirming the importance of the United Nations, in 
particular the United Nations Assistance Mission for 
Iraq(UNAMI), in supporting the efforts of the Iraqi people 
and Government to strengthen institutions for 
representative government, promote political dialogue and 
national reconciliation, engage neighboring countries, 
assist vulnerable groups, including refugees and 
internally displaced persons, and promote the protection 
of human rights and judicial and legal reform, 
 
Recognizing that security is essential for UNAMI to carry 
out its work on behalf of the people of Iraq and urging 
Member States and relevant organizations to continue 
providing the resources necessary to ensure the security 
of United Nations and associated personnel; 
 
Welcoming the Secretary-General's appointment on 11 
September 2007 of a new Special Representative for Iraq 
and recognizing his expanded role in advising the 
Government of Iraq and supporting the Iraqi people as 
established in resolution 1770 (2007) of 10 August 2007, 
 
Welcoming the important roles played by the United Nations 
 
and the Government of Iraq in the First Anniversary 
Ministerial Review of the International Compact with Iraq, 
 
held in Stockholm on 29 May 2008, as well as in the 
expanded Neighbors Conference on 22 April 2008, its 
working groups, and its support mechanism, and 
underscoring the importance of continued regional and 
international support for Iraq's development, 
 
Welcoming the letter of X August 2008 from the Minister of 
Foreign Affairs of Iraq to the Secretary-General, 
[S/2008/xxx, annex] setting forth the request of the 
Government of Iraq that the United Nations Assistance 
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) continue to assist Iraqi efforts 
to build a productive and prosperous nation at peace with 
itself and its neighbors, 
 
Taking note of the letter dated X August 2008 from the 
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the 
Security Council (S/2008/xxx), and expressing its 
appreciation for the role that the United Nations is 
playing in Iraq with the support of the international 
community, 
 
¶1. Decides to extend the mandate of the United Nations 
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) for a period of twelve 
months from the date of this resolution; 
 
¶2. Calls on Member States to continue providing UNAMI with 
the necessary financial, logistical and security resources 
and support to fulfill its mission; 
 
¶3. Expresses its intention to review the mandate of UNAMI 
in twelve months or sooner, if requested by the Government 
of Iraq; 
 
¶4. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Council 
within three months from the date of this resolution on 
UNAMI operations in Iraq, and on a quarterly basis 
thereafter on the progress made towards the fulfillment of 
all UNAMI's responsibilities; and 
 
¶5. Decides to remain seized of the matter. 
RICE