06MANAGUA1383
SCENESETTER FOR VISIT OF STATE DEPARTMENT
Fri Jun 23 00:00:00 +0200 2006
SECRET
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #1383/01 1741716
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
O 231716Z JUN 06
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6745
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 0712
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DCS E C R E T MANAGUA 001383 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA ASSISTANT SECRETARY THOMAS SHANNON AND 
WHA SENIOR ADVISOR OF PUBLIC DIPLOMACY MARIA TAMBURRI, 
WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/23/2026 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINR PHUM MARR MOPS KDEM ECON EFIN
NU 
SUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR VISIT OF STATE DEPARTMENT 
ASSISTANT SECRETARY THOMAS SHANNON 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul A. Trivelli. Reasons 1.4 (B,D). 
 
¶1.  (S) Summary/Introduction: Your visit to Nicaragua allows 
you to reiterate U.S. opposition to the Sandinista 
(FSLN)-Liberal Constitutional Party (PLC) pact and assure the 
Nicaraguan people that we share their desire for free, fair, 
credible, and inclusive elections.  Your presence will also 
confirm to Nicaraguans that the USG speaks with one voice vis 
a vis Nicaragua and will dispel the PLC's disinformation 
campaign alleging the removal of the Ambassador and its bogus 
linkage of the Deputy Secretary's resignation to a shift in 
U.S. policy.  Meeting with both Liberal dissident Eduardo 
Montealegre and FSLN dissident Herty Lewites will demonstrate 
that we support principles and not specific presidential 
candidates.  Preparations for Nicaragua's November 5 
elections are generally on track, but critical challenges 
remain, including providing national/voter IDs to tens of 
thousands of Nicaraguans.  Financial backing for Liberal 
dissident Eduardo Montealegre's campaign, including from 
local financiers and the Taiwanese, appears to be coming on 
board, if slowly. Montealegre's most immediate challenge is 
to unite the disparate egos and parties supporting him around 
a common purpose.  End Summary/Introduction. 
 
¶2.  (C) President Bolanos still relies on FSLN and PLC 
support, or at least non-interference, in the National 
Assembly to effectively govern.  The relapse of his son 
Javier, who suffers from leukemia, has understandably 
dampened his spirits.  If his son's condition worsens, 
President Bolanos may be out of country during your visit. 
Bolanos considers CAFTA and the Millennium Challenge Compact 
the pillars of his lasting legacy for Nicaragua, along with 
achieving debt relief and his goal to turn over a country 
with a stable macro-economy and an ongoing IMF program to his 
successor.  He is also justifiably proud of having taken a 
firm stand against the caudillos of corruption, although he 
recognizes that he has paid a heavy political price. 
 
¶3.  (C) President Bolanos has not succeeded in his lobbying 
of the Assembly to vote for MANPADS destruction.  The 
military and the Defense Ministry (MOD) allege the problem 
lies with an uncooperative legislature, while lawmakers point 
fingers at the military and MOD for tying further destruction 
to military hardware in return.  The PLC links its votes for 
MANPADS destruction on amnesty for Aleman and the FSLN ties 
its support to a meeting between the Ambassador and Daniel 
Ortega -- an unwise move during this pivotal election year. 
 
¶4.  (S) Your meeting with President Bolanos will allow you to 
reiterate our support for the Nicaraguan government (GON); 
congratulate him for supporting CAFTA-DR and the MCC compact; 
press him to act on his commitment to destroy all remaining 
in the Nicaraguan Army's inventory; and urge his government 
to resolve more outstanding property confiscations of U.S. 
citizens before the end of the 2005-2006 waiver period.  You 
may also encourage President Bolanos to continue engaging his 
regional counterparts, the Taiwanese, and the region's 
private sector to back Montealegre's campaign, while avoiding 
public statements that suggest Montealegre is a cookie-cutter 
replica of his persona.  President Bolanos and Foreign 
Minister Norman Caldera may also raise concerns over U.S. 
Immigration Reform Bill and how it might affect the thousands 
of Nicaraguans residing in the United States. 
 
¶5.  (C) Additional points to raise in your separate meeting 
with Foreign Minister Caldera could include the following: 
 
--Appreciate his courage in publicly supporting U.S. efforts 
to ensure Nicaragua holds clean, fair, and credible elections 
and his denouncement of Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez' 
direct interference in Nicaragua's presidential campaign. 
 
--Recognize GON support for its support of the adoption of 
the Third Additional Protocol and membership in the Red Cross 
and Red Crescent Movement (Movement) for the Israeli national 
society, the Magen David Adom (MDA). Nicaragua voted in favor 
of the initiative during the June 20-21 International 
Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent. 
 
--Urge the GON to rethink its support for Japan's whaling 
policies (as a recipient of Japanese aid, the GON is 
reluctant to cross the Japanese on this issue, but some local 
environmental groups are starting to challenge the GON's 
 
position). 
 
--Motivate the GON to revive its diplomatic relations with 
Iraq.  According to the MFA, the GON never severed its 
diplomatic ties with Iraq, but its relations are not active. 
Caldera has expressed interest in meeting with the new Iraqi 
Ambassador to the United Nations, Hamid al-Biyati, on his 
next trip to New York, possibly in July. 
 
--Encourage the GON to send a military staff contingent to 
Iraq, Afghanistan, or Kuwait.  While the GON is receptive to 
deploying de-mining specialists or light infantry to Iraq or 
Afghanistan, deployment would require a vote of approval from 
a hostile National Assembly.  The Defense Minister has 
suggested, however, that sending de-mining specialists as 
part of the UN mission in Afghanistan or staff officers to 
Kuwait or Afghanistan may be more feasible.  National 
Assembly approval would not be required. 
 
U.S./CEPPS AND CIVIL SOCIETY ELECTION SUPPORT REVS UP 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶6.  (C) Our support for free, fair, inclusive and transparent 
elections is crucial, especially given the FSLN's and PLC's 
control over the National Assembly, the courts and the 
Supreme Electoral Council (CSE).  Timely international 
technical assistance and monitoring will help stem the 
efforts of the FSLN and the PLC to fraudulently manipulate 
election results.  During the recent voter list (padron) 
verification process, the CSE discovered that thousands of 
Nicaraguans had migrated from the Atlantic Coast North and 
South Autonomous Zones (RAAN and RAAS) back to the adjacent 
departments of Matagalpa and Jinotega.  CSE President Roberto 
Rivas, ALN candidate Eduardo Montealegre, and others have 
called for an investigation into this apparent irregularity 
(NOTE:  Montealegre suspects that the PLC may have moved 
supporters from Matagalpa and Jinotega to the Atlantic coast 
to stack the March 5 Atlantic Coast elections in its favor 
and these maneuvers would explain why the PLC fared better 
than expected in the RAAN. 
 END NOTE.) 
 
¶7.  (SBU) CEPPS partners IFES, IRI, and NDI and their local 
affiliates are now fully engaged in helping Nicaraguans 
prepare for their November 5 national elections.  Election 
program activities are exerting a significant positive impact 
on the electoral environment, encouraging greater 
transparency and accountability from the CSE and increasing 
voter participation and awareness.  As the political parties 
begin campaigning in earnest, we expect the civil society and 
technical assistance components of the program will rev up to 
ensure a more substantive debate and greater responsiveness 
to constituent interests.  Your dinner with CEPPS partners 
and local affiliates will allow you to convey our 
appreciation for their fine efforts and query participants 
about specific concerns and areas of weakness that merit 
attention. A summary of CEPPS efforts: 
 
-- Padron Audit: NDI, working with the local chapter of 
Ethics and Transparency (ET), finalized a civil society audit 
of the voter roll (padron) and presented their findings to 
political parties, civil society and the international 
community June 7-9.  According to the audit, roughly 25% of 
the voting population is incorrectly listed on the padron, 
which will impede their ability to vote.  Further, 10% of the 
voting population (individuals currently possessing a 
national/voter ID card, called "cedula") is not included on 
the padron.  According to ET, both of these problems can be 
remedied through the CSE verification process.  NDI 
redirected program monies from other projects to fund 
national observation of the verification process and a public 
awareness campaign.  CSE President Roberto Rivas claimed that 
ET had not been "authorized" to perform a civil society audit 
of the padron, but the CSE has not refuted any of the 
findings of the study.  NDI has offered to provide training 
to all the political parties on 
 how to use the findings of the audit to ensure their 
constituents are registered to vote. 
 
--Padron Verification:  With over 21 percent of eligible 
Nicaraguan voters estimated to have verified their status and 
location on the official voters list (padron), the CSE 
proclaimed the June 10-11 and 17-18 verification process a 
 
success.  This assessment was supported by observers from the 
Carter Center and the Latin American Council of Electoral 
Experts (CEELA).  IFES has worked closely with the CSE on 
padron verification, providing technical assistance and 
training for regional and municipal CSE officials.  IFES 
invested 100% of their public awareness funds on the 
verification process given the potential impact on the 
upcoming elections and the CSE's unwillingness to invest 
adequate funding in the verification campaign.  The OAS 
Election Observation Mission (EOM) fielded 29 observers. 
 
--Voter Education and Awareness:  IFES has doubled the 
capacity of the CSE voter hotline to meet the rising number 
of citizen inquiries regarding the electoral process.  IFES 
has helped the CSE update its website, making it more 
interactive and responsive to voter inquiries.  IRI has 
initiated grassroots voter awareness projects with four 
Nicaraguan civil society organizations.  Youth Vanguard is 
distributing flyers promoting voting and cedulas at 
university campuses.  Movement for Nicaragua (MpN) has radio 
and television adds encouraging citizens to obtain their 
cedulas prior to the August 6 deadline.  MpN and the 
Institute for Development and Democracy (IPADE) are 
canvassing secondary schools encouraging 16-18 year olds to 
participate in the electoral process.  MpN's youth outreach 
program reveals that 70-80% of the students visited have no 
cedula, while the majority of these youth plan to participate 
in the upcoming elections.  MpN is working with the Ministry 
of Education to provide assistance and transportation to 
students interested in applying for cedulas.  JUDENIC is 
performing focus groups with youth to finalize the slogan and 
message of the Rock the Vote campaign, to begin in late June. 
 
 
--Cedula Issuance and Retrieval: The CSE is focusing its 
efforts on encouraging eligible voters to apply for their 
cedulas and register before the August 6 deadline.  To serve 
citizens who have requested but never received voter ID 
cards, IFES conducted an inventory of all outstanding voter 
IDs (roughly 200,000 nationwide).  This information has been 
included on the CSE hotline and website and distributed to 
all CSE regional and municipal centers, as well as churches, 
civic centers, post offices and schools.  With IFES support, 
the CSE is opening seven kiosks in high-traffic markets in 
the Managua metropolitan area for citizens to solicit voter 
IDs.  The CSE claims these kiosks will provide expedited 
voter ID services in only 15 days.  Public pressure on the 
CSE appears is working, as the price to obtain a cedula has 
dropped to 20% of the previous cost. 
 
--Citizen Attention Centers:  With NDI support, MpN has 
extended operations in Managua.  It has also opened seven new 
Citizen Attention Centers (CAC) that help citizens to obtain 
birth certificates and soliciting voter ID cards (Rio Blanco, 
Matagalpa, Masaya, Esteli, Chinandega, Leon and Carazo). 
With additional funding, MpN will expand CAC coverage 
nationwide.  MpN held a "Cedulathon" in Managua on June 17 
with local bands and other entertainment to encourage youth 
to get their voter IDs and participate in the electoral 
process.  Cedulathon proceeds will be used to support the 
CACs.  You will visit one of the MpN Citizen Attention 
Centers during your stay. 
 
--Political Party Poll Watching:  IRI has finalized the 
training schedule for Herty Lewites' MRS and Eduardo 
Montealegre's ALN political party poll watchers, which will 
begin in late June and continue through August.  Based on the 
lists submitted by both parties, IRI will train 12,000 poll 
watchers for MRS and 18,000 for the ALN.  With additional 
funding, poll watcher training will be extended to Eden 
Pastora's Alternativa por el Cambio (AC) and poll watcher 
manuals will be distributed to all five parties.  (NOTE: PLC 
and FSLN poll watchers receive training through the CSE, an 
institution totally controlled by these two traditional 
parties.  END NOTE.) 
 
OAS TAKES GLASS HALF FULL APPROACH, PRESENCE ON GROUND SPOTTY 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  - - -  - - - - 
 
¶8.  (C) OAS Mission: The OAS grant should be finalized soon. 
In the meantime, a pre-award letter allows it to spend U.S. 
funds.  Twenty OAS observers led by OAS Election Mission head 
Gustavo Fernandez and supported by political adviser Raul 
 
 
Alconada arrived in country on June 5 for the padron 
verification process.  Over the June 10-12 weekend, a team of 
three ex-foreign Ministers from the region joined the OAS 
team to add a political dimension to the process, and they 
met with leaders of the political parties competing in the 
November national election.  The OAS believes that 
cooperation with the CSE is acceptable and the chances of the 
inhibition of any of the presidential candidates are low. 
 
¶9.  (C) The OAS is now addressing longer range issues: reform 
of the electoral law and regulations, what can be done to 
avoid entry into force of the pact-inspired constitutional 
reform to weaken presidential authority this January, and the 
possibility of real constitutional changes.  During your 
visit to Managua, OAS Election Mission technical director 
Patricio Gajardo will be in country.  However, Fernandez and 
Alconada's political team will not be present.  The GON has 
expressed concern that the OAS team does not maintain a 
robust political presence here, a concern we share.  Your 
meeting with Gajardo at the CEPPS dinner will provide you an 
opportunity to raise this concern. 
 
RALLYING DONOR SUPPORT FOR COMMON ELECTION STATEMENT 
- - - - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶10.  (C) The Ambassador participates in regularly scheduled 
meetings of ambassadors representing donor countries.  The 
DCM, USAID, and POL participate in working level meetings 
focusing on election support.  Embassy has been engaging 
members on the need to issue a joint donor statement in 
August to reiterate our common interest in, and commitment 
to, helping Nicaraguans hold a clean, fair, credible, and 
inclusive electoral process.  Your encouragement could help 
consolidate this initiative. 
 
REMINDING VOTERS OF THE ORTEGA ERA 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶11.  (C) The Permanent Human Rights Commission's (CPDH) 
investigation of Sandinista era abuses against Nicaragua's 
Miskito population, which we have supported, continues to 
draw attention to the failings of the Sandinista regime.  On 
June 7, the CPDH formally denounced the alleged Sandinista 
genocide/atrocities committed against the Miskitos during the 
1980s.  The next day, CPDH held a press conference in Managua 
and filed evidence against Sandinista leader Daniel Ortega 
and others -- including written and video taped materials 
gathered from over one hundred witnesses and survivors -- 
before the attorney general's and public prosecutor's 
offices.  Coverage of the cases has extended beyond Nicaragua 
including the United States. 
 
¶12.  (C) Responding to Zoilamerica's request for assistance 
in continuing her case before the Inter-American Human Rights 
Commission (IAHRC) against stepfather Daniel Ortega for years 
of sexual abuse, Embassy provided her a small grant to pursue 
her case.  She is currently in the United States, where she 
will meet with IAHRC and Department officials, as well as 
foundations that may be able to help her with pro bono legal 
assistance or support her foundation Sobrevivientes 
(Survivors).  She will also meet with Spanish-speaking media 
in Miami and arrange an interview with Univision. 
 
ARCHBISHOP REFRAINS FROM POLITICS, CARDINAL PROMOTES ORTEGA 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶13.  (C) Unlike his predecessor Cardinal Miguel Obando y 
Bravo -- who is now openly campaigning for Daniel Ortega 
(even though the Nuncio told us the Cardinal privately favors 
Arnoldo Aleman) -- Managua Archbishop Brenes has largely 
refrained from using his office to engage in politicking. 
Instead, Brenes has urged dialogue and national consensus, 
calling for candidates to be sincere in their campaign 
promises and to refrain from smearing tactics.  Your 
encouraging Brenes to continue this constructive, apolitical 
role would be helpful.  You may clarify with him that our 
concern over a possible Ortega win in the elections stems 
from Ortega's anti-democratic rhetoric; his long record of 
complicity in human rights abuses - including against the 
Miskito Indians; and, his probable sexual abuse of his own 
stepdaughter.  (Note: On June 22, Brenes held a special mass 
for all of the presidential candidates; possibly he set the 
date knowing that Daniel Ortega was abroad.  End Note.) 
 
 
MONTEALEGRE SHIFTS INTO THIRD GEAR 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶14.  (C) Arnoldo Aleman will not cede his leadership of the 
PLC and Daniel Ortega will not let him because he relies on 
Aleman to keep the right divided.  Thus, a five-way race 
remains the likely scenario, although PLC candidate Jose Rizo 
may decide to withdraw if his numbers do not climb by 
September.  Montealegre's most immediate challenge is to 
unite the disparate egos and parties supporting him around a 
common purpose.  The results of the next poll to be released 
in July will provide a clearer idea of voter trends and may 
influence the direction of financial support.  If Montealegre 
holds strong, and support for Rizo does not climb, 
Montealegre is likely to receive all the financial backing he 
needs.  However, if Rizo's number rise, Pellas and other 
financiers may leave Montealegre hanging another month before 
they decide where to place the bulk of their support. 
 
¶15.  (C) Much of Nicaraguan and regional capital appears 
poised to back Montealegre's campaign, although some, like 
Nicaraguan industrialist Carlos Pellas, are likely to hedge 
their bets by giving smaller quantities of cash to his 
competitors, including Daniel Ortega.  Carlos Pellas has 
assured us that he will back Montealegre.  Montealegre's 
running mate Fabricio Cajina confirmed to us on June 21 that 
Chamorro-Pellas family patriarch Carlos Chamorro told him 
that Montealegre will obtain the funds he requires.  We have 
also confirmed that Taiwanese interests will support 
Montealegre's campaign and that they will not/not help PLC 
candidate Jose Rizo.  Impressing upon Montealegre the 
immediacy of uniting his alliance around a common purpose and 
platform will be helpful.  He may seek your reassurance that 
we will not cave to pressures from the PLC, which constantly 
waves the Ortega and Chavez flags to scare us into supporting 
PLC candidate Rizo. 
 
ENGAGING HERTY 
- - - - - - - - 
 
¶16.  (C) Lewites has been effusive in his desire to maintain 
cordial, constructive, and cooperative relations with the 
United States.  Lewites has also been supportive of CAFTA, 
with the observation that small farmers and small business 
must in some way be assisted.  He favors MANPADS destruction, 
asserting "they are of no good use to anybody."  Some Embassy 
contacts do not trust Lewites' intentions, noting that 
members of Lewite's immediate circle are "orthodox" 
Sandinistas.  Others insist Lewites could eventually rejoin 
the Ortega fold; still others claim the bad blood between 
them is such that they will never form an alliance.  We 
believe that for now, encouraging the Sandinista division and 
focusing USG criticism on the "Danielistas" specifically, 
instead of "Sandinistas" as a group, is appropriate.  Keeping 
Lewites in the race will also subtract votes from Ortega and 
could spell the difference between Ortega's winning on the 
first round or losing on the second. 
 
¶17.  (C) Your meeting with Lewites will allow you to 
reinforce our position that we have no election favorite and 
that we support democratic candidates who desire responsible 
government and constructive relations with the United States. 
 You may wish to encourage him to visit Washington (he has 
told us he might visit closer to the November election).  His 
selection of Dr. Edmundo Jarquin (IADB consultant, lawyer and 
economist, former university professor, Ambassador to Spain 
and Mexico during the Sandinista regime, and a National 
Assembly Deputy in the early 1990s) as his running mate 
suggests that if elected, he would practice sound 
macro-economic policies. 
 
MEET AND GREET 
- - - - - - - - 
 
¶18.  (U) Your meeting with the Embassy community will show 
high-level appreciation for their efforts to ensure Nicaragua 
holds free, fair, and transparent elections in 2006.  The 
Mission has 80 American employees, 11 Family Member 
employees, 310 local engaged staff (LES), and 280 local 
guards.  In addition to State and USAID, DAO, Mil Group, DEA, 
OBO, RLA, USDA/FAS/APHIS, Peace Corps, and Millennium 
Challenge Account offices are present.  Construction began on 
 
the New Embassy Compound in February 2005.  The new embassy 
is situated on 13 acres; the former Ambassador ("Casa 
Grande") and DCM residences (currently Marine offices) are on 
the site.  The expected date of completion of the Embassy is 
around April 2006.  The new USAID complex will be co-located 
on the land and completed around May 2007. 
TRIVELLI