06MANAGUA1438
MANAGUA INL REPORT FOR OCT-MAR, FY 2006
Mon Jul 03 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0002
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #1438/01 1841824
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 031824Z JUL 06
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6814
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS MANAGUA 001438 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR INL/LA, INL/RM AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR NU KJUS
SUBJECT: MANAGUA INL REPORT FOR OCT-MAR, FY 2006 
 
¶1. (U) Summary:  Over the last six months, INL supported 
Nicaraguan Navy and Police operations have resulted in 
substantial seizures and arrests.  According to DEA 
statistics, 9.3 kilos of heroin, 1,538.6 kilos of cocaine and 
52 kilos of marijuana were seized.  Nicaraguan authorities 
arrested 41 people in conjunction with the seizures.  INL 
Managua also provided training to law enforcement officials 
and supported anti-corruption activities. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Highlights: 
 
-- December 17, 2005:  The Nicaraguan National Police (NNP) 
seized 809 kilograms of cocaine and arrested 6 subjects.  The 
NNP seized the cocaine from vehicles along the 
Chinandega-Corinto highway.  The cocaine was brought in by 
boat to the Port of Corinto and then loaded into the 
vehicles.  The NNP successfully apprehended the captain of 
the boat and seized the boat and communication equipment used 
by the drug traffickers. (Comment:  This seizure is also 
significant because it occurred on the Pacific Coast, which 
may indicate a shift in routes by drug traffickers.  Drugs 
are traditionally moved up the Atlantic Coast of Nicaragua by 
boat or overland from the Costa Rican border.) 
 
-- December 17-20:  INL funded a DEA-supported NNP operation 
which involved deploying NNP teams to the Nicaraguan borders 
with Costa Rica and Honduras and the Managua airport in order 
to deter the flow of drugs overland through Nicaragua.  The 
NNP focused on "blind spots" along the Nicaraguan border with 
Costa Rica, which officers stationed permanently at the 
border are unable to cover.  The operation resulted in a few 
small seizures and arrests, but more importantly, it shifted 
drug trafficking patterns and deterred the use of traditional 
routes.  The operation also resulted in better intelligence 
and information on the methods and routes used along the 
border. 
 
-- February 22:  The NNP seized over 500 kilograms of cocaine 
at the Penas Blancas vehicle inspection station.  The NNP 
pulled over a suspicious vehicle as it crossed the border 
from Costa Rica.  The drugs were discovered in a 20-foot long 
steel bridge girder hidden under scrap metal, oil filters, 
and dirt to mask the scent of the drugs -- which was so 
effective that the K-9s did not alert on the drugs until the 
girder had been taken apart.  The vehicle was apparently 
headed to Guatemala. (Comment:  Post is funding urgently 
needed repairs at Penas Blancas to improve working conditions 
and officers' effectiveness in detecting contraband.) 
 
¶3. (U) INL supported NNP anti-narcotic activities: 
 
-- INL Managua funded three deployments monthly of the NNP's 
Mobile Interdiction and K-9 units. 
 
-- INL Managua supported the deployment of the Nicaraguan 
National Police Chemical Precursor Inspection Unit (CPIU) for 
4 and 5 day operations for two months. 
 
-- We sponsored the trip of an NNP officer to San Diego, CA 
to coordinate with DEA and regional counterparts on an 
ongoing narcotics case. 
 
-- INL sponsored the travel of two NNP officers to Costa Rica 
to coordinate investigative efforts into an organizations 
shipping cocaine from Costa Rica to Guatemala via Nicaragua. 
 
-- INL funds funded basic maintenance at Penas Blancas and 
repairs to NNP equipment. 
 
¶4.  (U) Training: 
 
-- The NNP Deputy Chief of Police attended an FBI Retrainer 
Conference in Panama City Oct. 16 - 21. 
 
-- INL sponsored an NNP Police officer to attend an anti-gang 
conference in El Salvador in November. 
 
-- Six NNP officers attended training in Costa Rica on 
vehicle inspection techniques, sponsored by INL. 
 
-- INL sponsored NNP officers to attend a mini-IDECs and 
IDECs (International Drug Enforcement Conference) in Latin 
America. 
 
¶5.  (U) Naval program: 
 
-- The second Dabur refurbishment was completed and repairs 
are set to begin on the third boat. 
 
-- We provided over USD 20,000 in spare parts to the 
Nicaraguan Navy for maintenance of their fast boat fleet. 
 
¶6.  (U) Anti-corruption activities (with Post's Resident 
Legal Advisor): 
 
-- INL sponsored the Nicaraguan Attorney General's trip to El 
Salvador to meet with a DOJ representative and attorney 
generals from other Central America countries and discuss 
pending corruption cases in the region. 
 
-- Post held the annual 'Mini Dublin' meeting and used the 
opportunity to promote discussion among donor nations on 
anti-corruption programs. 
 
-- INL sent two NNP officers to Panama City for a Money 
Laundering Conference. 
 
¶7. (U) Demand Reduction: 
 
-- INL provided funds to the OAS for a Culture of Lawfulness 
program in Nicaragua.  The first training sessions for 
teachers may begin in July and August. 
 
-- DARE materials were translated into the Miskito language 
and we are planning to print additional materials in Spanish 
and English to be used on the Atlantic coast. 
TRIVELLI