09MANAGUA1073
TURBULENT RELATIONS BETWEEN NICARAGUAN GOVERNMENT AND
Fri Nov 06 00:00:00 +0100 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #1073/01 3101931
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 061931Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0102
INFO WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RHEFHTA/TSA HQ WASHINGTON DC
RHMFISS/FAA NATIONAL HQ WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 001073 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 2019/11/06 
TAGS: EAIR EINV ETRD PGOV NU
SUBJECT: TURBULENT RELATIONS BETWEEN NICARAGUAN GOVERNMENT AND 
AIRLINES 
 
REF: MANAGUA 1034; MANAGUA 711; 08 MANAGUA 1448 
 
CLASSIFIED BY: Robert J. Callahan, Ambassador, Department of State; 
REASON: 1.4(B), (D) 
 
SUMMARY 
 
------- 
 
¶1. (C) Relations between commercial air carriers that serve 
U.S./Nicaragua routes and the GON's airport authority are 
worsening.  On November 3 a representative of Continental Airlines 
told econoff that the situation at Managua's Augusto C. Sandino 
International Airport is becoming "unbearable."  We heard similar 
comments from American, Spirit, UPS and TACA airlines during 
October's Civil Aviation Roundtable, hosted by the Economic 
Section.  According to these airlines, the GON has increasingly 
consolidated airport services under its aviation authority (EAAI), 
now firmly in the hands of Sandinista National Liberation Front 
(FSLN) loyalists close to President Daniel Ortega.  Post access to 
the airport remains highly restricted since 2008 (Ref C).  Airline 
representatives also described how the EAAI has refused to allow 
them to conduct audits of ground services, which could result in 
negative safety and security implications.  The upcoming 
Transportation Security Administration (TSA) inspection of the 
Augusto C. Sandino Airport, scheduled for December, will provide 
the airlines an opportunity to air their grievances.  Despite these 
ongoing difficulties, airlines report full flights, with especially 
large numbers of missionary groups and surfers. 
 
 
 
GON'S AIRPORT AUTHORITY MISMANAGED, INEPT, AND POLITICIZED 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
 
 
¶2. (C) On November 3, Ivan Cortes, Regional Manager for Continental 
Airlines, told econoff that managing the relationship with EAAI 
(the Nicaraguan airport authority) is making his job "unbearable," 
and he believes the relationship will continue to worsen.  In 
October, representatives of Continental, American, UPS, Spirit and 
TACA airlines told emboffs during the quarterly Civil Aviation 
Roundtable that EAAI is no longer cooperative--or transparent--in 
its relations with them.  They reported that the GON has 
increasingly consolidated management of the airport administration 
and security under EAAI, directed by Orlando Castillo, an FSLN 
loyalist of President Daniel Ortega.  (Comment: Orlando Castillo's 
father, Orlando Castillo Sr., serves as the Executive Director of 
Nicaragua's telecommunications regulator, TELCOR, which recently 
awarded new telecommunications bandwidth to a Russian-Nicaraguan 
joint venture on dubious grounds.  See Ref A.  End comment.) 
According to airline representatives, EAAI is now fully-staffed by 
FSLN loyalists who possess little or no knowledge of airport 
management.  Moreover, according to the participants at the 
roundtable, the EAAI is intent on exercising its power in an 
increasingly autocratic manner. 
 
 
 
¶3.  (C) Airline representatives told emboffs that keeping their 
planes on schedule as they negotiate logistical issues with the 
EAAI is a daily challenge.  The American Airlines representative 
described how it often requires six attempts to elicit a response 
from EAAI, if one is received at all.  Participants also said that 
EAAI is not investing in needed upgrades for airport operations. 
The American Airlines representative, for example, described how 
her firm had recently imported two specialized cargo loading 
vehicles, 15 dollies, and four small tractors as a result of EAAI's 
inability to provide sufficient ground-handling equipment. 
 
 
 
AUDITS REFUSED 
 
-------------- 
 
 
 
¶4. (C) On May 21, 2009, the Nicaraguan civil aviation authority 
(INAC) abruptly expelled the airport's ground-handling contractor 
(GHANSA) from its offices (Ref B).  Following GHANSA's dismissal, 
EAAI directly assumed management of ground-handling operations. 
Airline representatives told emboffs that since then, their 
requests to audit ground services have not been authorized by EAAI, 
including security, baggage services, aircraft fueling, and 
aircraft cleaning services.  The inability of the airlines to audit 
these services negatively affects their safety record and 
competitiveness.  Ivan Cortes of Continental told econoff that 
these audits are the industry standard; without them, the airlines 
are unable to ascertain whether or not they are receiving the 
services for which they are paying.  UPS said they conducted a 
successful audit in April of 2009, but since then, EAAI management 
has prevented them from assessing ground/ramp related services. 
More troubling, EAAI has stopped providing airlines with access to 
training certificates (for example, x-ray training) that airport 
security personnel should have on file.  Airline representatives 
also expressed concern over long shifts worked by Nicaraguan Army 
soldiers who provide airport security, in some cases more than 20 
hours. 
 
 
 
EMBASSY AIRPORT ACCESS REMAINS RESTRICTED 
 
----------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶5. (C) EAAI has not relaxed its restrictions on Post's access to 
the airport, implemented in 2008 (Ref C).  We are now limited to 
day-passes exclusively for classified diplomatic pouch runs, and 
only with 48-hour written advanced notice.  Recently, in October 
2009, EAAI denied Post access to the tarmac to deliver the 
classified diplomatic pouch directly to the airplane.  Post has yet 
to receive its first bill for this service, now provided by EAAI. 
 
 
 
PASSENGER NUMBERS STEADY 
 
------------------------ 
 
 
 
¶6. (C) Despite the aforementioned problems, airlines that serve 
routes between the United States and Nicaragua continue to report 
full flights, with especially large numbers of missionary groups 
and surfers continuing to visit.  Airline representatives said that 
they have increased ticket sales by lowering prices.  They are 
using smaller planes to keep their operations profitable.  In 
August 2008, approximately 44,000 passengers entered Nicaragua 
through Augusto Sandino International Airport.  In comparison, 
42,000 entered in August 2009.  In August 2008, approximately 
52,000 passengers departed Nicaragua.  In comparison, 49,000 
departed in August 2009.  While the 2009 figures represent a slight 
decrease, they fall within the historic range over the previous 
four years. 
 
 
 
COMMENT 
 
------- 
 
 
 
¶7. (C) The deterioration in the relationship between the airlines 
and EAAI reflects an ongoing phenomenon, that is, government 
agencies staffed with FSLN loyalists who have little or no 
expertise related to their new responsibilities.  The upcoming 
December 9-16 Transportation Security Administration (TSA) 
inspection of Sandino Airport thus comes at an ideal time to assess 
EAAI's ability to maintain security.  The team's access, however, 
may be limited as our relationship with EAAI devolves into a 
pattern of interaction similar to that with the respective airport 
authorities in Venezuela and Bolivia. 
SANDERS