05ANKARA942
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Feb 18 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 000942 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 18, 2005 
 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
US Warns Ankara: Military Intervention Will Destabilize Iraq 
- Sabah 
US: No Troop Buildup Against Turkey - Hurriyet 
US Opens to `TRNC' - Aksam 
US Commercial Counselor Lands at Ercan Airport in `TRNC' - 
Hurriyet 
Greek Cypriots Furious Over US Trade Mission to `TRNC' - 
Milliyet 
Sistani Will Have the Last Word in Iraq - Milliyet 
Syria to Buy Russian Missiles - Sabah 
US, EU Disagree Over Lebanese Hizbullah - Hurriyet 
Negroponte to be `Lord of the Spies' - Sabah 
US Intelligence Boss to Come From Baghdad - Hurriyet 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
US Embassy Denies Troops Build-Up in Northern Iraq - Radikal 
Northern Iraq Warning From US - Cumhuriyet 
Nicosia Angry about US Trade Visit to `TRNC' - Radikal 
US Companies Make Business Landing in `TRNC' - Zaman 
Visiting US Companies Signal Removal of Sanctions on `TRNC' 
- Zaman 
Rice Provokes World Against Syria - Yeni Safak 
US Puts Heavy Pressure on Syria - Radikal 
For Now, US Prefers Diplomatic Pressure on Iran - Cumhuriyet 
Tehran Warns of `Devastating' Response to US Attack - 
Radikal 
PM Erdogan: UN Failed in Cyprus, Iraq - Yeni Safak 
Negroponte Tapped as New US Intelligence Chief - Radikal 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
US Embassy Denies Military Buildup in Northern Iraq:  The US 
Embassy in Ankara denied Thursday a recent article in "The 
Guardian" claiming that the US has massed troops in northern 
Iraq in anticipation of ethnic conflict or a possible 
military intervention by Turkey.  The statement notes that 
there have been changes to the mission of US forces,duties 
in northern Iraq, but denies that any changes are directed 
against Turkey.  The US is pleased by the cooperation and 
support provided by Turkey for coalition efforts in Iraq. 
According to the statement, a military intervention by any 
of Iraq's neighbors would bring destabilization and wider 
conflict.  The statement added that the US `has no reason to 
think' that Turkey would undertake such an action.  Several 
papers reported that the `warning' tone of the embassy 
statement caused discomfort among officials at the Foreign 
Ministry.  Unidentified MFA officials told journalists that 
the statement went beyond denying the "Guardian" story, and 
unnecessarily made comments on Turkey's behalf. 
 
US Trade Delegation Visit to `TRNC' Draws Harsh Greek 
Cypriot Reaction:  A US trade delegation of 12 leading 
American companies paid a landmark visit to north Cyprus on 
Thursday to explore business opportunities.  The Turkish 
Cypriot Chamber of Commerce hailed the visit as a 
`milestone' of economic and political significance.  `The 
presence of US brands here will have a great influence on 
the Greek Cypriots,' told Ali Erel, head of the chamber, to 
the Turkish press.  Halim Neyzi, chairman of the American 
Business Forum in Turkey, which organized the trip, said the 
visit may be an initial step forward for recognition of the 
`TRNC.'  The delegation, headed by US Embassy Commercial 
Counselor Amer Kayani, prompted a formal protest from the 
Greek Cypriot government.  Greek Cypriot spokesman 
Chrysostomides said his government objected to the visit 
because American businessmen were accompanied by a US 
diplomat who entered Cyprus through an `illegal' airport in 
the north.  President Papadopoulos denounced the visit, 
saying it would neither help efforts for reunification nor 
enhance Cyprus-US relations.  Prime Minister Erdogan 
described the delegation's visit as `positive,' and called 
on the Europeans to undertake a similar initiative.  `After 
all,' the PM said, `the EU made a commitment on this issue 
as well.'  "Radikal" reports from Athens that Assistant 
Secretary of State Beth Jones told Greek journalists in a 
 
SIPDIS 
teleconference that the US business delegation to northern 
Cyprus was a `timely' event.  `Just like the European Union, 
the US is trying to free north Cyprus of sanctions.  Even 
President Papadopoulos has made statements in favor of the 
Turkish Cypriots' economic development,' Jones reportedly 
said.  `It is absurd that poverty should prevail in north 
Cyprus,' she added. 
 
Syrian Ambassador Holds Israel Responsible for the Hariri 
Killing:  The Syrian Ambassador to Ankara, Halid Raad, said 
that former Lebanese Prime Minister Refik Hariri had been 
assassinated by those wishing to incite ethnic division in 
Lebanon,  "Milliyet" reports.  `Israel, the strongest 
opponent of a strong and stable Lebanon, is responsible for 
the killing of Hariri,' Raad claimed, addign that Hariri had 
been planning to visit Syria before his death.  "Milliyet" 
reports that President Sezer, in a meeting with opposition 
CHP leader Deniz Baykal, argued that the Hariri 
assassination `would only bring trouble for Syria.'  `Why 
would the Syrians possibly want to cary out such an action?' 
Sezer reportedly asked. 
 
FM Gul Visits the Hariri Family in Beirut:  FM Abdullah Gul 
went to Beirut Thursday and conveyed Turkey's condolences to 
the family of assassinated former Lebanese PM Refik Hariri. 
Gul later visited the tomb of Hariri, and voiced hope that 
such incidents will not be repeated.  An MFA official said 
the FM had no plans for any official contacts while he was 
in Beirut. 
 
WSJ Column Draws Criticism, Praise:  The February 16 column 
by Robert Pollock in "The Wall Street Journal" criticizing 
the Turkish media for encouraging anti-American conspiracy 
theories drew strong reactions across the media today. 
Government-owned "Star" newspaper decried the column as part 
of an effort `by the US administration and the US media' to 
`throw mud' at Turkey.  The paper accused the United States 
of using the US media to `take revenge' for Turkey's 
decision not to allow US troops to enter Iraq through Turkey 
in March 2003.  Fehmi Koru, a prominent columnist in the 
Islamist "Yeni Safak" close to some in the AKP government, 
described the column as `racist' and `vengeful.' Koru 
claimed that Pollock had `obviously been fed' his negative 
view of Turkey by US embassy officials.  Meral Tamer, 
writing in the mainstream daily "Milliyet," viewed the 
Pollock column as a `shot across Turkey's bow,' and noted 
that the Journal had not written a word against Turkey in 
the past 20 years.  Tamer noted that the journal `influences 
decision making at the White House and in US financial 
circles,' and urged Turkey to evaluate the Journal's warning 
carefully.  Ismet Berkan, writing for the liberal- 
intellectual "Radikal," largely agreed with Pollock's that 
much of the anti-Americanism seen today in Turkey stems from 
`anti-imperialist views based on isolationism and fear of 
foreigners.' 
 
Turkey's Contribution to Broader Middle East Initiative: 
Turkey plans to discuss the role of women in political and 
daily life at a conference to be be attended by Middle 
Eastern countries in Istanbul in June, "Cumhuriyet" reports. 
The paper regards the conference as a contribution by 
Turkey, a `model' country, to the US-sponsored Broader 
Middle East (BME) project.  Ankara has assigned Ambassador 
Omur Orhun as coordinator for Turkey's participation in the 
BME.  Turkey has outlined some principles concerning the BME 
initiative: Reforms in the Middle East should be supported 
by domestic dynamics rather than external forces; no single 
pattern of democracy should be applied to regional 
countries; all related countries should `take ownership' of 
the initiative; only those who are willing to participate 
should join the project; a special emphasis must be put on 
the role of NGOs. 
 
Turk Among 8 Shot Dead in Iraq:   A Turkish national is 
among eight people found shot dead near the town of Balad, 
north of Baghdad.  All the victims, employees of a US base 
near Balad, were on their way to work when they were 
abducted and killed. 
 
 
MEDIA REACTION: Transatlantic Relations/Iraq/Middle East 
 
"Anti-Americanism and a Paranoid Society" 
Ismet Berkan warned in the liberal-intellectual "Radikal" 
(2/18): "The Wall Street Journal article by Robert Pollock 
not only puts a mirror to our face, but also warns about the 
danger of losing US friendship.  Rising anti-Americanism in 
Turkey is an undeniable fact.  One can come up with many 
reasons for it, and a certain amount of the blame can be 
attributed to the United States.  But the fact of the matter 
is that growing anti-Americanism largely stems from a 
paranoia, just as was expressed by the WSJ writer. . There 
are many reasons to get angry at the US -- for taking 
revenge for the 9/11 attacks against innocent Afghans and 
Iraqis, for instance, or for seeking more revenge in the 
occupation of Iraq.  Or you may be angry at the US for not 
signing the Kyoto protocol.  There are reasons to be angry 
at the US, but expressing this anger must also be in a 
healthy fashion.  I am afraid the current anti-Americanism 
in Turkey has gone beyond beyond frustration about certain 
US policies.  Anti-Americanism in Turkey, as Pollock wrote, 
stems more from our isolationist and xenophobic tendencies, 
and includes anti-imperialistic rhetoric not unlike that of 
the former Soviet Union." 
 
"The Danger of Civil War in Northern Iraq" 
Kamuran Ozbir argued in the nationalist "Ortadogu" (2/18): 
"Things are not moving in the right direction in Iraq, and 
this has resulted in severe consequences for the situation 
in Kirkuk.  The Kurds are working hard to regain their 
political rights after being suppressed by Saddam's regime 
and its Arabization policy.  The Kurds are moving to settle 
in Kirkuk in the hopes that it will be the capital city of a 
future Kurdish state.  Such steps have been kept under 
control by the US, at least for now.  The US military 
presence helped the formation of a regional parliament 
representing the four minority groups.  With the help of the 
US, some other political regulations were also implemented 
and tension in this area is now under control.  A civil war 
in Iraq or a separate Kurdish state may seem like doomsday 
scenarios, but they are not completely out of the question. 
. Ankara should work to improve ties with Kurdish leaders 
and take steps toward changing the current psychology on 
both sides. That should include stopping financial aid to 
the Iraqi Turkmen Front and urging Kurdish leaders to act in 
a fair and just manner.  There is also a strong need for a 
special UN representative in Kirkuk to work with both 
sides." 
"Forming New Fronts in the Middle East" 
Sami Kohen opined in the mass appeal "Milliyet" (2/18): 
"Hariri's assassination, just like other similar examples, 
will be added on the list of murders carried out by unknown 
persons.  Such events are always open to various conspiracy 
theories, and the speculation will continue until the facts 
come to the surface.  As France has already suggested, 
therefore, it would be appropriate to have the assassination 
investigated by an international commission.  This can be 
done under UN supervision as well, as long as the Lebanese 
government gives permission.  The assassination in Beirut 
gave the US an opportunity to intensify its campaign against 
Syria.  In a way, the US has benefited from the incident. 
All US officials,  including Secretary of State Rice, are 
pressuring Damascus heavily to meet certain conditions - to 
stop sheltering terrorist organizations like Hamas and 
Hizbollah, to prevent terrorist infiltration into Iraq, and 
to withdraw from Lebanon under an existing UN decision. 
Will Syria, which has so far rejected US demands and 
threats, change its stance?  That seems doubtful.  On the 
contrary, Syria is forming a new front with Iran against the 
US.  These new formations in the always dangerous territory 
of the Middle East, signal a period of new conflict and 
tension." 
 
EDELMAN