05ANKARA905
TURKEY'S PARTICIPATION IN PSI OEG MEETINGS- MARCH
Thu Feb 17 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

170914Z Feb 05UNCLAS ANKARA 000905 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC PARM TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY'S PARTICIPATION IN PSI OEG MEETINGS- MARCH 
21-22, 2005 
 
REF: 04 ANKARA 4806 (NOTAL) 
 
¶1.  This is an action request- see para 5. 
 
¶2. MFA Arms Control and Disarmament Head of Department Sabri 
Ergen on February 16 informed EXBS Advisor that MFA had 
received a copy of an OSD invitation to Turkey to participate 
in the next PSI Operational Experts Group meeting to be held 
in Omaha, Nebraska in March.  The invitation was forwarded to 
them by the Turkish General Staff.  Ergen stated while this 
was not the preferred way that the GOT would like to receive 
invitations, due to the general time frame and the desire of 
GOT to actively participate in PSI activities, it will be 
viewed as an "official notification". Ergen said the GOT will 
be providing a team of experts to participate in the PSI OEG 
meeting. 
 
¶3.  The following individuals will comprise the Turkish 
delegation: 
 
¶A.  Brigade General Haldun Solmazturk, Department of 
Disarmament and International Security, Turkish Ground Forces 
Head Quarters, General Staff, Head of the Turkish Delegation. 
 
¶B.  Colonel Celal Pulat, Department of Disarmament and 
International Security, Turkish Ground Forces Head Quarters, 
General Staff 
 
¶C.  Captain Mustafa Iptes, Department of Plans and Policies, 
Chief Agreements and Standardization, Turkish Navy 
Headquarters, General Staff 
 
¶D.  Sabri Ergen, Head of Department, Disarmament and Arms 
Control Department, MFA 
 
¶E.  Major Abdullah Kaya, Legal Advisor, Turkish General Staff 
 
¶4.  Comment: Turkey is again increasing its participation in 
PSI activities after several high level USG visitors have 
informed the GOT that there is no plan to reconvene the PSI 
Core Group.  The GOT would like either to join the Core Group 
or see it abolished. End comment. 
 
¶5. Action Request:  The GOT interagency process is cumbersome 
at best.  On PSI, we have been told repeatedly that MFA has 
the lead on the Turkish side.  A more active Turkish 
participation in PSI requires our ensuring all the relevant 
agencies are engaged.  We therefore repeat our request reftel 
that future invitations be sent through the Embassy to allow 
us to deliver them via diplomatic note and to facilitate GOT 
interagency coordination. 
EDELMAN