05ANKARA662
DOD PARTICIPATION IN IDEF TURKEY 2005
Fri Feb 04 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 000662 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MARR TU
SUBJECT: DOD PARTICIPATION IN IDEF TURKEY 2005 
 
¶1.  Mission strongly supports and encourages direct 
Department of Defense participation in the 7th International 
Defense Industry, Aerospace and Maritime Fair (IDEF) 2005, 
which will be held in Ankara, Turkey from September 27-30, 
¶2005.  IDEF is held on a bi-annual basis and attracts the 
attention of developed industrial countries, as well as 
countries and organizations from the Balkans, Middle East, 
Central Asia, Caucasus, and North Africa.  IDEF plays an 
essential role in demonstrating progress and improvements in 
the field of Defense Industry to NATO members and regional 
allies. 
 
¶2.  Many of our systems are in heated procurement 
competitions for limited Turkish Defense resources.  As 
Turkey approaches the October start of EU accession 
negotiations, the European Union is pressing the Turkish 
government to think and buy European.  We therefore advocate 
a robust US presence at IDEF to display and demonstrate 
systems that showcase superior U.S. technology and 
interoperability.  Our presence would also advance U.S. 
security interest in  and illustrates our commitment to NATO 
and build strong coalition partnerships for the future. 
Participation in IDEF 2005 would directly support mission 
efforts to strengthen our bilateral security relationship. 
 
¶3.  IDEF 2005 will also offer a good forum to support the 
EUCOM and DOD's theater strategy of engagement and 
preparedness.  It is in both the U.S. and Turkish interests 
to promote interoperability, especially through shared 
procurement goals, as we continue to engage in the Global War 
On Terrorism.  A strong DOD presence at IDEF in 2005 would 
support for U.S. defense industry that has significant 
interest in sales and support for military equipment to 
Turkey given the government's upcoming and potential defense 
procurements, F-16 modernization, and Unmanned Aerial 
Vehicle, S-70 Sea Hawk, and attack helicopter tenders. 
Therefore, the Mission recommends DOD support of IDEF 2005. 
 
¶4.  A potential list of equipment involved may include items 
such as,M1A2 Sep, AH64D Longbow Apache, CH-47D, CH53, AH-1Z 
Bell King Cobra, AVDS-1790 1500 HP Eng (GDLS), Harpoon, JDAM, 
F15E, and UAV's such as the GNAT- 750, I-GNAT, Predator B, 
Prowler and Prowler II, and Altus. 
 
¶5.  Mission contact for this program is LTC Joe DellaSilva, 
who can be reached by phone at (90)(312) 418-9503 or at 
dellasilvaj@odc-t.ankara.af.mil. 
 
EDELMAN 
EDELMAN