05BRASILIA388
BRAZIL: GOB REQUESTS USG "BEST EFFORTS" TO
Wed Feb 16 00:00:00 +0100 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Brasilia
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L BRASILIA 000388 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR A/S NOREIGA, NSC FOR TOM SHANNON, DOD/OSD 
FOR DASD PARDO-MAURER 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/15/2015 
TAGS: PREL MARR MOPS BR
SUBJECT: BRAZIL: GOB REQUESTS USG "BEST EFFORTS" TO 
DISCOURAGE ALLEGED U.S. FIRM'S RECRUITMENT OF BRAZILIANS 
FOR SECURITY WORK IN IRAQ 
 
Classified By: AMBASSADOR JOHN J. DANILOVICH. REASONS: 1.4 
(B)(D). 
 
 ¶1. (C) Ambassador, accompanied by PolCouns, Consul General 
and Special Assistant, met on 15 February with Ambassador Ruy 
Nogueira, Foreign Ministry (MRE) Under Secretary for 
Cooperation and Brazilian Overseas Communities, at Nogueira's 
request.  Nogueira, whose regular portfolio focuses on 
consular, immigration and expat issues, indicated that he was 
substituting for Under Secretary for Political Affairs 
Pedrosa (who is traveling), on instruction by FM Amorim, to 
urgently register senior-level GOB concern regarding reports 
of recruiting of Brazilians to work in Iraq as security 
contractors for a U.S. firm, Inveco International Holding 
S.A. of Florida.  Nogueira noted that the issue had already 
been raised in Washington in January by Brazilian Ambassador 
Abdenur with senior officials at State, NSC and DOD/OSD. 
Nogueira said Abdenur had been told that the USG had no 
information on Inveco but would investigate and follow up 
with the GOB.  Nogueira provided Ambassador an aide-memoire 
detailing the Washington meetings and GOB concerns (Note: An 
informal translation of the aide-memoire is being e-mailed to 
Department WHA/BSC. End note.) 
 
¶2. (C) Nogueira said that two German nationals, identified as 
Heiko Helmut Emil Seibold and Frank Gunter Salewski, had been 
reportedly seeking to recruit ex-Brazilian military personnel 
in Goias and Sao Paulo states for security work in Iraq. 
Salewski's efforts were reported in recent days in the press, 
indicating the recruiting effort was continuing weeks after 
the GOB's initial manifestation of concern to the USG in 
January.  The press attention was proving "a source of some 
embarrassment" for the GOB, Nogueira said, and although the 
GOB is aware of the "delicacy" of the issue, he requested USG 
"best efforts" to investigate Inveco's activities and 
dissuade it from recruiting in Brazil. 
 
¶3. (C) Ambassador replied that he was aware of Abdenur's 
discussions in Washington, and would immediately provide the 
aide-memoire to Washington.  However, he noted that DOD/OSD 
DAS for Western Hemisphere Pardo-Maurer had told Ambassador 
that DOD could not, thus far, find record of a security 
contractor called Inveco.  Ambassador requested any 
additional information that the GOB could provide on the 
firm.  Nogueira indicated that the GOB is considering 
interviewing Salewski. 
 
¶4. (C) Comment: With the GOB receiving heat in the press for 
its inability to determine the fate, let alone arrange the 
release of the one known Brazilian hostage in captivity in 
Iraq, the MRE apparently is anxious to assure the pool of 
potential Brazilian victims does not increase.  Some 
editorial comment here has already waxed indignant about 
Brazil's supplying "cannon fodder" for "mercenary" 
contractors in Iraq.  In light of this and the repeated, 
high-level GOB requests, we hope that we can provide some 
feedback to the Brazilians asap.  We ask that Washington 
agencies attempt to track down Inveco and determine what it 
may be doing in Brazil. We are checking locally; a quick 
search through the internet found a few hits for "Inveco 
International Holding" in stories related to Iraq, and one 
Brazilian press report indicated Inveco is tied to "Global 
Security Group,"  a New York security and risk management 
firm that has a web site (www.globalsecuritygroup.com).  We 
will also contact colleagues at the German Embassy, where 
some press reports claim Salewski and Seibold -- described as 
long-time expats resident in Brazil -- have sought assistance. 
 
DANILOVICH