05TELAVIV1170
WB/G SITREP: FEBRUARY 28, 2005 (1200 HOURS LOCAL)
Mon Feb 28 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEL AVIV 001170 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR BURNS/SATTERFIELD/DIBBLE; 
NEA/SA/EX FOR RICHIE; DEPT FOR DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR 
DS/IP/NEA; 
NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN; USAID FOR DCHA, DCHA/FPP, PRM FOR 
DEWEY/GREENE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG PHUM PREL PTER ASEC CASC GZ IS
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: FEBRUARY 28, 2005 (1200 HOURS LOCAL) 
-- FIVE DEAD AND MORE THAN 50 INJURED IN TEL AVIV SUICIDE 
BOMBING 
 
 
This is a joint ConGen Jerusalem/Embassy Tel Aviv cable. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: A suicide bomber affiliated with 
Palestinian Islamic Jihad detonated an explosive device 
outside a Tel Aviv nightclub at 2320 hours February 25, 
killing four people and injuring another 55 Israeli 
civilians, five of them severely and eight moderately.  A 
fifth victim died of her injuries overnight February 27-28. 
The PA released a statement February 26 condemning the 
bombing, charging that the attack sought to sabotage 
Palestinian national interests, and promised to pursue the 
perpetrators.  PA President Abbas also met on February 26 
with PA security chiefs and ordered immediate action in 
response to the bombing.  On February 26, the IDF imposed a 
curfew on the West Bank village of Deir al-Ghusun, near 
Tulkarm, for several hours, arresting five Palestinians, 
including two brothers of the Tel Aviv suicide bomber.  The 
IDF also arrested the local Imam in the village.  PA Interior 
Minister Nasir Yusif announced on February 26 that PA 
security forces arrested three Palestinians from Deir 
al-Ghusun suspected of being associates of the bomber.  End 
Summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: In Qalqilya, a Hamas activist died on February 26 
from injuries received during clashes with the IDF earlier 
this month. 
 
-- Attack/Injury: An Israeli Border Policeman shot and 
wounded a Palestinian woman on February 26 outside the 
Ibrahim Mosque/Tomb of the Patriarchs in Hebron after the 
woman attempted to stab the policeman with a knife. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) ARRESTS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Curfew/Arrests: The IDF on February 26 imposed a curfew on 
the West Bank village of Deir al-Ghusun, near Tulkarm, and 
arrested five Palestinians, including two brothers of the Tel 
Aviv suicide bomber.  The IDF also arrested the local Imam in 
the village.  The IDF lifted the curfew several hours later 
(see "Israel"). 
 
-- Arrests: Palestinian Authority (PA) Interior Minister 
Nasir Yusif announced on February 26 that PA security forces 
arrested three Palestinians from Deir al-Ghusun in connection 
with the suicide bombing in Tel Aviv.  The three arrested men 
are suspected on being associates of the bomber. 
 
-- Arrests: The IDF arrested nine Palestinians February 27 in 
the villages of Idhna, near Hebron, and Illar and Attil 
villages, near Tulkarm.  One of the arrested individuals 
includes an officer from the PA intelligence service, the 
Mukhabarat. 
 
-- Incursions/Arrests: The IDF entered overnight February 
27-28 the Balata refugee camp near Nablus and Ramallah, 
arresting at least five Palestinians. 
 
-- Arrests: Israeli police announced on February 27 the 
arrest of eight individuals, five Israelis and three 
Palestinians, suspected of fraudulently acquiring and selling 
West Bank land owned by Palestinians. 
 
-- Security Development: The IDF on February 26 imposed as 
many as 13 flying checkpoints in the northern West Bank in 
response to the February 25 suicide bombing in Tel Aviv. 
 
-- Security Development: Palestinian gunmen on February 27 
fired gunshots at an Israeli vehicle traveling near the 
village of Zawiya in the northern West Bank.  There were no 
injuries reported from this incident. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- The PA on February 26 released a statement that condemned 
the February 25 suicide bombing in Tel Aviv, charging that 
the attack sought to sabotage Palestinian national interests, 
and promised to pursue the perpetrators.  PA President Abbas 
also met on February 26 with PA security chiefs and ordered 
immediate action in response to the bombing. 
 
-- PA security advisor Jibril Rajoub declared that the 
Palestinian factional talks scheduled to take place in Cairo 
on March 5 are postponed until March 15 in the wake of the 
February 25 suicide bombing in Tel Aviv. 
 
-- PA President Abbas departed Ramallah on February 27 for 
Amman, en route to the United Kingdom to attend the March 1 
London Conference. 
 
-- Palestinian media reported that Prime Minister Quraya, 
appointed PA Minister for Civil Affairs Minister Mohammad 
Dahlan as the PA,s Coordinator on the Gaza Disengagement 
Plan. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Palestinian media reported that one Palestinian 
died February 25 from injuries sustained earlier that day 
when three Palestinians attempted to cross the Egyptian-Gaza 
border at Rafah.  The other two men were arrested, according 
to Israeli media reports. 
 
-- Injuries: Nil. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: Nil. 
 
-- Shootings: The IDF reported that Palestinian militants 
launched one shooting attack at an IDF outpost south of Neve 
Dekalim February 27. 
 
-- Shootings: UNRWA reported that IDF soldiers opened fire 
with machine guns for five minutes February 26 at a group of 
Palestinian farmers attempting to approach their bulldozed 
fields near Kfar Darom.  No injuries were reported. 
 
-- Explosions: Nil. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) INCURSIONS/DEMOLITIONS: 
 
-- UNRWA reported that an IDF bulldozer leveled ground 
northwest of Kfar Darom February 25. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS: 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was open February 26-28, with a major detour at 
Netzarim Junction.  Abu Khouli and Netzarim Junction are both 
open 24 hours per day.  Abu Khouli is open only for public 
transportation; no private vehicles are allowed to cross. 
 
-- Erez Crossing was open for internationals and for a 
limited number of Palestinians February 25-27, and 530 
laborers and 35 merchants crossed into Israel February 25; 47 
laborers and 16 merchants crossed February 26; and 978 
laborers and 122 merchants crossed February 27. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone was open February 27, and 457 
Palestinian laborers entered the zone.  The Erez Industrial 
Zone was closed February 25-26. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers February 
27-28, but was open for the import of aggregates used in 
construction.  Sufa was closed February 26. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was partially open February 26-28. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open for arrivals and departures 
February 26-28. 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan checkpoint was closed.  Toufah checkpoint 
was open for residents of al-Mowassi, except for males 
between the ages of 16-35. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) ISRAEL: 
 
 -- A suicide bomber affiliated with Palestinian Islamic 
Jihad (PIJ) detonated an explosive device outside a Tel Aviv 
nightclub at 2320 hours February 25, killing four people and 
injuring another 55 Israeli civilians, five of them severely 
and eight moderately.  A fifth victim died of her injuries 
overnight February 27-28. 
-- According to media reports, the GOI decided to refrain 
from responding militarily to the February 25 suicide attack. 
 The IDF will, however, resume operations, including targeted 
killings, against PIJ activists, has delayed the expected 
transfer of five West Bank towns to PA security control, and 
has postponed indefinitely planned joint meetings to discuss 
prisoner releases. 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
KURTZER