05TELAVIV671
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Fri Feb 04 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 TEL AVIV 000671 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
Mideast 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
The electronic media reported that last night, in his 
State of the Union address, President Bush reiterated 
his two-state vision for Israel and Palestine, and said 
that Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice will discuss 
with PM Sharon and PA Chairman Mahmoud Abbas "how we 
and our friends can help the Palestinian people end 
terror and build the institutions of a peaceful, 
independent, democratic state. To promote this 
democracy, I will ask Congress for USD 350 million to 
support Palestinian political, economic, and security 
reforms."  The electronic media also quoted the 
President as saying: "We expect the Syrian government 
to end all support for terror and open the door to 
freedom" and cited his remarks that "Iran remains the 
world's primary state sponsor of terror -- pursuing 
nuclear weapons while depriving its people of the 
freedom they seek and deserve."  Bush further 
commented: "We are working with European allies to make 
clear to the Iranian regime that it must give up its 
uranium enrichment program and any plutonium 
reprocessing, and end its support for terror." 
 
All media highlighted the acceptance by Sharon, Abbas, 
and Jordan's King Abdullah of Egyptian President Hosni 
Mubarak's invitation to a summit meeting in Sharm el- 
Sheikh on Tuesday.  Ha'aretz quoted GOI sources as 
saying that the summit will conclude with the 
announcement of new security understandings between 
Israel and the PA.  Yediot says that the end of the 
Intifada will be proclaimed at the conclusion of the 
talks.  Leading media reported that Egypt and Jordan 
are expected to announce at the summit that they are 
returning their ambassadors to Israel.  Channel 2-TV 
and other media reported that Israel will not agree to 
discuss diplomatic issues being raised at the summit. 
Maariv reported that King Abdullah has suggested that 
the 1,000-strong Jordanian army's "Bader" brigade be 
stationed in the northernmost part of the West Bank, 
that Abbas agreed to the idea, but that Israel is 
hesitant on the matter. 
 
Israel Radio reported that this morning, Sharon 
convened the restricted diplomatic ministerial 
committee to discuss the transfer to the PA of security 
responsibility in the cities of Jericho, Bethlehem, 
Ramallah, Qalqilya, and Tulkarm.  Defense Minister 
Shaul Mofaz proposed to his colleagues a series of 
gradual, cautious and reversible steps to restore 
security relations with the PA -- concerning prisoner 
release, the reopening of border crossings, etc. 
 
Yediot reported that Israel will pardon Muhammad Deif, 
the most wanted Palestinian activist, who is 
responsible for the deaths of 90 Israelis, provided he 
pledges to refrain from planning and being involved in 
terrorist attacks.  Israel Radio quoted Vice Premier 
Shimon Peres as saying that he approves the release of 
wounded Palestinian prisoners "with blood on their 
hands." 
 
Israel Radio reported that Mofaz has ordered the 
demolition of settler outposts in the West Bank. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that the IDF and Shin Bet are 
increasingly concerned by a series of harassment acts 
by extreme right-wing activists aimed at religious IDF 
officers who live and are stationed in the territories. 
 
Jerusalem Post reported that the Yesha Council of 
Jewish Settlements in the Territories is quietly 
supporting a legal forum that is lobbying the GOI for 
land inside Israel to relocate several Gush Katif 
(Katif Bloc) settlements. 
 
In an interview with Jerusalem Post, Interior Minister 
Ophir Pines-Paz (Labor) praised the upcoming Sharon- 
Abbas summit, but warned that a Gaza Strip withdrawal 
cannot be taken as a foregone conclusion. 
 
All media reported that German President Horst Koehler 
started his speech to the Knesset on Wednesday with 
remarks in Hebrew, in a bid to assuage criticism by 
some politicians about him delivering his speech in 
German.  (Health Minister Danny Naveh and other Knesset 
members walked out of the plenum in protest.)  Koehler, 
who also visited Sderot, stated that his country must 
deal with anti-Semitism. 
 
Ha'aretz and Jerusalem Post reported that Peace Now is 
calling for the establishment of a commission of 
inquiry to investigate and, if necessary, order 
indictments against those, including housing ministers 
and prime ministers, who lent a hand to the 
construction of outposts in the territories and thus 
broke the law. 
 
Leading media reported that on Wednesday, Diaspora and 
Jerusalem Affairs Minister Natan Sharansky, who chairs 
the cabinet committee that adopted the controversial 
decision to apply the Absentee Property Law to 
Jerusalem, indignantly rejected A-G Menachem Mazuz's 
charge that the Ministerial Committee on Jerusalem 
Affairs made its decision improperly.  Ha'aretz and 
Jerusalem Post reported that on Wednesday, Finance 
Minister Binyamin Netanyahu defended the cabinet 
decision to the Knesset. 
 
Leading media reported that for the first time on 
Wednesday, Palestinian security officials demolished an 
arms-smuggling tunnel linking the Palestinian and 
Egyptian sides of Rafah.  Yediot reported that 
Wednesday Defense Minister Shaul Mofaz faulted PA 
policemen for not having prevented mortar fire at Katif 
Bloc settlements. 
 
Jerusalem Post cited a denial by the IDF Spokesperson 
of a Channel 2-TV report on Wednesday claiming that 
thousands of reservists would receive call-ups in the 
coming days to undergo military training in preparation 
for the Gaza disengagement.  Reporting on a meeting 
Vice Premier Shimon Peres and Minister Haim Ramon held 
Wednesday with chief PA negotiator Saeb Erekat and 
Palestinian security official Muhammad Dahlan, Yediot 
writes that the Palestinians demanded that Israel 
demolish the houses to be evacuated in the Gaza Strip, 
as the PA prefers to build high-rise buildings for 
Palestinian residents. 
 
Maariv reported that during the weekend, Mofaz met in 
London with an "unofficial Syrian figure," whom he 
surprised with his knowledge of Syria. 
 
Maariv reported that in the first public move of this 
type, a delegation of associates of Jordanian King 
Abdullah will arrive in Israel to day to meet Likud 
Knesset members.  The newspaper writes that Jordan is 
worried by an initiative put forward several months ago 
by Likud activist Uzi Cohen to establish a Palestinian 
state in Jordan and Syria. 
 
Jerusalem Post and Israel Radio quoted Danish PM Anders 
Fogh Rasmussen as saying this week in a speech at the 
University of Arhus: "Israel is surrounded by enemies 
that want to throw it into the sea, and we should 
recognize that it has a special history.  Israel must 
use somewhat tough measures to defend itself." 
 
Ha'aretz reported that the U.S. may rank Israel among 
the group of countries not taking action against 
trafficking in persons -- a move that could result on 
the imposition of economic sanctions.  The newspaper 
writes that, in its response to questions on the matter 
from the U.S. administration, the Justice Ministry 
noted that while Israel has seen grave cases involving 
the exploitation of foreign workers, and even isolated 
incidents that can be defined as trade for the purposes 
of labor, these cases do not meet the U.S. legal 
definition of trafficking in persons. 
 
Jerusalem Post quoted a source close to the suit 
against the Arab Bank, which has allegedly funded 
Palestinian terror operations, as saying that the New 
York branch of the Jordanian bank is now being 
investigated by U.S. Treasury bank regulators for money 
laundering. 
 
Yediot reported that many Israelis have given up on the 
idea of obtaining an immigrant visa to the U.S., 
because of the United States' tough policy in the 
matter.  The newspaper reported that there has been a 
23 percent drop in issuance of immigrant visas by the 
U.S. Embassy in Tel Aviv.  Yediot reported that 
Ambassador Dan Kurtzer has recently told Foreign 
Ministry D-G Ron Prosor that this policy is part of the 
attempt by U.S. authorities to cope with illegal 
employment of young Israelis in the U.S. 
 
Erratum: Wednesday's Media Reaction report mentioned: 
"Ha'aretz recommends that those 'with blood on their 
hands' not be included [among Palestinian prisoners to 
be released]."  It should have read: "Ha'aretz reported 
that the Shin Bet recommends that those 'with blood on 
their hands' not be included." 
 
-------- 
Mideast: 
-------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Aluf Benn wrote on page one of 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: "From Sharon's 
point of view, the official invitation to Egypt ... 
marks the end of the international isolation." 
 
Chief Economic Editor and senior columnist Sever 
Plotker wrote in the lead editorial of mass- 
circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot: "The summit of 
the Intifada's end constitutes, to begin with, a 
tremendous personal victory for Ariel Sharon." 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Ben Caspit wrote in popular, 
pluralist Maariv: " What is going to happen on Tuesday 
at Sharm el-Sheikh?.... In any case the Prime Minister 
has nothing to lose there.  For Sharon it will be the 
hero's return.  For Abu Mazen it is the point of no 
return." 
 
Conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized: 
"Don't get us wrong, we appreciate the warming in 
relations.  But if Egypt wants Israelis to consider it 
a credible mediator, let alone a leader toward peace, 
summits, hints and promises are not enough." 
 
Senior columnist and chief defense commentator Zeev 
Schiff wrote in Ha'aretz: "In the steps he has recently 
taken, Mahmoud Abbas has revealed another aspect of 
Arafat's character." 
Middle East affairs commentator Guy Bechor, a lecturer 
at the Interdisciplinary Center, wrote in Yediot 
Aharonot: "Terror activity in general has been 
suspended, but it is in fact the quiet in Hamas that 
arouses suspicion." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
¶I.  "A Surprise Invite" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Aluf Benn wrote on page one of 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (February 3): "From 
Sharon's point of view, the official invitation to 
Egypt -- for the first time in his four years in power 
-- marks the end of the international isolation.  If 
the leaders of the Arab world are hosting Sharon, he 
will be a welcome guest in every capital.  But Sharon 
is less concerned today with his global image, and is, 
as per usual, busying himself with internal survival. 
The photo-op with Mubarak, Abbas and Abdullah will 
illustrate to the people at home that Sharon is 
bringing peace.... U.S. President George Bush wants 
democracy in Egypt, Jordan and Saudi Arabia, but right 
now, he needs peace and quiet in Israel. The Sharm 
summit is supposed to herald the renewal of the peace 
process, and to ensure that when he arrives in 
Washington in some 10 days time, [Egyptian intelligence 
chief Omar] Suleiman will be welcomed with cheers and 
pats on the back for his mediation efforts." 
 
II.  "To Sinai, Not in a Tank" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Ben Caspit wrote in popular, 
pluralist Maariv (February 3): "What is going to happen 
on Tuesday at Sharm el-Sheikh?  An historic opportunity 
or a photo opportunity?  In any case the Prime Minister 
has nothing to lose there.  For Sharon it will be the 
hero's return.  For Abu Mazen it is the point of no 
return.  He is standing on the bank of the Rubicon 
hesitating.  At Sharm el-Sheikh [others] are expected 
to give him courage....   Sharon is in no state of 
euphoria.  If Shimon Peres is like a balloon floating 
in the air, full of imaginary plans, Sharon is the 
little boy on the ground holding the string.  There 
will be more terrorist attacks and mistakes and crises 
and failures.  Sharon knows that very well.  On the 
other hand why does he have to put Abdullah and Mubarak 
in the same boat, and everyone else who wants to join 
(except of course Bashar Assad)?  Perhaps it is so that 
he can blame them all [in the event of failure] or at 
least share the responsibility with them....  Two 
fateful weeks await Sharon and us. Condoleezza Rice on 
Sunday, the Sharm el-Sheikh conference on Tuesday, then 
the compensation law for the settlers who are to be 
evacuated, then the disengagement vote in the cabinet, 
then the security fence vote in the cabinet and the 
budget vote in the Knesset.  What more could we want? 
Sharon is calm and is keeping his eye on the ball.  He 
is focused on the target, but he is also worried.  He 
knows his political situation is not simple.  He is no 
stranger to our volatile political system.  He knows 
the dangers which lie in wait for him, and for us." 
 
III.  "The Summit of the End to the Intifada" 
 
Chief Economic Editor and senior columnist Sever 
Plotker wrote in the lead editorial of mass- 
circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot (February 3): 
"The summit of the Intifada's end constitutes, to begin 
with, a tremendous personal victory for Ariel Sharon, 
the Prime Minister of Israel, who just a short time ago 
was declared by Arab public opinion to be an arch 
murderer, who drinks Palestinian blood, who is off 
bounds for any dialogue.  Sharon's determined stand 
against Arafat proved itself and bore fruit for Israel. 
Ever since Arafat's death, there has been a deep 
positive change in relations between the Palestinian 
Authority and Israel.  The four-way summit in Egypt 
will also grant an umbrella of pan-Arab prestige to Abu 
Mazen's position as the leader of the Palestinian state 
and will strengthen the Middle East policy of President 
Bush and his administration.  The festive pictures of 
Sharon being genial in the company of three leading 
Arab leaders will take the place of the pictures of 
fire and killing, terror and assassinations, which our 
region has provided in the last four and a half years. 
This is a substantive change, of true historic 
significance." 
 
 
 
 
IV.  "Expecting More From Egypt" 
 
Conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized 
(February 3): "The coming Sharm e-Sheikh summit ... can 
be construed as a positive development.... [But] if 
Egypt conceives of itself as a mediator out to 
facilitate the formulation of new agreements, then the 
least we can expect is that it adhere to its own 
clearly stipulated commitments in the carefully drafted 
treaty it signed, for which Israel relinquished huge 
stretches of territory -- to say nothing of self- 
sufficiency in oil supplies.... Instead, Egypt is 
showing its people that nothing is normal in its 
relations with Israel and that Israel remains a pariah 
in the region, undeserving of legitimacy.   One need 
only glance at Egypt's state-controlled press to 
realize how demonized Israel remains.... All Mubarak 
needs to do is issue a single directive.  He hasn't 
done so.   Don't get us wrong, we appreciate the 
warming in relations.  But if Egypt wants Israelis to 
consider it a credible mediator, let alone a leader 
toward peace, summits, hints and promises are not 
enough." 
 
¶V.  "The Indirect Message of Mahmoud Abbas" 
 
Senior columnist and chief defense commentator Zeev 
Schiff wrote in Ha'aretz (February 3): "Through ... 
steps [to prevent the firing of rockets against Israel 
and to reduce the clout of Arafat's old guard], Mahmoud 
Abbas basically, if indirectly, sent [an] important 
message.  The speed and the way in which the deployment 
of the large force was executed indicated that the 
force had always been ready, but that someone had 
prevented its deployment and involvement.  In other 
words, Yasser Arafat did not want to do so because he 
had an interest in continuing the violent conflict.  He 
did not give the order to prevent the shooting and when 
someone else, such as Muhammad Dahlan, wanted to do so, 
Arafat stopped him.  When Dahlan showed steadfastness, 
Arafat dispatched his relative, Musa Arafat, to take 
action against him.... In the steps he has recently 
taken, Mahmoud Abbas has revealed another aspect of 
Arafat's character.  Although he is considered, 
justifiably, the father of the Palestinian revolution, 
he was a violent man who used rhetoric and crude lies 
when he said he was interested in ending the violence. 
Israel was not the only place he acted this way.  He 
also caused the deaths of thousands of Arabs in Jordan, 
Lebanon and Syria.  This is part of the heritage he 
left behind him.  It is a shame that he also deceived 
so many Israelis almost to his dying day." 
 
VI.  "Fear Only the Still Waters" 
 
Middle East affairs commentator Guy Bechor, a lecturer 
at the Interdisciplinary Center, wrote in Yediot 
Aharonot (February 3): "There is no question that there 
have been changes for the better in the Palestinian 
Authority of late, a result of the disengagement from 
Arafat.  Terror activity in general has been suspended, 
but it is in fact the quiet in Hamas that arouses 
suspicion -- particularly when this radical Islamic 
organization, like the other military organizations, is 
not to be disarmed. Could it be that the relative quiet 
that Hamas has taken on itself lately is not only meant 
to be used to regroup after the blows it has taken from 
the IDF, but also to create a new balance of terror and 
deterrence against Israel and the Palestinian 
Authority?.... This balance of terror, if it works, is 
also liable to be copied in the future to Judea and 
Samaria [the West Bank] against central Israel.  Israel 
should therefore preempt this now.  And Abu Mazen 
should also not delude himself....   Arafat never 
dreamed of putting Hamas in powerful positions in his 
Palestinian Authority, as Abu Mazen is liable to do in 
order ostensibly to shore up his rule....  There is no 
doubt that there is a pragmatic side to Hamas, one that 
respects the government, in the spirit of the Muslim 
Brothers, but this movement still wants to take over 
the Palestinian camp and to turn it into a religious 
state under Hamas leadership naturally.  Of this the 
Palestinian adage says: 'Fear only the still waters.' 
Does Israel know this saying?" 
 
KURTZER