04MADRID2449
Country Clearance granted for USGS: Bricker
Tue Jun 29 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Madrid
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MADRID 002449 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DOI/INT/USGS/RESTON/JSAFFER 
 
E.O.12958: N/A 
TAGS: OTRA TPHY KSCA ECON SP
SUBJECT: Country Clearance granted for USGS: Bricker 
and Newell. 
 
REF: SECSTATE 137674 
 
1.Post welcomes and grants clearance to Mr. Owen P. 
Bricker, Research Hydrologist and Mr. Wayne L. Newell, 
Research Geologist to travel to Segovia, Spain July 2- 
18, 2004 to present a paper and participate in the Geo- 
Environment 2004 workshop. 
 
¶2. Embassy assistance is not required. Should travel 
schedule change USGS will notify Embassy via fax. In 
country contact is Gaye McKeough, Wesses Institute of 
Technology, Tel: 44 238-029-3223. 
 
¶3. Travelers have applied for Schengen visas. Lodging 
accommodations will be obtained at the Hostal Don 
Jaime, C/Ochoa N8, Ondategui, Segovia. Tel: 34 921- 
¶444787. 
 
4.Visitors are reminded that bearers of diplomatic and 
official passports coming to Spain on official business 
need to obtain a Spanish visa prior to their arrival. 
 
5.In general, Spain is safe.  However, Madrid and other 
large cities in Spain attract a number of criminals and 
pickpockets and frequent incidents of crimes of 
opportunity against the unwary occur.  Carry only 
essential items, including a photocopy of your 
passport.  Visitors can protect themselves from crime 
by being street-smart, alert, and aware of their 
surroundings.  In the event you are victimized by 
crime, or experience any other security-related 
incident, please contact the Embassy's Regional 
Security Office at (91) 587-2550.  Additional 
information regarding safety and security in Spain is 
available on the U.S. Department of State's website 
(http://www.state.gov). 
 
6.Travelers are encouraged to review the most recent 
Worldwide Caution issued by the Department of State. 
As the Department of State continues to develop 
information on any potential security threats to 
Americans overseas, it shares credible threat 
information through its Consular Information Program 
documents, available on the Internet at 
http://travel/state.gov.  In addition to information on 
the Internet, U.S. travelers can hear recorded 
information by calling the Department of State in 
Washington, D.C. at 202-647-5225 from their touch-tone 
telephone, or receive information by automated telefax 
by dialing 202-647-3000 from their fax machine. 
 ARGYROS