05BAGHDAD5133
MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, DECEMBER 15th
Wed Dec 28 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 005133 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, DECEMBER 15th 
ELECTION, TRANSPARENCY; BAGHDAD 
 
SUMMARY: The major themes in today's editorials were the 
political discussions and conflicts regarding parliamentary 
elections and the Kurdish initiative to contain the 
political crisis. 
 
Quasi-independent As-Sabah published a front-page editorial 
entitled "Continuity," in which the author discusses Jalal 
Al-Talabani's initiative to unify the disparate Iraqi 
political groups. The Kurdish Al-Ittihad focuses on the same 
theme in an editorial about the Kurdish initiative to 
harmonize political disagreements among Iraqi factions. 
Independent As-Sabah Al-Jadeed discusses the establishment 
of the forthcoming government and how the Iraqi people look 
forward to witnessing its achievements in its front-page 
editorial, "This Morning." Independent Al-Mashriq criticizes 
the conflict among the disparate political groups and 
contends that parliamentary seats are the keys to wealth and 
dominance in "Share the Cake Fairly." END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "Politicians and Short-Sightedness" (Ad-Dustoor, 12/27) 
¶B. "Why Aggravation?" (Al-Fourat, 12/27) 
¶C. "People Defend Their Votes" (Al-Bayyan, 12/27) 
¶D. "A Mistake That Can Be Contained" (Dar As-Salam, 12/27) 
¶E. "Because Iraq Is Worthy" (Al-I'ttisam, 12/27) 
 
---------------------------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "Politicians and Short-Sightedness" 
(Ad-Dustoor, independent, published a front-page editorial 
by editor in chief Bassam Al-Sheikh about Iraqi politicians. 
The editorial reads in part) 
 
"During their speeches or statements, Iraqi politicians 
think they are guardians of specific sects or groups. They 
think that they are authorized to speak on behalf of the 
people. I believe this represents the short-sightedness from 
which most of those politicians suffer. Iraq and Iraqis deal 
with a special kind of politician who devastated the 
country. Today, those politicians discriminate against 
people and favor others without having any national 
principles. They only speak about national principles in 
their bombastic slogans. Those politicians who call for 
power-sharing will fail in the end. The Iraqi people will be 
able to distinguish between those politicians, and then they 
will know how to restore their wounded country from the 
hands of occupiers and their followers." 
 
¶B. "Why Aggravation?" 
(Al-Fourat, independent, anti-coalition, published a front- 
page editorial by editor in chief Shakir Al-Jibouri about 
the political discussions among Iraqi factions. The 
editorial reads in part) 
 
"Iraqis held their breath yesterday after some rest from the 
bombs that rocked Baghdad. We don't know why these bombings 
occurred when they did, and we don't know who benefits from 
this violence, as the Iraqi people are still the only 
victims. Current political discussions seek to achieve a 
unified understanding to save the country from the current 
crisis. For this reason, we deny and reject the principle of 
aggravation. All parts must consider the unity of the 
country and end extremism and violence. Our people do not 
need lessons in patriotism and sacrifice, but they want a 
positive environment to develop fraternity. Our problems and 
crises will be solved by our unity." 
 
¶C. "People Defend Their Votes" 
(Al-Bayyan, affiliated with the Islamic Ad-Dawa Party 
published a front-page unattributed editorial about the 
demonstrations in Iraqi cities after the announcement of 
preliminary election results. The editorial reads in part) 
 
"The demonstrations that began in Baghdad and other 
provinces after the announcement of preliminary election 
results show that the people have political awareness. The 
people confirmed during their rallies that they refuse to 
redo the election, as this would belittle the people's 
willpower and choice. This also would reduce the UIA's large 
success in the election. Moreover, these demonstrations have 
called for reelecting Ibrahim Al-Ja'fari as prime minister 
in the forthcoming period. It indicates that Al-Ja'fari has 
widespread popularity from the people because his government 
has achieved many accomplishments in spite of its young age. 
Finally, these demonstrations represent a democratic 
phenomenon that shows Iraqi people have the right to defend 
their determination." 
 
¶D. "A Mistake That Can Be Contained" 
(Dar As-Salam, affiliated with Iraqi Islamic Party, 
published a front-page unattributed editorial about the 
political conflicts that arose after the announcement of 
preliminary election results. The editorial reads in part) 
 
"Iraq today is experiencing a sensitive political stage. 
Iraq is about to reach the most dangerous political 
interchange since its occupation in April 2003. Day after 
day, we believe that the American occupation of Iraq has 
made mistakes, starting from the Governing Council to the 
last parliamentary election. However, it is important for 
all influential political groups in Iraq to know how to get 
over the current political crisis. Those who think that they 
have wide popularity among Iraqis must understand that it is 
important to adopt honest methods in any political practice. 
In every crisis, the IIP suggests suitable solutions for 
crises. This time, the party thinks this crisis can be 
solved by re-holding the elections, since this election was 
proven to be rigged. Finally, we say that this crisis can be 
contained by adopting the wisdom and sense to establish a 
united country." 
 
¶E. "Because Iraq Is Worthy" 
(Al-I'ttisam, affiliated with General Conference for Ahl Al- 
Iraq, led by Adnan Al-Dulaimi, published a front-page 
unattributed editorial about the political process. The 
editorial reads in part) 
 
"The patriotic and honest powers that oppose the occupation 
have participated in the political process in spite of all 
difficulties, threats, and conspiracies. The honest powers 
in the Iraqi Harmony List knew that Iraq's political 
environment was not healthy. Additionally, the participation 
of those who have been marginalized from the political 
process will not be easy because there are many groups that 
try to control the political process.Those groups do not 
want to give in to the real builders of the state and those 
who have clean hands, histories, and consciences. This group 
of people will be able to mend what was destroyed in the 
country and they will put out the flames of the occupation 
and its followers. Today, we face an enormous national 
battle to fix the problems, remove the chaos, and build our 
civilization. Because Iraq is worthy, we have to win this 
battle." 
 
KHALILZAD