05PARIS8269
FRANCE: BLUE LANTERN LEVEL 3: POST-LICENSE END USE
Tue Dec 06 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS PARIS 008269 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR PM/DTCC - BLUE LANTERN COORDINATOR 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: ETTC KOMC FR
SUBJECT:  FRANCE: BLUE LANTERN LEVEL 3: POST-LICENSE END USE 
CHECK ON LICENSE 05-928205 
 
REF: STATE 211262 
 
¶1. Per reftel, Post Blue Lantern Action Officer contacted French 
company Ixsea Oceano and spoke with CEO Thierry Gaiffe as well 
as Quality Director Nicolas Faussot.  Both were very 
cooperative.  Faussot thoroughly answered all of our questions. 
 
¶2.  First, Faussot confirmed that Ixsea ordered four (2) 
accelerometers (QA 3000, P/N 979-3100-001, order number CF 
4M000304) from Honeywell on April 16, 2004.  They were received 
on August 2, 2004, under license number 928205 (Honeywell 
invoice number 63158053). 
 
¶3.  Faussot also confirmed that the accelerometers had been 
ordered and were used/integrated for the design of a prototype 
for intertial navigation (centrale de navigation inertielle) 
developed by Ixsea in the framework of their work with the 
French Naval Construction Directorate (Direction des 
Constructions Navales).  This prototype is Ixsea property for 
their exclusive use in the context of their internal design 
project.  Faussot asserted that their prototype has not be 
delivered to any client and they have been (and will continue) 
to respect the conditions of the export license end user 
agreement. 
 
¶4.  Lastly, Faussot said that his company systematically makes 
and stands by commitments in importation agreements to not/not 
deliver imported material, no matter what its nature, to 
entities under U.S. embargo, as stipulated in the Export 
Administration Regulations. 
 
Stapleton