05QUITO2890
Results Report: ITT "Trafficking in
Mon Dec 19 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Quito
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002890 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR ECA/PE/V/G/W, WHA/PDA; WHA/AND 
GUAYAQUIL FOR NOUHRA 
 
E.O. 12958: 
TAGS: SCUL KPAO OEXC EC
SUBJECT: Results Report: ITT "Trafficking in 
Persons," October 7-November 4 
 
REFTEL:  Quito 1386 
 
¶1. Summary: The two participants reported the trip was 
extremely useful and well-designed, and generated many 
ideas they hope to implement in Ecuador.  Though the 
U.S. has far greater resources, the participants felt 
that the root problem is the same and the methods for 
dealing with the issue are applicable in both countries. 
The visitors have a lengthy list of contacts and follow- 
up activities they plan to pursue.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. Date: October 7-November 4, 2005, first quarter, FY 
¶06. 
 
¶3. MPP Theme and Audience Reached:  Democracy, Combating 
Trafficking in Persons (TIPs).  As leaders on TIPS 
issues within the national Police and in the Ministry of 
Government, the participants have the potential to shape 
anti-trafficking policy at the national level. 
 
¶4. Justification and Objective: See reftel. 
 
¶5. Description of Activity:  Three-week ITT for Ecuador 
on Trafficking in Persons.  The visitors traveled to 
Washington, D.C.; Seattle, WA; Houston, TX; San Diego, 
CA and Tallahassee, FL. 
 
¶6. Result/Impact: Excellent. Highlights follow: 
 
Nelly Jacome, who is Director of Gender Issues at the 
Ministry of Government, and Major Mery Jimenez, who 
leads the police unit dedicated to child protection, 
said they learned a great deal about trafficking issues 
and about the U.S. in general.  There were enthusiastic 
about maintaining contact with U.S. counterparts, 
implementing changes in Ecuador and building a stronger 
anti-trafficking network both within Ecuador and 
throughout Latin America. 
 
Both commented that though the U.S. has far greater 
resources to implement anti-trafficking programs and 
assist victims, the problem is essentially the same in 
both countries.  They were somewhat surprised that the 
U.S. also has trouble estimating the extent of the 
trafficking problem, just as does Ecuador.  They were 
impressed by the degree of coordination among NGOs and 
government at all levels, though they recognized that at 
times communication does break down between local and 
federal government.  Jimenez noted that NGOs are 
independent, yet benefit from government support in many 
areas.  She discussed the need in Ecuador to improve 
coordination and sharing of information between 
government entities and NGOs assisting victims. 
 
Though they found virtually all their meetings useful, 
they found meetings with police in San Diego and border 
patrol agents in Houston to be especially interesting. 
They also commented that they found the work of an NGO 
in Seattle dedicated to promote women's participation in 
the political process to be inspiring.  Jacome hopes to 
bring members of the NGO to Ecuador in the next year to 
conduct workshops.  She also was impressed by the level 
of personal commitment on the part of those involved in 
anti-trafficking issues.  The women also enjoyed meeting 
with many female representatives of law enforcement 
agencies, government entities and NGOs. 
 
Jacome is pursuing joint projects with many of the NGOs 
with whom she met.  She also hopes to instigate a study 
to capture the extent of human trafficking in Ecuador so 
that those combating the problem can better focus their 
efforts.  Jimenez is working to organize a Latin America 
conference on trafficking issues for police from 
throughout the region.  She also noted the need to 
better use the advantages Ecuador has in comparison to 
the U.S. - for example, Ecuador has one national police 
force, which should simplify coordination on trafficking 
issues. 
 
The visitors had three suggestions for improving the 
program.  First, they said they would have liked to end 
their visit in Washington because during the program 
they formed many questions they would have liked to pose 
to their Washington interlocutors.  Second, they would 
suggest a visit to a shelter for trafficking victims 
(however, they emphasized that their meeting with 
shelter officials was excellent and that they understood 
the need to protect the privacy of victims by keeping 
the shelter itself off limits to outsiders). 
 
Finally, they noted that there was little time for 
cultural activities since by the time meetings ended, 
museums and similar institutions were closed.  They also 
did not have an opportunity to enjoy home hospitality, 
which they would have enjoyed (Note:  The visitors 
arrived two days late due to visa issuance delays. In 
addition, the planned program in Miami had to be moved 
to Tallahassee at the last minute because of a 
hurricane.  These may have been factors in the lack of 
time for purely cultural activities or home 
hospitality.) 
 
¶7. Media Coverage:  N/A. 
¶8. Non-USG Support:  N/A. 
 
¶9. Quality of Support: Excellent. The visitors said the 
entire program was well-organized and the logistical 
support excellent.  They said the program in Tallahassee 
was very good despite the fact that it had been arranged 
at the last minute due to the hurricane disrupting the 
planned program in Miami. 
 
JEWELL