05RECIFE166
LULA AND CHAVEZ, BONDING AT SITE OF FUTURE REFINERY
Sat Dec 17 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Recife
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS RECIFE 000166 
 
SIPDIS 
 
WHA FOR BSC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EINV PGOV PREL BR
SUBJECT: LULA AND CHAVEZ, BONDING AT SITE OF FUTURE REFINERY 
 
REF: RECIFE 130 
 
¶1.  (U) Summary. Brazilian President Lula da Silva traveled to 
the northeastern state of Pernambuco with his Venezuelan 
counterpart Hugo Chavez to lay the cornerstone for an oil 
refinery and to reinforce their alliance December 16.  The 
anti-American rhetoric of Chavez was no surprise, but the 
emotional pledges of support from Lula revealed his self 
identification with the Venezuelan. End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (U) Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez came with Brazil's 
President Lula on a one-day visit to the state of Pernambuco 
December 16 to focus attention on their planned joint venture 
oil refinery (reftel). The press coverage focused more on the 
campaign atmosphere - with Lula saying he would only run for 
re-election if he were going to win and local gubernatorial 
candidates vying for political advantage from the refinery. 
(PMDB Governor Jarbas Vasconcelos was booed by Lula supporters, 
brought in for the ground-breaking ceremony at the refinery 
site, a surprise to the popular governor whose support for any 
candidate is considered invaluable in this state.)  Buried under 
the local politics in the news, Chavez got small headlines on 
back pages including "Venezuelan attacks the U.S.A," and "Chavez 
parties in Abreu e Lima; blames U.S. for problems of Latin 
America." 
 
¶3.  (U) According to the press, Chavez denounced the U.S. as he 
received honorary citizenship in the small industrial town of 
Abreu e Lima, named for the Brazilian general who fought beside 
Simon Bolivar. Chavez said the U.S. was responsible for keeping 
Latin America backwards and poor, "Enough of so much looting! We 
have the right to be free, enough to 500 years (sic) of 
imperialism," he said, adding that Simon Bolivar "foresaw" the 
imperialist threat of the United States. 
 
¶4. (U) More interesting than Chavez' rhetoric was President 
Lula's defense of Chavez and how he identified himself with 
Chavez. "I met you in Venezuela at a time when I could not 
imagine that the press in a country could do to a president what 
the Venezuelan press was doing to you," Lula said as he looked 
at his Venezuelan colleague, according to the Diario de 
Pernambuco. "I was in the hotel with my comrade Marco Aurelio 
watching TV and the propaganda against Chavez was of such 
magnitude, so great were the personal offenses, that I could not 
imagine how, in a democratic country, the press could act this 
way against a president. And now we in Brazil are living through 
something similar." President Lula went on berating the press 
for accusing without substantiation of their charges, expressing 
sympathy for other Brazilian Presidents (Kubitschek and Vargas) 
whose presidencies ended under press accusations of misconduct. 
 
 
¶5. (U) Lula returned to his praise for Chavez adding, "I often 
tell Chavez, every time he has a fight with President Bush, I 
say 'Chavez, patience, patience - these things one resolves by 
talking a little more."  Finally he added that "I want you to 
leave Brazil with the conviction that when you have 
difficulties, you can lie down each evening and say 'I know I am 
not alone' because President Lula and a great portion of the 
Brazilian people will be with you."  The Brazilian president 
also told his followers in Pernambuco that he would return to 
the Northeast in January to inaugurate a 1,800 kilometer 
railroad project to link the Suape port with the Ceara port of 
Pecem, an investment of 4.5 billion reales (about 2.2 billion 
dollars.) 
PAGE