05TELAVIV6743
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Fri Dec 02 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

021035Z Dec 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 TEL AVIV 006743 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
USCINCCENT MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
¶1.  Mideast 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Ha'aretz and other media extensively covered remarks 
made by Prime Minister Ariel Sharon at the annual 
editors' convention at Sokolov House in Tel Aviv on 
Thursday, addressing the major issues concerning 
Israel's future.  He emphasized that Israel, as well as 
other countries, could not accept the prospect of 
Iranian nuclear weapons, but Israel was preparing for 
such a scenario.  Israel "can't accept a situation 
where Iran has nuclear arms" and "is making all the 
necessary preparations to handle a situation like 
this," Prime Minister Ariel Sharon said.  Iran's 
enemies have "the capability" to use military force to 
disrupt Iran's bid for nuclear arms, he said, adding 
that "before exercising it, every attempt should be 
made to pressure Iran into stopping its activity." 
Sharon stressed  that "Israel doesn't lead the 
struggle" to keep Iran nuclear-free, and he hoped the 
UN Security Council would neutralize "this great 
danger."  "Israel is not without hope and is taking all 
necessary measures, as it should," he said.  Changing 
tack, Sharon referred to international pressure on 
Syria as critical, saying he was not inclined to 
discuss a return of the Golan Heights or anything else 
that might "make things easier for the Syrians."  There 
are "no contacts" between Israel and Syria now, he 
said.  Sharon alluded to diplomatic pressure on Israel 
when he said Israel had no plans to build an eastern 
fence in the Jordan Valley, which he termed "within 
Israel's security zone."  Sharon reaffirmed his 
commitment to the road map plan and retaining the major 
settlement blocs in the West Bank.  He said he was 
unwilling to encourage Israelis living east of the 
security barrier to relocate.  Sharon reiterated his 
opposition to Hamas's participation in the upcoming 
Palestinian elections, but indicated he would not 
prevent its participation, adding: "It's not a good 
thing to interfere in other people's elections." 
 
In an interview with The Jerusalem Post, Meir Sheetrit, 
Transportation Minister and Likud veteran who has 
joined Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's new Kadima party, 
said he believes not a "single additional house" should 
be built in Judea and Samaria because the "true Zionism 
of tomorrow" is to settle the Galilee and the Negev. 
Ultimately, he said Israel would "have no choice but to 
leave most of the territories and let the Palestinians 
establish a state next to us" to guarantee that Israel 
remain a democratic state with an overwhelming Jewish 
majority.  Sheetrit, who said he had been promised a 
prominent position by Sharon on the Kadima slate for 
the elections, tempered his comments somewhat by adding 
that he had no objection to someone choosing to build a 
home in a West Bank area that would remain under 
Israel's permanent control, if there was room to do so. 
He indicated that he thought it would be "fair enough" 
were Israel to permanently control the 5%-10% of the 
West Bank covered by the major settlement blocs.  He 
pledged that Sharon would be true to his word in ruling 
out further unilateral disengagement from the West 
Bank, and said Israel would stay put there for as long 
as necessary - until or unless the Palestinian 
leadership dismantled terrorist organizations and thus 
opened the path to a resumption of peace talks.  He 
also ruled out concessions in Jerusalem and dismissed 
Palestinian demands to establish their capital in the 
city. 
Ha'aretz reports that the Likud is continuing to 
plummet in the polls, capturing a mere nine seats in 
the latest Haaretz-Dialog survey, while Prime Minister 
Ariel Sharon's Kadima party continues to gain strength. 
The poll, conducted on Tuesday and Wednesday among 500 
voters, found that if elections were held now, Kadima 
would win 37 seats, compared to nine (9) for the Likud. 
Some 65 percent of those who voted Likud in 2003 said 
that they planned to vote Kadima this time, while only 
16 percent said that they definitely plan to stick with 
the Likud.  The poll also found that Labor is currently 
holding firm at 26 seats, while Shinui continues to 
shrink, and would now win only five seats.  Asked for 
their preferred candidate for defense minister, 41.5 
percent of respondents chose the incumbent, Mofaz. 
Other candidates - Ami Ayalon, Ehud Barak, Avi Dichter 
and Matan Vilnai - trailed far behind.  For finance 
minister, the race was much closer: Some 28 percent 
chose Amir Peretz, followed by Netanyahu, Avishay 
Braverman and Ehud Olmert. Interestingly, 23.5 percent 
of Likud voters named Peretz as their preferred 
candidate for the treasury.  For foreign minister, 
Shimon Peres was the favorite, winning 44 percent of 
the vote, compared to 26 percent for the incumbent, 
Shalom. Peres even outpolled Shalom among Likud voters, 
40 percent to 30 percent. 
Haaretz reports that, reacting to this and other recent 
polls, senior Likud officials lashed out at 
disengagement opponents Thursday for causing Prime 
Minister Ariel Sharon to leave the party, saying that 
Likud's nosedive in the polls shows that Sharon is 
taking almost the entire party with him. 
The Jerusalem Post reports that dozens of Palestinian 
gunmen stormed PA offices in the Gaza Strip on Thursday 
in protest against the decision to suspend Fatah's 
primary elections. Sources in the Gaza Strip said the 
gunmen were members of Fatah's armed wing, Aksa Martyrs 
Brigades. No one was hurt in the raid - the latest sign 
of growing lawlessness and anarchy in PA-ruled areas. 
Meanwhile, PA Chairman Mahmoud Abbas, who also heads 
Fatah, is seeking to resolve the crisis in his party 
quickly. Wednesday night he chaired an urgent meeting 
of the Fatah central committee in Ramallah to discuss 
the latest crisis and ways of easing tensions between 
Fatah's old guard and young guard. It was decided to 
form a 24-member review board, chaired by Abbas, to 
look into allegations of massive irregularities and 
fraud during the voting. 
Trouble with the recently opened Rafah crossing is the 
top story on Israel Radio this morning and features 
high on the Yediot Ahronot news pages. The media report 
that at least 15 Hamas militants, described as 
prominent fugitives who had been deported by Israel 
from the Gaza Strip, took advantage of the recently 
opened crossing to reenter unhindered.  This was also 
confirmed by Palestinian security sources. 
 
Yedioth Ahronot cites security officials who said this 
situation will continue until the first terror attack 
after which Israel will be compelled to impose real 
supervision on the crossing.  Israel also notified 
American officials that the Palestinians are not 
relaying photographs of those entering the crossing as 
per the agreement reached, prompting Prime Minister 
Sharon to repeat his warning to the Palestinians that 
if they do not fulfill their part of the agreement, 
Israel will close the Erez and Karni terminals. 
Speaking Israel Radio, Yuval Steinitz, Knesset Foreign 
Affairs and Defense Committee Chairman, said that we 
can blame only ourselves and that the security envelope 
in Gaza has collapsed. 
 
Ha'aretz Internet site reports that IDF troops 
operating in the West Bank town of Hebron on Wednesday 
arrested a reporter for the Web site of the Arabic 
satellite channel Al Jazeera.  Awad Rajoub, 29, was 
arrested at his home, Walid al-Amari, Al Jazeera bureau 
chief for the West Bank, Gaza and Jerusalem, said on 
Thursday.  Israel has not explained the arrest, he told 
Reuters. "We are checking to find out why they arrested 
him."  An IDF spokeswoman said that Awad was being held 
"for security reasons." 
 
Haaretz reports that US Secretary of State Condoleezza 
Rice is sending a senior envoy here to monitor the 
implementation of the Rafah border crossing agreement 
she brokered last month.  The envoy, State Department 
counselor Philip D. Zelikow, is also expected to 
expedite parts of the agreement that have not been 
executed yet. Rafah reopened last week, as part of a US- 
brokered deal on new border arrangements. 
In a follow-up on yesterday's story and main weekend 
supplement article, Yedi'ot Aharonot reports that the 
Israelis who were reportedly training Kurds in northern 
Iraq have been uncovered by Iranian intelligence and 
were forced to leave "a few months ago" - showing the 
story covers an affair that seems to be over. 
¶1.  Mideast 
                        Summary 
                     ------------- 
 
Senior columnist and chief defense commentator Zeev 
Schiff writes in independent, left-leaning Haaretz: 
"Israel must prepare itself for the American withdrawal 
from Iraq. especially if it takes place without the 
United States achieving its main goals in Iraq..  It 
doesn't matter if it is a Democrat or Republican. The 
new president will surely do everything possible to 
find a convenient formula for a withdrawal from Iraq. 
Therefore, Israel must prepare strategically for an 
American withdrawal and carefully examine what can be 
achieved in the realm of arrangements with the 
Palestinians." 
 
 
Bloc quotes 
--------------- 
Senior columnist and chief defense commentator Zeev 
Schiff writes in independent, left-leaning Haaretz: 
"Israel must prepare itself for the American withdrawal 
from Iraq. An American withdrawal, especially if it 
takes place without the United States achieving its 
main goals in Iraq, will certainly influence the 
strategic situation throughout the region. The American 
military deployment in the Middle East in the wake of 
the Iraq war is of unprecedented scope. Its forces are 
deployed on the flanks of Iran and Syria, opposite 
Lebanon and near Jordan and Saudi Arabia. As a result, 
Iran and Syria are behaving much more cautiously. 
However, the American public is badly influenced by the 
events in Iraq and the losses suffered there, without 
any sign of a tangible solution approaching. That 
feeling has penetrated Congress, and members of the 
president's own party are starting to talk about the 
need to develop an "exit strategy" from Iraq. President 
Bush's popularity is at an unprecedented low. But Bush 
keeps reiterating that he will not order an exit from 
Iraq until the goals of the war are met..  America's 
enemies will certainly exploit those changes to claim 
that Washington failed to achieve its minimal goals in 
the Iraq war. When defeated in wars in the past, the 
Arabs often managed to convince their people that they 
won. In any case, an unsuccessful American withdrawal 
from Iraq will certainly cause Iran to step up its 
involvement there, strengthen Hizballah and further 
encourage terror against Israel.  Al-Qaida will also 
feel more confident in its attacks on moderate and pro- 
Western regimes like Jordan, Egypt and Saudi Arabia. 
Palestinian extremists will draw encouragement from 
such a development. What doesn't get done before the 
American withdrawal with regard to Israeli-Palestinian 
road map arrangements will be much harder to accomplish 
afterward. The results of various elections in the 
Middle East could also make things more difficult for 
the moderates.  In any case, Israel must assume that an 
American withdrawal from Iraq will take place in three 
years at the latest, when a new president enters 
office. It doesn't matter if it is a Democrat or 
Republican. The new president will surely do everything 
possible to find a convenient formula for a withdrawal 
from Iraq. Therefore, Israel must prepare strategically 
for an American withdrawal and carefully examine what 
can be achieved in the realm of arrangements with the 
Palestinians." 
Jones