04PANAMA548
PANAMA'S INPUT FOR FOURTH ANNUAL ANTI-TRAFFICKING
Fri Mar 05 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Panama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.id: 14632
date: 3/5/2004 16:08
refid: 04PANAMA548
origin: Embassy Panama
classification: UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
destination: 
header:
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.



----------------- header ends ----------------

UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 10 PANAMA 000548 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
STATE PASS FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL 
PRM, IWI, WHA/PPC/FALLS, AND WHA/CEN/BRIGHAM 
STATE PASS FOR USAID 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD ASEC PREF ELAB CO PM LABOR HUMAN RIGHTSPOLMIL
SUBJECT: PANAMA'S INPUT FOR FOURTH ANNUAL ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
IN PERSONS (TIP) REPORT 
 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 7869 
     ¶B. 03 SECSTATE 27013 
     ¶C. PANAMA 399 
     ¶D. SINTESIS REGIONAL - INTERNATIONAL LABOR 
        ORGANIZATION 
     ¶E. PANAMA 229 
     ¶F. PANAMA 419 
     ¶G. 03 PANAMA 708 
     ¶H. 03 PANAMA 1015 
     ¶I. 03 PANAMA 3095 
     ¶J. 03 PANAMA 3224 
     ¶K. PANAMA 148 
     ¶L. SUHR-MCINTYRE E-MAIL 3/2/04 
     ¶M. RESEARCH FOR SEX WORK JOURNAL 6/02 
     ¶N. 03 PANAMA 3170 
     ¶O. LINDERMAN-MCINTYRE E-MAIL 2/13/04 
     ¶P. DIRECTORIO DE INSTITUTCIONES- INTERNATIONAL 
        LABOR ORGANIZATION 
     ¶Q. PANAMA 226 
 
 
------ 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  While Embassy Panama believes that trafficking in 
persons (TIP) is a problem in Panama, it is still relatively 
small and manageable.  Embassy has worked closely with the 
Government of Panama (GOP) to discover more about the extent 
of the problem in Panama and to encourage the GOP to work 
harder and more effectively to put an end to it.  We believe 
that the GOP is moving quickly in the right direction to 
address TIP and we have found great support for enhanced 
anti-TIP measures from all GOP levels, including its highest 
officials.  The GOP acknowledges that it has a TIP problem 
and is carrying out more intensive measures to sharply reduce 
the number of TIP victims.  In particular, the GOP recognizes 
that enhanced public awareness, public statements by 
government officials, effective legislation, aggressive 
police work and prosecution, victim assistance, and better 
program coordination all are necessary components to 
successful anti-TIP efforts.  The GOP is open to suggestions 
from Embassy-G/TIP and GOP ministries and the Legislative 
Assembly are increasingly "on alert" about the seriousness of 
TIP.  End Summary. 
 
 
¶2.  (U) Per Reftels (A and B) Embassy Panama is pleased to 
submit its input for the annual Trafficking in Persons (TIP) 
report. 
 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  Answers to Checklist Question 18. 
 
 
¶A.  IS THE COUNTRY A COUNTRY OF ORIGIN, TRANSIT OR 
DESTINATION FOR INTERNATIONALLY TRAFFICKED MEN, WOMEN OR 
CHILDREN?  Yes.  SPECIFY NUMBERS WITHIN EACH GROUP: 
Estimated Men (0), Women (50-100), Children (50-100).   DOES 
THE TRAFFICKING OCCUR WITHIN THE COUNTRY'S BORDERS? Yes. 
 
 
DOES IT OCCUR IN AN AREA OUTSIDE THE GOVERNMENT'S CONTROL? 
No.  ARE THERE ESTIMATES OR RELIABLE NUMBERS AVAILABLE AS TO 
THE EXTENT OR MAGNITUDE OF THE PROBLEM? PLEASE INCLUDE ANY 
NUMBERS OF VICTIMS.  WHAT IS (ARE) THE SOURCE(S) OF AVAILABLE 
INFORMATION ON TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS?  HOW RELIABLE ARE THE 
NUMBERS AND THESE SOURCES?  GOP tracks arrests, prosecutions, 
and victim complaints, in addition to deportations of illegal 
foreign sex workers. (Ref. C)  The International Labor 
Organization (ILO)/Program for Eradication of Child Labor 
(IPEC), along with academics at the University of Panama 
(UP), publish reports on commercial sexual exploitation of 
minors. (Ref. D)  (NOTE: ILO/IPEC is working regionally to 
combat commercial sexual exploitation of minors.  End Note) 
Panama's press has reported on underage sex workers and 
arrests and prosecutions of their traffickers. (Ref. E & F) 
GOP and NGOS officials also provide verbal reports and 
updates to Emboffs on numbers of TIP victims. (Ref. C) 
 
 
GOP and ILO reports and commentary are reliable.  Press 
reports at times are reliable, but  are often 
sensationalized.  A combination of official GOP reports, NGO 
studies, discussions with GOP and NGO officials, and 
extrapolation indicates the overall TIP victim total 
surpasses Department and G/TIP's 100 victim threshold. 
Estimated number of victims is 50-100 Women.  Embassy 
evaluated the sources of the reports and took a "realistic 
and solid evidence" approach, basing total TIP victims 
numbers on verifiable evidence and knowledge of Panama's 
overall social and economic conditions.  The estimates for 
the adults does assume that a small percentage (5-10%) of 
female sex workers in Panama or transiting Panama could be 
considered TIP victims.  All knowledgeable TIP sources agree 
that the overwhelming majority of adult female sex workers in 
Panama or transiting Panama have chosen their profession 
freely and are not to be considered TIP victims. (Ref. C, G, 
H, I, J) 
 
 
The estimated number of minor TIP victims is 50-100.  This 
estimate is based on ILO/IPEC reports, recent child sex 
worker ring busts, and meetings with NGOs. (Ref. E and K) 
The ILO reports indicate that there are at least 100 minors 
who are sexually exploited for commercial purposes, but a 
careful reading reveals that many of the victims appear to be 
part of the larger problem of familial sexual abuse or 
prostitute themselves because of drug addictions. 
 
 
Official GOP reports would indicate a combined adult and 
minor TIP victim population of 20-60 based on complaints, 
investigations, and extrapolation from other official 
records.  Immigration Department officials indicated 
approximately 125 women were deported for working illegally 
in the sex trade, mainly Colombians and some Dominicans. 
They reported that none of these women claimed to be TIP 
victims. (Ref. L)  (Note:  There have been unsubstantiated 
allegations of debt bondage amongst smuggled Mainland 
Chinese. (Ref. K)  No evidence has been uncovered to support 
these allegations.  Embassy continues to search for more 
credible evidence.  Estimates are not provided for debt 
bondage TIP victims.  End Note.) 
 
 
¶B.  WHERE ARE PERSONS TRAFFICKED FROM? Women: Colombia 
(primarily), Dominican Republic.   Children:  No credible 
evidence of international trafficking of children to or 
through Panama.  WHERE ARE THE PERSONS TRAFFICKED TO: Panama, 
Costa Rica, United States (through Central America). 
 
 
¶C.  HAVE THERE BEEN ANY CHANGES IN THE DIRECTION OR EXTENT OF 
TRAFFICKING?  In recent months it is likely that trafficking 
slowed because of high-profile arrests and prosecutions.  The 
direction of trafficking has not changed.  For women it flows 
from Colombia and Dominican Republic to or through Panama. 
For minors, evidence indicates it is an internal trafficking 
issue only. 
 
 
¶D.  ARE THERE EFFORTS OR SURVEYS PLANNED OR UNDERWAY TO 
DOCUMENT THE EXTENT AND NATURE OF TRAFFICKING THE COUNTRY? IS 
ANY ADDITIONAL INFORMATION AVAILABLE FROM SUCH REPORTS OR 
SURVEYS THAT WAS NOT AVAILABLE LAST YEAR?  ILO/IPEC publishes 
reports and studies on the extent of commercial sexual 
exploitation of minors in Panama. (Ref. D)  Most of their 
reports have been published within the last two years.  NGOs 
publish reports on the health status of sex workers in 
Panama. (Ref. M)  The GOP tracks TIP victims complaints/cases 
through the Panamanian Judicial Police (PTJ) Sex Crimes Unit. 
 Immigration tracks deportations of illegal sex workers.  GOP 
could improve its reporting with better inter-agency 
coordination and a more formalized structure. 
 
 
¶E.  IF THE COUNTRY IS A DESTINATION POINT FOR TRAFFICKED 
VICTIMS:  WHAT KIND OF CONDITIONS ARE THE VICTIMS TRAFFICKED 
INTO?  WHAT METHODS ARE USED TO ENSURE THEIR COMPLIANCE? ARE 
THE VICTIMS SUBJECT TO VIOLENCE, THREATS, WITHHOLDING OF 
DOCUMENTS, DEBT BONDAGE, ETC?  Women and minors (girls) are 
trafficked into massage parlors and nude dancing 
establishments, which serve as brothels.  Many also work on 
the streets.  PTJ Sex Crime Unit detectives indicate that 
withholding of documents (passports) and heavy debts are the 
most common means of ensuring compliance.  Withholding of 
documents is most common for those who are working illegally 
(without work permits/"alternadora" visas) in prostitution. 
Threats of violence have not been reported in the vast 
majority of cases.  In a recent bust of child prostitution 
ring, PTJ detectives told EmbOffs that the minor victims 
(girls) and their families feared physical harm from the 
ring's operators who are linked with known drug traffickers. 
(Ref. F) 
 
 
¶F.  IF THE COUNTRY IS COUNTRY OF ORIGIN:  Panama is not a 
country of origin for women or minors.  WHICH POPULATIONS ARE 
TARGETED BY TRAFFICKERS? WHO ARE THE TRAFFICKERS? WHAT 
METHODS ARE USED TO APPROACH VICTIMS?  WHAT METHODS ARE USED 
TO MOVE VICTIMS?  GOP and ILO reports indicate minors (girls) 
are offered cash and clothing by those running sex worker 
rings.  Traffickers are usually non-family, third parties. 
According to recent reports, girls are approached on the 
streets when away from their parents by third parties. 
Victims are transported within Panama by car and usually 
within a relatively limited area. (Ref. F) Adult victims are 
likely Colombian, and, to a lesser extent, Dominican female 
sex workers that arrive willingly in Panama to work in the 
sex trade but could become victims of TIP. 
 
 
¶G.  IS THERE POLITICAL WILL AT THE HIGHEST LEVELS OF 
GOVERNMENT TO COMBAT TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS? Yes.  IS THE 
GOVERNMENT MAKING A GOOD FAITH EFFORT TO SERIOUSLY ADDRESS 
TRAFFICKING? Yes.  IS THERE A WILLINGNESS TO TAKE ACTION 
AGAINST GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS LINKED TO TIP?  Yes.  IN BROAD 
TERMS, WHAT RESOURCES IS THE HOST GOVERNMENT DEVOTING TO 
COMBATING TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS (IN TERMS OF PREVENTION, 
PROTECTION, AND PROSECUTION)  The GOP, within its limited 
means, devotes considerable resources to combating TIP.  The 
Foreign Ministry (MFA) and the Ministry of Government and 
Justice (MOGJ) are well aware of the issue and are 
strengthening their efforts and putting into place pro-active 
and imaginative measures to combat TIP ((see para. 3(A), 4(A) 
and 5(A)).  (Refs. C, G, H, N)  The PTJ Sex Crimes Unit along 
with the Family and Children Court District Attorneys 
(Fiscales) are the primary investigation and prosecution arm 
of the GOP.  Within the Sex Crimes Unit, there are 6 
detectives who have specialized TIP knowledge but they do not 
exclusively investigate TIP cases.  (NOTE:  Panama has a 
greater magnitude problem of sexual violence and 
non-commercial sexual exploitation.  Resources and manpower 
within the Sex Crimes Unit and the District Attorneys offices 
are dedicated accordingly.  End Note.) 
 
 
The Immigration Department as part of its broader mission to 
deter illegal migration conducts raids on brothels and other 
establishments were TIP victims may be present.  These 
operations are carried out every two to three months and on 
an ad-hoc basis responding to complaints and leads. 
Immigration works in conjunction with the Panama National 
Police (PNP). (Ref. L)  Immigration also has increased 
airport and border-crossing enforcement, often in conjunction 
and with the assistance of USG resources.  As discussed with 
EmbOffs, Immigration officers are aware that certain visitors 
to Panama fit the profile of persons seeking to work 
illegally in the sex trade who could subsequently become or 
are TIP victims.  (NOTE: The profile includes adult women 
from Colombia or the Dominican Republic with limited cash, a 
one way or open-ended ticket, who often claim to be artists 
or hairdressers.  End Note.)  The National Air Service (SAN) 
and National Marine Service SMN also conduct interdictions to 
apprehend illegal migrants.  To date, no TIP victims have 
been found in these interdictions. 
 
 
The Ministry of Labor, Youth, Women, Children and Family 
Affairs, and Education have projects designed to eliminate 
illegal child labor, forced or otherwise, which can include 
commercial sexual exploitation of minors.  NGOs ((see para. 
5(I)) and international organizations (such as ILO) are also 
active in combating the larger problems of domestic violence 
and sexual abuse of women and children.  Combating TIP has a 
natural link with 
their work in these areas. 
 
 
Panama's legislature is preparing an important improvement to 
its existing TIP law ((see para. 5(A)). 
 
 
Per Reftels (C, G, H, N) USG has on-going TIP dialogue with 
all levels of the GOP.  The message has been delivered and 
heard by from the President to the offices of the PTJ Sex 
Crime Unit.  Embassy continues to work closely with the 
highest levels of the GOP and believes that in the coming 
weeks and months, GOP will further strengthen their anti-TIP 
efforts. 
 
 
¶H.  DO GOVERNMENTAL AUTHORITIES OR INDIVIDUAL MEMBERS OF 
GOVERNMENT FORCES FACILITATE OR CONDONE TRAFFICKING, OR ARE 
THEY OTHERWISE COMPLICIT IN SUCH ACTIVITIES?  No.  There are 
allegations that a Panamanian consul is facilitating TIP 
related visa and/or passport fraud. (Ref. O)  Embassy is 
working with the GOP to investigate allegations.  Embassy is 
confident GOP would welcome additional information and take 
appropriate action.  DO GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS (SUCH AS 
CUSTOMS, BORDER GUARDS, IMMIGRATION OFFICIALS, LABOR 
INSPECTORS, LOCAL POLICE, OR OTHERS) RECEIVE BRIBES FROM 
TRAFFICKERS OR OTHERWISE ASSIST IN THEIR OPERATIONS?  No 
evidence has been uncovered regarding bribes to GOP officials 
from TIP traffickers.  WHAT PUNITIVE MEASURES, IF ANY, HAVE 
BEEN TAKEN AGAINST THOSE INDIVIDUALS COMPLICIT OR INVOLVED IN 
TRAFFICKING? N/A, see above. 
 
 
¶I.  WHAT ARE THE LIMITATIONS ON THE GOVERNMENT'S ABILITY TO 
ADDRESS THIS PROBLEM IN PRACTICE?  FOR EXAMPLE, IS FUNDING 
FOR POLICE OR INSTITUTIONS INADEQUATE?  Funding is limited 
for TIP-specific investigations within PTJ, PNP, Immigration 
and other GOP ministries.  Lack of funding limits training 
and hurts victim's assistance and coordination within the GOP 
and with NGOs.  The current anti-TIP, anti-child pornography 
law, while sufficient, can hamper active investigations 
because of the need for a formal complaint to be filed and 
antiquated legal definitions. (Ref. C)  IS OVERALL CORRUPTION 
A PROBLEM?  Corruption is a problem in Panama.  However, 
corruption does not seem to be related to GOP anti-TIP and 
anti-child pornography efforts. 
 
 
¶J.  TO WHAT EXTENT DOES THE GOVERNMENT SYSTEMATICALLY MONITOR 
ITS ANTI-TRAFFICKING EFFORTS (ON ALL FRONTS, PROSECUTION, 
PREVENTION, AND VICTIM PROTECTION) AND PERIODICALLY MAKE 
AVAILABLE, PUBLICLY AND PRIVATELY AND DIRECTLY OR THROUGH 
REGIONAL/INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS, ITS ASSESSMENTS OF 
THESE ANTI-TRAFFICKING EFFORTS?  The PTJ Sex Crimes Unit 
tracks all active and closed cases and prosecutions.  The PNP 
and Immigration have statistics on deportations, including 
those involving illegal prostitution.  The GOP Ministries 
that work to eradicate forced child labor and commercial 
sexual exploitation of minors all track results of their 
projects.  The GOP shares its statistics with NGOS, ILO/IPEC, 
and the Embassy.  Embassy officials can call at any time and 
receive the latest updates from these GOP ministries. 
ILO/IPEC uses statistics from the PTJ to supplement their own 
reporting. 
 
 
¶K.  IS PROSTITUTION LEGALIZE OR DECRIMINALIZED? Yes and it is 
regulated.  IF PROSTITUTION IS LEGAL AND REGULATED, WHAT IS 
LEGAL MINIMUM AGE FOR THIS ACTIVITY? 18 
 
 
¶L.  DOES THE PRACTICE OF BUYING OR SELLING CHILD BRIDES 
(BRIDES UNDER THE AGE OF 18 YEARS) OCCUR IN COUNTRY?  No.  DO 
MEN OF THE COUNTRY TRAVEL ABROAD TO PURCHASE CHILD BRIDES?  No 
 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  Answers to checklist question 19 
 
 
¶A.  DOES THE GOVERNMENT ACKNOWLEDGE THAT TRAFFICKING IS A 
PROBLEM IN THAT COUNTRY?  Yes, GOP officials acknowledge 
there are TIP victims in Panama.  Those within GOP working to 
combat TIP speak openly about its existence in Panama but 
most do not believe there are more than 100 victims. (Ref. C) 
 However, GOP continues devote considerable time, efforts and 
resources to combating TIP. 
 
 
¶B.  WHICH GOVERNMENT AGENCIES ARE INVOLVED IN 
ANTI-TRAFFICKING EFFORTS?  PTJ (including Sex Crimes Unit), 
PNP, Immigration, MFA, Ministry of Labor, Ministry of Health, 
SAN, SMN, Family and Child Courts, District Attorneys, the 
Ombudsman (Defensora) and the Legislature. 
 
 
¶C.  ARE THERE OR HAVE THERE BEEN GOVERNMENT-RUN 
ANTI-TRAFFICKING INFORMATION OR EDUCATION CAMPAIGNS? IF SO, 
BRIEFLY DESCRIBE THE CAMPAIGN(S), INCLUDING THEIR OBJECTIVE 
AND EFFECTIVENESS. DO THESE CAMPAIGNS TARGET POTENTIAL 
TRAFFICKING VICTIMS AND/OR THE DEMAND 
FOR TRAFFICKING (E.G. "CLIENTS" OF PROSTITUTES OR 
BENEFICIARIES OF FORCED LABOR).  The PTJ Sex Crimes Unit has 
conducted informal education sessions at schools and 
universities specifically discussing trafficking and related 
crimes.  The government, to date, has not conducted a formal 
national outreach campaign.  Embassy plans to assist the PTJ 
and other GOP ministries with the development of a public 
education program within the coming months. (Ref. C)  Program 
will follow similar format as the GOP educational campaigns 
on money-laundering, drugs, and violent crimes.  The 
Ministries of Labor, Education, Youth, Women, Children, and 
Family Affairs conduct educational campaigns about the 
negative effects of sexual abuse and forced child labor, 
including commercial sexual exploitation of minors. 
Immigration hosts radio call-in program where a variety of 
migration issues are discussed. (Ref. L)  (NOTE:  USG 
assistance supported GOP educational campaigns addressing 
money laundering, drugs, and violence.  Given the increased 
USG, GOP, and international communities efforts to combat 
TIP, USG support will enhance GOP's on-going efforts. End 
Note.) 
 
 
¶D.  DOES THE GOVERNMENT SUPPORT OTHER PROGRAMS TO PREVENT 
TRAFFICKING? (E.G. TO PROMOTE WOMEN'S PARTICIPATION IN 
ECONOMIC DECISION-MAKING OR EFFORTS TO KEEP CHILDREN IN 
SCHOOL). PLEASE EXPLAIN.  Yes, GOP sponsors a number of 
programs through the Ministries of Health, Labor, Education, 
and Youth, Women, Children and Family Affairs. These programs 
range from increasing access to education for child workers, 
anti-drug, HIV and Safe Sex awareness, and combating violence 
against women.  (Ref. G & N)  NGOs and other international 
organizations sponsor similar campaigns.  (Ref. K) 
 
 
¶E.  IS THE GOVERNMENT ABLE TO SUPPORT PREVENTION PROGRAM? 
Yes, but limited due to lack of funding. 
 
 
¶F.  WHAT IS THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS, 
NGOS, OTHER RELEVANT ORGANIZATIONS AND OTHER ELEMENTS OF 
CIVIL SOCIETY ON TRAFFICKING ISSUE?  Good.  The GOP working 
relations, especially through the PTJ Sex Crime Unit, with 
the ILO/IPEC are good.  Embassy believes enhanced focus on 
prevention and victims assistance would improve effectiveness 
of GOP and NGO efforts to combat TIP.  USG-GOP relations are 
outstanding on this issue.  EmbOffs and Washington Reporting 
Officers are granted immediate and unrestricted access to GOP 
officials, including the opportunity to conduct "ride-alongs" 
with PTJ sex crimes unit detectives. 
 
 
¶G.  DOES THE GOVERNMENT ADEQUATELY MONITOR ITS BORDERS? Yes. 
DOES IT MONITOR IMMIGRATION AND EMIGRATION PATTERNS FOR 
EVIDENCE OF TRAFFICKING? Yes. DO LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES 
RESPOND APPROPRIATELY TO SUCH EVIDENCE? Yes, the Immigration 
Department continues to increase its efforts to stem the flow 
of illegal migrants to and through Panama.  While the vast 
majority of those identified as illegal foreign sex workers 
are not TIP victims, Immigration does track the number of sex 
workers they deport.  According to Immigration officials, of 
the approximately 125 illegal foreign sex workers, all asked 
for voluntary departure and did not claim to be TIP victims. 
(Ref. L)   DHS/ICE works closely with Panamanian Immigration 
on detection and investigation of alien smuggling and TIP. 
The SAN and SMN also conduct interdictions based on 
intelligence received.  The overwhelming majority of those 
persons arrested are being voluntarily smuggled and not 
trafficked. 
 
 
¶H.  IS THERE A MECHANISM FOR COORDINATION AND COMMUNICATION 
BETWEEN VARIOUS AGENCIES, SUCH AS MULT-AGENCY WORKING GROUP 
OR TASK FORCE?  DOES THE GOVERNMENT HAVE A TRAFFICKING IN 
PERSONS TASK FORCE? There is no formal TIP task force.  The 
MFA conducts ad-hoc briefings with various GOP ministries 
based on USG demarches and of its own initiative.  Ministries 
also work together on prevention, protection, and prosecution 
on an ad-hoc basis.  ILO/IPEC has published a report with 
detailed information on which GOP agencies and NGOS are 
working to combat commercial sexual exploitation of minors. 
(Ref. P)  DOES THE GOVERNMENT HAVE A PUBLIC CORRUPTION TASK 
FORCE? No.  GOP has an anti-corruption prosecutor and the 
Ministry of Economics and Finance has an office to coordinate 
anti-corruption efforts. 
 
 
¶I.  DOES THE GOVERNMENT COORDINATE OR PARTICIPATE IN 
MULTINATIONAL OR INTERNATIONAL WORKING GROUPS OR EFFORTS TO 
PREVENT, MONITOR, OR CONTROL TRAFFICKING?  GOP coordinates 
border control with neighboring countries through Immigration 
and PNP.  GOP and the Government of Colombia (GOC) have a 
border security working group for Darien Province.  GOP works 
directly with the International Organization on Migration 
(IOM) on alien smuggling and anti-TIP programs.  PTJ and PNP 
receive intelligence from Interpol on TIP cases.  (NOTE: 
Embassy believes GOP would support and participate actively 
in any additional bi-lateral and/or regional working groups. 
End Note.) 
 
 
¶J.  DOES THE GOVERNMENT HAVE A NATIONAL PLAN OF ACTION TO 
ADDRESS TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS?  GOP does not have published 
national anti-TIP plan, however GOP, Legislature, 
international organizations (ILO), and NGOs have a number of 
proposals that if coordinated and formalized with their 
on-going efforts to combat TIP would constitute a national 
action plan.  IF SO, WHICH AGENCIES WERE INVOLVED IN 
DEVELOPING IT? District Attorneys, PTJ, Immigration, PNP, 
Labor, Youth, Women, Children and Family Affairs, Legislature 
 WERE NGOS CONSULTED IN THE PROCESS? Yes.  WHAT STEPS HAS THE 
GOVERNMENT TAKEN TO DISSEMINATE THE ACTION PLAN?  Proposed 
legislation has been discussed in the press.  The ILO action 
plan reports are public documents.  GOP should publicize 
their efforts to combat TIP more. 
 
 
¶K.  IS THERE SOME ENTITY OR PERSON RESPONSIBLE FOR DEVELOP 
ANTI-TRAFFICKING PROGRAMS WITH THE GOVERNMENT? Given their 
investigative and prosecution responsibilities, the PTJ and 
the District Attorneys are the primary anti-TIP agencies 
within the GOP.  Immigration has strong role within the 
context of border security and illegal migration.  The 
Ministries of Labor and Youth, Women, Children and Family 
Affairs concentrate on efforts to combat commercial sexual 
exploitation of children.  MFA serves as a moderator and 
brings together various GOP ministries to address current TIP 
issues. 
 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  Answers to checklist question 20 
 
 
¶A.  DOES THE COUNTRY HAVE A LAW SPECIFICALLY PROHIBITING 
TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS-BOTH FOR SEXUAL EXPLOITATION AND 
TRAFFICKING FOR NON-SEXUAL PURPOSES (E.G. FORCED LABOR)? Yes. 
 IF SO, WHAT IS THAT LAW? Section 310 and 310 (a)  The law 
makes it a punishable crime for those who traffick people, or 
those who are part of an organization that trafficks people. 
The law also makes punishable any intervention related to 
trafficking involving fraud, or evading any immigration law 
in pursuit of trafficking.  A third law, Law 231, makes it a 
crime to facilitate the entry or exit of a person to engage 
in non-regulated prostitution, although it does not 
specifically mention trafficking.  Article 501 of the Family 
Code and Article 215C of the penal code criminalize child 
prostitution and child pornography.  ARE THESE LAWS, TAKEN 
TOGETHER, ADEQUATE TO COVER THE FULL SCOPE OF TRAFFICKING IN 
PERSONS? Yes. However, the laws need updating. 
Investigations and prosecutions are hampered by the need for 
a formal complaint to be filed in TIP-specific 
investigations.  Police officials need legal authorization to 
be more aggressive in their investigations.  The child 
pornography laws needs to be updated to incorporate the wide 
reaching effects of the Internet and to include harsher 
penalties for TIP and child pornography. 
 
 
A bill is currently before the legislature and with good 
chances of passage would remedy most if not all of the 
current shortcomings. Based on recent meetings between 
EmbOffs and legislative leaders from two leading political 
parties, it seems likely that an updated, tougher anti-TIP 
and anti-child pornography legislation will pass during the 
current legislative session.  The legislation would increase 
penalties for TIP, expand definitions of child pornography to 
include Internet based crimes, and eliminate the need for a 
formal complaint to initiate TIP-specific investigations. 
(NOTE:  Panamanian legislators proposed the new legislation 
on their own initiative and not because of pressure from 
EmbOffs.  End Note.)  Upon seeing G/TIP's model legislation, 
Panamanian legislators agreed to incorporate as much as 
possible into the pending bill.  In addition, the GOP is 
proposing a "cyber-police force" that would investigate child 
pornography on the Internet. (Ref. F) 
 
 
The Immigration Department is proposing eliminating the 
"alternadora" visa for foreign sex workers. (NOTE:  Contrary 
to prior information given to Embassy, the alternadora is not 
restricted to Colombians.  However, the vast majority of 
recipients are Colombians.  This visa was established in the 
1950s at the request of the USG.  End Note.) 
 
 
¶B.  WHAT ARE THE PENALTIES FOR TRAFFICKERS OF PEOPLE FOR 
SEXUAL EXPLOITATION? FOR TRAFFICKERS OF PEOPLE FOR LABOR 
EXPLOITATION?  Law 310 sets the penalty at 10-15 years in 
prison. Law 310 A sets it at 5-10 years.  The different 
penalties depend on the circumstances and severity of the 
offense.  Under Law 231, the penalty is 2 to 4 years and 6 
years under more aggravated circumstances. 
 
 
¶C.  WHAT ARE THE PENALTIES FOR RAPE OR FORCIBLE SEXUAL 
ASSAULT? HOW DO THEY COMPARE TO THE PENALTY FOR SEX 
TRAFFICKING? Under laws 216-218 of the penal code, rape is 
punishable by 3 to 10 years under most circumstances, and 5 
to 10 years under more serious circumstances. 
 
 
¶D.  HAS THE GOVERNMENT PROSECUTED ANY CASES AGAINST 
TRAFFICKERS? Yes.  IF SO, PROVIDE NUMBER OF ARRESTS, 
INDICTMENTS, CONVICTIONS, SENTENCES, INCLUDING DETAILS ON 
PLEA BARGAINS AND FINES, IF RELEVANT AND AVAILABLE.  In 
2003-2004, the Sex Crimes Unit (PTJ) has completed six formal 
investigations leading to 10 arrests for TIP-specific crimes, 
more arrests are possible. Two cases (total of approximately 
five adults) have been forwarded to the District Attorney 
(Fiscal) for trial. Other cases are awaiting transfers to the 
District Attorney.  The Supreme Court recently rejected an 
appeal of an infamous child prostitution ring leader Thonya 
Hubbard and upheld her 76 months sentence.  An associate 
(Thanya Bedoya) was sentenced to 3 years and a 
client/associate (Larry Pinto) was sentenced 2 years and 3 
months. (Ref. F)  Hubbard was convicted twice in separate 
trials in 1999 and 2002.  Bedoya was convicted in 1999 and 
Pinto in 2002. 
 
 
The PTJ has been conducting TIP-specific investigations since 
¶1999.  There were approximately 6 TIP specific investigations 
before 2003.  The Sex Crimes Unit has doubled the amount of 
formal investigations since last year's TIP report.  The unit 
does conduct surveillance and intelligence gathering on TIP 
but does not classify those operations as formal 
investigations.  As noted, the need for a formal complaint 
prior to an investigation limits does has limiting effect. 
(NOTE: The Panamanian judicial system is slow, inept and 
often corrupt. While no evidence indicates corruption affects 
TIP investigation, the overall nature of the system does slow 
TIP prosecutions. End Note.) 
 
 
Immigration, in conjunction with the District Attorneys and 
the PNP, have kept a number of brothels (EL Ovalo, El Halcon, 
El Buffalo) closed for several months based on complaints and 
investigations.  While no TIP victims were discovered, 
Immigration kept the establishments closed for other 
violations.  Immigration fines brothels with illegal foreign 
sex workers. (Ref. L)  ARE THE TRAFFICKERS SERVING TIME 
SENTENCED? Yes. IF NO, WHY NOT?  PLEASE INDICATE WHETHER THE 
GOVERNMENT CAN PROVIDE THIS INFORMATION, AND IF NOT, WHY NOT? 
Government willingly provides all information. 
 
 
¶E.  IS THERE ANY INFORMATION OR REPORTS OF WHO IS BEHIND THE 
TRAFFICKING? Yes, independent dance club and/or massage 
parlor owners and, on occasion, persons with connections to 
illegal drug trade  ARE GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS INVOLVED? No 
hard evidence of government officials involved. There is one 
third party, third country allegation of a GOP official 
issuing visas and passports to women for alien smuggling and 
TIP. (Ref. O)  ARE THERE ANY REPORTS OF WHERE PROFITS FROM 
TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS ARE BEING CHANNELED? (E.G. ARMED 
GROUPS, TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS, JUDGES, BANKS, ETC).  Most 
profits appear to go directly to traffickers.  One child 
prostitution ring had ties to drug traffickers. 
 
 
¶F.  DOES THE GOVERNMENT ACTIVELY INVESTIGATE CASE OF 
TRAFFICKING? Yes, however PTJ Sex Crime Unit is limited by 
law and must have formal complaint to investigate TIP cases. 
Immigration and PNP have more freedom to investigate alien 
smuggling, which may include TIP victims.  (Ref. C)  DOES THE 
GOVERNMENT USE ACTIVE INVESTIGATIVE TECHNIQUES IN TRAFFICKING 
IN PERSONS INVESTIGATIONS? Yes.  TO THE EXTENT POSSIBLE UNDER 
DOMESTIC LAW, ARE TECHNIQUES SUCH AS ELECTRONIC SURVEILLANCE, 
UNDERCOVER OPERATIONS, AND MITIGATED PUNISHMENT OR IMMUNITY 
FOR COOPERATING SUSPECTS USED BY THE GOVERNMENT?  Undercover 
operations are primary tools.  There are very strict 
regulations for use of electronic surveillance. DOES THE 
CRIMINAL PROCEDURE CODE OR LAWS PROHIBIT THE POLICE FORM 
ENGAGING IN COVERT OPERATIONS? No. 
 
 
¶G.  DOES THE GOVERNMENT PROVIDE ANY SPECIALIZED TRAINING FOR 
GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS IN HOW TO RECOGNIZE, INVESTIGATE, AND 
PROSECUTE INSTANCES OF TRAFFICKING?  GOP provides limited 
internal training. Most training is provide by third parties. 
 DHS/ICE provided specialized training in May and September 
2003 to GOP agencies on investigation and prosecution of 
child pornography in Miami. (Ref. N)  The Spanish government 
has proposed additional legal training for the PTJ Sex Crimes 
Unit this year. 
 
 
¶H.  DOES THE GOVERNMENT COOPERATE WITH OTHER GOVERNMENTS IN 
THE INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION OF TRAFFICKING CASES? Yes, 
but depends on types of cases.  The GOP recently cooperated 
with the GOC on the take down of child prostitution ring in 
Panama.  (Ref. F)  Some of the ring leaders were Colombians. 
Immigration and MFA are very active with IOM programs to 
combat alien smuggling and TIP.  IF POSSIBLE, CAN POST 
PROVIDE THE NUMBER OF COOPERATIVE INTERNATIONAL 
INVESTIGATIONS ON TRAFFICKING?  At the moment, there is no 
additional data on cases other than that already listed. 
 
 
¶I.  DOES THE GOVERNMENT EXTRADITE PERSONS WHO ARE CHARGED 
WITH TRAFFICKING IN OTHER COUNTRIES? No known extradition 
requests DOES THE GOVERNMENT EXTRADITE ITS OWN NATIONALS 
CHARGED WITH SUCH OFFENSES? No known extradition requests IF 
NOT, IS THE GOVERNMENT PROHIBITED BY LAW FROM EXTRADITING ITS 
OWN NATIONALS? Constitution prohibits extradition of 
Panamanians. 
 
 
¶J.  IS THERE EVIDENCE OF GOVERNMENT INVOLVEMENT IN OR 
TOLERANCE OF TRAFFICKING, ON A LOCAL OR INSTITUTION LEVEL? 
No. As mentioned before, there are allegations that a 
Panamanian consul is facilitating TIP related visa and/or 
passport fraud.  Embassy is confident GOP would welcome 
evidence, if it could be found, and take appropriate action. 
Corruption is systemic in Panama but no current evidence 
indicates ties to TIP. 
 
 
¶K.  IF GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS ARE INVOLVED IN TRAFFICKING, WHAT 
STEPS HAS THE GOVERNMENT TAKEN TO END SUCH PARTICIPATION? 
Embassy is following up on report that GOP deported 
diplomatic officials from a third-country for TIP and/or 
alien smuggling.  (Ref. O)  HAVE ANY GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS 
BEEN PROSECUTED FOR INVOLVEMENT TRAFFICKING OR TRAFFICKING 
RELATED CORRUPTION? No GOP officials have been charged. 
 
 
¶L.  HAS THE GOVERNMENT SIGNED, RATIFIED, AND/OR TAKEN STEPS 
TO IMPLEMENT THE FOLLOWING INTERNATIONAL INSTRUMENTS? PLEASE 
PROVIDE THE DATE OF SIGNATURE/RATIFICATION IF APPROPRIATE? 
 
 
ILO CONVENTION 182: Ratified on June 15, 2000. Deposited in 
Geneva on October 31, 2000 
ILO CONVENTION 29:  Ratified in 1930 
ILO CONVENTION 105: Ratified in 1957 
THE OPTIONAL PROTOCOL TO THE CONVENTION ON THE RIGHTS OF THE 
CHILD (CRC): Singed on October 31, 2000 and ratified on 
February 9, 2001 
THE PROTOCOL TO PREVENT, SUPPRESS AND PUNISH TRAFFICKING IN 
PERSONS, ESPECIALLY WOMEN AND CHILDREN, SUPPLEMENTING THE UN 
CONVENTION AGAINST TRANSNATIONAL ORGANIZED CRIME: Panama 
signed this convention on December 13, 2000 but has not yet 
ratified it. 
 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  Answers to checklist question 21 
 
 
¶A.  DOES THE GOVERNMENT ASSIST VICTIMS, FOR EXAMPLE, BY 
PROVIDING TEMPORARY TO PERMANENT RESIDENCY STATUS, RELIEF 
FROM DEPORTATION, SHELTER AND ACCESS TO LEGAL, MEDICAL, AND 
PSYCHOLOGICAL SERVICES?  IF SO, PLEASE EXPLAIN. Access to 
legal, medical, and psychological services are available. 
PTJ has a crime victims assistance center at PTJ headquarters 
in Panama City.  Service coordination is available at this 
center.  These services are not specifically focused on TIP 
victims but are designed to provide more generalized victims 
assistance.  MFA is proposing, in cooperation with IOM, the 
creation of shelter for victims of alien smuggling and TIP. 
This shelter and its services will be based on local NGO Casa 
Esperanza (see para 5(I)).  Immigration coordinates referrals 
to hospitals and NGOs for scheduled deportees who claim to be 
victims of abuse and TIP.  (Ref. L)  DOES THE COUNTRY HAVE 
VICTIM CARE AND VICTIM HEALTH CARE FACILITIES?  PTJ center 
coordinates victim referrals to these services.  Some 
hospitals and clinics have medical staff trained to treat 
rape and other sexual assault victims.  TIP-specific training 
would be beneficial.  IF SO, CAN POST PROVIDE THE NUMBER OF 
VICTIMS PLACED IN THESE CARE FACILITIES?  Statistics are not 
tracked for TIP victims specifically.  ARE TRAFFICKING 
VICTIMS OFFERED HIV/AIDS SCREENING OR OTHERWISE TESTED FOR 
HIV/AIDS? IF SO, WHAT ARE THE RESULTS? HIV/AIDS screening is 
offered but on a broader basis both to rape and sexual 
assault victims and to sex workers.  HIV/AIDS screenings are 
required and provided by the Ministry of Health for 
registered sex workers. (Ref. M) 
 
 
¶B.  DOES THE GOVERNMENT PROVIDE FUNDING OR OTHER FORMS OF 
SUPPORT TO FOREIGN OR DOMESTIC NGOS FOR SERVICES FOR VICTIMS? 
PLEASE EXPLAIN.  There is no direct financial support of NGOs 
by government. 
 
 
¶C.  IS THERE A SCREENING AND REFERRAL PROCESS IN PLACE, WHEN 
APPROPRIATE, TO TRANSFER VICTIMS DETAINED, ARRESTED OR PLACED 
IN PROTECTIVE CUSTODY BY LAW ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITIES TO NGO'S 
THAT PROVIDE SHORT OR LONG TERM CARE? The PTJ center 
coordinates victims assistance.  There is no formal and 
publicized procedure specifically related to TIP victims and 
NGOS.  Most victims assistance is coordinated through the Sex 
Crimes Unit.  Those NGOS that work with victims (adult and 
minors) of sexual abuse and assault are well known and law 
enforcement authorities can make referrals on ad-hoc basis. 
The services are available, but better coordination and 
publicity about victims assistance is needed. 
 
 
¶D.  ARE THE RIGHTS OF VICTIMS RESPECTED OR ARE VICTIMS 
TREATED AS CRIMINALS?  Victims are not treated as criminals; 
their rights are respected.  ARE VICTIMS DETAINED, JAILED OR 
DEPORTED? Victims are not usually jailed.  A small portion of 
deported sex workers who are held in custody may have been 
TIP victims, although none claimed to be.  Enhanced victim 
identification training would be useful.  IF DETAINED OR 
JAILED, FOR HOW LONG? Most victims are not detained. If they 
committed another crime or are awaiting deportation, then the 
jail time will vary depending on the circumstances.  ARE 
VICTIMS FINED? Not unless they are found guilty of a crime. 
ARE VICTIMS PROSECUTED FOR VIOLATIONS OF OTHER LAWS, SUCH AS 
THOSE GOVERNING IMMIGRATION OR PROSTITUTION? As stated, there 
may be small percentage of undocumented sex workers 
(primarily Colombians, with smaller percentage of Dominicans) 
who could TIP victims.  Because of their illegal work status, 
they can be charged with immigration and labor violations. 
According to GOP, almost all ask for voluntary departure. 
 
 
¶E.  DOES THE GOVERNMENT ENCOURAGE VICTIMS TO ASSIST IN THE 
INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION OF TRAFFICKERS?  Yes, victim 
participation is crucial.  PTJ and other law enforcement need 
a formal complaint to initiate active investigation and 
prosecutions.  Embassy is working with GOP to establish a 
victims hotline to further assist investigations and victims 
assistance.  MAY VICTIMS FILE CIVIL SUITS OR SEEK LEGAL 
ACTIONS AGAINST THE TRAFFICKERS? Yes.   DOES ANYONE IMPEDE 
THE VICTIMS' ACCESS TO SUCH LEGAL REDRESS? Like the United 
States, civil court cases can be a lengthy and expensive 
process. IF VICTIMS ARE MATERIAL WITNESSES IN A COURT CASE 
AGAINST THE FORMER EMPLOYER, IS THE VICTIM PERMITTED TO 
OBTAIN OTHER EMPLOYMENT OR LEAVE THE COUNTRY?  They are 
permitted to leave country. If they have legal status to 
work, they can seek other employment. IS THERE A VICTIM 
RESTITUTION PROGRAM? No. 
 
 
¶F.  WHAT KIND OF PROTECTION IS THE GOVERNMENT ABLE TO PROVIDE 
FOR VICTIMS AND WITNESSES?  Identity of victims are not 
revealed.  There is not a witness protection program. DOES IT 
PROVIDE THESE PROTECTIONS IN PRACTICE? Yes 
 
 
¶G.  DOES THE GOVERNMENT PROVIDE ANY SPECIALIZED TRAINING FOR 
GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS IN RECOGNIZING TRAFFICKING AND IN 
PROVISION OF ASSISTANCE TO TRAFFICKING VICTIMS, INCLUDING THE 
SPECIAL NEEDS OF TRAFFICKED CHILDREN?  GOP has limited 
internal training but approximately 20-30 GOP officials from 
seven different ministries have received training from 3rd 
parties in Panama and abroad.  Ad hoc training is provided by 
DHS/ICE officials to Customs and Labor inspectors on forced 
child labor, including commercial sexual exploitation and 
child pornography.  DHS/ICE officials at Panama international 
airport provide informal training to Immigration officials on 
identification of potential TIP victims entering country. 
GOP sent six officials from the MFA, PNP, and Immigration to 
specialized TIP training in Bogota this year.  In February 
2003, the head of Immigration, an assistant district attorney 
and a Panamanian journalist all attended Washington, D.C. TIP 
conference. (Ref. Q)  Embassy, with G/TIP support, will 
provide training from the Paul and Lisa Project in April 2004 
to approximately 40-50 professionals from the PNP, PTJ, 
Immigration, Fiscales Courts, Labor, MFA, Customs, Youth, 
Women, Children and Family Affairs, ILO/IPEC, NGOs, and 
members of the local press. (Ref. C, N)  Department of 
Justice (DOJ) is scheduled to provide training to GOP 
officials in October 2004.  DOES THE GOVERNMENT PROVIDE 
TRAINING ON PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO ITS EMBASSIES AND 
CONSULATES IN FOREIGN COUNTRIES THAT ARE DESTINATION OR 
TRANSIT COUNTRIES? Panama is not a country of origin for TIP 
victims.  DOES GOVERNMENT URGE THOSE EMBASSIES AND CONSULATES 
TO DEVELOP ONGOING RELATIONSHIPS WITH NGOS THAT SERVE 
TRAFFICKED VICTIMS? 
N/A, see above 
 
 
¶H.  DOES THE GOVERNMENT PROVIDE ASSISTANCE, SUCH AS MEDICAL 
AID, SHELTER, OR FINANCIAL HELP, TO ITS REPATRIATED NATIONALS 
WHO ARE VICTIMS OF TRAFFICKING? N/A, Panama is not a country 
of origin. 
 
 
¶I.  WHICH NGOS, IF ANY, WORK WITH TRAFFICKED VICTIMS? 
ILO/IPEC (commercial sexual exploitation of minors) and Nueva 
Era en Salud (Sex Workers/Public Health).  The following NGOs 
do not have specific programs for TIP victims only but 
sponsor victim assistance programs.  Casa Esperanza 
(education/housing/nutrition for minors), Hogar Luisa McGrath 
(victims of incest/rape), Mujeres Coloneses en Camino 
(women's assistance programs).  There are a number of other 
NGOs with similar programs.  WHAT TYPE OF SERVICES DO THEY 
PROVIDE? WHAT SORT OF COOPERATION DO THEY RECEIVE FROM LOCAL 
AUTHORITIES?  Education, nutrition, health services and 
shelter.  Many provide counseling programs.  The GOP does not 
financially support these NGOS.  The government cooperates 
with their missions but a combined and more structured 
GOP/NGO victims referral system would improve TIP victim 
assistance. 
 
 
¶7.  (U)  Embassy point of contact for TIP issues is Political 
Officer John McIntyre (507) 207-7183, (F) 507-207-7418.  Time 
spent preparing this report: 60 hours.  Members of Embassy 
TIP working group spent between 2-10 hours reviewing this 
report. 
 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
¶8.  (SBU)  Panama, like the vast majority of nations 
(including the United States), suffers the ill effects of 
TIP.  While the magnitude of the problem is not nearly equal 
to that of familial sex abuse, violence against women and 
children, and drug abuse, the GOP has recognized that TIP 
must be addressed aggressively.  Like any nation with limited 
resources, there are a number of areas where efforts to 
combat TIP could be improved.  As noted in Reftel (C), 
improved training, increased victims assistance, and better 
laws are needed.  The GOP's ongoing efforts to combat TIP can 
be enhanced by USG material support and expertise.  The GOP 
is already a willing partner in USG efforts to stem the drug 
trade, money-laundering, and alien smuggling.  With better 
coordination of their efforts, the GOP and NGOs can ensure 
that Panama's TIP problem is a short term anomaly rather than 
a long term and growing blight. 
 
 
WATT 

=======================CABLE ENDS============================