04PANAMA2589
PANAMA INVESTIGATORS, PROSECUTORS PUSH TIP AGENDA
Tue Oct 19 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Panama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PANAMA 002589 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
DEPARTMENT ALSO FOR WHA/PPC/MICHAEL PUCCETTI, G/TIP/RACHEL 
OWEN/ANTHONY ETERNO, WHA/CEN/THOMAS PIERCE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL SMIG PM KTIP LABOR HUMAN RIGHTSPOLMIL
SUBJECT: PANAMA INVESTIGATORS, PROSECUTORS PUSH TIP AGENDA 
 
 
REF: A. PANAMA 2153 
     ¶B. PANAMA 2533 
 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
 
¶1. (SBU)  Despite the continued absence of funding for the 
anti-TIP law enacted in March 2004 (see Reftel A) and a 
recent change in administration, Panama's Judicial Police 
(PTJ) and prosecutors have continued to push the TIP agenda. 
They have publicized the anti-TIP law, created a specialized 
section for child sexual exploitation, extended anti-TIP 
efforts to the provinces, and fostered inter-governmental 
cooperation.  Institutionalizing the anti-TIP effort within 
the PTJ and the Prosecutor's office at the technical level 
has created momentum in the GOP's anti-TIP efforts.  End 
Summary. 
 
 
------------------------------- 
PTJ PUBLICIZES NEW ANTI-TIP LAW 
------------------------------- 
 
 
¶2.  (U)  On October 6, the PTJ publicized its new Sexual 
Exploitation Section with a launch ceremony and news 
conference.  On the same date, the PTJ's Sex Crimes Unit 
Chief Ana Cajar appeared on the program Caracol to publicize 
the anti-TIP law and Sexual Exploitation Section.  Since the 
anti-TIP law was passed, Chief Cajar and PTJ officials have 
spoken at several schools and two universities to publicize 
the new law and raise awareness about the problem of sexual 
exploitation of children.  The PTJ's Public Affairs Office 
prepared brochures for the launch ceremony explaining Sexual 
Exploitation of Minors, the cases the Sexual Exploitation 
Section handles, and the problem of sexual predation.  As 
funding under the new-TIP law (which has a designated tax 
source) becomes available, the PTJ plans to distribute the 
brochures at police intake rooms and in schools in 
cooperation with the Ministry of Education. 
 
 
------------------------ 
FOCUS OF NEW SECTION 
------------------------ 
 
 
¶3.  (U)  The PTJ created the Sexual Exploitation Section to 
fulfill its obligations under its new anti-TIP law.  The 
section serves both citizen and foreign minors in Panama who 
have been sexually exploited.  The Sexual Exploitation 
Section can initiate its own investigations, conduct 
undercover operations, and monitor computers with court 
approval.  The PTJ's already existing Sex Crimes Unit directs 
the new section, which handles cases of corruption of minors, 
pimping, international sex trafficking, child pornography, 
and sex tourism. 
 
 
¶4.  (U)  Through September 2004, the Sexual Exploitation 
Section opened 15 cases with eight of those cases in 
September alone.  One-third of the cases involved child 
prostitution, another third involved pimping or prostitution, 
and two cases involved sex trafficking. 
 
 
-------------------------- 
EXTENSION TO THE PROVINCES 
-------------------------- 
 
 
¶5.  (U)  The PTJ has extended the reach of the Sexual 
Exploitation Section outside of Panama City by naming 
investigators and support personnel in provinces to 
coordinate the new section.  Activist prosecutors in the 
provinces, especially the Darien, created greater TIP 
awareness within other ministries.  By pursuing new cases, 
the prosecutors involved more ministries through their 
efforts to protect and provide services to victims. 
 
 
----------------------------- 
INTERGOVERNMENTAL COOPERATION 
----------------------------- 
 
 
¶6.  (U)  Family Court Judge President Esmeralda Arosemena de 
Troitino, Sex Crimes Prosecutor Maruquel Castroverde, Chief 
Cajar, and PTJ Director General Erick Bravo Dutary all spoke 
during the October 6 launch of the Sexual Exploitation 
Section.  Judge Arosemena explained the challenges in 
providing assistance to victims.  Prosecutor Castroverde 
spoke passionately about the new tools the anti-TIP law 
provides and encouraged witnesses to come forward. 
Prosecutor Castroverde stated that while the Prosecutor's Sex 
Crimes Office lacks resources, it will still get the job 
done.  Chief Cajar stressed the need to investigate cases 
using undercover operations and her belief that sexual 
exploitation of minors is linked to international crime. 
COMMENT 
¶7.  (SBU)  Efforts to implement and publicize the anti-TIP 
law throughout Panama indicate that the PTJ and Prosecutors 
have a strong institutionalized commitment to combat sex 
trafficking of minors regardless of agency resources.  As 
will be discussed in septel on victim protection, Minister of 
Youth Leonor Calderon expects the Attorney General to convene 
the Commission created by the anti-TIP law on November 26, 
making additional anti-TIP resources available.  The PTJ news 
conference represented an inexpensive way for the PTJ and the 
Sex Crimes Prosecutor to keep sexual exploitation on the 
agenda.  While the Torrijos administration has recently 
nominated Esmeralda Arosemena to the Supreme Court in a 
controversial move to replace Justice Cesar Pereira (see 
reftel B), anti-child exploitation advocates expect her to 
remain committed to combating TIP.  Despite the 
intergovernmental approach, the PTJ still faces coordination 
challenges in implementing the new law with the National 
Police, who require more anti-TIP training. 
 
 
MCMULLEN