05PANAMA555
PANAMA'S INPUT FOR FIFTH ANNUAL ANTI-TRAFFICKING
Mon Mar 14 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Panama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 17 PANAMA 000555 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN PIERCE, G/TIP RACHEL OWEN, G, INL, 
DRL, PRM, IWI, WHA/PPC/PUCCETTI FALLS 
STATE PASS FOR USAID 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD ASEC PREF ELAB PM LABOR HUMAN RIGHTSPOLMIL
SUBJECT: PANAMA'S INPUT FOR FIFTH ANNUAL ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
IN PERSONS (TIP) REPORT 
 
REF: A. 04 STATE 273089 
     ¶B. 04 PANAMA 02153 
     ¶C. PANAMA 00338 
     ¶D. 04 PANAMA 00548 
     ¶E. 04 PANAMA 00148 
     ¶F. 2004 HUMAN RIGHTS REPORT FOR PANAMA 
     ¶G. PANAMA 00390 
     ¶H. 04 PANAMA 02589 
     ¶I. PANAMA 00088 
     ¶J. 04 PANAMA 02613 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Embassy Panama believes that trafficking in 
persons (TIP) is a relatively small and manageable problem, 
involving around 200-500 victims.  In 2004, Embassy worked 
closely with the Government of Panama (GOP) to discover the 
true extent of TIP in Panama and to strengthen the anti-TIP 
legal framework, investigate and prosecute traffickers; 
publicize the crimes associated with TIP; train officers and 
staff; reduce the number of TIP victims; and improve the care 
they receive.  Passage of the March 2004 anti-TIP law was a 
positive step that greatly enhanced the GOP's ability to 
publicize and prosecute TIP and to protect victims.  In 
October the Technical Judicial Police (PTJ) created a Sexual 
Exploitation Section within its Sex Crimes Unit; in November 
the Ministry of Children, Youth, Women and Family (MINJUMFA) 
initiated an awareness campaign and began seeking shelter and 
counseling services for more TIP victims; and in February 
2005 the Attorney General convoked a permanent anti-TIP 
commission.  As seen with Panama's July 2004 ratification of 
the U.N. Protocol to Prevent, Suppress, and Punish 
Trafficking in Persons, the National Assembly is increasingly 
"on alert" about TIP.  The GOP is pushing for tougher 
anti-TIP measures.  The GOP is open to suggestions from 
Embassy-G/TIP and the GOP has reached out to the 
international community for help in addressing its TIP 
problem.  Nonetheless, the Immigration Directorate continues 
to favor issuance of "alternadora" visas for female sex 
workers, citing public health concerns.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (U) Per Reftel A Embassy Panama is pleased to submit its 
input for the annual Trafficking in Persons (TIP) report. 
Classified information regarding corruption will be sent by 
septel. 
 
IS THE COUNTRY A COUNTRY OF ORIGIN, TRANSIT OR DESTINATION 
FOR INTERNATIONALLY TRAFFICKED MEN, WOMEN OR CHILDREN? 
SPECIFY NUMBERS WITHIN EACH GROUP.  DOES THE TRAFFICKING 
OCCUR WITHIN THE COUNTRY'S BORDERS? 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  Panama is a country primarily of destination for 
internationally trafficked men, women, and children and a 
country of origin primarily for internally trafficked 
children.  Embassy estimates that approximately 125-375 
children (both boys and girls), 75-125 women, and 0 men are 
trafficked annually in Panama, 95% of whom are trafficked 
internally. 
 
DOES IT OCCUR IN AN AREA OUTSIDE THE GOVERNMENT'S CONTROL? 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  Commercial sexual exploitation of children occurs 
disproportionately in Darien province, a remote area that has 
little infrastructure and has historically received few 
government resources.  The prosecutor for the Darien region 
suspects, but has limited proof, that at least one 
traditional leader of one of Panama's semiautonomous 
indigenous groups in the Darien area offers indigenous girls 
for prostitution. 
 
ARE THERE ESTIMATES OR RELIABLE NUMBERS AVAILABLE AS TO THE 
EXTENT OR MAGNITUDE OF THE PROBLEM?  PLEASE INCLUDE ANY 
NUMBERS OF VICTIMS.  WHAT IS (ARE) THE SOURCE(S) OF AVAILABLE 
INFORMATION ON TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS?  HOW RELIABLE ARE THE 
NUMBERS AND THESE SOURCES? 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  GOP tracks arrests, investigations, and victim 
complaints, and deportations of illegal foreign sex workers. 
The International Labor Organization (ILO)/Program for 
Eradication of Child Labor (IPEC), along with academics at 
the University of Panama (UP), publish reports on commercial 
sexual exploitation of minors.  (NOTE: ILO/IPEC is working 
regionally to combat commercial sexual exploitation of 
minors.  End Note.) Panama's press has reported on the trade 
involving underage sex workers and arrests and prosecutions 
of their traffickers.  GOP and NGO officials also provide 
verbal reports and updates to Emboffs on numbers of TIP 
victims.  GOP and ILO reports and commentary are reliable. 
Press reports at times are reliable, but are often 
sensationalized.  Embassy evaluated the sources of the 
reports and took a "realistic and solid evidence" approach, 
basing total TIP victims numbers on verifiable evidence and 
knowledge of Panama's overall social and economic conditions. 
 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  The estimated annual number of Women victims is 
75-125.  The estimates for the adults does assume that a 
small percentage (5-10%) of female sex workers in Panama or 
transiting Panama could be considered TIP victims. 
Immigration Department statistics indicate that approximately 
367 women were deported for working illegally in the sex 
trade from January through November 2004, mainly Colombians. 
Immigration officials indicate that illegal sex workers also 
include women from the Dominican Republic.  Immigration 
officials reported that none of these women claimed to be TIP 
victims.  All knowledgeable TIP sources agree that the 
overwhelming majority of adult female sex workers in Panama 
or transiting Panama have chosen their profession freely. 
(Note:  There have been unsubstantiated allegations of debt 
bondage amongst smuggled Mainland Chinese. (reftel E)  A 2002 
paper by OAS Chinese migration consultant Dr. Ramon Mon 
describes a press account of Chinese debt bondage in Panama 
in the early 1990s.  No recent evidence has been uncovered to 
support such allegations.  Embassy continues to search for 
more credible evidence and the GOP invited Dr. Mon to 
participate in its DOJ-sponsored TIP training March 7-9. 
Estimates are not provided for debt bondage TIP victims.  End 
Note.) 
 
¶7.  (SBU)  The estimated annual number of minor TIP victims 
is 125-375 (both male and female), primarily victims of 
internal trafficking for commercial sexual exploitation. 
This estimate is based on ILO/IPEC reports; recent police 
busts; meetings with NGOs, prosecutors, and investigators; 
and extrapolation.  The ILO reports indicate that there are 
at least 100 minors who are sexually exploited for commercial 
purposes.  Since March 2004, an ILO/IPEC pilot program with 
local officials in Veraguas province removed approximately 
130 girls from child domestic labor, some of whom may have 
also been trafficking victims (reftel B). 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  (Note: Although the estimate is higher than in 
last year's report (reftel D), Embassy does not believe that 
the actual number of victims is increasing.  Rather, GOP 
prevention and awareness campaigns have resulted in more 
victims and witnesses coming forward.  Similarly, the March 
2004 anti-TIP law gave prosecutors and police investigators 
greater investigative powers, allowing the GOP to uncover 
more victims). 
 
WHERE ARE PERSONS TRAFFICKED FROM? WHERE ARE THE PERSONS 
TRAFFICKED TO? 
 
¶9.  (SBU)  Women are trafficked from Colombia (primarily) and 
the Dominican Republic to Panama, Costa Rica, United States 
(through Central America) and Europe.  There is some credible 
evidence that minors have been trafficked from Colombia to 
Panama in previous years.  Child domestic laborers who may be 
trafficking victims originate primarily from western 
provinces and go to Panama City.  Children trafficked for 
commercial sexual exploitation are trafficked primarily 
within Panama City and from Darien province to Panama City. 
 
HAVE THERE BEEN ANY CHANGES IN THE DIRECTION OR EXTENT OF 
TRAFFICKING? 
 
¶10.  (SBU)  In the past year it is likely that trafficking 
slowed because of vigorous investigation and prosecution 
under the March 2004 anti-TIP law.  During 2004, the GOP 
"suspended" issuance of the "alternadora visa" (reftel F). 
GOP officials reported that because Colombians can enter 
Panama without a visa, Colombians entered Panama as tourists 
and began to practice prostitution without regulation and 
health controls. 
ARE THERE EFFORTS OR SURVEYS PLANNED OR UNDERWAY TO DOCUMENT 
THE EXTENT AND NATURE OF TRAFFICKING IN THE COUNTRY? IS ANY 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION AVAILABLE FROM SUCH REPORTS OR SURVEYS 
THAT WAS NOT AVAILABLE LAST YEAR? 
 
¶11.  (SBU)  NGOs publish reports on the health status of sex 
workers in Panama.  ILO/IPEC publishes reports and studies on 
the extent of commercial sexual exploitation of minors in 
Panama.  ILO also publishes reports on child domestic labor 
in Panama.  Most of their reports have been published within 
the last three years.  Since last year, ILO reports showed 
that girls from Veraguas province may be trafficked for child 
domestic labor (reftel B) and that commercial sexual 
exploitation is linked to concepts of masculinity in Panama. 
 
 
¶12.  (SBU)  TIP prevention and protection proposals by the 
Attorney General's Office and MINJUMFA contemplate studies on 
TIP (reftel C).  The GOP tracks TIP victims' complaints 
through the Panamanian Judicial Police (PTJ) Sex Crimes Unit 
Sexual Exploitation Section.  Under the March 2004 anti-TIP 
law, authorities must send TIP case statistics to the 
National Commission for Criminal Statistics (CONADEC).  The 
new anti-TIP commission (CONAPREDES) must study the 
mechanisms for preventing and eliminating crimes of 
commercial sexual exploitation. (reftel G) Immigration tracks 
deportations of illegal sex workers, classified as "non-bona 
fide" tourists. 
 
IF THE COUNTRY IS A DESTINATION POINT FOR TRAFFICKED VICTIMS: 
 WHAT KIND OF CONDITIONS ARE THE VICTIMS TRAFFICKED INTO? 
WHAT METHODS ARE USED TO ENSURE THEIR COMPLIANCE? ARE THE 
VICTIMS SUBJECT TO VIOLENCE, THREATS, WITHHOLDING OF 
DOCUMENTS, DEBT BONDAGE, ETC? 
 
¶13.  (SBU)  Women and minors are trafficked into massage 
parlors and nude dancing establishments, which also serve as 
brothels.  Many work on the streets.  PTJ Sex Crime Unit 
investigators, prosecutors, and judges indicate that 
withholding documents (passports) and heavy debts are the 
most common means of ensuring compliance.  Withholding 
documents is most common for those who are working illegally 
(without work permits/"alternadora" visas) in prostitution. 
Threats of violence have not been reported in the vast 
majority of cases.  In cases of internal trafficking of 
minors for commercial sexual exploitation, victims and their 
families have received threats of physical harm after the 
victim, the PTJ, or prosecutors initiated investigations.  In 
cases of child domestic labor, girls may pay a fee to find a 
job in the city which is deducted from their meager wages. 
(Note:  The March 2004 TIP law makes the withholding of 
documents a crime punishable by 3-5 years in prison). 
 
IF THE COUNTRY IS COUNTRY OF ORIGIN: WHICH POPULATIONS ARE 
TARGETED BY TRAFFICKERS? WHO ARE THE TRAFFICKERS? WHAT 
METHODS ARE USED TO APPROACH VICTIMS?  WHAT METHODS ARE USED 
TO MOVE VICTIMS? 
 
¶14.  (SBU)  Panama is a country of origin for internal 
trafficking.  GOP and ILO reports indicate minors (girls) are 
offered cash and clothing by those running sex worker rings. 
Traffickers are usually non-family, third parties.  According 
to recent reports, girls are approached on the streets when 
away from their parents by third parties.  Victims are 
transported within Panama by car and usually within a 
relatively limited area.  Adult victims are most likely 
Colombian, and, to a lesser extent, Dominican female sex 
workers who arrive willingly in Panama to work in the sex 
trade but could become victims of TIP.  In the case of child 
domestic labor, recruiters contact rural girls hoping to 
continue their education in the city and arrange for their 
transportation for a fee to be deducted from wages (reftel 
B). 
 
IS THERE POLITICAL WILL AT THE HIGHEST LEVELS OF GOVERNMENT 
TO COMBAT TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS? IS THE GOVERNMENT MAKING A 
GOOD FAITH EFFORT TO SERIOUSLY ADDRESS TRAFFICKING?   IS 
THERE A WILLINGNESS TO TAKE ACTION AGAINST GOVERNMENT 
OFFICIALS LINKED TO TIP?  IN BROAD TERMS, WHAT RESOURCES IS 
THE HOST GOVERNMENT DEVOTING TO COMBATING TRAFFICKING IN 
PERSONS (IN TERMS OF PREVENTION, PROTECTION, AND PROSECUTION) 
 
 
¶15. (SBU)  Throughout 2004, the GOP has demonstrated will at 
the highest levels of government to combat trafficking in 
persons and has made a good faith effort to seriously address 
trafficking.  In March 2004, the National Assembly passed and 
former President Moscoso signed a new anti-TIP law that has 
led to increased attention to TIP throughout the GOP, 
institutionalizing the country's anti-TIP efforts at the 
policy and the technical level.  As a result of the 
legislation, the PTJ's Sex Crimes Unit created a Sexual 
Exploitation Section to combat crimes under the new law 
(reftel H).  Because the new law allowed PTJ investigators 
and government prosecutors to initiate their own cases, the 
PTJ and Prosecutors have devoted more time, energy, and 
resources to combating TIP cases, generally cases of sexual 
exploitation of minors.  With an increasing number of 
investigations and prosecutions, Attorney General Gomez 
immediately identified combating TIP as a priority upon 
taking office (reftel I).  (NOTE:  Domestic sexual violence 
and non-commercial sexual exploitation.  Resources and 
manpower within the PTJ and the prosecutors' offices are 
dedicated accordingly.  End Note.) 
 
¶16.  (SBU)  Attorney General Gomez acted quickly to convoke 
the anti-TIP Commission CONAPREDES under the new law on 
February 15.  CONAPREDES includes policy makers from the 
Ministry of Government and Justice (MOGJ), MINJUMFA, the 
Ministry of Health, and the Ministry of Education. (reftel 
G).  Under the anti-TIP law, CONAPREDES is charged with 
creating a fund from a special tax source for training, 
education, and prevention.  MINJUMFA Minister Calderon has 
devoted additional vehicles, social workers, and shelter 
services to TIP protection, particularly for victims from the 
Darien region (reftel C).  Minister Calderon and the Office 
of the First Lady also initiated a TIP prevention program. 
¶17.  (SBU)  MOGJ's Immigration Directorate conducts raids on 
brothels and other establishments where TIP victims may be 
present.  These operations are carried out every two to three 
months and on an ad-hoc basis responding to complaints and 
leads.  Immigration works in conjunction with the Panama 
National Police (PNP).  Immigration also increased airport 
and border-crossing enforcement, often in conjunction and 
with the assistance of USG resources.  As discussed with 
EmbOffs, Immigration officers are aware that certain visitors 
to Panama fit the profile of persons seeking to work 
illegally in the sex trade who could subsequently become or 
are TIP victims.  The National Air Service (SAN) and National 
Marine Service SMN also conduct interdictions to apprehend 
illegal migrants. 
 
¶18.  (SBU)  Despite having no declared TIP victims through 
immigration operations, Vice MOGJ Minister Olga Golcher 
announced in February 2005 plans to create a special MOGJ 
office to receive complaints from and to provide services to 
TIP victims.  The MOGJ has already initiated a new office of 
gender. 
 
¶19.  (SBU)  MINJUMFA and the Ministry of Education also have 
projects designed to eliminate illegal child labor, forced or 
otherwise.  MINJUMFA also helps fund NGOs that are involved 
in combating child labor, domestic violence, or victims' 
assistance.  Combating TIP has a natural link with their work 
in these areas.  For example, MINJUMFA funds the NGOs Casa 
Esperanza (involved in fighting child labor) (reftel B) and 
Casa Malambo (involved in sheltering victims) (reftel C). 
¶20.  (SBU)  Embassy has on-going TIP dialogue with all levels 
of the GOP.  Embassy continues to work closely with the 
highest levels of the GOP and believes the GOP will further 
strengthen their anti-TIP efforts.  However, some GOP 
officials continue to support the use of the "alternadora 
visa," citing public health reasons.  Nonetheless, these GOP 
officials have stated they wish to modify the "alternadora" 
visa to ensure that it complies with the U.N. Protocol to 
Prevent, Suppress, and Punish Trafficking in Persons, which 
Panama ratified in July 2004. 
 
DO GOVERNMENTAL AUTHORITIES OR INDIVIDUAL MEMBERS OF 
GOVERNMENT FORCES FACILITATE OR CONDONE TRAFFICKING, OR ARE 
THEY OTHERWISE COMPLICIT IN SUCH ACTIVITIES? DO GOVERNMENT 
OFFICIALS (SUCH AS CUSTOMS, BORDER GUARDS, IMMIGRATION 
OFFICIALS, LABOR INSPECTORS, LOCAL POLICE, OR OTHERS) RECEIVE 
BRIBES FROM TRAFFICKERS OR OTHERWISE ASSIST IN THEIR 
OPERATIONS?    WHAT PUNITIVE MEASURES, IF ANY, HAVE BEEN 
TAKEN AGAINST THOSE INDIVIDUALS COMPLICIT OR INVOLVED IN 
TRAFFICKING? 
 
¶21.  (U)  This issue will be addressed in septel. 
 
WHAT ARE THE LIMITATIONS ON THE GOVERNMENT'S ABILITY TO 
ADDRESS THIS PROBLEM IN PRACTICE?  FOR EXAMPLE, IS FUNDING 
FOR POLICE OR INSTITUTIONS INADEQUATE? 
 
¶22.  (SBU)  The new anti-TIP law allows prosecutors and PTJ 
investigators to initiate their own cases, eliminating a past 
limitation (reftel B, C, F  Nonetheless, funding is limited 
for TIP-specific investigations within PTJ, PNP, Immigration 
and other GOP agencies.  Lack of funding also hinders 
coordination within the GOP and with civil society, hampering 
prevention and protection efforts. 
 
IS OVERALL CORRUPTION A PROBLEM? 
 
¶23.  (SBU)  Corruption is a problem in Panama. 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT DOES THE GOVERNMENT SYSTEMATICALLY MONITOR ITS 
ANTI-TRAFFICKING EFFORTS (ON ALL FRONTS, PROSECUTION, 
PREVENTION, AND VICTIM PROTECTION) AND PERIODICALLY MAKE 
AVAILABLE, PUBLICLY AND PRIVATELY AND DIRECTLY OR THROUGH 
REGIONAL/INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS, ITS ASSESSMENTS OF 
THESE ANTI-TRAFFICKING EFFORTS? 
 
¶24.  (SBU)  The PTJ Sexual Exploitation Section keeps 
excellent statistics on the TIP cases it sends for 
prosecution, including the age and gender of victims and the 
nationalities of the perpetrators.  Immigration has 
statistics on deportations, including those involving illegal 
prostitution.  The Judicial Branch compiles and distributes 
statistics, but they are current only through 2003, prior to 
the passage of the anti-TIP law.  The GOP Ministries that 
work to eradicate forced child labor and commercial sexual 
exploitation of minors all track results of their projects. 
The GOP shares its statistics with NGOs ILO/IPEC, and the 
Embassy.  Embassy officials can call at any time and receive 
the latest updates from these GOP ministries. 
 
¶25.  (SBU)  ILO/IPEC uses statistics from the PTJ to 
supplement their own reporting.  The March 2004 
anti-trafficking law requires authorities to keep statistics 
on sexual TIP and send those statistics to the National 
Commission for Criminal Statistics (CONADEC) to serve as a 
baseline for authorities in their prevention and protection 
efforts.  Embassy expects that the new anti-TIP commission 
(reftel G) will work to improve statistics at the ministerial 
level for transmission to CONADEC.  The anti-TIP prevention 
and protection proposals from the Office of the Attorney 
General and MINJUMFA (reftel C) include programs for 
increasing monitoring capabilities. 
 
IS PROSTITUTION LEGALIZED OR DECRIMINALIZED?  IF PROSTITUTION 
IS LEGAL AND REGULATED, WHAT IS THE LEGAL MINIMUM AGE FOR 
THIS ACTIVITY? 
 
¶26.  (U)  Prostitution is legalized and regulated.  The 
minimum age for prostitution is 18. 
DOES THE GOVERNMENT ACKNOWLEDGE THAT TRAFFICKING IS A PROBLEM 
IN THAT COUNTRY? 
 
¶27.  (SBU)  GOP officials acknowledge there are TIP victims 
in Panama but most do not believe there are more than 100 
victims who are trafficked annually across borders.  However, 
GOP continues devote considerable time, efforts and resources 
to combating TIP.  GOP officials are well aware of the 
internal trafficking problem of commercial sexual 
exploitation of minors and the use of Panamanian minors in 
international pornography. 
 
WHICH GOVERNMENT AGENCIES ARE INVOLVED IN ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
EFFORTS? 
 
¶28.  (SBU)  PTJ (including the Sex Crimes Unit and its Sexual 
Exploitation Section), PNP, Immigration, MINJUMFA, MFA, 
Ministry of Labor, MOGJ, Ministry of Health, Ministry of 
Education, Social Security (CSS), Office of the First Lady, 
Ministry of Commerce, SAN, SMN, Family and Child Courts, 
District Attorneys, the Office of Tourism (IPAT), the 
Ombudsman (Defensoria) and the National Assembly. 
 
ARE THERE OR HAVE THERE BEEN GOVERNMENT-RUN ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
INFORMATION OR EDUCATION CAMPAIGNS? IF SO, BRIEFLY DESCRIBE 
THE CAMPAIGN(S), INCLUDING THEIR OBJECTIVE 
AND EFFECTIVENESS. DO THESE CAMPAIGNS TARGET POTENTIAL 
TRAFFICKING VICTIMS AND/OR THE DEMAND FOR TRAFFICKING (E.G. 
"CLIENTS" OF PROSTITUTES OR BENEFICIARIES OF FORCED LABOR). 
 
¶29.  (SBU)  In November 2004, MINJUMFA and the Office of the 
First Lady initiated a formal campaign against the sexual 
commercial exploitation of minors and sexual tourism. 
(reftel F).  The campaign targeted the demand for 
trafficking, using the slogans "IF YOU ARE A MAN, WE'RE 
DEPENDING ON YOU" and "PANAMA: A COUNTRY THAT REJECTS SEX 
TOURISM."  The campaign also sought to create awareness of 
TIP among the general public.  The program included a launch 
event at the international airport with the First Lady, the 
MINJUMFA Minister, the MOGJ, tourist agencies, and IPAT; the 
distribution of thousands of postcards with anti-TIP messages 
to tourists in transit at the principal airports, ports, 
travel agencies, and hotels in Panama; the distribution of 
flyers throughout the country in internet cafes, bars, 
pharmacies, restaurants, and health centers; and three 
celebrity radio spots calling on men to stop sexual 
exploitation of minors.  The campaigned increased awareness 
of the issue, but MINJUMFA found tourist sector businesses 
resistant to informing their patrons of the problem of sex 
tourism.  MINJUMFA submitted an anti-TIP prevention proposal 
to extend its campaign and work more intensively with tourist 
sector businesses.  (reftel C) 
 
¶30.  (SBU)  In November 2004, MINJUMFA initiated an anti-TIP 
awareness workshop in the Darien region (reftel F) aimed at 
50 Darien judges, "corregidores," prosecutors, mayors, 
police, educators, health professionals, and NGOs.  The 
workshop resulted in a Darien action plan, receipt of 
additional complaints, and an agreement between MINJUMFA and 
the PNP to train PNP personnel in attention to cases of 
commercial sexual exploitation of minors. 
 
¶31.  (SBU)  In November 2004, MINJUMFA conducted a National 
Forum on Integral Assistance to Child Victims of Sexual 
Violence that identified advances, challenges, and strategies 
in providing victims' assistance.  The forum included 150 
participants, including judges, "corregidores," prosecutors, 
mayors, health, education and labor officials, and NGOs.  At 
the forum, MINJUMFA distributed 300 copies of the new 
anti-TIP law and anti-TIP publicity materials, a thousand 
press packets, and other publicity. 
¶32.  (SBU)  Throughout 2004 the PTJ Sex Crimes Unit and its 
Sexual Exploitation Section conducted informal education 
sessions at schools and universities specifically discussing 
trafficking and related crimes.  The PTJ also publicized the 
March 2004 anti-TIP law and the creation of the Sexual 
Exploitation Section (reftel H).  The PTJ worked with the ILO 
to design anti-TIP information for its victim center. 
 
¶33.  (SBU)  To address the issue of child domestic labor, an 
ILO/IPEC pilot project created a provincial sub-committee 
composed of local government and civil society to raise 
awareness and address child domestic labor.  The program 
included radio spots about child domestic labor.  The pilot 
program succeeded in removing approximately 130 girls from 
child domestic labor in less than a year and the First Lady 
hopes to extend the program throughout the country.  The 
regional sub-committe took innovate steps, such as arranging 
for a local bus transportation company to verify that girls 
traveling to Panama City had work permits (reftel B). 
 
¶34.  (U)  The Sex Crimes Prosecutors in the Attorney 
General's Office promoted the new anti-TIP law throughout the 
year on TV and radio programs and during anti-TIP launch 
events.  The Attorney General's Office conducted a public 
awareness campaign in January and February 2005 in the weeks 
prior to the carnival holidays to make citizens and the media 
aware of the new anti-TIP law.  The campaign aimed to prevent 
the commercial sexual exploitation of minors and child 
pornography at Carnival festivities, particularly 
photographing undressed minors.  The Attorney General's 
office included anti-TIP information (such as Carnival 
awareness information and the Attorney General's remarks at 
anti-TIP events) on it's excellent website. 
 
DOES THE GOVERNMENT SUPPORT OTHER PROGRAMS TO PREVENT 
TRAFFICKING? (E.G. TO PROMOTE WOMEN'S PARTICIPATION IN 
ECONOMIC DECISION-MAKING OR EFFORTS TO KEEP CHILDREN IN 
SCHOOL). PLEASE EXPLAIN. 
 
¶35.  GOP sponsors a number of programs through MINJUMFA, and 
the Ministries of Health, Labor, and Education (reftel B). 
These programs range from increasing access to education for 
child workers; anti-drug, HIV and Safe Sex awareness; income 
generating projects for families; and combating violence 
against women.  NGOs and other international organizations 
sponsor similar campaigns. 
 
IS THE GOVERNMENT ABLE TO SUPPORT A PREVENTION PROGRAM? 
 
¶36.  The GOP has been able to support a limited campaign due 
to lack of funding.  The Attorney General's Office and 
MINJUMFA have submitted anti-TIP prevention proposals (reftel 
C).  CONAPREDES, the new anti-TIP commission, is charged with 
creating a fund from a special tax to support prevention 
efforts, which Embassy estimates will be fully functional by 
the end of 2005 (reftel C). 
 
WHAT IS THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS, NGOS, 
OTHER RELEVANT ORGANIZATIONS AND OTHER ELEMENTS OF CIVIL 
SOCIETY ON TRAFFICKING ISSUE? 
 
¶37.  (SBU)  The GOP (particularly MINJUMFA, prosecutors, and 
investigators) relation with the ILO/IPEC is good.  The 
Immigration Directorate has been extremely active with the 
International Organization for Migration (OIM) in 2004-2005, 
presiding over the IOM until November 2004 and receiving two 
anti-TIP training seminars.  The Ombudsman's Office has a 
special network which helped design and pass the March 2004 
anti-TIP law.  This network includes civil society and 
representatives from the executive, legislative, and judicial 
branches.  With the installation of the anti-TIP commission 
in February 2005, the GOP further institutionalized this 
relationship at a policy and technical level because the 
commission includes government and civil society members 
(reftel I).  USG-GOP relations continue to be outstanding. 
DOES THE GOVERNMENT ADEQUATELY MONITOR ITS BORDERS?  DOES IT 
MONITOR IMMIGRATION AND EMIGRATION PATTERNS FOR EVIDENCE OF 
TRAFFICKING?  DO LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES RESPOND 
APPROPRIATELY TO SUCH EVIDENCE? 
 
¶38.  (SBU)  The Immigration Directorate continued to increase 
its efforts to stem the flow of illegal migrants to and 
through Panama.  While illegal foreign sex workers have not 
identified themselves as TIP victims, Immigration does track 
the number of sex workers they deport.  DHS/ICE works closely 
with Panamanian Immigration on detection and investigation of 
alien smuggling and TIP.  The SAN and SMN also conduct 
interdictions based on intelligence received.  The 
overwhelming majority of those persons arrested are being 
voluntarily smuggled and not trafficked. 
 
IS THERE A MECHANISM FOR COORDINATION AND COMMUNICATION 
BETWEEN VARIOUS AGENCIES, SUCH AS MULTI-AGENCY WORKING GROUP 
OR TASK FORCE?  DOES THE GOVERNMENT HAVE A TRAFFICKING IN 
PERSONS TASK FORCE? 
 
¶39.  (SBU)  There are several mechanisms for communication 
among various agencies and between the GOP and civil society. 
 The March 2004 anti-TIP law created an anti-TIP commission 
(CONAPREDES).  The Attorney General convoked CONAPREDES in 
February 2005 (reftel G), institutionalizing TIP policy and 
technical coordination regarding TIP for most relevant GOP 
ministries and agencies.  Although the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs (MFA) is not a CONAPREDES member, the Attorney 
General's Office coordinates with the MFA.  For example, at 
the MFA's request, the Attorney General's office invited MFA 
representatives to the DOJ-sponsored TIP training for 
CONAPREDES on March 7-9.  Training participants created a 
draft operations manual as a point of departure for 
increasing coordination. 
 
¶40.  (SBU) In March 2004 under the Moscoso Administration, 
the MOGJ created an ad-hoc Inter-Institutional Commission to 
Fight Trafficking in Persons (reftel B).  As a result of an 
inquiry from the IOM at its February 2005 training seminar 
for MOGJ's Immigration Directorate, the Torrijos 
Administration's MOGJ is studying whether the ad-hoc 
Inter-Institutional Commission fulfilled its mandate or 
should be reconvened.  The Ombudsman's Office also has a 
special network that includes civil society and executive, 
legislative, and judicial branch officials (para 37).  The 
GOP Ministries also work together on prevention, protection, 
and prosecution on an ad-hoc basis. 
 
DOES THE GOVERNMENT HAVE A PUBLIC CORRUPTION TASK FORCE? 
 
¶41.  (U)  In October, the GOP created the National Council 
for Transparency, headed by an Anti-Corruption Secretary with 
the rank of Vice-Minister (reftel F, J).  The Attorney 
General's Office has an anti-corruption prosecutor.  The 
Ministry of Economics and Finance has an office that conducts 
special audits at the Minister's request. 
 
DOES THE GOVERNMENT COORDINATE OR PARTICIPATE IN 
MULTINATIONAL OR INTERNATIONAL WORKING GROUPS OR EFFORTS TO 
PREVENT, MONITOR, OR CONTROL TRAFFICKING? 
 
¶42.  (U)  GOP was very active with the IOM on alien smuggling 
and anti-TIP programs in 2004-2005 (para 37).  In December 
2004, Panama hosted the International Law Enforcement Academy 
Key Leaders Conference in which regional law enforcement 
heads discussed TIP extensively.  Panama also worked 
multilaterally on TIP at the Security Commission of Central 
American Integration and the Meeting of the Joint Task Forces 
in El Salvador.  GOP coordinates border control with 
neighboring countries through Immigration and PNP.  The GOP 
has bilateral exchange information agreements with Ecuador, 
Colombia, and Mexico.  The MOGJ's Office of Mutual Legal 
Assistance handled international requests for judicial 
assistance in TIP cases.  GOP and the Government of Colombia 
(GOC) have a border security working group for Darien 
Province.  In March 2004, PNP Secretary General Luis Benitez 
Aponte presented a paper on TIP at the Ordinary Meeting of 
the Commission of Heads of Police of Central America and the 
Caribbean.  PTJ and PNP receive intelligence from Interpol on 
TIP cases.  (NOTE: Embassy believes GOP would support and 
participate actively in any additional bi-lateral and/or 
regional working groups. 
End Note.) 
 
DOES THE GOVERNMENT HAVE A NATIONAL PLAN OF ACTION TO ADDRESS 
TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS?  IF SO, WHICH AGENCIES WERE INVOLVED 
IN DEVELOPING IT? WERE NGOS CONSULTED IN THE PROCESS?  WHAT 
STEPS HAS THE GOVERNMENT TAKEN TO DISSEMINATE THE ACTION 
PLAN? 
 
¶43. (SBU)  The GOP's national action plan to address 
trafficking in persons was institutionalized in March 2004 
with the new anti-TIP law, which contains prosecution, 
prevention, and enforcement provisions.  The Attorney 
General's office introduced the bill which received input 
from the Ombudsman's intergovernmental/civil society network 
on this issue.  The law called for the creation of a Sexual 
Exploitation Section within the PTJ.  The law also created 
CONAPREDES, which includes civil society members (para 12, 
16, 36, 39, 44)  The PTJ, the Attorney General's office, and 
MINJUMFA, have conducted prevention activities to distribute 
the new law (reftels B, C, H; para 29-34).  The GOP conducted 
a training seminar in Panama City and Veraguas Province to 
train the PTJ in the new law (reftel B). 
 
IS THERE SOME ENTITY OR PERSON RESPONSIBLE FOR DEVELOPING 
ANTI-TRAFFICKING PROGRAMS WITH THE GOVERNMENT? 
 
¶44.  (SBU)  CONAPREDES is responsible for studying the 
prevention and eradicat