06PANAMA1402
GOP PREVIEWS NEW NATIONAL SECURITY PLAN
Mon Jul 17 00:00:00 +0200 2006
SECRET
Embassy Panama
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHZP #1402/01 1982009
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
R 172009Z JUL 06
FM AMEMBASSY PANAMA
TO RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFHLC/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHINGTON DC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHDC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8579
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA 2358S E C R E T PANAMA 001402 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DNG: CO 07/17/2016 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PTER PM
SUBJECT: GOP PREVIEWS NEW NATIONAL SECURITY PLAN 
 
REF: (A) PANAMA 0919 (B) PANAMA 1371 
 
Classified By: Ambassador William A. Eaton for Reasons 1.5(b and d). 
 
¶1.  (S) Summary: At the Ambassdor's request, Panama's 
National Security Director Erick Espinosa, Minister of 
Government & Justice (MOGJ) Olga Golcher, and other top GOP 
security officials briefed Ambassador and Emboffs July 14 on 
Panama's new national security strategy.  The strategy is 
premised on the notion that the U.S. withdrawal made Panama 
responsible for its own security, as well as for security of 
trade flows through the Panama Canal consistent with the 
neutrality provisions of the 1977 Torrijos-Carter Treaty.  It 
is also based on the emergence of new "asymmetric" threats 
and lays out three pillars: development of democratic 
institutions, external security, and democratic citizen 
protection.  Espinosa and Golcher reaffirmed the GOP's 
continued commitment to partnering closely with the U.S. in 
ways that do not undermine the Panama Canal's neutrality. 
They hope to do both "traditional" military-type PANAMAX 
exercises, as well as a new type of exercise to boost 
cooperation among law enforcement and inte 
lligence agencies.  The GOP offered reassuring words 
regarding continued close ties to the U.S.  Given the 
apparent disconnect between recent GOP actions and the 
high-minded aims of its new national security plan regarding 
corruption and transparency, we will continue to press the 
GOP to match its words with deeds.  End summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
National Security: Torrijos' "New Vision for a New World" 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
¶2.  (S) Panama's Deputy National Security Director Marcel 
Salamin briefed Ambassador and Emboffs on July 14 with a 
90-minute powerpoint presentation on the GOP's emerging new 
national security strategy.  The plan is based on two 
fundamental assumptions.  First, that the USG's hand-over of 
the Panama Canal and its related assets, together with the 
withdrawal of U.S. forces, also meant that Panama must assume 
responsibility for its own security.  Moreover, the GOP 
believes that it must ensure the Panama Canal's neutrality 
for the benefit of global commerce and regional development 
consistent with the neutrality provisions of the 1977 
Torrijos-Carter Treaty. 
 
¶3.  (S) The plan's second underlying assumption is that 
Panama must now cope with the emergence of new types of 
"asymmetric" and "unpredictable" threats that demand 
multilateral responses.  Although the GOP recognizes the 
continued threat of conventional military threats, the GOP 
now emphasizes the civilian, rather than military, nature of 
its response to these new threats, particularly in light of 
Panama's constitutional demilitarization (following the 1989 
ouster of Manuel Noriega). 
 
¶4.  (S) In presenting the plan, Salamin stressed President 
Martin Torrijos' personal involvement in its development.  He 
said that the plan brings together more than a year's worth 
of inter-agency discussions and coordination and that it 
represents a "new scenario" for Panama and the international 
community.  Salamin concluded, "This plan is ambitious.  But 
we can dream, can't we?  All we ask is to be respected." 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
Three Pillars of the "Integrated National Security Plan" 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
Development of Democratic Institutions 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (S) With "human security" as the foundation of the GOP's 
new national security plan, "democratic institutional 
development" is the first of the plan's three main pillars. 
Salamin said that the Torrijos administration has developed 
the "Panamanian Initiative for Democratizing the Public 
Space" ("IPDED" is its Spanish acronym) as a conceptual 
framework to carry out this pillar.  He said President 
Torrijos will not seek another term, but aims to leave a 
legacy of a stronger democracy by bolstering local 
governments, boosting citizen participation, respecting press 
freedoms, ensuring transparency in government, and 
institutionalizing Panama's multi-ethnic population and 
protecting minority groups.  The GOP will implement IPDED 
through various "governing plans" addressing a range of 
issues, such as energy, housing and urban development, 
training and education, cultural diversity, science and 
technology, public services and infrastructure, health, 
increased market openings (e.g., free trade agreements), and 
mo 
dernization of institutions. 
 
Panamanian External Security 
---------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (S) With this pillar, Salamin said that the GOP hopes to 
make a "unique contribution to international peace and 
security."  He said President Torrijos has stressed Panama's 
need to ensure international commerce in ways consistent with 
the 1977 treaty, i.e., not through military means.  Noting 
that Panama effectively represents an "internal border for 
many countries," the GOP developed its "Panama Secure Trade 
and Transportation Initiative" (PST&TI) as a non-military 
tool for multiple partners to use in securing trade flows 
through Panama.  Under PST&TI, the GOP envisions hosting an 
annual conference of the program's partners, creating an 
independent "board of advisors" for the President (akin to 
that used by the Panama Canal Authority), implementing a 
regime for non-intrusive container inspections, control of 
dual use items, and restricting the trade and transportation 
of weapons of mass destruction. 
 
¶7.  (S) The GOP is also developing "Biosecurity Programs" 
under the leadership of its National Secretariat for Science, 
Technology, and Innovation (SENACYT).  These programs, which 
include the ministries of health and agricultural and the 
Gorgas Memorial Laboratory, are focused on combating the 
re-emergence of tropical diseases, forming a "network of 
bio-partners," establishing a regional center for 
bio-medicine, and developing a network for handling 
radioactive disasters. 
 
¶8.  (S) In addition, the GOP is focused on training programs 
for its merchant marine personnel and to develop security 
specialists for ports, airports, immigration, and customs 
agencies. 
 
Democratic Citizen Protection 
----------------------------- 
 
¶9.  (S) This pillar is aimed at ensuring public safety and 
restoring the credibility of Panama's Public Forces through 
implementation of programs for social development, public 
security, and democratic institution building.  Torrijos has 
issued several Presidential Directives aimed at, inter alia, 
improved hiring and training of Public Forces personnel, 
creating specialized units to address youth gangs, organized 
crime, and family violence, and creating a "Special Frontier 
Service" that essentially merges traditional police and 
military functions in border areas.  Salamin mentioned the 
need for Panama's security services to have their own 
academies since officers who have studied overseas come back 
with "different ideas." 
 
¶10.  (S) In addition, the GOP plans to fuse its Maritime and 
Air services into a single Coast Guard, create a National 
Immigration Service, and establish a National Customs 
Service.  The GOP is also using a $22 million IDB loan to 
strengthen and modernize the National Police and to fully 
complete the transition of Panama's former military forces 
into an effective police force. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Implications for U.S. Engagement 
-------------------------------- 
 
"Neutrality" vs. "Alliance" 
--------------------------- 
 
¶11.  (S) Ambassador pressed Panamanian officials for clarity 
on whether Panama planned to pursue a new policy of 
"strategic neutrality" vs. Panama's more traditional 
"strategic alliance" with the U.S.  National Security 
Director Espinosa and MOGJ Golcher reaffirmed the GOP's 
continued commitment to partnering closely with the U.S. in 
ways that do not undermine the Panama Canal's neutrality. 
 
Military Training & PANAMAX 
--------------------------- 
 
¶12.  (S) Espinosa and Golcher blamed GOP "improvisation" and 
"internal miscommunication" for Panama's late cancellation of 
recent training exercises programmed earlier with DoD.  They 
acknowledged the financial and other problems this caused for 
the USG and stressed their intent to improve GOP coordination 
with the DoD.  They also stressed that the GOP recognizes the 
importance of PANAMAX and remains committed to it, but noted 
that, in keeping with their new strategic vision, the GOP 
would like to also develop a second type of PANAMAX-like 
exercise focused on addressing emerging "new threats" (e.g., 
terrorism and organized crime).  Their hope would be to do 
both "traditional" military-type PANAMAX exercises, as well 
as this new type of exercise to boost cooperation among law 
enforcement and intelligence agencies. 
 
Planned SMN-SAN Merger and PTJ Changes 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶13.  (S) The GOP has yet to set a date for its announced 
merger of the National Maritime Service (SMN) and the 
National Air Service (SAN) into a Coast Guard-like entity, 
although President Torrijos told Ambassador June 9 that it 
would be sometime after October 22, the date of the Panama 
Canal referendum.  The administration is developing a new 
"maritime security doctrine" that would reflect this new 
entity and appears to have just started drafting the new 
"organic law" required to effect the merger.  Salamin said 
the GOP wants its new Coast Guard to function primarily as a 
police agency, but recognized that its "other functions" 
would likely warrant military training.  The same can be said 
for the creation of a Special Border Service, which will be 
separate from the Panamanian National Police (PNP).  This 
service would answer to the MOGJ and would have combined 
police/military-type functions. 
 
¶14.  (S) As for planned changes to the "Judicial Technical 
Police" (PTJ - Panama's FBI equivalent), Golcher stressed 
that the GOP's plans to modernize the PTJ, along with 
Panama's other law enforcement agencies, would not 
"undermine" the USG's significant investment in training for 
PTJ personnel.  Stressing that "public safety is the top 
priority," Espinosa said that fifteen years of PTJ's 
existence has "clearly shown" the need for changes in the 
organization's mission and human resources management, but 
that the decisions do not rest entirely with the executive 
branch. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
Comment: If Not in Deed, GOP at Least Reassures in Word 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
¶15.  (S) The Ambassador had sought this meeting to seek 
clarification of GOP intentions, given a series of recent 
mishaps involving planned USG-GOP military training 
exercises, as well as hints that the Torrijos government may 
seek to distance itself from the U.S. for "neutrality" 
purposes.  Although we don't discount the likelihood that 
old-guard PRD party types will continue to try and push 
Torrijos toward an "arm's length" relationship with the U.S., 
we were re-assured by Espinosa's and Golcher's recognition of 
Panama's historically close ties to the U.S. and their 
forward-leaning commitment to improving the GOP's 
coordination with us on military and law enforcement 
training.  Given the ambitious scale and the heavy investment 
the GOP's new national security plan would likely require, 
they will need considerable help to carry it out.  When we 
begin planning for the next budget cycle, the GOP will likely 
scrutinize closely the training we offer to see how it fits 
with their new plan, which clearly de-emphas 
izes military elements in favor of police work. 
 
¶16.  (S) Nonetheless, we are struck by the apparent 
disconnect between the growing influence of Noriega-era 
holdovers and recent GOP backsliding on anti-corruption 
(reftels) and the high-minded aims set forth in Torrijos' 
National Security Plan to, inter alia, promote democratic 
institutions, guarantee transparency, and respect freedom of 
the press.  Though mindful of what the GOP says on this 
score, we will continue to watch closely what it does and 
will press the GOP to match its words with deeds.  End 
comment. 
EATON