09AITTAIPEI745
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS, IRAN
Mon Jun 22 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0012
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0745/01 1730940
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 220940Z JUN 09
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1799
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 9253
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0682UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000745 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/P, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS, IRAN 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused June 
20-22 news coverage on Tropical Storm Linfa's brush past Taiwan, 
local economic problems, and on the development of cross-Strait 
relations. 
 
¶2. Among editorials and commentary, an editorial in the 
mass-circulation "Apple Daily" urged President Ma Ying-jeou not to 
implement a pro-China policy unilaterally at the expense of Taiwan's 
relations with the United States, Japan and European countries. 
Otherwise, Taiwan will fall into China's hands and become a 
dependency of China, the editorial warned.  A column in the 
centrist, KMT-leaning "China Times" cast doubts on the effect of the 
first-ever BRIC summit, which just concluded, on the global 
financial system, because of the divergent interests among Brazil, 
Russia, India and China.  For example, the reason that China refused 
to endorse Russia's idea of developing new reserve currencies to 
challenge the dominance of the U.S. dollar was because China has 
great common interests with the United States and does not want to 
challenge the United States.  Another editorial in the 
pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" urged the 
opposition DPP to bolster dialogue with the United States, including 
setting up a office in Washington, so as to let different voices in 
Taiwan be heard in the United States.  Regarding the current unrest 
in Iran, an editorial in the conservative, pro-unification, 
English-language "China Post" urged the United States to open 
dialogue with Iran after Iran's post-election unrest settled.  The 
editorial also reminded Taiwan that while maintaining a close 
economic and trade relationship with Iran, Taiwan should not export 
any sensitive technologies to Iran that could violate the 
international embargo against Iran led by the United States.  End 
summary. 
 
¶3. U.S.-China-Taiwan Relations 
 
A) "Ma Ying-jeou's Dangerous Unilateralism" 
 
The mass-circulation "Apple Daily" [circulation: 520,000] 
editorialized (6/22): 
 
"... As a result, Taiwan, instead of excessively depending on China 
now, must simultaneously establish a multilateral equilibrium, 
through building diverse, extensive and constructive relationships, 
including in non-governmental sectors, with the United States, Japan 
and the European Union.  The current Taiwan-style of 
'unilateralism,' which only leans toward China and estranges the 
United States and Japan, or passively maintains relations with the 
United States and Japan, is extremely stupid and dangerous. 
President Ma Ying-jeou must reverse the situation, so as to avoid 
becoming a dependency of China before it is too late." 
 
B) "China Does Not Want to Use BRIC to Pound on the U.S." 
 
"The so-called developed countries, especially the United States, 
all felt relieved after the 'BRIC' summit that 'Eh! [The BRIC 
summit] was only so-so.' ... 
 
"Although China mentioned the issue of global currency reserves 
before the 'G20' London summit, it declined, however, to treat this 
BRIC summit as a meeting to confront the United States.  It is 
because far greater common interests exist between China's economic 
rise and the United States.  Although China is not a 'G8' country 
member, China is the major beneficiary of the current international 
economic order, and also the largest creditor of -- as well as 
exporter to -- the United States.  Furthermore, as far as 
geopolitical and international 'strategic thinking' is concerned, it 
is not appropriate for [China] to use 'BRIC' to pound on the United 
States.  Such a position [for China] is far different from that of 
Russia.  How could China be willing to let the [BRIC] meeting become 
a tool of Russia to earn the right to speak and contend with the 
United States?" 
 
C) "DPP Must Bolster Dialogue with U.S." 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" [circulation: 
20,000] editorialized (6/22): 
 
"... The urgency of the DPP's re-entry into diplomacy is 
demonstrated by the very fact that the new Democratic administration 
under President Barack Obama favors the 'cross-strait 
reconciliation' approach adopted by the Ma government toward the 
Chinese Communist Party-ruled PRC, evidently unaware of the negative 
impact of the KMT-CCP rapprochement on Taiwan's internal democracy 
and human rights, Taiwan's substantive independence and on the hopes 
for democratic transitions in China and elsewhere in the world. ... 
 
"First, the DPP must put serious effort into identifying 
authoritative channels for communications and messages and should 
also engage in honest discussion with its American counterparts 
across the political spectrum regarding both the U.S. views on core 
or controversial issues and honestly and effectively express its own 
views and reflect the long-term concerns of the Taiwan people. 
Moreover, the DPP needs to realize that prior and full consultation 
about mutual interests and priorities is essential to sustaining 
mutual trust and to appreciate that allowing Washington to 
understand major steps or statements that Taiwan leaders are about 
to make does not constitute a disgrace to the dignity of our 
leaders. ... 
 
"More concretely, the DPP's first priority should be the restoration 
of frequent and high-profile contact between [DPP Chairperson] Tsai 
[Ing-wen] and other DPP leaders and the U.S. Democratic 
administration, Congress and opinion leaders. 
 
"No less urgent is re-establishment of a high-profile office in 
Washington, D.C. to serve as a hub and a listening post to build 
connections among present and future U.S. policy makers and serious 
policy thinkers and as a channel to train DPP staffers and talented 
activists and thereby build up the ranks of DPP staffers who can 
thoroughly and comfortably elaborate the party's policies and 
perspectives in foreign languages." 
 
¶4. Iran 
 
"Protest Sparking Curiosity about Iran" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (6/21): 
 
"... After the present unrest subsides, Iran should go ahead with 
plans to open a representative office in Taipei and expand its 
unofficial ties with Taiwan.  The R.O.C. should make sure not to 
export any sensitive or dual-use technologies that could violate the 
U.S.-led embargo against Iran or assist Iran with its ambitions to 
become a nuclear power. ... 
 
"Like most other governments, Taipei would like to see a dialogue 
opened between Iran and the United States that would ultimately lead 
to a normalization of Iran-U.S. relations.  U.S. President Barack 
Obama has opened the door to opening such a dialogue by agreeing to 
talk to Iran, but Washington's plans have been put on hold by the 
unexpected domestic turmoil in Iran.  After the turmoil subsides, 
Tehran and Washington should proceed with opening that dialogue so 
that 30 years of animosity can finally be laid to rest.  While the 
U.S. and Iran will surely continue to disagree on many important 
issues, the two countries should cooperate to stabilize the 
situation in Iraq so that tensions in the region can subside." 
 
YOUNG