09BAGHDAD1700
ANTI-CORRUPTION EFFORTS IN IRAQ:  THE POSITIVE
Fri Jun 26 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO9581
RR RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHDH RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #1700/01 1770810
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 260810Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3655
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 001700 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS TO USAID 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCOR PGOV KDEM EAID IZ
SUBJECT: ANTI-CORRUPTION EFFORTS IN IRAQ:  THE POSITIVE 
ENERGY OF IRAQ'S CIVIL SOCIETY 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  SUMMARY:  The Government of Iraq's lead 
anti-corruption agency, the Commission of Integrity (COI), 
works with NGOs and civil society (hereafter referred to as 
NGOs) to enforce ethical behavior in the public and private 
sectors.  A number of NGOs have demonstrated their commitment 
to fight corruption and many would like to have funding to do 
anti-corruption programs.  NGO representatives agree there is 
a need for a national strategy and coordination among the 
NGOs and that corruption is pervasive in society.  They also 
concur that a preventive strategy, teaching children early in 
their schooling about transparency and integrity, is 
essential for change.  There seems to be no shortage of 
groups calling themselves NGOs, but no real control on the 
legitimacy or efficacy of these groups.  Most have some 
political, religious, social, business, or media connections. 
 Iraqi NGOs have the potential to make a lasting difference 
in the fight against corruption.  The Anti-Corruption 
Coordination Office (ACCO) plans to hold a conference to 
promote coordination between NGOs and government officials on 
anti-corruption efforts. END SUMMARY. 
 
The Commission of Intergrity Work with NGOs 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  The lead GOI anti-corruption agency, the 
Commission on Integrity (COI), has a Director General level 
officer, Mr. Samir, who works directly with NGOs.  Mr. Samir 
told us the COI, under authority of CPA Order 55 that created 
the COI, has worked with various NGOs since its inception in 
¶2004.  He has a select list of around 50 "cleared" 
organizations he trusts with which he normally works (he will 
share the list with us), though he cautioned that these 
organizations also have numerous sub-branches and groups, 
especially in the provinces, on which the COI has no 
information.  Samir noted not all NGOs are active or honest. 
The COI provides training to these groups in all provinces 
except those in the Kurdistan Region.  Samir said COI 
Commissioner Judge Raheem Al-Ugaili supports this work and 
has asked him to expand his activities.  Samir is in the 
final stages of forming a CSO Alliance for Integrity and 
Fighting Corruption, a core group of 27 NGOs, that will be 
open to others to join, centering their activities on 
fighting corruption. 
 
NGOs Interested in Anti-Corruption Projects 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  At a lunch the ACCO hosted for a number of NGOs, 
NGO representatives noted a major concern was how pervasive 
corruption is throughout society, citing administrative and 
financial corruption and the impact of corruption on 
services.  There was universal agreement that a generational 
change was essential and key to such change would be to teach 
children about transparency, accountability, and integrity 
early in their educational development.  One participant 
spoke of the need for a joint government/NGO strategic work 
plan to combat corruption.  In separate follow-on meetings 
with some of the more active NGOs, ACCO discovered there has 
been activity by some in the field of anti-corruption. 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  Some of the larger, more well organized and funded 
NGOs have had a number of programs or are planning new 
programs that touch on anti-corruption issues.  For example, 
the Al-Noor Universal Foundation, established in 2003, has 
worked on numerous anti-corruption related programs with 
international implementers, e.g., conducting anti-corruption 
workshops for NGO leaders and creating posters and banners 
with anti-corruption themes.  Among the new programs they 
Qwith anti-corruption themes.  Among the new programs they 
propose is a project to educate Iraqi government employees on 
existing anti-corruption institutions and mechanisms for 
fighting corruption.  They would like to hold workshops to 
increase the awareness of corruption concerns among youth. 
Al-Noor also proposes to establish a National Committee to 
Fight Corruption, with members to be selected from 
representatives of the media, academia, the arts, women, 
other NGOs, politicians, the private sector, religious 
leaders, social leaders, and youth.  Also on Al-Noor's agenda 
are public outreach campaigns and training of provincial 
officials.  The Iraqi Green Peace Organization proposes a 
project to educate teachers and, in addition, students in 
grades four and five, in an effort to reach out early for the 
children to learn about anti-corruption ideals.  This 
proposal fits in with the ongoing coordination between the 
Commission of Integrity Education Department and the 
Education Ministry on development of a new anti-corruption 
curriculum for all school levels. 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  The Media Center for Iraqi Civil Society 
Organizations would like to start up a website to serve as a 
 
BAGHDAD 00001700  002 OF 002 
 
 
repository for documents and publicize anti-corruption 
related documents covering visions and opinions, news and 
activities, and projects and programs.  The services would 
include translation and search engine capability.  A 
representative from the Democratic Center for Women's 
Rehabilitation would like to see the NGOs organize 
subcommittees from NGOs, media, etc., to be incorporated into 
a national strategy to produce recommendations on fighting 
corruption and how to implement those recommendations and 
then create a national strategy based on the best of those 
recommendations. 
 
Some Concerns about the NGOs 
---------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  One NGO representative asserted that NGO 
coordination in Iraq is lacking.  She expressed the deep need 
for Iraqi NGOs to make their own decisions and not to follow 
international directions.  The NGOs, she added, need to focus 
on their purpose, justification, and sustainability and 
monitor anti-corruption activities.  There is concern about 
the current draft NGO law and fear it will make it much too 
difficult for NGOs to operate.  (NOTE:  The Embassy is 
working closely with the Parliament's Civil Society Committee 
to amend the draft NGO law to bring it into compliance with 
international best practices.  End note.)  All agree on the 
need for accountability and transparency in government and 
the importance of giving Iraqi citizens the key role in 
monitoring and reforming society. 
 
 
¶7.  (SBU)  COMMENT:  There is a long tradition of NGOs in 
Iraq, both in the public and private sectors, although 
changes are taking place within these organizations in the 
post-conflict environment.  There seems to be no shortage of 
groups calling themselves NGOs, but no real control on the 
legitimacy or efficacy of these groups.  Most have some 
political, religious, social, or media connections.  Others 
are hitched to business interests and register an NGO 
foundation with the Iraqi authorities to give them a special 
umbrella to cover their other activities.  Still others are 
groups formed to get funding from international sources for 
their worthy causes of the day.  Judging from our contacts 
with the NGO community, they are well aware of the corruption 
going on throughout the country and have numerous ideas of 
how to combat this corruption.  Unfortunately NGOs themselves 
are, in a number of cases, under suspicion for corrupt 
practices, receiving funding and not being able to account 
for how the money is spent.  However, despite concerns, there 
are a number of active, effective, honest NGOs, and some NGOs 
have already been involved in anti-corruption activities. 
Opportunities exist for international donors to collaborate 
with NGOs on anti-corruption projects, providing mentoring 
and oversight.  Iraqi NGOs have the potential to make a 
lasting difference in the fight against corruption.  The ACCO 
plans to hold a conference to promote coordination between 
NGOs and government officials.  END COMMENT. 
 
FORD