09BAGHDAD1467
Iraqi Technology Task Force Launches, Ready to Produce
Thu Jun 04 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHGB #1467/01 1550301
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 040301Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3333
INFO RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 2206
RUEHME/AMEMBASSY MEXICO 0035UNCLAS BAGHDAD 001467 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV OIIP SCUL EINTECPS TINT KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: Iraqi Technology Task Force Launches, Ready to Produce 
 
¶1. Summary: Thanks to the catalyst provided by the April visit to 
Iraq of U.S. high tech executives as part of a TechDel led by S/P's 
Jared Cohen, and at the behest of Deputy Prime Minister Barham 
Salih, the Iraqi Technology Task Force (ITTF) formed in early May to 
seek ways to empower Iraqis to use new media.  DPM Salih energized 
the genesis of the ITTF and mandated the ITTF serve as the liaison 
in Iraq to the Support Network for a Digital Iraq (SNDI), the U.S. 
portal that S/P is developing with the TechDel members.  The ITTF 
has met several times, agreed on its mission statement and developed 
a logo and web site that will be on the web within days to signal 
the ITTF's official beginning.  On May 27, S/P Cohen hosted a video 
conference with the ITTF members and the group followed that on May 
28 by meeting with DPM Barham to report on the ITTF's activities and 
pass on an update from the SNDI.  End Summary. 
 
ITTF: Going Where No TF Has Gone Before 
 
¶2. The Iraqi Technology Task Force (TTF) is a public-private 
partnership that formed in early May and over a series of meetings, 
developed its mission statement with its mandate, "to empower the 
Iraqi people."  (Note: Full text of mission statement below. End 
Note.) With a diverse and talented membership made up of leaders 
from the public and private sphere, the ITTF is set to serve not 
only as liaison to the SNDI, but will also work to use the tools of 
new media to improve Iraq.  It is co-chaired by a private 
businessman, Farhad Alaaldin, and DG Mahmood Sharief from the 
Ministry of Science and Technology (MoST).  Emboffs from PAS and 
Econ sit on the ITTF as advisory members and ACAO serves as liaison 
between the SNDI and the ITTF. 
 
ITTF: We See Your "YouTube" and Raise You "Click" 
 
¶3. In addition to several projects the ITTF is currently working on 
in concert with members of the SNDI (National Museum web site, GOI 
YouTube Channel, internships, etc) the ITTF hopes to also hold a 
conference in mid-November in Baghdad with the assistance of the 
SNDI.  The ITTF plans to invite some of the leading technology 
companies from the SNDI and also link in companies from other 
tech-savvy countries with interest in Iraq.  The ITTF is developing 
a draft conference program and will include a session on how new 
media can help politicians campaign.  The ITTF also hopes to work 
with leading Iraqi TV station Al-Iraqiya to develop a program that 
would be modeled after BBC's "Click" a five-minute high technology 
program.  The ITTF is working to secure five minutes of airtime for 
the Iraqi "Click" program just before the 8 o'clock news.  The SNDI 
could offer U.S. tech executives as interview subjects for the 
"Click" as well as offer advice and content for the micro-show that 
would help educate Iraqis about latest technology trends. 
 
ITTF Mission: Not Impossible 
 
¶4. The ITTF has adopted the following as its mission statement: "TTF 
is a Public-Private partnership that seeks to harness the digital 
world to empower the Iraqi people. It seeks to foster transparency, 
accountability, and good governance in Iraq.  TTF seeks to fulfill 
its mandate by encouraging greater use of the internet and raising 
awareness of its unparalleled commercial and social networking 
capacity and its role in developing civil society."  The activities 
of the ITTF will be defined further as projects are defined and 
focus areas set.  The ITTF will also serve as the all-important 
liaison and eyes and ears in Iraq for the SNDI. 
 
ITTF Meets S/P, NEA 
 
¶5. On May 27 the members of the ITTF connected via video conference 
Q5. On May 27 the members of the ITTF connected via video conference 
with S/P's Jared Cohen along with representatives from NEA.  Mr. 
Cohen complimented the members of the ITTF on how quickly they had 
assembled and moved into action.  He explained what the Support 
Network for Digital Iraq (SNDI) was and what it hoped to do and 
noted there was immense interest generated in the SNDI by the 
TechDel's visit to Iraq.  Moving ahead, Mr. Cohen hopes to develop a 
joint virtual presence to make "meetings" easier using the tools of 
the internet.  He highlighted the strong support from the Secretary 
the ITTF and SNDI enjoy.  The ITTF members thanked Cohen for his 
update and several told emboffs after the meeting that they were 
encouraged by the progress in Washington and heartened by the 
expression of support. 
 
DPM Barham: Eyes Wide Open 
 
¶6. On May 28, DPM Barham Salih told the ITTF members and emboffs 
that the April visit of the TechDel had "opened his eyes," to the 
potential of new media to help the GOI as well as the people and 
culture of Iraq.  He encouraged the ITTF to establish an internet 
presence and formalize the ITTF with regular meetings, formulate a 
charter that defines the role of the ITTF as well as the roles of 
individual members, submit ideas to his office for new policy 
initiatives, and continue work to deliver specific accomplishments 
in the near term.  Youth should play a prominent role in the ITTF, 
he emphasized.  To further the goals and fulfill the mandate of the 
ITTF, DPM Barham offered his help and encouraged the ITTF members to 
use his office as a resource and pledged he would use his 
considerable influence freely to ensure the GOI did not impede the 
progress of the ITTF.  Emboff passed a message to DPM Barham from 
the Secretary of State, noting that many were following his tweets, 
indicating U.S. looked forward to an equal partnership between the 
SNDI and the ITTF to empower the Iraqi people using the tools of new 
media, and assuring the DPM that the Secretary was personally 
engaged with this initiative. 
 
Not Out of the Woods Yet 
 
 
¶7. The ITTF is not incorporated legally so in the weeks ahead, the 
group must decide on how to incorporate, as an NGO or as an 
attachment to a GOI entity, either the DPM's office or the MoST. 
While DPM Salih has repeatedly assured us he will continue to 
support the ITTFs efforts no matter his political future, it is 
crucial the ITTF develop into a robust, self-sustaining institution 
that will not depend on political backing from a particular 
politician or political group. 
 
Comment 
 
¶8. The ITTF's potential to address systemic problems in Iraq across 
various sectors (cultural, political, educational, etc) in a dynamic 
and innovative way is virtually unlimited if the ITTF succeeds in 
finding consistent political patronage after DPM Barham leaves 
Baghdad and if the SNDI is able to contribute in an active, 
significant and continued way.  The exciting part of this initiative 
is that we have in place, in Iraq and the U.S., components to drive 
this initiative with limited financial commitment from the USG or 
the GOI.  Further guidance and support from the USG, however, is 
crucial to help us successfully launch the ITTF so it can produce 
results and gain needed credibility as the nascent organization 
struggles to find its footing in Iraq's challenging business and 
political environment.  End Comment. 
 
HILL