09BERLIN777
MEDIA REACTION: CLIMATE BILL, OBAMA-MERKEL MEETING,
Mon Jun 29 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Berlin
R 291248Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY BERLIN
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 4465
INFO WHITE HOUSE WASHINGTON DC
SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
DIA WASHINGTON DC
CIA WASHINGTON DC
DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
FRG COLLECTIVE
AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 
AMEMBASSY LONDON 
AMEMBASSY PARIS 
AMEMBASSY ROME 
USMISSION USNATO 
USMISSION USOSCE 
HQ USAFE RAMSTEIN AB GE
HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE//J5 DIRECTORATE (MC)//
CDRUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GE
UDITDUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GEUNCLAS BERLIN 000777 
 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/PAPD, EUR/PPA, EUR/CE, INR/EUC, INR/P, 
SECDEF FOR USDP/ISA/DSAA, DIA FOR DC-4A 
 
VIENNA FOR CSBM, CSCE, PAA 
 
"PERISHABLE INFORMATION -- DO NOT SERVICE" 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO GM US IR RS IZ
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: CLIMATE BILL, OBAMA-MERKEL MEETING, 
NATO-RUSSIA COUNCIL, IRANIAN PROTESTS, WITHDRAWAL FROM IRAQ 
 
¶1. Lead Stories 
¶2. U.S. Climate Policy 
¶3. Chancellor Merkel In Washington 
¶4. NATO-Russia Council 
¶5. Iranian Protests 
¶5. U.S. Troop Withdrawal from Iraq 
 
 
 
Lead Stories 
 
All major media led with stories on the CDU/CSU election platform. 
Most weekend media focused on the death of Michael Jackson, the tax 
debate within the CDU, and Chancellor Merkel's visit to Washington. 
Editorials focused on the CDU/CSU election platform and U.S. climate 
policy. 
 
U.S. Climate Policy 
 
Many German papers carried lengthy reports on the U.S. climate 
change legislation, noting that President "Obama wants to take the 
lead in climate protection" (Frankfurter Allgemeine, front-page 
headline).  Sueddeutsche headlined: "U.S. representatives in favor 
of climate protection."  Frankfurter Rundschau carried a report 
under the headline "Obama's climate change," saying that "the U.S. 
wants for the first time to reduce greenhouse gas emissions." 
 
Under the headline "Weak law with enormous effects," Sueddeutsche 
commented:  "The real impact of the climate protection bill will be 
a turning point concerning the attitude Americans have in regard of 
climate protection and the consumption of energy-just as civil 
rights legislation did not abolish racism but increasingly 
ostracized those who practiced discrimination.  America will catch 
up concerning climate protection." 
 
Tagesspiegel's editorial remarked: "In the Senate, there still is 
not a majority in favor of the climate protection bill-and even less 
for a legally binding multilateral climate protection treaty. 
President Obama will need any support he can get to lead his country 
onto the path towards a future with less carbon dioxide." 
 
Berliner Zeitung editorialized: "Compared with the modest goals of 
the U.S. climate policy, the German contribution to reduce 
greenhouse gases appears to be enormous indeed.  While Obama, Pelosi 
and co. have difficulties agreeing to cut emissions marginally by 
2020 below the level of 1990, the German government promises to cut 
emissions by 40 percent over the same time-a goal that all parties 
in the Bundestag support.  However, it is in the stars whether this 
goal can be reached at all." 
 
Tageszeitung commented: "The good thing is that after twenty wasted 
years, the U.S. is bearing responsibility in the fight against 
global warming.  Against the resistance of Republicans and 
Democrats, the climate legislation of the Obama administration 
passed the first hurdle in Congress.  This is remarkable because in 
the time of a recession, climate change is not a priority among 
Americans." 
 
Neue Osnabruecker Zeitung noted: "The signs from Washington raise 
hope for the climate conference in Copenhagen.  If the U.S. bears 
its responsibility, other countries like Canada, Australia, Russia, 
China, and India will join in.  Obama's praise of Europe's and 
Germany's leading role should not lull them because, unlike the 
Republicans, he realizes the potentials of renewable energies.  They 
do not destroy but create jobs.  The competition is in full swing. 
The U.S. is on the path to become a lead nation.  Given a world with 
disappearing resources, this can only be good." 
 
 
Chancellor Merkel In Washington 
 
All weekend media carried very favorable reports on President 
Obama's meeting with Chancellor Merkel on Friday, highlighting that 
"Obama and Merkel said Tehran must renounce violence" (Frankfurter 
Allgemeine) and that "President Obama sweet-talked the German guest" 
 (ARD-TV's Tagesschau).  Focus magazine wrote: "No 
disgruntlement-Merkel and Obama removed all speculation about 
personal disruptions during the Chancellor's visit to Washington." 
Welt am Sonntag highlighted: "Merkel and Obama developed a new 
German-American style: cordial, focused and liberal.  There was not 
a bit of irritation." 
 
Norddeutscher Rundfunk radio remarked: "It seems to make a 
considerable difference whether leaders speak by phone, meet on the 
margins of a summit or sit together for a one-to-one conversation. 
Particularly the fagade is completely different....  Apart from the 
corresponding analyses on foreign and security policy hotspots, such 
as Afghanistan, Iran and the Middle East, Angela Merkel wanted to 
embark on the last stretch in the race to Copenhagen at the end of 
this year.  She urgently called for an ambitious U.S. climate policy 
and praised Obama for the intermediate results, which she had not 
thought to be possible a year ago.....  On Guantanamo, it was Barack 
Obama who signaled understanding for the fact that Germany is in a 
holding pattern, although everybody knows that concrete requests to 
accept a dozen detainees keep Berlin and several regional ministries 
busy.  Angela Merkel expressed her general readiness to share the 
burden, but confidently demanded more clarity about the history of 
potential asylum grantees.  It is remarkable that both leaders did 
not specify anything when they talked about the next opportunity to 
resolve the financial and economic crises." 
 
Sueddeutsche editorialized: "Even if some people in Washington 
believe the Germans are a bit complicated, as Merkel rightly stated, 
Obama appreciates them as partners.  The new team in Washington is 
not deeply dissatisfied with Germany....  In principle, Obama's 
people also understand that their counterparts in Berlin have to 
consider a domestic audience in foreign policy issues, for instance 
in the discussion over the German military contribution to the 
mission in Afghanistan." 
 
Tagesspiegel said in a front-page editorial: "Both leaders get on 
well.  This has become obvious after Angela Merkel's visit.... Both 
speak a common language on Iran and Israel's settlement policy. 
Both prefer a pragmatic policy style.  They appreciate their mutual 
reliability.  This creates a good foundation for their 
cooperation....  However, sensational success must not be expected. 
Their leeway is small, at home and abroad.  In the case of Iran they 
expressed their solidarity with the movement protesting against 
election fraud.  However, at the end they regard the disruption of 
Iranian plans for nuclear weapons as more important than the freedom 
of Iranians.  Regardless of how the power struggle in Tehran will 
end... Merkel and Obama want to keep the door open to talks on the 
nuclear program." 
 
Frankfurter Rundschau opined: "Concerning the content, the German 
and U.S. governments are certainly closer today than under George W. 
Bush.  There are differences about the means but not the goals.  In 
this respect, there will be much work to be done after the visit of 
the Chancellor to Washington." 
 
ARD-TV's Washington correspondent Hanni Huesch commented: "This time 
around, Angela Merkel needed Barack Obama.  He gave her the images 
she needs in the election campaign in Germany.  However, Barack 
Obama also needs her for Guantanamo and Afghanistan.  The Germans 
will have to deliver after [the elections on] September 27 at the 
latest." 
 
Handelsblatt also commented on the impact Merkel's meeting with 
Obama has on the German elections: "It might sound tough, but Obama 
has already done his part in the German election campaign before it 
has really started.  Chancellor Merkel has the photos with the 
charismatic U.S. President, the media reported at length about the 
meeting with half of Obama's cabinet, the press conference in the 
prestigious East Room and the rare invitation to speak to Congress. 
Foreign policy talks on Iran, climate protection, and the economic 
were important.  However, more important was the gain for politics 
at home.  The trip to Washington made clear that the former Bush 
confidante Merkel has arrived in the Obama times....  Merkel will 
benefit from the numerous summits coming up over the next months and 
be Obama's constant interlocutor, while Steinmeier must reconsider 
whether a visit to Washington makes sense for him.  The SPD 
chancellor candidate must find a different way to raise his 
profile." 
 
NATO-Russia Council 
 
Several papers carried reports and editorials on the NATO-Russia 
Council's decision to fully recommence its cooperation. 
 
Under the headline "Priority Russia," Sueddeutsche commented: "The 
blockade of the generally practical cooperation after the war in 
Georgia might have been a satisfactory response to the outrage over 
Moscow.  However, it was not in the interest of the transatlantic 
alliance.  Political reason always dictated a different course, 
namely the one the NATO-Russian Council now embarked on.  The fact 
is that NATO currently needs Russia more than the other way around. 
It needs secure supply lines for the mission in Afghanistan." 
 
Tagesspiegel editorialized: "The change in the White House and a 
reassessment of who is to blame for the conflict between Russia and 
Georgia made this possible.  At least four topics make the 
cooperation urgently necessary:  creating peace in Afghanistan, the 
development of the Iranian nuclear program, the fight against 
international terrorism and piracy off the eastern coast of Africa 
and the Pacific Ocean. The fact that the meeting is followed by that 
of the OSCE at the same place makes the dimension of the problem 
clear." 
 
Tageszeitung opined: "Russia's realpolitik paid off.  After ten 
months of silence, the NATO-Russia council resumes its work although 
the differences of opinion between NATO and Moscow on the status of 
the Caucasus remain unresolved....  NATO's reconciliatory tones 
might be seen as weakness, but it is the right decision to resume 
talks.  It is business as usual against for both sides.  Before the 
conflict, relations weren't any warmer." 
 
Iranian Protests 
 
Tagesspiegel editorialized on the arrest of Iranian staff of the 
British Embassy: "The regime in Tehran sticks to its tough policy 
and lashes about.  With the arrest of Iranian employees of the 
British Embassy, the battle with Britain went into a second 
round-after both countries expelled diplomats earlier last week." 
The commentary concludes: "The fact is that without Rafsanjani, the 
revolt is lost.  The longer he stays calm, the more likely it is 
that the opportunists fear an open rebellion.  The die would be 
cast." 
 
Die Welt commented: "The Iranian regime represses with utmost 
brutality and targeted terrorism what is left of the protest 
movement....  The regime stepped up its aggression by obviously 
arresting Iranian employees of the British Embassy.  This shows that 
the regime will try to unite the ranks of the divided Iranian elite 
by ideological propaganda against Western influence." 
 
Many weekend media highlighted that President Obama and Chancellor 
Merkel stood united against the repression of peaceful protesters in 
Iran.  Saturday's Frankfurter Allgemeine led with a story saying 
that "Germany and the U.S. stepped up their criticism of the Iranian 
leadership."  Sueddeutsche's front page report noted that "the 
President and the Chancellor condemned 'with one voice,' as Obama 
emphasized, the repression of peaceful protests in Iran."  ZDF-TV's 
Heute interpreted Obama's statement that the "clock is ticking" as 
"almost a threat" to the Tehran leadership. 
 
U.S. Troop Withdrawal from Iraq 
 
Under the headline "Withdrawal to the suburbs," Tagesspiegel carried 
a lengthy report on the withdrawal of U.S. forces, highlighting that 
"the Shiites and the Iraqi government leader celebrate the 
withdrawal of the Americans, while it is coming too early for the 
Sunnis."  Frankfurter Rundschau carried a long feature under the 
headline "Iraq's Prime Minister believes he has reached the goal," 
saying in the intro: "It is his great moment.  Maliki declared 
Tuesday to be a holiday and speaks of a 'historic victory.'" 
 
 
  KOENIG