09CHENGDU115
SOUTHWEST CHINA:  TIBETAN NEW EDUCATIONAL PROGRAM
Tue Jun 30 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Chengdu
VZCZCXRO1941
RR RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHCN #0115/01 1810151
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 300151Z JUN 09
FM AMCONSUL CHENGDU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3277
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 3952UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 CHENGDU 000115 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM SOCI PGOV CH
SUBJECT: SOUTHWEST CHINA:  TIBETAN NEW EDUCATIONAL PROGRAM 
 
CHENGDU 00000115  001.2 OF 004 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: According to local official media, ten 
thousand Tibetan middle school graduates students are to be 
given three-year government scholarships under the new "Sichuan 
Tibetan Areas Nine Plus Three Free Education Plan."  The 
Tibetans will attend schools in Chinese-speaking parts of 
Sichuan Province.  While initially focusing on vocational 
training, the proportion of places offered for regular high 
school programs that can lead to university training will also 
increase over the next several years.  Prospective students will 
be screened for their political views as well as for health and 
Chinese language capability.  Widespread unrest in Tibetan areas 
in March 2008, as well as the reported initial success of a 
pilot project with 300 students from Ganzi Prefecture in early 
2009, apparently led to the rapid adoption of this program.  End 
Summary. 
 
Vocational Training Initiative 
 
------------------------------------- 
 
 ¶2.  (U) The "Nine plus Three" plan offers places both to new 
middle school graduates and to any middle school graduate who 
will be under the age of 19 as of September 1, 2009.  In its 
first year, the plan concentrates on vocational education, a 
constant focus of educational programs for Tibetans since their 
relative lack of facility in Chinese does not equip them for 
non-vocational tracks.  According to a June 16 article in the 
Sichuan Province Party Committee newspaper Sichuan Ribao 
(article translated in full below), by 2013 there will be a 
significant increase in regular high school slots for Tibetans: 
"the province will accelerate the expansion of access to high 
school and raise the proportion of middle school students going 
on to high school to 95 percent.  The proportion of student 
places at regular high schools and vocational high school will 
reach the ratio of 6:4."  The students are to come from Tibetan 
areas in Aba Prefecture (5920 students), Ganzi Prefecture (over 
4000 students), and Liangshan Prefecture (over 400 students). 
The Tibetan students will attend about 80 schools in non-Tibetan 
areas of Sichuan Province. 
 
Qualifications for "Nine Plus Three" Include Political Criteria 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------------- 
 
 
 
¶3.  (SBU) On June 18, the Sichuan Provincial government's 
Examination Committee issued a notice on the recruitment of 
Tibetan area students to schools in the interior (i.e. Han 
areas) of Sichuan Province.  According to the official notice, 
students must actually be living at their place of household 
registration in ethnic Tibetan areas and be graduates of middle 
school with a clean criminal record, good health, unmarried, 
adequate level of Chinese language for study, interest in 
learning a specialty, and be under 19 years of age as of 
September 1, 2009.  Recruiting schools should get information on 
the ideology and character of students from the school they are 
applying from in their home area or, for students who have 
already graduated, from the local government office in charge of 
household registrations.  Students who "oppose the principles of 
the PRC Constitution," or who do not change their views after 
receiving education, should not be enrolled.  Students who have 
received fines or punishments from public security must report 
this with supporting documents from their local government 
including official opinions on the disposition of the case. 
Students are responsible for the authenticity of materials 
provided.  Information on recruiting students and policies and 
procedures for this program will be announced on the website of 
the Sichuan Examination Institute at URL WWW.ZK789.NET 
 . 
 
 
 
¶4. (SBU) Sixty students from Ganzi Prefecture in western Sichuan 
are among the first group of 300 "Nine plus Three" program 
students to be sent to the city of Leshan (south of Chengdu). 
They began taking courses at a local vocational high school in 
March 2009 and were visited recently by the Sichuan media, 
including the Sichuan Party Committee's Sichuan Daily and local 
television.  Reflecting widespread official attitudes, the 
article described how their Han Chinese teacher had "tamed the 
wild nature of the Tibetans" in just six classroom sessions. 
The article highlighted a photo essay on the fine school 
facilities the Tibetan students were enjoying and the kindness 
of their teacher, who invited them into her home for dinners on 
weekends. 
 
 
 
Possible Response to Unrest and Unemployed Youth in Tibetan Areas 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------------- 
 
CHENGDU 00000115  002.2 OF 004 
 
 
 
¶5.  (SBU) With highly subsidized development programs 
transforming the two Sichuan largely ethnic Tibetan prefectures 
of Ganzi and Aba, including a program for the resettlement of 
Tibetan nomads, the Chinese leadership may be trying to respond 
to the potential problem of what to do with nomads once they 
have been resettled.  Large numbers of unemployed youth could 
cause social instability.  The education plan may represent a 
"feeling for the rocks as one crosses the stream" response to 
that concern.  Assimilation of ethnic Tibetans to Chinese 
culture appears well advanced in some Tibetan areas, including 
southern Aba Prefecture in Sichuan and northwest Yunnan, but not 
in Ganzi Prefecture and pastoral areas of western Sichuan or in 
the Tibetan Autonomous Region (TAR). 
 
Building on an Old Idea 
 
------------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶6.  (SBU) The new education initiative likely builds on the 
experience of a similar program for students from the TAR that 
began in 1985.  Since then, some Tibetan elementary school and 
junior high school graduates from the TAR have been mainstreamed 
into regular Chinese language high schools.  Tibetan high 
schools or special programs for TAR students within regular high 
schools are found in a number of cities across China.  The 
children of Tibetan Communist Party and government cadres and 
some high scoring rural students attend the best Tibetan 
programs in Beijing, Shanghai and Nanjing.  There are also 
Tibetan high school programs or schools in Wuhan, Chongqing, 
Chengdu and other cities.  According to regulations on the 
management of Tibetan high schools in the Chinese interior that 
were promulgated by the State Education Commission in 1989, 
Tibetan high schools aim primarily to promote Chinese language 
skills, but also to "strengthen" Tibetan language skills. 
Schools were ordered to place special stress on ideological work 
and assign a person dedicated specifically to that task.  Heavy 
emphasis is also placed on political education, including 
patriotic education and "education on the unity of Chinese 
nationalities." 
 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) Ethnic Tibetan students with excellent Chinese prior to 
university reportedly stand a good chance of succeeding 
academically.  However, Tibetans who have not had intensive 
Chinese training in a Chinese-speaking environment and get into 
good Chinese universities, sometimes with the help of bonus 
points for minority students, receive little remedial help and 
often are unable to complete their coursework.  While some 
individual Tibetans from Ganzi and Aba Prefectures in the past 
received scholarships, this is the first time Sichuan Province 
has attempted such a comprehensive program similar in scale to 
what is done in the TAR.  The Sichuan Province "Nine Plus Three" 
Tibetan student program will enroll ten thousand students each 
year for three-year programs.  As noted by one local contact, 
30,000 students will represent a significant proportion of 
annual middle school graduates in Tibetan areas of Sichuan, 
perhaps as much as half of all Tibetan middle school students in 
Aba this fall. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) It is unclear if this educational program can actually 
reduce social disruptions that will likely accompany Sichuan 
Province's multi-billion dollar development plans for  Tibetan 
areas, including the Chengdu to Lhasa railway line to be 
completed in ten years that will open the area wider to the 
outside world than ever before.  Many Tibetans also retain a 
strong ethnic Tibetan identity despite a Chinese education and 
achieving native speaker fluency in Chinese.  One of China's 
most famous Tibetan authors, Woeser, writes exclusively in 
Chinese. Encounters with ethnic Han prejudices against Tibetans 
in schools in ethnic Han areas may strengthen Tibetan 
identities.  In a widely copied article posted on the internet, 
"I'm a Tibetan, I'll Fight Anyone Who Insults Our Nationality", 
one anonymous Tibetan high school student complained of the foul 
insults Tibetans at schools throughout China have endured from 
ethnic Han classmates over the past year.  The student concluded 
with the statement "Atheists have no business judging our 
Tibetan religion." 
 
¶9. (U) Consulate translation of June 16 Sichuan Daily article 
Sichuan in September Will Inaugurate Full Scale Tibetan Areas 
"Nine Plus Three" Education Plan: 
 
 [Sichuan Daily (Sichuan Province Communist Party Committee 
newspaper in Chinese) June 16, 2009] 
 
Ten Thousand Tibetan Area Students Will Study at High Schools 
and Vocational Schools this Fall 
 
 
CHENGDU 00000115  003.2 OF 004 
 
 
(article by Sichuan Daily journalist Zhang Shoushuai)  This 
Fall, Sichuan Province will send over 10,000 ethnic Tibetan 
students to high schools and vocational schools in interior 
areas of Sichuan for a free education.  This journalist learned 
from the Sichuan Province Education Bureau on June 14 that, 
beginning September 2009, Sichuan Province will inaugurate its 
full-scale "Nine Plus Three" Free Education Plan.  The Bureau 
has already designated 80 schools at the provincial level or 
higher key high schools and vocational schools as schools that 
will be implementing this plan. 
 
In order to help peasants and herders escape poverty and in 
order to develop the high quality workforce and technically 
trained people needed for the social and economic development of 
the Tibetan areas, Sichuan Province in March 2009 organized the 
first group of 300 students from Ganzi Prefecture to study at 
five key vocational schools.  This project elicited a very 
favorable response.  Zhongbu is a member of that first group of 
students who went to study in the interior of Sichuan who is now 
at the Second Vocational High School in Renshou County.  Zongbu 
noted; "being able to come to the interior to study for free 
ignited dreams in my heart." The school provides bedding, daily 
necessities, a school uniform, and 300 RMB/month in living 
expenses to each student.  Jide, a parent, said; "this state 
policy is very good.  Now we all want to send our children to 
the outside to study." 
 
Government subsidies for ethnic Tibetan students going to the 
interior for three years of high school study comes to a total 
subsidy of RMB 20,000 for each student.  This includes free 
tuition of RMB 2000, a living expenses subsidy of RMB 3000 per 
year for the first two years, and an additional RMB 1500 subsidy 
for the third year (the balance is made up of compensation 
earned in work-study and work practicum).  There is also a RMB 
1500 annual subsidy that covers transportation, dormitory, books 
and miscellaneous expenses. 
 
Sichuan Province has announced that by 2013, in addition to 
fully implementing nine years of compulsory education in all 
ethnic Tibetan areas of the province, it will arrange for 
schooling at high schools and vocational schools in the interior 
for 10,000 children of peasants and herders.  The province will 
accelerate the expansion of access to high school and raise the 
proportion of middle school students going on to high school to 
95 percent and the proportion of student places at regular high 
schools and vocational high school will reach the ratio of 6:4. 
Therefore the Sichuan Province Education Bureau organized the 
"Tibetan Areas "Nine Plus Three" Free Vocational Education At 
High Schools and Vocational Schools in the Interior Expert 
Leading Committee, which is charged with selecting 68 
specialties and 169 specialty development tracks suited for 
Tibetan students that will be provided as suggestions to the 
high schools and vocational schools recruiting Tibetan students, 
and to assist that school adjust their plans for recruiting 
students for various specialties. 
 
According to preliminary statistics, at present, of those ethnic 
Tibetan students who intend to study at high schools this Fall 
in interior Sichuan, there are 5920 from Aba Prefecture, over 
4000 from Ganzi Prefecture, and over 400 from Liangshan 
Prefecture. This shows the great effort put into to developing 
new talent for the ethnic Tibetan areas. 
 
The pace of economic and social development in a region depends 
to a large extent upon its human talent.  Sichuan Province in 
implementing the Tibetan Areas "Nine Plus Three" Free Education 
Plan, will enable Tibetans to get a high quality vocational 
education in the interior. This is putting much effort into 
developing new talent for the Tibetan areas and is an important 
measure for providing human talents and construction of the new 
socialist pastoral areas.  This policy has the enthusiastic 
support of the great majority of peasants and herders and will 
promote the rapid economic and social development of Sichuan 
Province's ethnic Tibetan areas. 
 
This is the first year of the full implementation of the Sichuan 
Province's Tibetan Areas "Nine Plus Three" Free Education Plan. 
Scientific, effective implementation of this project for the 
people's livelihood will be important for the development of the 
"Virtuous Government Project". 
 
Every level and every department of government should strengthen 
leadership, make plans to be more concrete, lay stress on 
essentials according to what is needed for the successful 
implementation of Sichuan Province's Tibetan Areas "Nine Plus 
Three" Free Education Project.  Moreover, every sector in 
society should with real actions show their concern for the 
studies and growth of the ethnic Tibetan students and create a 
good environment in which they can live and study. 
 
Source: Sichuan Ribao at 
http://epaper.xplus.com/papers/scrb/20090615/ n1.shtml 
 
CHENGDU 00000115  004.2 OF 004 
 
 
 
 
¶10. (U) Online References Collated by Consulate General Chengdu: 
 
-- Sichuan Educational Testing Committee notice (2009) 55 on 
recruiting students to high schools and vocational schools under 
the Sichuan Province Tibetan Areas "9+3"High School and 
Vocational School Free Temporary Guidelines" Education online at 
URL tinyurl.com/tibet-scholarships-sichuan . 
 
-- Sichuan Province Examination Institute website www.zk789.net 
   . 
 
-- PRC State Education Commission March 1989 Temporary 
Regulations on the Management of Tibet High School Courses of 
Study in the Chinese Interior at URL tinyurl.com/TibetanHSregs . 
 
-- Web report with photos on some of the first group of "Nine 
Plus Three" Tibetan students at a high school in Leshan.  URL at 
tinyurl.com/leshan-wild-tibetans . 
 
-- A Tibetan at a Chinese high school complains about attitudes 
of Han students towards Tibetans "I'm a Tibetan, I'll Fight 
Anyone Who Insults Our Nationality" 
 
at URL tinyurl.com/Tibetan-student-writes . 
BOUGHNER