09MANAMA383
THE BAHRAIN BANKING SECTOR 2009: A PRIMER
Thu Jun 25 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Manama
VZCZCXRO8677
PP RUEHDE RUEHDH RUEHDIR
DE RUEHMK #0383/01 1761039
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 251039Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY MANAMA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8763
INFO RUEHZM/GULF COOPERATION COUNCIL COLLECTIVE
RUEATRS/TREASURY WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 MANAMA 000383 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EFIN BA
SUBJECT: THE BAHRAIN BANKING SECTOR 2009: A PRIMER 
 
¶1. Summary: Bahrain hosts 412 diverse financial institutions ranging 
from local lenders to large-scale project finance investment banks. 
 Supported mostly on the back of petrodollars, this sector has grown 
to become the largest contributor to the Bahraini economy.  This 
cable outlines the banking sector as a whole, and describes the 
major players within each of the three main subsectors: wholesale 
(offshore) banking, retail (commercial) banking, and Islamic 
banking.  End Summary 
 
------------------- 
Traditional Banking 
------------------- 
 
¶2. Bahrain has long been the financial conduit for the petrodollars 
of its GCC neighbors.  In order of importance, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, 
Qatar, and the UAE, account for the overwhelming majority of banking 
assets in Bahrain.  Several of the major banks are owned either 
directly or indirectly by the governments of these countries. 
 
¶3. The Bahraini banking sector is comprised of 61 wholesale 
(offshore) banks, 42 investment banks, and 28 retail (commercial) 
banks, of which 26 are foreign owned.  According the Central Bank of 
Bahrain (CBB), at the end of Q1 2009, the traditional banking system 
(not including Islamic finance) had a consolidated balance sheet of 
$243.9 billion.  Almost three-quarters of this total was accounted 
for by the wholesale sector at $179.9 billion, while the retail 
sector added $64 billion.  Total Domestic Assets equaled $51.2 
billion, while total foreign liabilities reached $187.4 billion, or 
more than eight times the annual GDP of Bahrain.  The total equity 
of the banking sector was $24.1 billion. 
 
--------------- 
Islamic Banking 
--------------- 
 
¶4. The Government of Bahrain (GOB) has identified Islamic banking as 
one of the main economic growth areas in the coming five years. 
Islamic banking principles are similar to those of conventional 
banking, with the exception that Islamic banks must conform to 
Shari'ah, or Islamic law.  Islamic finance prohibits charging 
interest for the use of money, and disallows dealing in certain 
commodities.  Islamic banking falls under four main categories: 
 
--Murabiha: cost-plus financing - i.e., buying a product from a 
supplier and selling it to a customer for a profit; 
--Musharraka: a profit sharing system that is similar to equity 
participation; 
--Ijara: leasing; and 
--Istisna: the financing of construction or manufacturing. 
 
¶5. Islamic banking attracts investors because of its profit 
potential, as well as its religious and ethical approach.  While the 
sector is still small, it has registered strong continual growth 
despite regional uncertainties that hindered growth in conventional 
banking.  At the end of Q1 2009, the Islamic sector had $24.6 
billion in total assets. 
 
¶6. Islamic banking became an engine of growth for Bahrain and 
continues to attract high net-worth individual investors from GCC 
countries.  This sector has grown by an average of 21 percent over 
the past three years.  The Crown Prince and other government 
officials have voiced Bahrain's commitment to developing the sector 
further. 
 
---------------------- 
Regulatory Environment 
---------------------- 
 
¶7. In 2006, the Bahrain Monetary Agency (BMA) transformed into the 
Central Bank of Bahrain (CBB).  The CBB regulates the banking sector 
under the provisions of the BMA law (Decree Law No. 23 of 1973).  In 
May 2002, the Government of Bahrain announced that regulatory 
responsibility for the insurance sector and stock exchange would 
move to the BMA (now CBB).  Seeking to maintain Bahrain's status as 
the Gulf region's preeminent financial center, the CBB changed its 
licensing practices in 2006 to give banks greater opportunities to 
invest domestically and regionally.  The CBB has been active in 
developing regulations for the Islamic banking sector, and has been 
instrumental in making Bahrain a recognized center of Islamic 
banking.  The Central Bank has fully implemented Basel II standards 
for both the traditional and Islamic banking sectors. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
The Top Three Retail (Commercial) Banks 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶8. Ahli United Bank -- Ahli United is the largest publically traded 
commercial lender in Bahrain.  Major stake-holders include Ahmed Al 
Kharaffi (Kuwait), and various members of the Kuwaiti Royal family. 
Ahli United holds a 25% share of Alliance Housing Bank, and major 
stakes in Future Bank (Iran), Bank of Kuwait & the Middle East, 
Qatar Ahli Bank, and the Commercial Bank of Iraq.  In January 2009 
 
MANAMA 00000383  002 OF 003 
 
 
it reported a market capitalization of more than $6 billion.  Under 
CEO Adel El Labban, Ahli United is licensed by the CBB for 
commercial, wholesale, investment and private banking, and fund 
management. 
 
¶9. National Bank of Bahrain (NBB) -- Established by the government 
in 1956, NBB has the largest number of outlets in Bahrain (currently 
28).  Through its quasi-sovereign wealth fund Bahrain Mumtalakat 
Holding, the government still owns a 50% share of the bank.  At the 
end of Q1 2009, NBB reported a market capitalization of 
approximately $2 billion.  NBB's CEO is Abdul Razak Qassim, a 
Bahraini, and it is licensed as a commercial bank only. 
 
¶10. BBK (formerly Bank of Bahrain & Kuwait) -- BBK was established 
in 1971, and has 21 branches in Bahrain. Although publicly traded, 
Ithmaar Bank and Kuwait Global Investment combined own approximately 
a 45% share of BBK.  Its market capitalization is approximately $1.5 
billion, and is most well known as the Bahraini bank that had the 
largest direct exposure to sub-prime mortgage instruments, directly 
resulting in the resignation of long-time CEO Fareed Al Mullah. 
Mullah was replaced by Abdul Karim Bucheeri.  It is licensed as a 
commercial bank only. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
The Top Three Wholesale (Offshore) Banks 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶11. Gulf International Bank (GIB) -- GIB was originally set up by 
the GCC member states, with each state holding an equal share. 
After years of poor risk management and significant losses, the 
original owners have sold off their stakes, with the Saudi 
government buying up shares.  Today the primary stake holder is the 
Saudi Monetary Authority with a 67.5% share, followed by the Saudi 
Public Investment Fund at 29.7%.  The remaining 2.8% is held by the 
original partners: Kuwait Investment Authority--0.73%; Qatar 
Investment Authority-- 0.73%; Bahrain Mumtalakat--0.44%; Oman 
Ministry of Finance-- 0.44%; and the UAE Ministry of Finance--0.44%. 
 GIB has a stated focus on the oil and gas sector, but is known to 
have had significant exposure to financial crisis, and has needed to 
be re-capitalized twice.  Since 2007, total losses have exceeded 
$1.5 billion.  Top management is all Saudi, including CEO Yahya Al 
Yahya. 
 
¶12. Arab Banking Corporation (ABC) -- Established 1980, ABC is owned 
in almost equal shares by three countries: Kuwait Investment 
Authority -- 29.7%, the Central Bank of Libya -- 29.5%, and the Abu 
Dhabi Investment Authority-- 27.6%.  A variety of other shareholders 
hold the remaining 13.2%.  ABC's market capitalization was around $2 
billion at the end of 2008, and losses since 2007 are believed to be 
nearly $1 billion.  CEO and President, Hassan Ali Juma, used to be 
the CEO of NBB. 
 
¶13. United Gulf Bank (UGB) -- UGB is the investment banking arm of 
Kuwait Projects Company (KIPCO).  With a market capitalization of 
$1.6 billion, it operates in 11 NEA countries.  Headquartered in 
Bahrain, it is licensed as a wholesale bank only.  Both management 
and investors are known to have close ties to the Kuwaiti royal 
family.  Long-time Amcit CEO William Khoury resigned in June 2008 
and has not yet been replaced. 
 
--------------------------- 
The Top Three Islamic Banks 
--------------------------- 
 
¶14. Gulf Finance House -- Gulf Finance House is one of the 
best-diversified of all the Islamic banks, with holdings and 
investments in every major sector.  Its CEO, Essam Janahi, has 
recently entered into three major Islamic finance ventures with 
Ithmaar Bank (headed by his brother Khalid Janahi) and Abu Dhabi 
Investment House (led by his brother Rashaad Janahi):  InfraCapital, 
AgriCapital, and the Hospitality Development Fund.  GFH's market cap 
exceeds $3.1 billion, and it has major real-estate holdings 
throughout the region - one residential project in Bahrain contains 
30,000 units valued at $3.2 billion.  Gulf Finance House also runs 
and operates a stand-alone commercial unit under the name Khaleej 
Finance House. 
 
¶15. - Al-Baraka Islamic Bank -- A subsidiary of Lebanon-based Al 
Baraka Group, Al Baraka Islamic has a market cap of almost $1.7 
billion.  One of the most successful banks in 2008, it announced a 
net income increase of 62% in 2008.  In March 2009, it announced 
plans to expand into South Asia and Indonesia.  Primarily a 
wholesale operation, Al Baraka also operates a commercial unit in 
Bahrain.  One of the most prominent stakeholders is Sheikh Salah 
Kamel from the Western Province of Saudi Arabia. 
 
¶16. Arcapita -- Arcapita is a well-diversified, international 
Islamic bank with significant holdings in the U.S.  Arcapita 
maintains offices in Bahrain, Atlanta, London, and Singapore.  The 
bank has a paid-in capital of $282 million, of which approximately 
67% is held by some 270 prominent individuals, including Saudi 
national Mohammed Abdulaziz Al Jumaih, one of the wealthiest 
 
MANAMA 00000383  003 OF 003 
 
 
billionaires in the world, along with numerous investors from both 
the Qatari and Saudi royal families.  The remaining 33% is 
beneficially held by Arcapita's management.  Arcapita has net assets 
totaling $5.1 billion and an equity capital base of $1.4 billion. 
Arcapita focuses on business investment, corporate investment, real 
estate investment, and asset-based investment and venture capital. 
 
------------ 
Rising Stars 
------------ 
 
¶17. Ithmaar Bank (Traditional) -- Ithmaar Bank, incorporated as a 
small subsidiary of Shamil Bank in 1984, has grown significantly, 
purchasing major stakes in a variety of other banks and investment 
houses including once-parent company Shamil Bank, BBK, SAKANA 
Mortgage, First Leasing Bank, and Solidarity Insurance.  Headed by 
Khalid Janahi, brother of Gulf Finance House giant Essam Janahi, 
Ithmaar Bank was one of the few banks to report profits every 
quarter throughout 2007-2008.  Ithmaar bank recently spun off a 
wholly-owned subsidiary, Ithmaar Development Company, to handle 
major real estate development projects throughout the region, 
including Dilmunia Health Care Island in Bahrain. 
 
¶18. Unicorn Bank (Islamic) -- Founded in 2004, Unicorn Investment 
Bank (Unicorn) is an Islamic investment bank with an international 
presence in the United States, Malaysia, the UAE, Turkey, and 
Pakistan.  Unicorn's stated goal is to become the leading global 
provider of Shari'ah-compliant investment banking products and 
services.  Unicorn has developed its business model around six core 
business lines: Capital Markets, Private Equity, Corporate Finance, 
Asset Management & Real Estate, Strategic Mergers & Acquisitions, 
and Treasury.  Unicorn's U.S. office is located in Chicago. 
 
¶19. Istiklaf Bank (Islamic) -- Istiklaf Bank, set to open in the 
fall of 2009, aims to be the largest Islamic Bank in Bahrain with a 
target opening capitalization of $5 billion.  Istiklaf is a new 
subsidiary of the Al Baraka Group (parent company of Al Baraka 
Islamic Bank), and rumor has it that its initial investors are 
primarily from Saudi Arabia's Western Province. 
 
HENZEL 
#