09MANAGUA646
NICARAGUA: SCENE SETTER FOR USNS COMFORT VISIT
Mon Jun 29 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0001
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #0646/01 1802211
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 292211Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RHBVJPX/COMPHIBRON SIX  PRIORITY
RHBPCOM/USNS COMFORT  PRIORITY
RHBPCOM/MEDTRE FAC COMFORT  PRIORITY
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4290
RUMIAAA/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 000646 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FROM AMB CALLAHAN TO COMMODORE NEGUS 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN KRAAIMOORE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/25/2019 
TAGS: PGOV PREL NU
SUBJECT: NICARAGUA: SCENE SETTER FOR USNS COMFORT VISIT 
 
REF: A. MANAGUA 629 - H1N1 UPDATE 
     ¶B. MANAGUA 626 - RADIO STATION JAMMING 
     ¶C. MANAGUA 600 - CPC UPDATE 
     ¶D. MANAGUA 599 - MCC REACTION 
     ¶E. MANAGUA 580 - MCC CANCELATION 
     ¶F. MANAGUA 541 - NGO MANUAL 
     ¶G. MANAGUA 534 - NICARAGUAN ECONOMY OUTLOOK 
     ¶H. MANAGUA 524 - TRIPARTITE WAGE AGREEMENT 
     ¶I. MANAGUA 443 - CPC PRAYER CAMPAIGN 
     ¶J. MANAGUA 415 - MISKITO INDEPENDENCE MOVEMENT 
     ¶K. MANAGUA 258 - CAMPAIGN AGAINST OPPOSITION 
     ¶L. 2008 MANAUGA 1392 - MUNICIPAL ELECTION FRAUD 
     ¶M. 2008 MANAGUA 1240 - CONSTITUTIONAL REFORM 
     ¶N. 2007 MANAGUA 1785 - 28TH ANNIVERSARY CELEBRATION 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Robert J. Callahan for reasons 1.4 (b & d) 
 
¶1. (C) Commodore Negus, your visit to Nicaragua on July 3 
through 14 comes at an auspicious time and into a challenging 
political environment with a government that is suspicious 
and critical of the USG, even as the Nicaraguan public 
remains fundamentally pro-US.  Troubling phenomena include: 
economic instability; political consolidation of party 
control over national and local government; and an active 
party-patronage system that rewards loyalty and punishes 
opposition. Your visit also coincides with the 30-year 
anniversary of the Sandinista-led victory over the Somoza 
dictatorship, and follows the June 10 cancellation of the 
Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC) $62 million aid 
program.  We believe that the Nicaraguan people will welcome 
the visit, but that there will be pressure by government 
officials to create the public impression that the 
Sandinistas planned, programmed and orchestrated the entire 
COMFORT mission.  We expect politically-appointed officials 
in the Ministry of Defense and Health to be uncooperative, 
while local mayors, doctors, nurses, and veterinarians will 
fully support the mission. 
 
--------------------------------- 
MISSION CONTEXT / PERFECT TIMING? 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (C) From a public diplomacy standpoint, the timing for the 
COMFORT visit is perfect.  The ship arrives three weeks after 
the MCC board canceled approximately $62 million of USG 
assistance because of election fraud (see reftel D, E, L). 
Within five days of the COMFORT's departure, the ruling 
party, the Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN), will 
celebrate its 30-year anniversary of defeating the Somoza 
dictatorship on July 19 (see reftel N).  The confluence of 
these events allows the visit to demonstrate the continuing 
commitment of the US to the Nicaraguan people in a tangible 
way, countering GON messages of hostility. In general, 
Nicaraguans continue to have a very high opinion of the 
United States and its people.  This mission will certainly 
reinforce that message. 
 
¶3. (C) From a political standpoint, the timing for the visit 
is challenging.  The FSLN once again has control over all 
four branches of government with the return of Daniel Ortega 
to the Presidency in 2007 (with only 38% of the vote) and 
through a "pacto" or alliance with the Constitutional Liberal 
Party (PLC).  National control combined with the FSLN's local 
Citizen Power Councils (CPCs) actively restricts the ability 
of civil society, NGOs, the media and the opposition to 
exercise their civic rights (reftel B, C, F, K).  The FSLN's 
stated goal is to further consolidate power through 
constitutional reform that would allow President Ortega to 
remain in power beyond the end of his term in 2011. 
Meanwhile, Nicaragua's economy is distressed - there is high 
unemployment from maquila closings and budget shortfalls 
because of donor nations cutting funds (see reftel G). 
Social services, including healthcare and education, are 
suffering from two rounds of 20% budget cuts and there are a 
growing number of confirmed cases of H1N1 flu virus now in 
the country, including one case within the US Embassy 
community (patient has recovered). (see reftel A). 
 
--------------------- 
MCC CANCELATION HURTS 
--------------------- 

¶4. (C) The MCC board announced on June 10 the cancellation of 
approximately $62 million of USG assistance as a consequence 
of election fraud perpetrated by the GON during the November 
2008 municipal contests (see reftel D, E, L).  Government and 
FSLN party leaders, including Ortega himself, claim that the 
USG is interfering with Nicaragua's sovereignty and its 
internal affairs by asking them to account for the electoral 
fraud.  The expected cancellation announcement came after six 
months of diplomatic efforts urging the GON to address the 
electoral fraud.  Of the $175 million MCC Compact, 
approximately $110 million had already been spent or 
obligated.  The loss of the remaining $62 million in aid is a 
blow economically and politically to the Ortega government, 
particularly since the impact will be felt acutely in the 
FSLN's historical base of Leon and Chinandega - areas that 
will be served by the COMFORT mission.  Public reaction to 
the MCC decision generally placed the blame on the Ortega 
administration (see reftel D, E). 
 
----------------------- 
30-YEAR FSLN ANIVERSARY 
----------------------- 
 
¶5. (C) On July 19, five days after the COMFORT's departure 
from Nicaragua, the FSLN will celebrate its 30-year 
anniversary of defeating the Somoza dictatorship.  At 
previous celebrations (see reftel N), Ortega hosted 
Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez and organized large public 
demonstrations.  This year's event is expected to be much 
grander in scope.  Preparations began in earnest after the 
November 2008 municipal elections.  Lighted Christmas trees, 
topped with illuminated "30" cubes, remain installed in all 
of Managua's major traffic roundabouts (see reftel I). Also 
this year, the FSLN has staged dozens of party affiliation 
meetings, primarily for public employees, to declare that 
they are "militants" within the FSLN party (see reftel C). 
The FSLN has already held small public rallies, and there are 
television public service announcements and billboards about 
the 30-year anniversary through the country.  Nonetheless, 
one large public rally was canceled in Masaya on June 21 
because of public health fears about the spread of H1N1 flu. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
CONSTANT ATTACKS AGAINST NGOS, MEDIA & OPPOSITION 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶6. (C) Since entering office in 2007, Ortega has consolidated 
power across all levels of government.  Perhaps the only 
remaining independent institution is the professional 
military.  The FSLN's stated goal is constitutional reform 
that will either allow President Ortega to be re-elected or 
change the government structure into a parliamentary system 
(see reftel M).  The FSLN already controls the four branches 
of the national government through a "pacto" or alliance with 
the PLC. Ortega announced the creation of CPCs in 2007 as a 
form of direct democracy independent of political 
affiliation; however, by the end of 2008, CPCs were 
overwhelmingly FSLN-controlled local organizations.  One 
national poll showed that less than 5 percent of Nicaraguans 
participated in CPCs.  The FSLN is actively limiting the 
ability of civil society, NGOs and the media to exercise 
their civic rights.  A new NGO manual proposed by the 
Ministry of Government, would restrict Nicaraguans' freedom 
of association and influence on public policy (see reftel F). 
 In mid-June the GON arbitrarily blocked the signal and 
confiscated the equipment of an opposition radio station (see 
reftel B). 
 
¶7. (C) In a February speech, Ortega declared the FSLN in a 
permanent campaign against the political opposition (see 
reftel K).  Opposition leader and National Assembly Deputy 
Eduardo Montealegre refused to appear before a judge on June 
22 for politically motivated charges regarding the issuance 
of government bonds (CENIS) while he served in the previous 
administration.  The FSLN has now threatened to strip 
Montealegre of his immunity from prosecution in the National 
Assembly (see septel). 
 
------------------- 
ECONOMY LOOKS BLEAK 
------------------- 

¶8. (U) With a per capita income of $1,140 and poverty rate of 
46%, Nicaragua is the second-poorest country in the Western 
Hemisphere.  Official unemployment was 4.9% in 2007, but 60% 
of all workers earn a living in the informal sector, where 
underemployment is as high as 90%.  The Central Bank 
forecasts 0.5% economic growth in 2009, but independent 
economists believe the economy may in fact contract by as 
much as 1% this year.  Exports to the United States, which 
account for 59% of Nicaragua,s total exports, increased 45% 
from 2005 to 2008, but they are down 14% so far in 2009. 
 
¶9. (U) In the wake of fraudulent municipal elections, the 
government has been unable to secure continued budget support 
provided by European donors, resulting in a significant 
fiscal deficit that led President Ortega to cut spending and 
appeal to assistance from international financial 
institutions and Venezuela.  In 2008, Venezuela provided 
about $326 million in assistance, all off-budget through 
entities controlled by the FSLN.  In 2008, Nicaraguans 
received $818 million in remittances from abroad, most of 
which came from the United States. 
 
¶10. (U) President Ortega,s harsh rhetoric against the United 
States, capitalism, and free trade has had a negative effect 
on foreign investor attitudes and perceptions of country 
risk.  Since President Ortega took office, Nicaragua has 
fallen in the World Economic Forum,s Competitive Index 
Ranking from 95th place in 2006 to 120th in 2008. 
Nonetheless, the government reports foreign investment 
inflows of $626 million in 2008, mostly for 
telecommunications infrastructure and electricity generation. 
 However, many companies in the textile/apparel sector, 
including a $100 million U.S.-owned denim mill, have 
shuttered during the past twelve months due to falling demand 
for these goods in the United States. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶11. (C) Many of the current circumstances Nicaragua faces at 
the arrival of the USNS COMFORT recall the last time the FSLN 
was in power in the 1980's: economic turmoil; overt efforts 
to consolidate one-party control over both the national and 
local government; active repression of civil society, 
independent media and the opposition; and an active FSLN 
propaganda machine to claim greater public support for the 
party and its agenda.  Unlike the 1980's however, Nicaragua 
has made significant economic progress since the return of 
democracy in 1990, and while its political institutions are 
weak and easily manipulated, civil society, the Catholic 
Church, the media, and more serious elements of the 
opposition have in fact pushed back and restricted the GON,s 
ability to pursue its authoritarian agenda. 
 
¶12. (C) Ortega and his party need to create the impression 
that they brought the COMFORT mission to Nicaragua to 
ameliorate the enormous negative impact of the MCC 
cancellation which has generally been blamed on his 
administration despite rhetoric to the contrary.  We believe 
that there will be considerable pressure by the FSLN, 
particularly through its CPCs, to manipulate public events in 
order to cast the COMFORT visit as something planned, 
programmed, and orchestrated solely by the FSLN.  We are 
taking all measures to minimize this.  We also believe that 
the FSLN may try to manipulate the patient selection process 
for surgeries as much as possible in order to reward faithful 
party members in the run-up to the 30-year anniversary.  We 
expect that senior-level FSLN-political appointees in the 
Ministry of Defense and the Ministry of Health will be 
hostile and generally uncooperative with the mission -- that 
they will create unnecessary bureaucratic obstacles to a 
smooth operation instead of the open cooperation COMFORT has 
enjoyed in other countries.  In fact, GON officials told us 
privately that they would have preferred a visit by the 
COMFORT earlier in its mission to avoid the proximity to the 
FSLN 30-year anniversary.  We also fully expect that the 
GON's propaganda machine will work overtime to either 
minimize media coverage of the mission or twist it to serve 
FSLN purposes. 
 
¶13. (C) Nonetheless, the Nicaraguan people will welcome the 
mission.  The uniformed Nicaraguan military, local mayors, 
and the Nicaraguan doctors, nurses, vets, and school 
directors will be helpful and supportive of the COMFORT 
mission.  They want the tremendous training benefits, 
rehabilitation projects, and Handclasp donations, not to 
mention the free medical attention that the mission will 
bring to their communities.  In brief, Nicaragua will be a 
challenging political environment for this USG 
humanitarian-military mission and there will be high stakes 
in the public relations struggle for the "hearts and minds" 
of the Nicaraguan people. 
 
------- 
CLOSING 
------- 
 
¶14. (U) Commodore Negus, on behalf of my embassy team, we 
heartily welcome you and the COMFORT to Nicaragua.  We pledge 
our full support to the successful execution of this 
wonderful humanitarian mission from the people of the United 
States to the people of Nicaragua. And I personally look 
forward to seeing a NWC alumnus again. 
CALLAHAN