09STATE62946
SECRETARY CLINTON'S REPLY TO ARAB LEAGUE
Thu Jun 18 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
O 180040Z JUN 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY CAIRO IMMEDIATEUNCLAS STATE 062946 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPDC PREL EG
SUBJECT: SECRETARY CLINTON'S REPLY TO ARAB LEAGUE 
SECRETARY GENERAL AMRE MOUSSA, S/ES 200910766 
 
¶1.  PLEASE DELIVER THE FOLLOWING MESSAGE FROM SECRETARY 
CLINTON TO ARAB LEAGUE SECRETARY GENERAL AMRE MOUSSA. 
THE DEPARTMENT DOES NOT PLAN TO RELEASE THE TEXT OF THE 
MESSAGE BUT HAS NO OBJECTION IF THE ARAB LEAGUE WISHES 
TO DO SO.  THERE WILL BE NO SIGNED ORIGINAL. 
 
¶2.  BEGIN TEXT: 
 
Dear Mr. Secretary General: 
 
Thank you for your letter dated June 7 expressing 
appreciation for President Obama's speech at Cairo 
University on June 4.  In his speech, the President 
proposed a new beginning between the United States and 
Muslims around the world, based on mutual interest and 
respect for one another.  The work of implementing this 
vision will require engaging diverse elements of the 
United States government and its international partners. 
I share the President's vision and hope we can work 
together to develop closer ties. 
 
The President has expressed, both publicly and 
privately, his strong support for the two-state solution 
and the importance of Israelis and Palestinians living 
in peace and security.  His Cairo speech reaffirmed his 
personal commitment to pursuing peace between Israel and 
all of her Arab neighbors.  The President has called on 
all the parties to fulfill their obligations under the 
Roadmap.  It is important for all of us to do our own 
part to help create the context that would support a 
return to meaningful negotiations, which can be brought 
to a quick conclusion. 
 
I hope the Arab League can continue to work closely with 
the United States on this issue.  I look forward to the 
upcoming meeting of the Quartet in Trieste, where I hope 
that Quartet representatives will have the opportunity 
to meet with several senior officials from Arab 
governments to discuss our shared objective: 
comprehensive peace in the Middle East.  Building upon 
the spirit of the Arab Peace Initiative to 
diplomatically engage Israel is an important step.  Arab 
states must also help the Palestinian people to develop 
the institutions that could support a future state. 
 
Sincerely yours, 
 
Hillary Rodham Clinton 
 
END TEXT. 
 
CLINTON