07HONGKONG150
EXTRANCHECK: POST SHIPMENT VERIFICATION: A&P
Wed Jan 17 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Hong Kong
VZCZCXYZ0003
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHHK #0150 0170909
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 170909Z JAN 07
FM AMCONSUL HONG KONG
TO RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
INFO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0142
RHMFIUU/HQ BICE WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS HONG KONG 000150 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USDOC FOR 532/OEA/LHINES/DFARROW 
USDOC FOR 3132 FOR FCS/OIO REGIONAL DIRECTOR WILLIAM 
ZARIT 
BICE FOR OFFICE OF STRATEGIC INVESTIGATIONS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BMGT BEXP HK ETRD ETTC
SUBJECT: EXTRANCHECK: POST SHIPMENT VERIFICATION: A&P 
INSTRUMENT CO LTD 
 
REF: A) USDOC 06875 B) D362961 
 
1.Unauthorized disclosure of the information provided 
below is prohibited by Section 12C of the Export 
Administration Act. 
 
¶2. As per reftel A request and at the direction of the 
Office of Enforcement Analysis (OEA) of the USDOC 
Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS), Export Control 
Officer Philip Ankel (ECO), accompanied by Commercial 
Assistant Sandy Lai, conducted a post shipment 
verification (PSV) at A&P Instrument Co. Ltd. (A&P), 
Unit 1, Kam Hon Industrial Building, 8 Wang Kwun Road, 
Kowloon Bay, Hong Kong.  The items in question are two 
position elliptical valves exported to A&P on October 
27, 2006 and valued at USD 158.  The Export Control 
Classification Number (ECCN) is 2B350 and the items 
were exported pursuant to export license D362961. The 
exporter was Cole-Parmer Instrument Company of Vernon 
Hills, Illinois. 
 
¶3.  The ECO visited A&P at the address referenced above 
on January 9, 2007 and met with Mr. Andy Wu, Senior 
Manager.  Mr. Wu provided background on A&P and its 
business, which involves the resale and distribution of 
testing equipment and other scientific instrumentation 
(more information including names of various U.S. 
suppliers at www.anpico.com).  Mr. Wu stated that the 
company had been representative of the exporter, Cole- 
Parmer, for 24 years.  He noted that A&P initially 
focused primarily on customers in Hong Kong but with 
the transition of significant manufacturing to the 
mainland, presently A&P's main business is with 
mainland Chinese companies (multiple mainland China 
offices are noted in the A&P website). 
 
¶4. A review of the Hong Kong Companies Registry reveals 
that A&P has been in business since 1990 and that Mr. 
Wu, a Hong Kong resident, is a director as is Hong Kong 
resident Yuet Ling Au. 
 
¶5.  With respect to the shipment that was the subject 
of the PSV, Mr. Wu provided the applicable 
documentation reflecting that the items had been 
received by A&P and subsequently resold to the end-user 
noted on license D362961, namely Millipore China 
Limited (Millipore).  The U.S. parent of Millipore 
China Limited (Millipore Corporation) is a New York 
Stock Exchange listed company that provides a range of 
products and services in the biopharmaceutical 
manufacturing and medical research fields 
(www.millipore.com).  Mr. Wu stated that at the request 
of Cole-Parmer, he obtained from Millipore a statement 
regarding the proposed end-use of the items, a copy of 
which he provided to the ECO.  That statement was in 
the form of an e-mail indicating that the items were 
for "valve use for filtration system."  Mr. Wu stated 
that the item was for use in Hong Kong and was 
delivered to Millipore in Hong Kong.  Mr. Wu also 
stated that he was made aware of the conditions of 
License D362961 and provided ECO with a copy of the 
license itself. 
 
¶6.  Mr. Wu also stated that he is familiar with both 
U.S. and Hong Kong export licensing rules.  He further 
stated that as a general rule A&P avoids dealing in 
items that may require an export license as obtaining 
such licenses represents a significant regulatory 
burden.  He noted that A&P's items typically are not at 
the level of technical sophistication that would result 
in them being controlled for export.  Information 
provided by OEA to the ECO indicates that A&P has 
rarely been the subject or applicant in export/reexport 
licenses. 
 
¶7. At the time visited, A&P appeared to be a suitable 
recipient of the commodities shipped since A&P 
cooperated with the PSV and provided all requested 
information concerning the use and final disposition of 
the shipment.  At the same time, the ECO was not able 
to inspect the subject item as it had already been 
delivered to A&P's customer, Millipore.  Consistent 
with guidance on reporting of PSVs where the items 
cannot be physically inspected, the ECO recommends that 
this PSV be classified as Limited.