07HONGKONG38
EXTRANCHECK: POST SHIPMENT VERIFICATION:
Fri Jan 05 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Hong Kong
VZCZCXYZ0008
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHHK #0038/01 0050714
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 050714Z JAN 07
FM AMCONSUL HONG KONG
TO RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
INFO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0013
RHMFIUU/HQ BICE WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS HONG KONG 000038 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USDOC FOR 532/OEA/LHINES/DFARROW 
USDOC FOR 3132 FOR FCS/OIO REGIONAL DIRECTOR WILLIAM 
ZARIT 
BICE FOR OFFICE OF STRATEGIC INVESTIGATIONS 
 
BEIJING FOR FCS JEANETTE CHU 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BMGT BEXP HK ETRD ETTC
SUBJECT: EXTRANCHECK: POST SHIPMENT VERIFICATION: 
ERQIANG TECHNOLOGY (H.K.) 
REF: A) USDOC 06595 
 
1.Unauthorized disclosure of the information provided 
below is prohibited by Section 12C of the Export 
Administration Act. 
 
¶2. As per reftel A request and at the direction of the 
Office of Enforcement Analysis (OEA) of the USDOC 
Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS), Export Control 
Officer Philip Ankel (ECO) and Commercial Assistant 
Sandy Lai conducted a pre-license check (PLC) at 
Erqiang Technology (H.K.) (Erqiang), Flat 1105, Block 
B, Ching Lai Court 264 Lai King Hill Road, Kowloon, 
Hong Kong. The item in question is five ring polyphenyl 
ether, classified under Export Control Classification 
Number (ECCN) 1C006 and controlled for national 
security (NS) reasons. If properly classified, this 
item would most likely not require a license for export 
to Hong Kong but would require a license to mainland 
China.  The exporter is Arch Technology Holding LLC of 
St. Charles, Missouri. 
 
¶3.  The ECO and Commercial Assistant visited Erqiang at 
the address referenced above on December 18, 2006 and 
met with Ms. Hoi Ping Chu, representative of Erqiang 
responsible for this shipment.  Erqiang's office is 
located in a small flat in a residential building.  Ms. 
Chu was open and forthcoming during the interview.  She 
provided background on Erqiang and its business, which 
involves the provision of logistics and freight 
forwarding services on behalf of mainland Chinese 
company, Photon Technology Co., Ltd. (Photon Shenzhen), 
the foreign purchaser noted in Reftel A.  Ms. Chu 
stated that Photon Shenzhen is the parent company of 
Erqiang although Erqiang is not Photon Shenzhen's sole 
logistics provider.  During the meeting, the ECO 
noticed several boxes marked "Photon" in the Erqiang 
office.  Ms. Chu stated that shipments for Photon 
Shenzhen are sent to her (modest) office and she 
arranges for their further shipment to Shenzhen. 
 
¶4.  According to the Hong Kong companies registry, 
Erqiang has been in existence since October 2000. Its 
directors are Yi Shun Eunice Yeung and Er Qiang Zhao. 
According to the Hong Kong companies registry, Erqiang 
is collocated with another company, Photon Technology 
Company Limited, established in 2003.  Ms. Chu is a 
director of that company as is Ms. Sau Yuen Yeung who 
was present during the meeting with Ms. Chu.  By 
subsequent phone call, Ms. Chu clarified that Photon 
Technology Company Limited is a sales office for Photon 
Shenzhen and operates separately from Erqiang.  Ms. Chu 
claimed not to know anything about another apparently 
related company, Neophotonics Corporation Limited, 
established in August 2004 but located in downtown Hong 
Kong. 
 
¶5.  A review of the Photon web site 
(www.photontec.com.cn) suggests the following likely 
relationship between the various companies. 
Neophotonics, Inc. of San Jose California 
(www.neophotonics.com) is the parent of Photon 
Shenzhen.  Neophotonics and Photon Technology Co., Ltd. 
merged in 2005.  Photon Shenzhen is the likely parent 
of Erqiang and Photon Technology Company Limited (the 
Hong Kong entity).  Neophotonics Corporation Limited is 
likely the Hong Kong affiliate of Neophotonics, Inc. of 
San Jose. 
 
¶6.  With respect to the item that is the subject of the 
PLC, Ms. Chu provided an "End User Application 
Statement" signed by Zie Zhang, Supplier Management 
Engineer for Photon Shenzhen (also identified in this 
document as Neophotonics (China) Corp.).  In that 
statement, Mr. Zhang confirms that all products of Arch 
Technology Holding LLC (the license applicant) will be 
used only in the manufacturing of modules and 
components for telecommunications applications.  Ms. 
Chu stated that she was unaware of Photon Shenzhen's 
customers. 
 
¶7.  Almost at the outset of the meeting, Ms. Chu asked 
the ECO whether this transaction would require a Hong 
Kong import and export license.  The ECO stated that he 
was not expert in Hong Kong export control regulations 
 
 
and Ms. Chu would likely obtain a definitive answer on 
the subject from the Trade and Industry Department of 
the Hong Kong Government (TID).  The ECO did, however, 
note that this particular item was likely on TID's list 
of items subject to control and that therefore a TID 
license might well be required.  Ms. Chu seemed 
disappointed at the prospect of requesting a TID 
license, stating that she had had problems applying for 
a TID license some years ago in relation to the import 
of some products manufactured by Phillips.  She stated 
that she had not applied for any TID licenses since 
then. 
 
¶8.  At the time visited, ERQIANG appeared to be a 
suitable recipient of the controlled items (as 
logistics provider to Photon Shenzhen) since it 
cooperated with the PLC and has a line of business 
consistent with its role in the transaction. The ECO 
recommends that this PSV be classified as Favorable. 
 
Sakaue