07JAKARTA108
JAN 12 UPDATE RE ADAM AIR; PIECES OF WRECKAGE FOUND; SEARCH
Fri Jan 12 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Jakarta
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHJA #0108/01 0120921
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 120921Z JAN 07
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2831
RUEHGP/AMEMBASSY SINGAPORE 5671UNCLAS JAKARTA 000108 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR CA/OCS/ACS/EAP,EAP/MTS,EB/TRA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIRASECCASCID
SUBJECT: JAN 12 UPDATE RE ADAM AIR; PIECES OF WRECKAGE FOUND; SEARCH 
CONTINUES 
 
REF:JAKARTA 050 AND PREVIOUS 
 
¶1. (U) Summary: Villagers and Government of Indonesia (GOI) search 
and rescue personnel found small pieces of wreckage from Adam Air 
flight KI-574 on various beaches in South Sulewesi on January 11th. 
Small wreckage debris continues to wash on shore. U.S. Military 
personnel continue to assist with sea search efforts and are 
awaiting equipment for deep sea water recovery.  Family members of 
AmCit passengers have left Indonesia, but remain in contact with 
Consular Staff.  End Summary. 
 
 
Wreckage Found; Search Efforts Shift to Sea 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) Villagers found a three foot piece of the elevator from the 
right horizontal stabilizer January 11 on a beach in the Pare-Pare 
district of Southern Sulewesi. Seat cushions, tray tables, clothing, 
and other small debris from the plane have also washed on up on 
shore in the area. Small personal effects have also washed on shore, 
but are in poor condition and hard to identify. Local media widely 
and inaccurately reported that the body of a young female crash 
victim was found washed ashore near Pare-Pare on January 11. 
However, [Indonesian health officials] have confirmed the victim 
died well after the accident and her death was not related to the 
crash in any way. According to Robert Benzon, leader of the 6-man 
NTSB team, the wreckage found on shore confirms a water impact, but 
larger pieces of the fuselage and the flight record locater are 
crucial to reconstructing the accident. 
 
¶3.  (U) The USNS Mary Sears continues to search Indonesian waters. 
However, a towed pinger locater (tpl) is needed to search deep seas. 
This equipment is expensive and must be sent from the United States. 
Benzon also noted that the flight recorder's batteries only have a 
30 day lifespan and that the search has already entered the 11 th 
day. 
 
¶4. (U) The six members of the U.S. NTSB accident investigation 
analyzed the wreckage at Hasnaruddin Air Force base this morning. 
The FAA and GE representatives of the NTSB team plan to return to 
the United States early next week since it is unlikely engine 
wreckage would wash on shore. The two NTSB and two Boeing 
representatives remain in Makkassar awaiting further developments. 
Team leader Benzon stated that the NTSB team is ready to provide 
technical assistance if needed, however the focus is now on the 
recovery of the wreckage. 
 
 
¶5. (U) DATT reporting in septels provides additional technical 
details related to USNS Mary Sears participation in the search. 
 
Update on NOK of AmCit Passengers 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (U) Amcits Felice DuBois and sons Gregory and Brian Jackson, NOK 
of Amcit passengers Scott, Stephanie and Lindsey Jackson, departed 
Indonesia January 12 to return home to Bend, OR.  Ms. Jackson and 
sons arrived in Surabaya Jan. 8 and traveled to Bali January 11 to 
stay with friends there.  Jakarta, Surabaya and Bali Consular Agent 
provided logistical assistance in changing the family's airline 
tickets. Surabaya staff assisted the family in meeting with Scott 
Jackson's employer and in securing valuables from his Surabaya 
apartment. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Embassy DATT and US NTSB Accident Investigation team leader 
Robert Benzon spoke several times with Ms. DuBois to provide her 
updates on search efforts, including information from USAF analysis 
of the plane's radar. Ms. Dubois was provided Robert Benzon's cell 
number and is in contact with him. Ms. DuBois repeatedly expressed 
to conoffs her appreciation for the detailed information DATT and 
NTSB have provided to her.  Ms. DuBois avoided any contact with the 
press in Indonesia.  Ms. DuBois and sons told Surabaya conoffs 
January 9 that they did not wish to sign a Privacy Act Waiver, but 
will reconsider after having the opportunity to discuss this with 
their U.S. lawyer.  Jack Maher, family friend who had accompanied 
Ms. Jackson and her sons to Indonesia, left Surabaya for Singapore 
Jan. 11.  Jakarta CG assured Ms. DuBois in telcon January 12 that 
Mission Indonesia personnel will continue to update her daily by 
e-mail and phone as new information is learned. 
 
U.S. Forensics Assistance Available 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶8. (U) Should recovery of the plane and passenger remains be 
possible, Embassy ICITAP officers with forensic training are 
prepared to assist as needed with identification of the remains of 
the three American passengers, and to assist Indonesian disaster 
victim identification efforts if requested to do so by the GOI. 
Dental records for Scott, Stephanie and Lindsey Jackson are being 
 
held at Consulate Surabaya and will be hand carried to Makassar 
victim identification center if needed. 
 
 
 
PASCOE