09CAIRO1415
EGYPT: FOLLOW-UP TO THE CAIRO SPEECH
Wed Jul 22 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
VZCZCXRO3538
PP RUEHROV
DE RUEHEG #1415/01 2031401
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 221401Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3250
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 CAIRO 001415 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/ELA AND NEA/PPD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV KISL KIRF EG
SUBJECT:  EGYPT: FOLLOW-UP TO THE CAIRO SPEECH 
 
REFTEL: A. STATE 71325 B. CAIRO 1158 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (U) Even before Air Force One departed on June 4, Embassy Cairo 
began wide-ranging consultations with Egyptian civil-society, 
private sector, and government leaders focused on implementing 
President Obama's ideas.  Egyptians are proud and excited that the 
President chose Cairo as the speech venue and have been eager to 
talk about follow-up.  Embassy Cairo has reached out at all levels, 
from student leaders to the business community to senior government 
officials.  Perhaps more significantly, Egyptians have been equally 
forward leaning in reaching out to us.  The President's speech has 
energized the Egyptian-U.S. dialogue in a way few observers here 
remember.  The challenge will be to maintain that momentum as we 
look for practical ways to put the ideas into practice. 
 
Key points in our dialogue with Egyptians include: 
 
-- Civil society leaders indicated strong interest in collaboration 
on women's issues, freedom of expression, judicial independence, and 
access to education.  They urged quick implementation of follow-up 
activities. 
 
-- Business leaders and Egyptian government officials emphasized 
skills development.  We expect to take part in developing several 
public-private partnerships targeted at entrepreneurship and human 
capital development. 
 
-- The GoE response was immediate and constructive.  Ongoing efforts 
to re-focus USG economic assistance on improving education have 
picked up speed.  In the short-term, we expect to use existing ESF 
funds to expand scholarships for post-graduate programs in 
education, help implement a model science and technology high school 
program, and expand programming that provides job skills to young 
people. 
 
-- Dialogue between Muslims and the West will continue to be a 
cross-cutting issue in our engagement with Egyptians and a key theme 
of a series of upcoming thematic roundtables that reflect the goals 
the President outlined in the speech. 
 
-- The media widely covered post-speech engagement by the Ambassador 
and other mission members. 
 
¶2. (U) Our engagement here has also reflected Egypt's key regional 
role.  Egyptians are eager to be seen as regional leaders in 
embracing and responding to the President's call for dialogue, and 
are in a position to offer a substantial boost to a regional 
implementation process, either as a host to coordinated U.S. efforts 
or as a facilitator of well-integrated regional follow-on efforts. 
The Arab League, headquartered in Cairo, has already expressed an 
interest in working with the USG on several initiatives, including 
access to education and building entrepreneurship skills in the 
region.  Key interlocutors like the Speaker of the People's 
Assembly, Dr. Fathi Sorour, have suggested that the speech "opened a 
new page" in the Arab world's dialogue with the U.S. - an indication 
of the sense of optimism the speech has generated. 
End Summary. 
 
------------------- 
Engagement Thus Far 
------------------- 
¶3. (U) The overwhelmingly positive response to the speech was 
accompanied by a clear call for rapid implementation.  Our 
engagement has generated numerous ideas about how to move forward, 
both through the expansion of existing initiatives as well as new 
proposals in areas like education, supporting innovation through 
science and technology initiatives, and skills based approaches to 
economic empowerment.  We have already begun to discuss these 
initiatives with the GoE.  This cable outlines our engagement to 
date, according to the priorities set out by the speech, and 
includes specific proposals for scaling up successful programs that 
address these areas of engagement.  These program proposals follow 
earlier suggestions regarding follow-up to the President's speech in 
Egypt (Ref B), which emphasized improving education and access to 
opportunity.   The majority of proposals below (See paras 15 to 18) 
seek to address needs with existing FY2009 funds (with the option of 
expansion in FY2010). 
--------------------------- 
Human Development/Education 
--------------------------- 
¶4. (U) CIVIL SOCIETY ENGAGEMENT, ENGAGING YOUTH:  Immediately 
following the speech, the Embassy conducted three civil society 
roundtables: the first led by Secretary Clinton, in which 
participants like the National Council of Women expressed an 
interest in participating in the Secretary's "Civil Society 2.0" 
initiative, a second with White House advisor Dahlia Mogahed and a 
third with Under Secretary for Political Affairs William Burns.  In 
 
CAIRO 00001415  002 OF 004 
 
 
each, civil society leaders expressed anxiety about continued U.S. 
support for human rights and democracy promotion.  Participants 
urged continued focus on freedom of speech, strengthening judicial 
independence, and fighting corruption as key to an "infrastructure 
for democracy."  U/S Burns also met with a variety of GoE officials 
on a "Strategic Dialogue" initiative that will include a civil 
society component.  Public Affairs engaged the Embassy's educational 
partners, AMIDEAST, the Institute for International Education (IIE), 
Fulbright, and the Egyptian Association for Educational Resources 
(E-ERA), on the way forward.  All recommend an expansion of current 
USG-funded programs including scholarships and exchanges, training 
in English, IT, entrepreneurship skills and vocational education 
that targets disadvantaged youth and is linked to the job market. 
¶5. (U) Embassy Cairo also reached out to youth directly, raising the 
President's goals in a variety of academic settings.  The Ambassador 
participated in a Cairo University sponsored roundtable on the 
President's speech where participants discussed U.S. commitments to 
human rights, Middle East peace, and economic development.  The 
Ambassador also addressed two groups of students from joint 
U.S.-Egyptian advanced degree programs in business and law, 
emphasizing the importance of education and innovation. 
 
¶6. (U) GOVERNMENT-TO-GOVERNMENT CONSULTATIONS:  As part of ongoing 
engagement in an effort to re-orient U.S. assistance towards 
education, Minister of International Cooperation Fayza Aboul Naga 
underlined the GoE desire to focus on education, a point reflected 
also in a June 10 letter to Secretary Clinton from Egyptian Foreign 
Minister Ahmed Aboul Gheit, in which he requested support for 
capacity building in the education system.  Separately, the Minister 
of Education reaffirmed that President Obama's initiatives matched 
Egypt's efforts well and welcomed USG support in teacher training, 
increased scholarships for graduate study in education, and efforts 
to match student skills with employer's needs.  The Minister of 
Higher Education urged an increase in funding of the Fulbright 
program in Egypt, with a focus on science and technology, English 
partners assigned by field of study, and digital learning 
initiatives.  The Minister of Health urged support for additional 
scholarships to U.S. MBA programs. 
 
¶7. (U) INITIATIVES OUTSIDE OF CAIRO:  NGO representatives from 
Alexandria told the Ambassador that improvement of basic education 
is the cornerstone of progress in Egypt.  The American Center 
Alexandria is working with the group to establish an Alexandria NGO 
Association which would provide networking and training for its 
members, a volunteer clearinghouse, promote volunteerism, and 
establish a small grants program. 
 
------------------------------------- 
Entrepreneurship/Economic Empowerment 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶8. (U) CIVIL SOCIETY ENGAGEMENT, REACHING OUT TO BUSINESS:  Our 
engagement with the Egyptian Young Businessmen's Association has 
been particularly fruitful.  The group has committed to the creation 
of an implementation plan to include areas of mutual interest, like 
entrepreneurship development and renewable energy.  Speaking to the 
MEPI-funded Middle East and North Africa Business Women's Network, 
the Ambassador underlined our commitment to improve economic 
opportunity for women and girls in the region.  At an 
Ambassador-hosted economic roundtable, experts suggested that while 
Egypt's economic policy has made progress, commitment to reform and 
transparency issues remain problematic. 
 
¶9. (U) GOVERNMENT-TO-GOVERNMENT CONSULTATIONS:  We have exchanged 
ideas with the GoE on ways of increasing innovation and 
entrepreneurship, including discussions with the Minister of 
Investment, Minister of Environmental Affairs, Minister of Manpower 
and Migration and the Minister of Economy and Trade, with whom we 
discussed the strengthening of trade relations between the U.S. and 
Egypt.  At that meeting, Ministry officials noted specific 
industries that might benefit from U.S. technical assistance 
including vocational training and spurring entrepreneurs in vital 
and under-served fields.  The GoE already produces regular annual 
reports on Egyptian competitiveness, which are a good basis for a 
way forward.  We expect to see specific proposals from the Ministry. 
 The Ministry of Higher Education has ongoing projects on ways to 
provide youth with skills the labor market needs and promote 
entrepreneurship among students. 
 
¶10. (U) INITIATIVES OUTSIDE OF CAIRO:  Alexandria Business 
Association members have provided us with a list of several concrete 
proposals to implement the President's initiatives including: 
increased financing and technical assistance for women's SME 
projects; a human resources training center; and establishing a 
center of scientific excellence at the Mubarak Center for Scientific 
research in Alexandria. 
 
---------------------- 
Science and Technology 
---------------------- 
 
 
CAIRO 00001415  003 OF 004 
 
 
¶11. (U) CIVIL SOCIETY ENGAGEMENT, ACCESS TO INFORMATION:  Embassy 
Cairo has already begun to pursue ways to support translation of 
educational materials (textbooks, classroom materials, teacher 
guides) for electronic delivery.  We have engaged two Egyptian 
publishing houses, pioneers in electronic delivery of scientific and 
education materials in Egypt, to distribute Arabic-language 
instructional materials electronically.   The Embassy is also 
looking at opportunities to translate education web sites and create 
Arabic-language mirror sites, including consultations with the 
Egyptian Digital Library Consortium. 
 
¶12. (U) GOVERNMENT-TO-GOVERNMENT CONSULTATIONS:  Our engagement on 
innovation and science and technology has focused on the need to 
improve the quality of Egyptian graduates and to ensure that they 
play a significant role in economic development.  The Ministers of 
Education, Higher Education, Investment and Economy have highlighted 
to us science and technology scholarships and online learning 
strategies for improving science and technology skills.  Ideas on 
possible U.S. support for science and technology model high schools 
have been well received.  These state-of-the-art schools would also 
be defined as scientific centers of excellence and act as training 
sites for teachers from across the country.  We have engaged staff 
at both the Ministry of Science and Technology and the U.S.-Egypt 
Joint Science/Technology Program on expanding the Program's 
activities in an effort to focus ongoing cooperation on applying 
science to local problems.  This fund has supported over 400 
collaborative projects since its inception in 1995 including efforts 
to identify Egyptian scientific projects with commercial potential. 
The GoE also has an ongoing pilot program through the Ministry of 
Science and Technology which provides stipends, education, and 
career development to young researchers. 
 
---------------------- 
Interfaith Partnership 
---------------------- 
 
¶13. (U) Strengthening dialogue between Muslims and the West has been 
a key theme in all of our discussions with Egyptians.  New 
opportunities for follow-up dialogue are emerging and we have begun 
engaging directly on this issue with religious and cultural leaders. 
 The Acting DCM attended a conference of the Sufi orders in Cairo, 
during which a number of speakers praised the core message of the 
President's speech, even while criticizing other aspects of U.S. 
foreign policy. In response to our engagement, the Biblioteca 
Alexandrina has proposed establishing a Middle East branch office of 
the Council of Religions for Peace to organize interfaith 
discussions and implement interfaith projects for women, youth, and 
poverty eradication.  Ambassador has engaged cultural contacts in 
the film, media and publishing industries to discuss ways to use new 
media to include youth and intellectuals in a new dialogue that 
would include faith. 
 
---------------------- 
Programming Activities 
----------------------- 
¶14. (U) In addition to considering new programs, Embassy Cairo has 
been looking at ways to build on what is already working here, 
particularly in education and science and technology.  Many of the 
proposed new or expanded programs below can be funded through FY 
2009 ESF with the potential for increased funding in FY2010. 
Programming that specifically addresses engagement on inter-faith 
partnership will be integrated into each of these initiatives, 
either through targeting recruitment, to ensure representation of 
the full spectrum of religious belief in Egypt, or through 
incorporating conflict-management modules that might address a wide 
variety of social concerns. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Education and Science/Technology 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶15. (U) Current education activities funded through FY08-FY09 ESF 
include a variety of programs that target students and their 
teachers at all points along the educational continuum.  Basic 
education programming has improved learning achievements for 120,000 
girls, while separate literacy programs focus on providing basic 
skills to adults, with a special focus on women.  Our long-standing 
teacher training program strengthens the professional development 
system to ensure quality instruction. The Embassy supports 
educational and cultural exchange and institutional capacity 
building through several scholarship programs.  We also have a long 
standing cooperation with Egypt that supports advanced research in 
the sciences.  The U.S.-Egypt Joint Science/Technology Program has 
supported over 400 collaborative projects that apply science to real 
world problems, like water and soil quality, since 1995. 
 
¶16. (U) Proposed new education and science/technology programming: 
 
-- Centers of Excellence in Science and Math Secondary Schools: 
These model high schools will provide quality instruction, 
state-of-the-art labs, enhanced curriculum, and extra-curricular 
 
CAIRO 00001415  004 OF 004 
 
 
activities to the students.  Strategically located in three Egyptian 
governorates, the Centers of Excellence will be also be used as 
training sites for teachers, teacher supervisors, and other 
education professionals from across the country. 
 
-- Science/Technology Enrichment Education: Generate excitement and 
awareness for science education though low-cost programs that would 
include: after-school English language science programs, summer 
science camps, an Arabic-language scientific television program, and 
a nation-wide science fair with a prestigious award. 
 
-- Science/Technology Field Internships:  Work with public secondary 
school and university students to locate paid summer internships in 
their fields of interest at research institutes, universities, and 
private high-tech companies. 
 
-- Teaching Online:  Support translation of educational materials 
(textbooks, classroom materials, teacher guides) for electronic 
delivery. Partner with local publishers already delivering 
Arabic-language instructional materials electronically.  Create 
Arabic-language mirror sites to science education web sites such as 
Discovery and National Geographic.  Egypt could serve as a regional 
hub for these activities. 
 
-- Professional Academy for Teachers: Provide training and 
assistance to this new Ministry of Education institution that 
provides professional development, mentoring, and certification 
standards for Egyptian teachers. 
 
-- Expand Scholarships/Exchanges:  Significantly expand scholarship 
programs that provide English-language learning opportunities to 
under-privileged youth and university students. 
 
-------------------- 
Economic Development 
-------------------- 
 
¶17. (U) Current USG economic development activities funded through 
FY08-FY09 ESF are focused on efforts to match youth with 
opportunities in the labor market.  This includes providing 
technical assistance for Ag-Tech schools to ensure improved training 
and access to the latest best practices.  Internships provided 
through the program give students real work experience.  Through a 
public-private partnership with H.J. Heinz Company, another program 
works with thousands of small farmers to teach them how best to meet 
modern market demands.  Support for several pilot Youth Centers for 
Employability has been very successful, providing a job training 
program and facilitating local recruitment. 
 
¶18.  (U) Proposed new economic development programming: 
 
-- Bi-national Initiative for post-graduate masters and PhD degrees: 
 Increase the numbers of scholarships to U.S. institutions to fill 
critical skill gaps identified through input from the GOE, the 
private sector, and the National Competitiveness Council. 
 
-- University Career Development Centers:  Provide entrepreneurship 
and life-skills training, including internships and career fairs. 
 
 
-- Youth Centers for Employability: Upgrade existing centers and 
incorporate new training programs to include literacy, math, IT, 
English language programs, as well as problem solving and 
interviewing tactics. 
 
-- Entrepreneurial Growth Initiative:  Partner with business 
associations to support micro, small and medium businesses (with a 
focus on women entrepreneurs) gain access to venture capital and 
business development training (i.e. how to prepare business plans). 
Support GoE efforts to help firms navigate the registration, tax, 
and licensing requirements. 
 
-- Focus on Franchising:  Franchising is a means to create jobs and 
transfer key management and technical skills from franchisor to 
franchisee.  FCS will provide technical assistance on new franchise 
legislation, determine appropriate sectors for vocational-tech 
industries (i.e. plumbing, automotive, electrical) and provide 
technical assistance/counseling for new franchise opportunities.