09CANBERRA695
AUSAID RESPONSE TO POST-ELECTION ASSISTANCE IN
Thu Jul 30 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Canberra
VZCZCXRO9826 
PP RUEHPT 
DE RUEHBY #0695/01 2110552 
ZNR UUUUU ZZH 
P 300552Z JUL 09 
FM AMEMBASSY CANBERRA 
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1840 
INFO RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD PRIORITY 1492 
RUEHBUL/AMEMBASSY KABUL PRIORITY 0291 
RUEHBN/AMCONSUL MELBOURNE 6553 
RUEHPT/AMCONSUL PERTH 4818 
RUEHDN/AMCONSUL SYDNEY 4797UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CANBERRA 000695 
 
SIPDIS 
 
S/SRAP-KAREN HANRAHAN; SCA/A-ARIELLA VIEHE; EUR/PRM-AARON 
COPE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AF AS EAID MARR MOPS PREL
SUBJECT: AUSAID RESPONSE TO POST-ELECTION ASSISTANCE IN 
AFGHANISTAN 
 
REF: (A) CANBERRA 00674 (B) STATE 74362 
 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY: AUSAID officials have provided further 
comment in response to points raised on July 20 regarding 
assisting Afghanistan following the August presidential 
election. They have also supplied additional information 
detailing their approach to development assistance in 
Afghanistan. End Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) AUSTRALIAN COMMENT ON POST-ELECTION ASSISTANCE: Begin 
Text: 
 
Australia welcomes the forward-looking objectives of the 
non-paper. We see value in assessing the performance and 
direction of development assistance in Afghanistan in order 
to better target and coordinate donor support. 
 
We would be grateful for any further information on the 
proposed Civilian Review. We remain keen to engage with the 
US in the development of other sector strategies and to 
discuss how best to develop the capacity of the Government of 
Afghanistan to deliver services to its population. 
 
Australia agrees that aligning program planning and 
implementation with Afghan government priorities is vital. 
Australia has received positive feedback from the Afghan 
government when we have provided civilian assistance that has 
responded to needs identified by the relevant Ministries. 
 
In the agriculture sector, we are considering support to 
Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock Change 
Management program and are working with the Ministry to 
provide civilian assistance to help donor coordination, 
dry-land farming and possibly small-scale irrigation. 
 
Australia is increasing its focus on sub-national governance 
and capacity building, particularly in Oruzgan Province and 
is working with the Afghan government and other stakeholders 
on improving service delivery, rural development and 
livelihoods. 
 
We would like to have further discussions with the United 
States on how donors and in particular, RC South donors can 
more effectively work together to assist the Afghan 
Government to deliver services at the provincial and district 
levels. 
 
We also look forward to close cooperation with the United 
States to identify options for expanding implementation of 
the National Solidarity Program in conflict affected areas 
and to improve the performance of other key national programs 
in the South. End Text 
 
 
¶3. (U) AUSTRALIAN APPROACHES TO DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE IN 
AFGHANISTAN: Begin Text 
 
WORKING AT THE PROVINCIAL AND NATIONAL LEVEL 
 
Australia's concurrent work at both the national and 
provincial levels recognizes the reality that Afghanistan is 
a unitary state and it is the national line agencies that are 
responsible for service delivery. Achieving gains in the 
provinces requires strengthening linkages to the national 
level. Australia will provide support, in the form of expert 
advisers, to key ministries including the Ministries of Rural 
Reconstruction and Development, Agriculture, Health and 
Education, through its Development Assistance Facility for 
Afghanistan (DAF A). Australia also supports the capacity 
building of key ministries and delivery of services through 
the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund. These efforts will 
be underpinned by an increasing focus on strengthening the 
capacity of government at the provincial level, a commitment 
made by our Prime Minister in April 2009. For example, we are 
providing capacity building support to the Oruzgan 
directorate of the Ministry of Energy and Water. In Oruzgan 
Australia works through trusted partners such as the World 
Bank and international and local NGOs and contractors that 
can access conflict affected areas. 
 
PARTNER-LED DEVELOPMENT 
 
Our work at provincial and national levels is underpinned by 
the emphasis Australia places on partner-led development. 
Australia places a priority on close consultation with the 
Afghan government at both the national level and with 
provincial government in Oruzgan. Australia works to 
priorities identified by the Afghan government. For example, 
we are working to respond to the Ministry of Agriculture's 
request to identify and support advisors for the agriculture 
sector. Strengthening government planning, coordination and 
budgeting processes also helps support the Afghan 
government's capacity to lead the donor community. 
Australia's engagement with the Afghan government is led by 
two Development Advisers in Oruzgan and a Counselor in Kabul 
(deployment date to be confirmed). Australia also has three 
contracted in-country staff who administer our bilateral 
assistance facility (DAF A) as well as a locally engaged 
staff member. 
 
DONOR COORDINATION 

Australia also places a priority on coordination with other 
donors nationally and in the south. Australia is also working 
with and through UNAMA to provide an agriculture expert to 
undertake a donor coordination role in the Ministry of 
Agriculture. Australia is also in discussions with the World 
Bank and other donors to develop approaches for more 
effective delivery of services at the provincial and 
districts level in the south and east through the National 
Solidarity Program. Our new Counselor in Kabul will play an 
important role in coordinating Australian efforts with other 
donors. End Text 
 
CLUNE