09CHENGDU122
SOUTHWEST CHINA: ENERGY EFFICIENCY UP AS OFFICIALS EMPHASIZE
Thu Jul 09 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Chengdu
VZCZCXRO6370
RR RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHCN #0122/01 1900910
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 090910Z JUL 09
FM AMCONSUL CHENGDU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3295
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHINGTON DC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEAEPA/EPA WASHINGTON DC
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 3970UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CHENGDU 000122 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/CM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG ECON CH
SUBJECT: SOUTHWEST CHINA: ENERGY EFFICIENCY UP AS OFFICIALS EMPHASIZE 
FAMILIAR TACTICS 
 
CHENGDU 00000122  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. (U) This cable contains sensitive but unclassified 
information - not for distribution on the Internet. 
 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) Summary:  Industrial energy efficiency progress was 
highlighted in a recent government-sponsored conference held in 
Chengdu, which drew little attention despite government emphasis 
on publicizing the importance of energy efficiency.  Consulate 
local contacts remarked that these conferences are disconnected 
from reality, and they have little interest in attending them. 
That said, Chinese government statistics released in late June 
show that provinces and municipalities in the Southwest are 
becoming more energy efficient, although the most substantial 
indicators of improvement come from a narrow statistical 
definition of industrial value added production.  End Summary. 
 
 
 
Energy Efficiency through Structural Adjustment and Technology 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------------- 
 
 
 
¶3. (U) More than 130 guests from around China attended the 2009 
China Industrial Energy Efficiency Conference held in Chengdu 
from June 30 - July 1, according to an employee with the Center 
for Industrial Efficiency that helped organize the event. 
Officials from Beijing, Shanghai, Sichuan and other provinces 
filled the schedule on the first day of the conference.  On the 
second day, representatives from industry associations including 
coal, cement, oil and gas, and nonferrous metals each gave short 
presentations.  In his opening speech, Wang Jianming, Deputy 
Director of Sichuan's Provincial Economic Commission emphasized 
promoting energy-saving technology, particularly in targeted 
industrial sectors. 
 
 
 
¶4. (U) Wang highlighted long-standing themes in China's energy 
efficiency drive including eliminating small, inefficient 
production and improving legal and administrative oversight of 
industry.  Sichuan seeks to become more energy efficient by 
increasing the value-added component of manufacturing and 
stream-lining supply chains.  This implies a structural shift in 
Sichuan's economy - which Wang raised separately - to greater 
secondary and tertiary production.  A vice president from the 
China Cement Association said that the cement industry was 
saving energy by increasing production of a new kind of concrete 
and eliminating less energy efficient cement production.  A 
deputy secretary from China's Coal Processing and Utilization 
Association similarly emphasized industrial efficiency and 
technological advances to reduce energy consumption. 
 
 
 
Media Coverage Low, Some Contacts Question Value 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) Local media are often invited to attend events and 
encouraged to report on topics the provincial government seeks 
to publicize, but the days following the conference saw very few 
such stories.  Despite Wang's call to increase publicity around 
energy saving, a Sichuan government-affiliated website was the 
only local outlet with significant information on the 
conference.  Even a portal website for energy-related 
information (www.China5e.com) did not appear to have any stories 
on the event.  The Center for Industrial Energy Efficiency ran 
an article on the Chinese language portion of their website, and 
posted a short article on the English language portion of the 
site. 
 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) Some of Congenoff's local contacts are skeptical about 
the value of participating in government-sponsored conferences 
like this one.  One  environmental NGO contact recently told 
Congenoff that government-sponsored conferences focus on things 
officials care about (guan shi), but he is more focused on 
reality (shi shi).  He implied that is why he would not attend a 
conference like this one on energy efficiency.  A separate 
contact with an academic background has lamented that during 
 
CHENGDU 00000122  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
formal events, local officials often convey only the official 
government line. 
 
 
 
New Statistics Show Energy Efficiency Gains 
 
------------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) Recently released Chinese government energy efficiency 
figures for calendar year 2008 show that while Southwest China's 
provinces and municipalities are becoming more energy efficient, 
they still lag behind the more prosperous coastal 
municipalities.  Chongqing municipality, Guizhou Province, 
Yunnan Province, and Sichuan Province all showed energy 
reductions per unit of GDP of between about 3.5 - 6 percent 
compared to the previous year.  Data for the Tibetan Autonomous 
Region was excluded from the national report.  Since the 
beginning of the 11th Five-Year Program (FYP) in 2005, the three 
provinces and one municipality have recorded 9.7 - 11.5 percent 
declines.  This is only about half of the reduction that China 
targeted nationally during the FYP, however.  Guizhou Province 
is the least energy efficient province in China, according to 
the new report, using roughly 4 times more energy than does 
Beijing municipality to generate a unit of GDP.  Chongqing, 
Sichuan, and Yunnan, while significantly more efficient than 
Guizhou, all rank in the bottom half of the list. 
 
 
 
¶8. (SBU) Southwest China's gains in energy efficiency, when 
measured relative to industrial value added production (IVA), 
were substantially greater than those measured relative to GDP. 
Sichuan's efficiency on an IVA basis showed a 5.6 percent 
decline last year compared to 2007, and Chongqing showed a 12.6 
percent reduction during the same period.  Official figures for 
Southwest China's show 20 - 30 percent declines in energy 
consumption per unit of IVA since the start of the FYP. 
 
 
 
Comment: Statistician Can't Explain Troubling Inconsistency 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
 
 
¶9. (SBU) Congenoff found the rather modest declines in energy 
consumption per unit of GDP surprising given the 30 percent 
decline in Sichuan's energy consumption as a portion of IVA. 
Industry in Sichuan accounted for 71-75 percent of energy 
consumption from 2005 - 2007, according to official government 
statistics.  However, when questioned about the large difference 
between the figures, an official at the Sichuan Bureau of 
Statistics (SBS) explained only by saying that IVA did not 
include all secondary production, which is mining, 
manufacturing, power generation, and construction.  Official 
statistics show that IVA as the official defined it, accounted 
for about 34-37 percent of provincial GDP from 2005-2007, but 
still does not seem to explain the large disparity between IVA 
efficiency and overall efficiency.  The official at SBS during a 
follow up phone call was unable to explain this statistical 
inconsistency - how this murkily defined IVA exceeded the 20 
percent reduction in the FYP target but energy efficiency 
relative to GDP did not. 
BOUGHNER