09HALIFAX43
ATLANTIC CANADA ENERGY UPDATE: NEW BRUNSWICK AND
Tue Jul 07 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Halifax
VZCZCXRO5018
RR RUEHGA RUEHMT RUEHQU RUEHVC
DE RUEHHA #0043/01 1881242
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 071242Z JUL 09
FM AMCONSUL HALIFAX
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1408
RUEHOT/AMEMBASSY OTTAWA 0620
INFO RUCNCAN/ALL CANADIAN POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHHA/AMCONSUL HALIFAX 1500UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 HALIFAX 000043 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAN, EB/ESC/ISC 
USDOE FOR IA (DEUTSCH) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EPET ENRG ECON PGOV CA
SUBJECT: ATLANTIC CANADA ENERGY UPDATE: NEW BRUNSWICK AND 
NEWFOUNDLAND IN THE SPOTLIGHT 
 
REF: HALIFAX 0032 AND PREVIOUS 
 
HALIFAX 00000043  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
-------- 
SUMMARY: 
-------- 
 
¶1.  Irving Oil and Repsol made history on June 27 when their 
Canaport LNG terminal in Saint John, NB, received Canada's first 
shipment of LNG.  In Newfoundland-Labrador, Premier Williams 
announced he had secured a Memorandum of Understanding to begin 
an extension of the offshore Hibernia oil field and energy 
companies are looking at conducting exploratory drilling 
offshore Labrador and the Laurentian Basin.  In New Brunswick, 
the provincial energy minister is hoping Maine state legislators 
endorse the energy corridor concept between the two 
jurisdictions.  Meanwhile, although the continuing cost of 
buying replacement power to compensate for the offline Point 
Lepreau nuclear station is presenting some fiscal challenges for 
the province, the minister has no worries over the impact that 
the sale of the federally-owned Atomic Energy Corporation 
Limited might have on the province's nuclear power industry. 
Finally, New Brunswick and Quebec will be looking at the 
possibility of expanding their energy relationship.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
Canaport LNG Terminal Receives First Shipment of Gas 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶2. On June 27 Canaport LNG Ltd. of Saint John, New Brunswick, 
marked a milestone when it received its first shipment of 
liquefied natural gas, the first time a tanker has delivered LNG 
in Canada for regasification.  Canaport is owned by Irving Oil 
of Saint John (25%) and Repsol of Spain (75%). Repsol, as the 
chief operator of the project, provided the gas and the tanker. 
The facility is currently undergoing the startup process and 
once completed in early July, will start shipping natural gas to 
customers primarily in New England.  The initial send-out 
capacity for the facility is one billion cubic feet of natural 
gas per day.  An official ribbon-cutting ceremony for the 
terminal is scheduled to take place in September. 
 
------------------------------------- 
Hibernia Extension Project to Proceed 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. Newfoundland-Labrador Premier Danny Williams announced on 
June 16 that his government had signed a Memorandum of 
Understanding with the owners of the Hibernia Offshore Project 
to develop the Hibernia South Extension.  The province will take 
a 10 percent equity stake in the project, which could result in 
an estimated $C10 billion in revenue once the estimated 223 
million barrels of recoverable oil is produced.  To date, the 
original Hibernia field has produced 630 million barrels of oil, 
which have netted revenues of $C1.9 billion for the province. 
Hibernia was the first project in the province's offshore, 
starting up in 1997. It is administered by the Hibernia 
Management and Development Co. Ltd., which includes ExxonMobil 
(33.125%), Chevron Canada (26.875%), Petro-Canada (20%), the 
federal government (8.9%), Murphy Oil (6.5%) and StatoilHydro 
(5%).  Neither the federal government nor Murphy Oil has a stake 
in the Hibernia South development. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
Newfoundland-Labrador Energy Corporation Off and Running 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
¶4. Nalcor Corporation, the GoN-L's energy corporation, wrapped 
up its first annual general meeting in St. John's on June 26. 
Established by the provincial government in 2007, the new 
corporation got underway in earnest in late 2008 when it took 
over management of the existing hydro development at Churchill 
Falls Labrador, the proposed Lower Churchill Falls project, the 
Bull Arm heavy industrial fabrication site, 
Newfoundland-Labrador Hydro and the province's equity stakes in 
offshore oil projects including the newly-announced Hibernia 
South extension.  According to documents presented at the 
meeting, the province has made a total investment of $C160 
million in these offshore interests:  White Rose, where it has a 
4.9% share, Hebron at 4.9% and Hibernia South where the province 
has 10%.  In terms of future endeavors, Nalcor executives said 
the corporation is concentrating on developing the Lower 
Churchill project, as well as more investments in new oil and 
gas projects and wind energy. 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
New Exploration Activity Offshore Newfoundland-Labrador 
 
HALIFAX 00000043  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
¶5. Husky Energy of Calgary and Chevron Canada are considering 
exploring the frontier area of the Labrador offshore.  In 2008 
the two companies teamed up to buy exploration licenses and made 
commitments to invest $C170 million in exploration.  The area is 
not a new one to offshore explorers.  During the late 1970s and 
early 1980s, energy companies drilled 37 wells in the area, with 
promising results for natural gas.  However, at that time oil 
was the preferred target, and development of the gas was put on 
hold.  Now, with the increasing demand for natural gas and new 
technology for drilling in harsh climates, the industry is 
taking another look at the area.  In other exploration news, 
ConocoPhillips Canada is hoping to sub-lease a rig to drill its 
first well in the Laurentian Basin off the south coast of 
Newfoundland.  The Basin lies between Newfoundland-Labrador and 
Nova Scotia and could contain as much as 8-9 trillion cubic feet 
of natural gas, and 700 million barrels of oil. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
NB Energy Min Comments on the NB-Maine Energy Corridor 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶6.  In a recent trip to New Brunswick, Consul General discussed 
the energy corridor proposal with provincial Energy Minister 
Jack Keir.  NB Premier Shawn Graham and Maine Governor John 
Baldacci announced in March that the two jurisdictions would be 
exploring development of what they called the northeast energy 
corridor which would focus on delivery of energy supplies 
through New Brunswick and on to Maine.  Since then, the idea has 
faced some opposition in Maine from those who believe that the 
corridor concept could prevent development of renewable energy 
projects in Maine.  Others oppose the idea on the grounds that 
the State should not be entering into an agreement with the 
Province of New Brunswick due to Canada's opposition to the 
proposed LNG terminals on the Maine shores of Passamaquoddy Bay. 
 In acknowledging these concerns, Keir said he realized that the 
Maine State Legislature, which is reviewing the proposal, must 
determine if this project is in the best interest of the 
citizens of Maine. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
Lepreau Refit Presents Fiscal "Challenges" to GoNB 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶7.  Bond rating agencies have said the C$1.4 billion 
refurbishment project currently underway at New Brunswick's 
Point Lepreau Nuclear generation station is exposing the 
government to greater financial risk.  Moody's Investor Services 
has cautioned that, with the project now some five to six months 
behind schedule, the C$1 million cost per day to purchase 
replacement power is causing the province some "challenges." 
Provincial energy minister Jack Keir told the Consul General in 
early June that most of the complex parts of the project have 
been completed and he anticipates the work should now stay on 
schedule.  The province got some good news at the end of June 
when a pair of new turbine rotors arrived at the plant, some 
eight months after they accidentally toppled into Saint John 
harbor.  The 107-metric ton turbine rotors are designed to spin 
faster than the original rotors, an improvement which officials 
estimate could generate an additional C$15 million worth of 
power each year. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
AECL Sale:  No Adverse Effect for New Brunswick 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶8.  NB Energy Minister Keir said the GoC's decision to sell 
Atomic Energy of Canada Limited's nuclear reactor business 
should not jeopardize the ongoing refurbishment of Point 
Lepreau. In fact, the minister described the announcement of the 
sale as good news since he believes the business would benefit 
from more stable sources of funding from the private sector. 
Keir is also confident that the change would not affect possible 
plans to build a second reactor at the Lepreau site.  The 
minister reaffirmed the government's commitment to the potential 
construction of the new project.  However, unlike the existing 
Lepreau station, neither the provincial government nor the 
provincially-owned NB Power would be involved in the 
construction of the project.  Rather, it would be built by Team 
Candu, a consortium made up of AECL and private sector 
engineering firms.  At present, Team Candu is still negotiating 
with would-be investors over complicated financial and legal 
arrangements that so far have not resulted in a firm commitment 
to proceed with the project. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
 
HALIFAX 00000043  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
New Brunswick and Quebec Launch Power Talks 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶9.  The New Brunswick Government is entering into discussions 
with the Province of Quebec with a view to developing 
partnerships in the energy sector.  Officials from the two 
provinces, as well as representatives of NB Power and Hydro 
Quebec will be exploring opportunities for cooperation, 
particularly in the areas of accessibility, supply, 
transmission, market opportunities, and greenhouse-gas 
reduction.  New Brunswick is already buying replacement power 
from Quebec to help offset the temporary shutdown of the Point 
Lepreau nuclear generation station, but the two provinces want 
to see if they can find other ways to cooperate.  New Brunswick 
envisages having greater access to cheaper Quebec power while 
Quebec could use New Brunswick's transmission lines to send more 
power into New England. 
FOSTER