09PANAMA549
PANAMA: FIRST IMPRESSIONS OF A FRACTIOUS GOVERNMENT
Thu Jul 09 00:00:00 +0200 2009
SECRET//NOFORN
Embassy Panama
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHZP #0549/01 1902135
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
R 092135Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY PANAMA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3571
INFO RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA 2823
RUEHGT/AMEMBASSY GUATEMALA 0789
RUEHMU/AMEMBASSY MANAGUA 0640
RUEHME/AMEMBASSY MEXICO 3837
RUEHSJ/AMEMBASSY SAN JOSE 2030
RUEHSN/AMEMBASSY SAN SALVADOR 1552
RUEHTG/AMEMBASSY TEGUCIGALPA 0430
RHMFISS/COMDT COGARD WASHINGTON DC
RHMFISS/DIRJIATF SOUTH
RHMFISS/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHDC
RHMFISS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDCS E C R E T PANAMA 000549 
 
NOFORN 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/08/2019 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PM
SUBJECT: PANAMA: FIRST IMPRESSIONS OF A FRACTIOUS GOVERNMENT 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Barbara J. Stephenson for 
reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  (S//NF) After one week of the new Martinelli government, 
Post has some initial impressions. The government is a 
fractious combination of strong personalities with widely 
differing agendas. There are signs that some newly appointed 
officials have questionable backgrounds that indicate that 
corruption may be a serious problem in the new government, 
while others seem genuinely interested in good governance. It 
is not clear where President Martinelli falls on this scale, 
though there are some indications that it is not where we 
would like. There are also signs that a broad political 
reorganization may be underway in Panama. The Revolutionary 
Democratic Party (PRD) is immersed in a crisis, while one of 
its more visible members has compared Martinelli to Omar 
Torrijos. This has left the new government virtually 
unopposed for the moment. Martinelli has also started his 
administration with a number of very popular moves that have 
given him an excellent public image, and early credibility 
for keeping his campaign promises. Post believes that the 
strong personalist bent of Martinelli, the weakness of his 
government's internal coherence, and the early signs of 
corruption make the strengthening of Panama's democratic 
institutions an important priority. We are working with 
international organizations such as the World Bank to 
implement such a program. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Factions in the Alliance for Change 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (S//NF) Martinelli's alliance is composed of four parties: 
his small Democratic Change Party (CD); the Panamanista Party 
(which is the second largest party in the country, and was 
the dominant opposition party up until Martinelli's ascent); 
the small Patriotic Union Party (UP); and the National 
Liberal Movement (MOLIRENA). Minister of the Presidency Jimmy 
Papadimitriu, Martinelli's campaign manager and the one most 
responsible for his victory, is the main representative of 
the small group of Martinelli loyalists who make up the CD 
group in the government.  Papadimitriu has created a new 
organizational structure withi the Ministry of the 
Presidency composed of "coordinators" for social, economic, 
political, security and youth policies. When asked what the 
significance of these bodies was, Papadimitriu told PolOff 
July 3, "soon anyone who wants to get something done will see 
who has the power, and where they have to come," referring to 
ministers within the established structure of the government. 
Supreme Court Magistrate Adan Arjona told PolOff July 7 that 
it was laughable to suggest that ministers would coordinate 
their offices through Papadimitriu. He said that while 
Papadimitriu played an important role keeping Martinelli 
focused, so was very important to the efficient functioning 
of the government, he did not have the political power to 
control the other powerful ministers within the government. 
He added that Papadimitriu was starting to create opposition 
within the coalition by trying to grab too much power. He 
noted a recent editorial in the Panama American newspaper 
questioning his support for Rogelio Alba's designation as 
governor of the Kuna Yala Comarca despite the numerous 
criminal investigations against Alba (Note: Alba was forced 
to step aside, after Papadimitriu publically defended him. 
End Note.), and the naming of his sister as Consul in Greece. 
Arjona quoted the article as saying, "two strikes, careful 
you don't strike out." Arjona said the paper was tied to the 
Panamanista Party, and the editorial might represent the 
beginning of a campaign against him. Post has also noticed 
that several questionable designations in the government 
appear to be linked to Papadimitriu (see para 5). 
 
¶3. (S//NF)  The Panamanistas are represented by the powerful 
Minister of Economy and Finance Alberto Vallarino, and by 
Vice President and Foreign Minister Juan Carlos Varela. These 
two men ran against each other in the Panamanista Party 
presidential primary, which Varela won. They continue to be 
rivals for influence within the party, and both men are 
likely to compete for the Panamanista presidential nomination 
in 2013. While both men are interested in using the 
government to strengthen their faction of the Panamanista 
Party, they are both believed to be interested in good 
governance, and building up a positive public image and 
reputation that they can then use as a base for a future 
political campaign. Both are wealthy businessmen. However, 
Post believes that Vallarino in particular is very keen to 
weaken Varela's position, and that his statements against 
signing a TIEA with the U.S. on his recent trip to Washington 
should be interpreted as an attempt to undermine Varela, who 
had publicly promised to do so earlier. Both of these men 
will be key to the Embassy's future engagement with the GOP, 
aimed at strengthening Panama's institutions. 
 
¶4. (S//NF)  The fourth pole of power is Jose Raul Mulino of 
UP, who has been named as Minister of Government and Justice, 
which nominally controls all the security forces in Panama. 
In reality the service chiefs report directly to the 
President on most important matters, as was made clear by 
incoming Panamanian National Police (PNP) Director Gustavo 
Perez during the change of command ceremony on July 2 when he 
promised, in his public comments, to coordinate all his 
actions, "with the President . . . and the Minster of 
Government and Justice." Mulino is reportedly not one of 
Martinelli's favorites. Arjona described him as "arrogant, 
corrupt and stupid." Arjona said that Mulino conned a 
Canadian businessman out of $600,000 six months ago by 
offering to sell him a piece of beach front property, but 
actually selling him the piece of land behind it. The case is 
now in the courts, and Arjona says Martinelli has the 
documentation and plans to use it to get rid of Mulino within 
the next six months. Mulino was given the job because Anibal 
Galindo, also from UP, declined it and Mulino, a former 
foreign minister, was the only other figure in UP with enough 
stature to take the job. So far Mulino has been most marked 
by his enthusiasm for arresting Honduran President Zelaya 
during the inauguration, after he received news that the 
Honduran de facto government had requested an international 
arrest warrant. 
 
----------- 
Corruption? 
----------- 
 
¶5.  (S//NF)  Post has information that several of the second 
tier figures in the new government have questionable 
backgrounds. DEA has information that the new Director of the 
Panamanian Tourism Authority, Salamon Shamah, may be linked 
to drug trafficking. Shamah, who developed much of the 
effective messaging Papadimitriu used during Martinelli's 
campaign, is close to Papadimitriu; Shamah also played a key 
role in organizing Martinelli's inaugeration events. DEA also 
has negative information on Irving Centeno, who is the new 
Director of Security at Tocumen International Airport, and 
may be involved with the gangs that rob merchants carrying 
cash from the airport to the Colon Free Trade Zone. The new 
Anti-Corruption Czar, Martinelli's first cousin Fernando 
Nunez Fabregas, is talking about getting tough on corruption. 
However, Arjona described Nunez as an, "amoral blackmailer" 
with close ties to corrupt Supreme Court Magistrate Winston 
Spadafora (septel). Angelica Maytin of the Panamanian chapter 
of Transparency International told PolOff July 3 that Nunez's 
real intention was to target companies and individuals with 
corruption probes in order to blackmail them. All of the 
government officials who have drawn early attention as 
potentially problematic are members of CD, or personally 
close to Papadimitriu or Martinelli himself. 
 
¶6.  (S//NF) One of the first targets of the Martinelli 
government has been businessman Jean Figali. Figali runs a 
convention center on land conceded from the government of 
Panama on the Amador Causeway. He is a controversial figure 
in Panama due to accusations that he has illegally filled in 
part of the Bay of Panama for a marina, and for his very 
public disputes with the government. He generally suffers 
from a very poor reputation, and is a frequent target of the 
newspapers. Martinelli has threatened to seize Figali's 
concession because he has failed to pay taxes, and because of 
the illegal landfill. Arjona said there was a "very strong 
rumor" in the business community that Martinelli's real 
intention was to seize the concession from Figali, and then 
re-adjudicate it to companies associated with himself and 
Vallarino. This same accusation has been made publicly on 
local radio. 
 
¶7.  (S//NF)  Arjona said that Martinelli has also been 
meeting with suspected money launderer and Colon Free Trade 
Zone businessman Abdel Waked, to discuss seizing the 
concession for the duty free stores in Tocumen Airport from 
Motta International, based in the Colon Free Trade Zone. 
Asked why a man as rich as Martinelli would engage in such 
behavior, Arjona said that Martinelli was not a very rational 
person, and had always expanded his empire through 
corruption, so his actions were not out of character. 
 
--------------------- 
But It's Playing Well 
--------------------- 
 
¶8.  (S//NF)  While the internal disputes and poor judgment 
have disturbed some insiders, publicly the administration is 
playing very well. On July 7, Martinelli, Vallarino, Mulino 
and Perez personally seized the Figali landfill, with 
Martinelli himself helping rip down a wall. The action played 
very well in the papers as a sign that the powerful were not 
going to be allowed to put their interests over those of the 
public good. The government is also on the popular side of 
several other initiatives, including lowering the age of 
criminal responsibility and trying youthful offenders as 
adults. At his first cabinet meeting, an open air meeting 
held in the middle of a slum, Martinelli gave Mulino 30 days 
to come up with a proposed reform of the law on adolescent 
offenders. Varela's brother Jose Luis, the newly elected 
president of the National Assembly, has also caught the 
public mood by cutting his salary, and proposing rules to 
fine deputies their pay if they don't show up for sessions. 
New Minister of Education Lucy Molinar, linked to Varela, is 
also getting high marks for denouncing corruption, and 
putting key jobs up for examination, rather than giving them 
to incompetent political cronies. 
 
----------------------- 
New Political Paradigm? 
----------------------- 
 
¶9.  (S//NF)  Martinelli's strong start is contrasted to the 
implosion of the Revolutionary Democratic Party (PRD) 
following Balbina Herrera's resounding loss to Martinelli. On 
June 28, the National Directorate of the PRD voted to cut 
short the term of the present Executive Council, due to end 
in 2013, and renew the body in March 2010. The decision 
represented a bargain between the present leadership of 
Martin Torrijos, and those leading a bitter revolt against 
his leadership, led by Vice Presidential candidate Juan 
Carlos Navarro and former president Ernesto Perez Balladares. 
The decision gives Navarro/Perez Balladares their opportunity 
to take control of the party from Torrijos, but also gives 
Torrijos time for the political situation to calm down so he 
can rally his still considerable power within the party. PRD 
Vice President Elias Castillo told PolOff July 3 that the 
situation of the PRD is critical, and the next eight months 
will be key in deciding if the party survives or splits. 
Political analyst and PRD member Renato Peireira agreed that 
the situation was serious, and said that while he hoped 
Torrijos would maintain control, he was worried that the 
party was in real danger of disintegrating under the pressure 
of internal division. 
 
¶10.  (S//NF)  The result is that the Martinelli government 
faces no organized political opposition at this time. The GOP 
Ambassador to Peru and prolific pro-PRD columnist Roberto 
Diaz Herrera wrote an opinion piece on July 5 comparing 
Martinelli to former Panamanian strong man and PRD founder 
Omar Torrijos due to his "caudillo" style as well as his 
concern for the poor and his willingness to break through the 
bureaucracy of government to deliver results. With many PRD 
members disoriented and de-motivated, Martinelli has an 
opportunity to redraw the political map of Panama by 
refocusing the populist impulses of the Panamanian people 
from the populist legacies of the PRD and the Panamanista 
Parties onto himself as a flesh and blood populist leader. 
The key to his success will be whether he supports those 
within his government who are interested in public service 
and bringing real positive change to Panama, or if he gets 
lost in the less noble instincts he and other members of his 
government share. 
 
----------------------------- 
It's the Institutions, Stupid 
----------------------------- 
 
¶11.  (S//NF)  Martinelli,s personalist leadership style 
seems almost certain to spell trouble for Panama,s 
democratic institutions, which are already under strain from 
a variety of sources, including increasing criminal activity. 
 Post has agreed to a request from the local World Bank 
representative to join forces to encourage adoption of a 
variety of transparency measures and other best practices 
aimed directly at shoring up institutions.  Our approach is 
to work with the powerful Minister of Economy and Finance 
(MEF), who is required by a provision in the recent law 
raising the debt ceiling to produce a five-year strategic 
plan.  At dinner June 8, Minister Vallarino, who is not 
particularly favorably disposed to Americans, told the 
Ambassador he welcomed close collaboration in part because he 
fears institutions could indeed suffer and take Panama down 
the path of other faltering Central American nations.  He 
outlined his goal to leave Panama on track to become the 
Singapore of the western hemisphere, with strong democratic 
institutions.   Our intent is to align the World Bank,s 
country partnership strategy (which covers $150 million in 
lending) and our own modest Merida strategic plan (which we 
are due to develop with the Ministry of Economy and Finance 
before December) with the five-year MEF plan to create a set 
of tools for the government, and for the media and civil 
society to use to provide oversight of the government.  Post 
will be taking a close look at judicial corruption and 
independence, ways to strengthen the media and police, and 
ways to ensure accountable and transparent budget and 
expenditure systems.  We hope to use our clout in Panama (our 
83% approval rating stems in part from admiration for a 
"gringo" way of doing business that highlights transparency 
and accountability) to help the Martinelli governmen deliver 
the positive change Panamanians voted for. 
STEPHENSON