06BASRAH6
LOCAL AUTHORITIES CONFIRM NO CASES OF H5N1 STRAIN OF AVIAN
Tue Jan 24 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
REO Basrah
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS BASRAH 000006 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TBIO PGOV ECON SOCI AMED AMGT IZ
SUBJECT: LOCAL AUTHORITIES CONFIRM NO CASES OF H5N1 STRAIN OF AVIAN 
FLU IN BASRAH 
 
1)  (U)  Summary:  Recent media reports and press releases from 
Governor Mohammed Mosabeh Mohammed Al Wa'ili's office state that 
the various numbers of people have contracted Avian flu are 
inaccurate. Discussions with local Iraqi medical authorities 
confirm that no cases of H5N1 have been found in Basrah. End 
Summary 
 
2)  (U)  Stories about avian flu in Basrah began to surface on 
January 21. These were followed by a statement from Governor 
Mohammed Mosabeh Mohammed Al Wa'ili office claiming that five 
people in Basrah were infected with the virus. (Note: This 
statement was later retracted. The governor has since sent out 
three press releases stating that no H5N1 bird flu has been 
found in the province. End Note.) 
 
3)  (U)  REO staff has been in contact with government and 
medical authorities regarding this issue. All have stated that 
there are no known cases of H5N1 in Basrah. Dr. Mushtak Abdul 
Mahdi, the head of Basra Veterinary Laboratories stated that 
they have found a small number of cases of H9N1 but no 
incidences of H5N1. Dr. Mushtak, who spoke from Baghdad, stated 
that another mobile lab is being sent to Basrah to help monitor 
the situation. Dr. Mushtak and Dr. Rasol Husain, the head of 
veterinary laboratories in north Basrah, are both in Baghdad 
attending Ministry of Health meetings on the subject chaired by 
Dawood Mohammad, Head of Veterinary Medicine. 
 
4)  (U)  In another conversation with REO staff Dr. Samson 
Samuel of the World Health Organization confirmed that no cases 
of H5N1 has been found in Iraq. He went on to say that the 
United Nations has allocated 66,000 USD for an education 
campaign in Iraq. 
 
5)  (U)  Mrs. Hajar Al Musawi and Dr. Wathib al Amod, members of 
the Basrah Provincial Council committee formed to monitor the 
bird flu situation in the province both stated that no human 
cases of the Avian flu have been registered in Basrah. 
 
6) (U)  Comment: A comprehensive check with numerous local 
authorities has confirmed that there have been no cases of the 
H5N1 strain of Avian flu in Basrah. Local concerns were fueled 
by inaccurate reports in the media and from the Governor's 
office. Hopefully public concerns will be soothed with the 
recent press releases from the Governor's office and more 
accurate media reporting. End Comment. 
 
MFMARRANO