06KABUL99
Update on CN Activities: 12/21/05 - 01/06/06
Mon Jan 09 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kabul
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KABUL 000099 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INL/FO AND SA/FO AMB QUINN 
NSC FOR AHARRIMAN/KAMEND 
 
 
E.O. 12958 N/A 
TAGS: SNAR PREL PGOV PTER KCRM AF
SUBJECT: Update on CN Activities: 12/21/05 - 01/06/06 
 
REF A) 05 STATE 230525 REF B) 05 KABUL 5137 REF C) 05 KABUL 
5223 
 
¶1. Summary:  The Ministry of Counter Narcotics (MCN) and 
INL are developing a series of media availabilities to 
complement the radio and printed products associated with 
the Governor-led eradication phase of the public 
information campaign.  Afghan Poppy Elimination Program 
(PEP) team staffing has increased considerably, with 75 
percent of the positions filled.  The USD 2 million Cash- 
for-Work program in Uruzgan launched with the first project 
focusing on rehabilitation of the Nacheen Canal.  In Herat, 
Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) officials aided 
Border Police in a significant seizure of opium, hashish, 
and heroin.  The Afghanistan Eradication Force (AEF) 
conducted numerous aerial reconnaissance missions to assist 
with eradication planning. End Summary. 
 
Public Information - Poppy Elimination Program 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶2.  (U) The Embassy's Counter Narcotics Public Information 
(CNPI) program officially entered its second phase-- 
comprehensive eradication messaging--on December 28 with 
the commencement of radio spots. Distribution of the printed 
products, including posters, stickers, educational 
pamphlets, banners, and billboards, began on January 1. All 
these products have a clear message: poppy is dangerous and 
illegal and the government will eradicate. A second tranche 
of products will debut on January 15.  This second series, 
while still focused on eradication, will highlight Rule of 
Law and Alternative Livelihoods. 
 
¶3.  (U) INL is working with the Ministry of Counter 
Narcotics in developing a series of media availabilities to 
take place before, during and after eradication season. 
These availabilities will emphasize the GOA's determined 
support for governor-led and centralized eradication. The 
availabilities will also aim to promote Afghanistan's 
commitment to sustainable rule of law and a comprehensive 
rural development strategy. Throughout the eradication 
season, national and international media will be invited to 
visit AEF headquarters, interview AEF forces and observe 
their preparations, attend briefs by AEF, Counter Narcotics 
Police - Afghanistan (CNPA), NIU officials, attend round- 
table discussions with relevant GOA ministers and 
government officials, plus visit eradication sites. More 
than any advertisements, news coverage will convince 
farmers that eradication is serious. 
 
 
PEP Logistics Update 
-------------------- 
 
¶4. (U) As a follow-up to the governor conferences held 
December 14-21 (REF C), representatives from INL and the 
British Embassy Drug Team (BEDT) met with Deputy Minister 
of the Interior Daud on December 31 and January 2.  While 
the MOI has the lead on any eradication efforts--whether 
Governor- or centrally-led--it is coordinating its efforts 
with the MCN.  A planning/working group has emerged from 
these meetings and is meeting regularly with Daud's Special 
Assistant whom Daud charged to lead the effort in his 
absence (for the Haj). 
 
¶5. (U) Afghan PEP recruitment continues apace with Farah 
and Badakhshan boasting a full team of six (office manager 
position for each to be hired following substantive 
position recruitment).  Kandahar has three team members; 
Balkh, Helmand, and Nangarhar have five; and Uruzgan ha 
one.  Four additional Uruzgan candidates have passed the 
interview stage, and are in the midst of completing the 
formal hiring process. 
 
¶6.  (U) Hiring for the PEP International Advisors (IAs) 
continues. Post has reviewed more than 40 resumes and 
approved 11 candidates. DynCorp offered positions to these 
11 and four have accepted.  Post recently approved two 
British candidates that the BEDT initially recommended. 
DynCorp is in the process of making contact with these 
candidates. The group of non-US candidates will be an 
important addition to these teams demonstrating diversity 
to the local Afghans and showing that this is not just a 
US-supported endeavor. 
 
Eradication 
----------- 
¶7.  (U) Aerial reconnaissance missions of Nangarhar, Farah, 
Kandahar and Helmand provinces have been conducted using 
the MI-8 wet lease aircraft. These initial missions are too 
early in the season to positively identify poppy; however, 
the missions are extremely beneficial in identifying the 
current status of general cultivation, selecting potential 
Forward Operating Base locations, and updating road 
viability. Future missions will become more refined as 
targets are identified. 
 
¶8.  (U) Pay problems have been resolved with the AEF. We 
have paid the last of the AEF their basic salaries and 
supplements for November and December and have received 
additional funding from INL Washington (REF A) to support 
the AEF salaries and supplements. 
 
¶9.  (U) Post worked closely with the MCN, MOI, and BEDT 
during the reporting period to develop a governor-led 
eradication plan.  Post will report more detailed 
information via septel. 
 
Aviation Support: 
 
¶10.  Post continues efforts to obtain land usage rights at 
Kabul International Airport for the Air Wing Main Operating 
Base.  The Minister of Transport has reservations related 
to how the land will be utilized, for how long, and what 
will be turned over to the Ministry upon INL vacating the 
land.  The Ambassador is now directly involved in 
facilitating our efforts to finalize the land usage 
Memorandum of Understanding with the GOA.  The first 19 
contract personnel that will be operating UH-1s at Kandahar 
Air Field arrived in country January 4-6.  All will transit 
to Kandahar by January 8 and establish the temporary 
footprint to begin reception of materials and remaining 
personnel. 
 
 
Alternative Livelihoods 
----------------------- 
 
¶11.  (U) USAIDs USD 2 million cash-for-work program in 
Uruzgan, which the Central Asian Development Group is 
implementing, began in December.  The one-year program 
(December 2005-December 2006) focuses on cash-for-work 
activities targeting the rehabilitation of roads and water 
systems.  Activities will generate 195,000 labor days and 
employ approximately 750 laborers.  Current activity 
involves canal rehabilitation on the Nacheen Canal. This 
task will rehabilitate 20 km of canal which provides water 
for 3,000 jeribs of agricultural land tended by 1,100 
families.  The program plans to work in five districts and 
will expand into more should the security situation 
improve. 
 
¶12. (U) The Alternative Livelihoods Comprehensive 
Development Program is working to develop investment 
partnerships.  For example, the AL Program in the southern 
region is negotiating with three prospective investors 
regarding the investment in and creation of anchor 
agribusiness activities for southern Afghanistan.  Specific 
activities will involve the construction and operation of 
three processing facilities, one each for dried fruit and 
nuts, dried vegetables and raisins.  ALP South is also 
finalizing plans to build an industrial park to promote 
overall economic growth and job creation within Helmand. 
 
Interdiction 
------------ 
 
¶13.  (U) During the reporting period, DEA personnel have 
continued to expand the curriculum of the NIU members to 
include basic investigative skills.  This training includes 
report writing, note taking, proper use of hand-held 
radios, basic surveillance skills, and the collection and 
preservation of evidence. 
 
¶14.  (U) In two incidents, DEA investigators have assisted 
the U.S. military in intercepting IEDs destined for 
roadside deployment. 
 
¶15.  (U) DEA also participated in intelligence gathering 
operations in Herat with U.S. military and MOI Border 
Police.  The police seized a total of 15 kilograms of 
opium; 15 kilograms of hashish; and eight kilograms of 
heroin.  No arrests were made. 
 
Justice Sector Reform 
--------------------- 
 
¶16.  (U) Owing to the holiday period, no major meetings or 
events occurred during the reporting period. 
 
 
NEUMANN