06KIRKUK8
U) KURDISH PARLIAMENT APPROVES KRG UNIFICATION
Mon Jan 23 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
REO Kirkuk
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS KIRKUK 000008 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/I 
BAGHDAD FOR POL, POLMIL, NCT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM IZ KDP
SUBJECT: (U) KURDISH PARLIAMENT APPROVES KRG UNIFICATION 
 
REF: KIRKUK 0004 
 
(U) SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED; PROTECT ACCORDINGLY; NOT FOR 
INTERNET DISTRIBUTION. 
 
¶1.  (U) SUMMARY AND INTRODUCTION:  Ambassador Khalilzad attended 
the January 21 special session of the Kurdistan National 
Assembly (KNA), which unanimously approved reftel agreement on 
unification of the two Kurdistan Regional Governments (KRGs). 
Iraqi President Jalal Talabani (leader of the Patriotic Union of 
Kurdistan, PUK, which controls Sulaymaniyah) and KRG President 
Masoud Barzani (leader of the Kurdistan Democratic Party, KDP, 
which controls Erbil and Dahuk), signed the agreement after it 
was read aloud.  Another special session will be called in a 
week's time to appoint the Prime Minister.  The key ministries 
of Interior, Justice, Peshmerga, and Finance are to be merged 
progressively within one year.  END SUMMARY AND INTRODUCTION. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) KNA Speaker Adnan Mufti chaired the special session in 
Erbil, which was held in the presence of the US, British, 
Chinese, French, and Iranian Ambassadors.  Other guests included 
former Prime Minister Ayad Allawi, Deputy Prime Minister Rosh 
Shaways (KDP), Foreign Minister Hoshyar Zeibari (KDP), and 
Planning Minister Barham Saleh (PUK).  As always, the only flag 
in evidence throughout Erbil was that of Iraqi Kurdistan, though 
both the Iraqi and Kurdish anthems were played when Presidents 
Talabani and Barzani arrived at the KNA. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) No individuals were named for any of the positions to 
be filled in the unified KRG, but it was stipulated that both 
parties support President Talabani to remain head of state.  It 
was made clear that the posts of Prime Minister and KNA Speaker 
would rotate by the end of 2007, whether or not regional 
elections are held by then.  While Nechirvan Barzani is still 
the choice for Prime Minister, the PUK has not yet decided on 
its nominee for Deputy Prime Minister; outgoing KRG-Sulaymaniyah 
PM Omar Fattah had appeared to drop out of contention, but is 
being mentioned again. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) It was announced that a joint committee of PUK and KDP 
would be formed in each province of Kurdistan, and that the 
Prime Minister would determine Kurdistan's representation abroad 
(now, the two parties often have competing offices). 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Talabani gave a brief speech, in Arabic (as is his 
custom, a way of reminding everyone that he is President of all 
Iraq).  He thanked the Coalition, noted that the Kurds have many 
friends now (a reference to the old saying that "the Kurds have 
no friend but the mountains"), and stressed that the Kurds are 
part of the solution in Iraq, not part of the problem. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Barzani spoke in Kurdish, recalling that the KDP had 
long demanded "democracy for Iraq, then autonomy for Kurdistan." 
 He said "the time for armed struggle is over," it is now time 
to defend the interests of Kurdistan by political and civil 
means.  He made clear that the interests of Kurdistan encompass 
those of all its inhabitants regardless of ethnic or religious 
affiliation, not just the Kurds.  He called on the political 
parties to refrain from interfering with the KRG, pledged 
commitment to a free-market economy and equal opportunity, and 
called on politicos to choose either government service or 
private business (not both), noting the need to strengthen the 
people's trust in their government.  He called for power-sharing 
and transparency because "absolute power corrupts."  He affirmed 
freedom of expression but insisted that it be practiced within 
the law, not by rioting and burning.  He apologized to the 
victims of past conflict between KDP and PUK, and spoke of the 
need to break through the psychological barrier between the two 
parties. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) COMMENT:  More than anything else, Barzani's frank 
words about past conflict and lingering distrust between KDP and 
PUK suggest that this is more than window-dressing, but rather a 
genuine attempt to open a new chapter in Iraqi Kurdish history, 
at a time when the Kurds are thriving and have an 
almost-undreamed-of opportunity to help shape an Iraq that is 
not inimical to them. 
 
BELL