06OTTAWA153
ECONOMIC POLICY IN CANADA'S ELECTION CAMPAIGN
Wed Jan 18 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ottawa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 OTTAWA 000153 
 
SIPDIS 
 
INFO USDOC WASHDC 
DEPT-OF TREASURY WASHDC 
ALL CANADIAN POSTS COLLECTIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA, WHA/CAN AND INR (SALCEDO) 
 
USDOC FOR 4310/MAC/ONA 
 
TREASURY FOR IMI 
 
DEPT PASS USTR FOR MELLE AND CHANDLER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON SOCI EFIN PGOV CA ECON CA NDP
SUBJECT:  ECONOMIC POLICY IN CANADA'S ELECTION CAMPAIGN 
 
REF:      04 OTTAWA 1371  (2004 CAMPAIGN) 
 
 
SUMMARY/INTRODUCTION 
-------------------- 
 
¶1. While the governing Liberal Party has highlighted its own 
strong economic record, and while both they and the leading 
Conservative Party have made various spending promises, 
economic policies have been less significant in this 
campaign than other issues such as crime and political 
corruption.  Business groups give roughly equal grades to 
the two major parties' economic platforms. 
 
¶2. The Conservatives have promised to cut taxes, 
specifically the GST (the federal value-added-type sales 
tax), and would downplay the Kyoto Accord in favor of a 
"made in Canada" climate change policy, but otherwise, there 
is little reason to expect sharp changes in specific 
economic policies under a new government.  Of greater 
importance is the Conservatives' commitment to respect 
provincial jurisdiction, which could imply significant 
adjustment of the federal government's role in Canadian 
economic life.  This meshes with the agendas, not just of 
the Bloc Quebecois, but also of most provincial governments. 
END SUMMARY 
 
 
NDP FOCUS ON HEALTH CARE 
------------------------ 
 
¶3. Of the four parties in Parliament, only the social- 
democratic New Democratic Party (NDP) has put a sustained 
spotlight on one economic issue in this campaign.  The NDP, 
which has its core support in public sector unions, has 
consistently attacked what it calls "privatization" in 
Canada's single-payer health care system.  Health care was 
an important issue in the 2004 campaign (reftel), with all 
parties vowing somehow to "strengthen" the system, but in 
the current race, the other parties have not ventured much 
beyond their previous stances. 
 
 
LIBERAL ECONOMIC RECORD UNCHALLENGED 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶4. The Conservative Party's traditional economic policy 
mantras from the Mulroney era (1984-93) -- trade 
liberalization, tax reform, and balanced budgets -- were 
effectively adopted by the Liberals after they took office 
in 1993.  (While the Mulroney team had succeeded with the 
first two goals, and backed the central bank's successful 
struggle with inflation, they never gained control of the 
fiscal deficit).  Losing these campaign planks contributed 
to the Conservatives' internal crises over the past decade. 
Even now, while they criticize many of the Liberals' 
policies and priorities, the Conservatives (and the smaller 
parties) generally do not attack the Liberal macroeconomic 
record. 
 
 
SIMILAR GRADES FROM BUSINESS GROUPS 
----------------------------------- 
 
 
¶5. Major business groups and most observers rate the two 
major parties' economic platforms similarly in the current 
race.  The Canadian Chamber of Commerce's campaign scorecard 
(see www.chamber.ca ) rates both parties "poor" on 
international trade but "good" on workforce strategies; it 
credits the Liberals with being somewhat better on fiscal 
policy and innovation, and the Conservatives somewhat better 
on energy/environment and health care. 
 
 
CONSERVATIVES WOULD RETREAT FROM KYOTO ACCORD 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. One key point of difference is that the Conservatives 
admit that the Kyoto Accord is unworkable, and also argue 
that it intrudes on provincial jurisdiction.  Instead, they 
would begin consultations with provincial governments to 
develop a new plan for reducing Canada's greenhouse gas 
emissions.  The Conservatives say that an international 
replacement for Kyoto should include the United States, 
China and India. 
 
DECENTRALIZING THEME HAS WIDE IMPLICATIONS 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶7. The Conservative Party's call on the GOC to focus on its 
own constitutional responsibilities and respect provincial 
jurisdiction is long-standing and would have implications in 
many areas, from natural resources to health care.  While 
this may be the theme which would most affect Canadian 
economic policy under a Conservative government, it has not 
been highlighted in the current campaign. 
 
 
A MINORITY GOVERNMENT COULD SPELL BUDGET TROUBLE 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶8. Because a minority government is a likely outcome from 
this election, and such governments usually look for 
Parliamentary support among members from the smaller parties 
(both of which are left-leaning), the next government will 
probably face strong upward pressure on spending.  Combined 
with a heritage of large spending and transfer commitments 
made by the GOC over the past two years (such as on health 
care), and the possibility of a macroeconomic slowdown in 
North America, this poses a real risk that Canada's years of 
federal fiscal surpluses may be drawing to a close. 
 
¶9. This risk might further increase under the Conservatives 
if they act on their promises to cut taxes.  Indeed, the 
Conservatives have also made a range of spending promises 
during the campaign, prompting the Liberals to call their 
fiscal plan (though it is approved by major economists) 
incompetent and under-funded by C$22 billion. 
 
 
WILKINS