06PARIS388
UNESCO: AMBASSADOR MEETS WITH OUTGOING
Fri Jan 20 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS PARIS 000388 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FROM USMISSION UNESCO PARIS 
STATE FOR IO/UNESCO CRISTINA NOVO, DOUGLAS ROHN 
 
E.O. 12958:     N/A 
TAGS: AORC SCUL MEPP UNESCO
SUBJECT:  UNESCO: AMBASSADOR MEETS WITH OUTGOING 
CULTURE SECTOR ADG ON STRENGTHENING WORLD HERITAGE, 
ENSURING COOPERATION ON JERUSALEM 
 
Culture ADG on U.S. Goals, Including Strengthening 
World Heritage Advisory Bodies. 
 
¶1.  The Ambassador met on January 16 with outgoing 
Culture Assistant Director General Mounir Bouchenaki. 
Bouchenaki and the Ambassador discussed the fact that 
the two key organizations for the World Heritage 
Program ICCROM (International Organization for the 
Conservation of Cultural Heritage) and ICOMOS 
(International Council on Monuments and Sites) are 
generally acknowledged to be weak.  They need to 
produce better guidance and more rigorous research and 
reports; these bodies are critical because 
implementation of World Heritage Committee decisions 
depend on them, Bouchenkai observed.  Bouchenaki, who 
will assume the leadership of ICCROM when he leaves his 
current position, said that he would work to strengthen 
the organization.  Bouchenaki also noted that in the 
July 2006 meeting of the WHC, it would be best to avoid 
timing conflicts caused by scheduling meetings on 
administrative and inscription issues at the same time. 
 
.Maintaining Consensus on Israeli-Arab Issues. 
 
¶2.  Ambassador Oliver stressed that UNESCO should press 
ahead on consensus resolutions at the Executive Board 
relating to Israeli-Arab cooperation:  we must maintain 
momentum.  The resolutions on Jerusalem and on 
education in the occupied territories at the next 
Executive Board (March 28-April 13) must be presented 
by the secretariat, and must not subject to amendment. 
The language of the new resolutions should be as 
identical as possible to the language adopted at the 
September 2005 Executive Board, with the exception of 
necessary updates on missions undertaken.  Bouchenaki 
told the Ambassador that the new Palestinian 
representative is said to be a scholar and fairly open- 
minded.  Bouchenaki reported that UNESCO DG Matsuura 
had asked him to continue to serve as a consultant on 
Middle East issues and on Iraq and Afghanistan after 
stepping down as Culture ADG. 
 
.Finding the Right Focus for the Arts Conference. 
 
¶3.  On the March 6-9 World Conference on Arts Education 
Conference in Lisbon, Bouchenaki assured the Ambassador 
that the U.S. participants proposed by the U.S. 
National Commission would be invited.  He signaled his 
lack of enthusiasm regarding the list of high-profile 
names proposed by Sir Paul Judge, Chairman of the Royal 
Society of Arts, and  organizer of the first 
roundtable.  Ambassador Oliver advised that the 
conference should maintain its focus on the issue of 
how to incorporate art into education, rather than 
become another large high-profile event with no real 
purpose. 
 
.and Finding the Right ADG for Culture 
 
¶4. Ambassador Oliver stressed to Bouchenaki that the 
choice of a new ADG for Culture will be very symbolic. 
The U.S. would not understand the choice of a candidate 
from a country that actively promoted the Cultural 
Diversity Convention; this would pose a big problem. 
Bouchenaki told the Ambassador that the names of ten 
finalists will be passed on to the DG.  Candidates 
currently working at UNESCO include:  Cultural Policies 
Division Director Stenou, Assistant Director General 
for the DG's Office Riviere and World Heritage Center 
Director Bandarin.  Candidates from outside the 
organization include a Moroccan, a Kenyan, and a 
Slovakian; Bouchenaki said the external candidates were 
all well and favorably known to him.  He would not rate 
the chances of the internal candidates.  Oliver.