06PARIS8
MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Russia-Ukraine Energy Tension
Tue Jan 03 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

031355Z Jan 06UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PARIS 000008 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR; IIP/RW; IIP/RNY; BBG/VOA; IIP/WEU; AF/PA; 
EUR/WE /P/SP; D/C (MCCOO); EUR/PA; INR/P; INR/EUC; PM; OSC ISA 
FOR ILN; NEA; WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC/WEUROPE; DOC FOR ITA/EUR/FR 
AND PASS USTR/PA; USINCEUR FOR PAO; NATO/PA; MOSCOW/PA; 
ROME/PA; USVIENNA FOR USDEL OSCE. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR FR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Russia-Ukraine Energy Tension 
Syria Bush's Iraq Speeches 
PARIS - Tuesday, January 03, 2006 
 
 
(A) SUBJECTS COVERED IN TODAY'S REPORT: 
 
Russia-Ukraine Energy Tension 
Syria 
Bush's Iraq Speeches 
 
B) SUMMARY OF COVERAGE: 
 
A large majority of today's headlines are devoted to the 
Russia-Ukraine tension over gas supplies, which are beginning 
to also cripple Europe. Popular France Soir headlines "The 
Energy War Threatens Europe," while Liberation headlines 
"Energy War: Putin Turns on the Pressure" and adds: "Europe 
concerned over its dependency on Russia." For editorialist 
Patrick Sabatier, "Europe is discovering, like Little Red 
Riding Hood, that Putin is indeed the Big Bad Wolf." Le Figaro 
titles its front page: "Russian Gas: Putin Causes Difficulties 
for Europe." For financial La Tribune's editorialist, "it is 
clear that the conflict is not of a financial nature, this is 
a political conflict." (See Part C) Former U.S. Ambassador 
William Ramsay, Co-Chairman of the International Energy 
Agency, is interviewed in La Croix: "The energy crisis could 
potentially affect Europe's industry, but individuals will not 
be affected. This is essentially a political crisis, between 
Russia and Ukraine." Still, several editorials, including Les 
Echos, suggest this is a good opportunity for Europe to 
diversify its energy sources. 
 
Other international news include the latest development in the 
Hariri investigation and the UN's desire to question Syria's 
President al-Assad. La Croix analyzes the relationship between 
Washington and Damascus, at the "expense of Beirut." (See Part 
C) The political battle in Washington triggered by the 
eavesdropping controversy is reported in Le Figaro. 
 
La Croix carries an op-ed entitled: "Bush in Nixon's 
Footsteps." "If you simply replace the word communism in 
Nixon's speeches by the word terrorism in Bush's speeches, you 
get pretty much the same type of thought process, unfocussed 
but determined." The author, Pierre de Charentenay, reviews 
President Bush's recent Iraq speeches. (See Part C) 
 
Popular France Soir devotes a two-page report, announced on 
its front page, to "Latin America's Challenge to the U.S." 
Thomas de Rochechouart describes "the emancipation of Latin 
America, America's former hunting ground." France Soir also 
interviews journalist and author Maurice Lemoine: "There are 
two danger zones: Venezuela, where we can expect the U.S. to 
begin operations of destabilization. and Bolivia. But one of 
the keys for the rising left will be the elections in Brazil." 
 
On the domestic front, President Chirac's decision to lift the 
state of emergency, which was implemented November 8 during 
the suburban violence, is the major domestic story. Many 
articles are also devoted to a controversial case of 
euthanasia and the justice system's probable decision not to 
prosecute the victim's mother and doctor. 
 
(C) SUPPORTING TEXT/BLOCK QUOTES: 
 
Russia-Ukraine Energy Tension 
 
"Negotiate, not Intimidate" 
Patrick Sabatier in left-of-center Liberation (01/03): "Europe 
thought it was done with the Cold War. It is now discovering 
that the Kremlin can use energy with as much if not more 
effectiveness as it did nuclear weapons. Like Little Red 
Riding Hood, Europe is discovering that behind Putin's charm 
there is a man-eating wolf ready to devour his neighbors. 
Ukraine bears its own responsibility in the crisis: Russia is 
simply applying the proven methods of international 
capitalism. Gazprom-Exxon, it is the same battle. As for 
Europe, it is learning a lesson. It forgot to define a common 
energy strategy and to stock enough gas for the winter. Its 
dependency on Russian gas is a serious weakness. Modern powers 
need to define diversified energy policies, both 
geographically and technologically, in order to ensure their 
growth. In the immediate future it is also important to remind 
our `Russian friend' that in an increasingly inter-dependent 
world, he, like everyone else, must act responsibly. The time 
has come to negotiate, not intimidate." 
 
"Russian Dolls" 
Pascal Aubert in centrist La Tribune (01/03): "Contemporary 
Russia is undeniably tied to the famous image of the Russian 
dolls. Like them, Moscow finds its meaning in the intricate 
ties it has with its former satellites. The disagreement 
between Moscow and Kiev is more than just a business issue. It 
is a political confrontation by other means between a 
dominating nation and its neighbors. The former Soviet nations 
are prisoners of the economic dependency they have been locked 
into with the Kremlin. Let us not forget that Gazprom is none 
other than the former Soviet Ministry of Energy. Putin's 
Russia is using the economic weapon as it did its military 
might. Ukraine sinned in wanting to take its distance from the 
former master. It is now paying the price for its 
independence. The brutality of the Kremlin's reaction proves, 
if proof were needed, that the conflict is not of a financial 
nature: it is a political conflict." 
 
"Europe and the Energy Crisis" 
Patrick Lamm in right-of-center Les Echos (01/03): "Faced with 
this `gas crisis' Europe must adopt a united front. This is 
not such an easy task, considering that every European nation 
has a different energy situation, some more dependent than 
others on Russia's stocks. In the long run, Europe will need 
to diversify its energy sources. First geographically, turning 
to Latin America, North Africa, Norway and the Middle East. 
Second, through the development of new energies, such as 
nuclear energies." 
 
Syria 
 
"Al-Assad Wanted for Questioning" 
Jean-Pierre Perrin in left-of-center Liberation (01/03): "For 
the first time since the assassination of Hariri, Al-Assad's 
regime appears to have been hit below the belt. What is 
striking in the new offensive by Khaddam is the timing. All 
observers have noted that in the past few weeks Syria had been 
acting triumphant, looking as if it could deal with the 
international pressure. The Syrian opposition itself seemed to 
be losing its footing and looked divided. For the first time, 
the accusations are coming from within. In Lebanon, Khaddam's 
declarations were particularly well received. Among other 
things, they weaken the allies of Damascus, Hezbollah." 
 
"Beirut Afraid to Pay the Price of a Washington Damascus 
Agreement" 
Agnes Rotivel in Catholic La Croix (01/03): "If the Damascus 
regime can help to stabilize the situation in Iraq, it hopes, 
in return, to have to pay only a modest price in case Syria is 
found to bear responsibility in Hariri's assassination. 
Damascus could then give up a few individuals, but outside the 
President's immediate circle. In exchange Damascus expects to 
be paid back with Lebanon. Syria has yet to accept having been 
forced out of Lebanon. Particularly because it feels Lebanon 
was used by the French and the Americans to weaken Syria. The 
fact is that Lebanon is crucial for Syria: economically, but 
also politically vis-a-vis Israel. This is why Syria cannot 
accept an anti-Syrian regime to take hold here. Conversely, 
this situation is a source of concern for the Lebanese. All 
the more so because history has taught them to be wary of 
Washington's turnabouts. In exchange for rallying with the 
anti-Saddam coalition during the Gulf war, Bush father had 
given Syria the key to the house of Lebanon, which Assad had 
immediately invaded, until last April." 
 
Bush's Iraq Speeches 
 
"Bush in Nixon's Footsteps" 
Pierre de Charentenay in Catholic La Croix (01/03): "With five 
major speeches on Iraq in three weeks, President Bush is 
putting pressure on U.S. public opinion, because it is 
beginning to abandon him. The U.S. President has been drafting 
an apocalyptic picture of terrorism and its designs of turning 
the world into `a gigantic battle ground.' He continues to 
link Al-Qaeda and Iraq, and to mention the attacks of 9/11. 
But he adds, `we are not losing.' And speaks of freedom for 
the Middle East. Violence in Iraq continues and two Americans 
out of three are increasingly wondering what the Marines are 
doing there. In order to revamp a damaged image, Bush has been 
developing a new idea: `victory.' Despite the absence of a 
calendar for withdrawal and a precise strategy, the victory he 
speaks of is supposed to launch a new dynamic. This rhetoric 
of war and victory reminds one of Nixon's own rhetoric. Iraq 
is not Vietnam. But the sequence of events is similar. And 
today, like yesterday, all those who criticize the war are 
labeled defeatists. The sequence of the Bush and Nixon 
speeches is also striking: if you replace the word communism 
with the word terrorism, one can see that the reasoning is the 
same. The speeches are aimed to improve public opinion. But 
the repetition of the same rhetoric is beginning to lose 
ground because things aren't moving and words are becoming 
suspect. No one wants a Vietnam style defeat. But if the war 
in Iraq continues with the same dynamics, the perspective for 
America is not great." STAPLETON