06PARIS390
USUNESCO:  COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR WILLIAM BRENNAN,
Fri Jan 20 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

201433Z Jan 06UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 000390 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FROM USMISSION TO UNESCO 
FOR USDOC NOAA/SWHARRIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OTRA SENV FR
SUBJECT: USUNESCO:  COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR WILLIAM BRENNAN, 
THOMAS LAUGHLIN, AND JENNIFER WINSTON 
 
REF:  USDOC 5408 
 
¶1.  Post welcomes and grants country clearance for William 
Brennan, Thomas Laughlin, and Jennifer Winston from the 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration(NOAA)and 
attend the Third Global Conference on oceans, coasts, and 
islands - January 21-29, 2006. 
 
¶2.  Control officer for the visit is Robert Dunn, who can be 
reached by e-mail at DunnRC@state.gov, by office phone at 33- 
1-45 24 74 21 or by fax at 33-1-45 24 74 58. She can also be 
reached at any time via the Embassy Switchboard at 33-1-4312- 
¶2222.  Cell phone number 06 13 69 60 56. 
 
¶3.  Post understands no further assistance is required. 
We would like to point out that a 48 hour notice is due in 
case of cancellation or modification in travel plans in 
order to avoid no-show charges. Please be aware that check- 
in time for hotels in France is officially 3:00 PM.  If you 
require a room to be ready earlier you will have to pay 
lodging for the night before arrival and your travel orders 
should reflect this requirement. Concerning luggage, as a 
convenience, hotels may allow travelers to leave their 
personal luggage at their hotel prior to 3:00 PM on the day 
of check-in.  If travelers cannot pay an additional day for 
an early check-in, it is up to the traveler to negotiate 
with the hotel to leave baggage prior to check-in. 
 
¶4.  In the event of a crisis or serious international 
incident involving the United States, you should immediately 
contact your control officer. 
 
¶5.  Embassy media policy stipulates that any contact with 
visitors with the media be coordinated through the Embassy 
press office at 01-4312-2833. 
 
¶6.  Embassy wishes to remind visitors that visas are 
required for holders of U.S. diplomatic or official 
passports on official business in France. 
 
¶7.  Action request:  Each visitor must bring a copy of 
his/her travel orders (or forward fiscal data) to cover 
costs of visit.  Each agency, organization, or visiting 
delegation will be charged for the actual costs attributed 
to their visit.  These costs include, but are not limited 
to, American and FSN overtime, field travel by Embassy 
employees, vehicle rentals, long distance telephone calls, 
equipment rentals, representational events and all other 
costs that are directly attributable to the visit.  Airport 
pickup is provided only for employees at the rank of 
Assistant Secretary or above.  Other visitors should take a 
taxi or Air France bus. 
 
¶8.  Following is current security information for France: 
 
(A) Current situation:  Travelers should be aware that the 
significant unrest that began in the northern suburbs of 
Paris Oct. 27 has now spread to several locations within the 
city limits of Paris, and to many other cities throughout 
France.  Check the Embassy website for the latest Warden 
Message: http://france.usembassy.gov 
 
Travelers using the Charles de Gaulle Airport in Paris 
should be aware that the train between the airport and Paris 
passes through an affected area and has occasionally been 
disrupted.  Travelers should rely instead on airport buses 
or taxis to downtown Paris. 
 
(B) Terrorism:  The current terrorism threat in France 
mirrors the general worldwide threat.  Trans-national terror 
groups such as al-Qaida likely have a presence in France and 
do present a general threat.  French law enforcement and 
intelligence services are effective in responding to this 
threat and remain in a heightened state of alert, but cannot 
completely negate it.  For this reason American citizens 
should practice good personal security when visiting France. 
Remaining unpredictable is perhaps the simplest but most 
effective way of ensuring personal safety.  This is 
particularly true when departing or arriving at your place 
of residence.  Being aware of your surroundings and 
suspicious persons or activities is also critically 
important.  Do not accept packages, do not open hotel doors 
to strangers and immediately report any suspicious 
activities to the police (telephone 17) and Regional 
Security Office (telephone 33 1 43 12 27 96). 
 
(C) Crime:  Street crime in French cities is similar to that 
in most large metropolitan areas.  The two most frequent 
crimes are pick pocketing and snatch/run theft.  These 
criminals most often ply their trade on public 
transportation routes used by tourists and at tourist sites. 
In Paris, visitors should be particularly alert when using 
Metro lines numbers one and two, in addition to the RER 
trains serving the airports.  Tourist sites such as the 
Eiffel Tower, Montmartre, the major museums and the Avenue 
des Champs Elysees are all areas of heavy activity. 
Visitors should use hotel safes whenever possible to store 
valuables and excess cash.  Awareness should go up when 
conditions are crowded.  Maintain control of cameras and 
bags; do not carry these items behind you.  Criminals on 
metros often push into you for distraction and pickpocket 
while doing so.  Another technique is to grab valuables and 
escape just as the metro doors are closing.  If credit cards 
are stolen, proceed to the nearest telephone and immediately 
notify the card issuer.  Stolen credit cards are used 
immediately.  Whenever possible, take a seat or keep your 
back to a wall when on the metro system.  It is also 
recommended that a photocopy of your passport identification 
page be carried in lieu of the passport itself.  Report any 
incidents to the Regional Security Office as soon as 
possible. 
 
(D) Electronic devices: privately owned laptops and personal 
computers are prohibited in controlled access areas (CAAs) 
of the Mission and consulates.  Travelers with USG 
unclassified and classified laptop or notebook computers 
 
SIPDIS 
should review '95 State 244394 (classified machines) and '95 
State 243825  (unclassified machines) and notify the 
Information Management Office (IMO) before bringing these 
machines into a CAA.  Cellular telephones are also 
prohibited in the CAA and must be left outside this area. 
Questions concerning other types of electronic devices may 
be directed to the Information Management Office or Regional 
Security Office. 
 
(E) Travelers planning to stay longer than 30 days are 
required to schedule a security briefing with the RSO.  For 
additional threat assessment information regarding France 
and/or Europe, you may contact DS/ITA in the State 
Department at (202) 663-0787. 
 
¶9.  Health Concerns:  For current information on health 
precautions for France, the U.S. Center for Disease Control 
and Prevention (CDC) website contains an analysis at 
 
http://www.cdc.gov/travel/diseases.htm. 
 
OLIVER