06WELLINGTON40
DRUG INDUSTRY SEES POSSIBLE SALVE TO ITS PAIN IN
Fri Jan 13 00:00:00 +0100 2006
CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN
Embassy Wellington
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHWL #0040/01 0130515
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 130515Z JAN 06
FM AMEMBASSY WELLINGTON
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2273
INFO RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA 4273
RUEHDN/AMCONSUL SYDNEY 0417
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC 0022C O N F I D E N T I A L WELLINGTON 000040 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EAP/ANP-DRICCI AND EB/TPP/BTA/ANA-MBGOODMAN 
STATE PASS TO USTR FOR BWEISEL 
COMMERCE FOR 4530/ITA/MAC/AP/OSAO/ABENAISSA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/12/2016 
TAGS: ECON ETRD NZ
SUBJECT: DRUG INDUSTRY SEES POSSIBLE SALVE TO ITS PAIN IN 
NEW ZEALAND 
 
REF: A. 05 WELLINGTON 577 
 
     ¶B. 05 WELLINGTON 119 
     ¶C. 04 WELLINGTON 1037 
 
(U) Classified by Charge d'Affaires David R. Burnett. 
Reason: 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
Summary 
------- 
¶1. (SBU) The pharmaceutical industry in New Zealand is 
enjoying a dose of optimism about the prospect of changes to 
the government's drug-purchasing system, which has crimped 
the industry for the past 12 years.  The government has 
promised a review of the system that controls the range and 
price of most prescription medicines in New Zealand, at a 
time when patient and doctors' attacks on its drug-purchasing 
agency have escalated.  Nonetheless, most drug companies 
continue to believe that only the lure of a free-trade 
agreement between New Zealand and the United States would 
prompt the New Zealand government to make the changes the 
industry contends are needed to assure its long-term 
viability in the country. 
 
Pressuring PHARMAC 
------------------ 
¶2. (U) Since 1993, the Pharmaceutical Management Agency 
(PHARMAC) has decided which medicines will be subsidized by 
the government and how much reimbursement will be paid. 
PHARMAC controls the purchase of about 80 percent of 
prescription pharmaceuticals in New Zealand.  The agency's 
aim is to contain pharmaceutical spending, and it has largely 
succeeded.  While the total number of prescriptions written 
for most drugs has risen since 1997, the average price of 
prescriptions has decreased, mainly as a result of price 
reductions negotiated by PHARMAC with drug manufacturers. 
The focus on holding down costs has meant that many 
cutting-edge drugs are not subsidized or that manufacturers 
withhold certain unsubsidized drugs from the New Zealand 
market because their negligible sales discourage efforts to 
secure regulatory approval (ref C). 
 
¶3. (U) Over the past year, PHARMAC has come under increased 
political criticism, greater scrutiny by the media and 
sharper questioning by the public.  First, it mishandled the 
supply of the nation's influenza vaccine before last winter's 
flu season.  To secure the best deal, PHARMAC placed its 
entire vaccine order with Sanofi Pasteur, which then 
encountered a manufacturing problem in late February 2005 
that left New Zealand 150,000 doses short.  Alternate 
suppliers eventually were found, and PHARMAC now insists on 
dual sources for vaccines.  But the incident highlighted the 
agency's common practice of maximizing discounts by 
negotiating with a single supplier. 
 
¶4. (U) Patient groups, doctors and the public have become 
increasingly vocal about PHARMAC's shortcomings -- a contrast 
from past years in which consumers generally believed that if 
PHARMAC did not fund a drug, it was not worth having (ref C). 
 Uppermost in the public's mind is the agency's failure to 
fund modern medicines for a range of illnesses including 
early stage breast cancer, heart disease, HIV/AIDS and 
Alzheimer's.  PHARMAC last year backed down from several 
decisions that sparked outrage among doctors and patients. 
For instance, the agency had hoped to save NZ $1 million (US 
$697,300) by halting subsidies for the asthma drug Ventolin 
in favor of Salamol, a cheaper substitute.  After a public 
outcry, PHARMAC announced it would allow patients to choose 
either product for a two-year period.  In perhaps the most 
significant expression of public unhappiness with PHARMAC, 25 
non-government health organizations on November 24 launched 
the Access to Medicines NGO Coalition, calling for a review 
of PHARMAC. 
 
¶5. (U) The past year also has seen a surge in newspaper 
articles describing the plight of patients with 
life-threatening diseases who were unable to afford 
unsubsidized medicines.  Professional criticism is also on 
the rise.  Several cancer specialists told reporters that New 
Zealand lagged other Western countries in providing publicly 
funded access to the latest cancer drugs.  A cardiologist 
said doctors increasingly were being forced to treat patients 
with outmoded medications.  The New Zealand Medical Journal 
published a series of case studies criticizing PHARMAC's 
practices, including its sole-supply agreements, the 
asthma-drug decision and the failure to subsidize certain 
 
medicines. 
 
¶6. (C) These developments provide mounting evidence of eroded 
public confidence in PHARMAC, according to Lesley Clarke, 
chief executive officer of Researched Medicines Industry 
Association of New Zealand (RMI), the industry's trade 
association.  She also noted that, after the flu-vaccine 
debacle, then Minister of Health Annette King acknowledged 
for the first time that PHARMAC needed improvement. 
 
Reviewing Pharmac 
----------------- 
¶7. (U) The Labour government has promised to develop "a 
long-term medicines strategy relating to quality 
pharmaceutical usage in the health sector including the role 
PHARMAC should play in implementing that strategy."  Labour 
made that commitment as part of its agreement with the United 
Future party to form a government after the September 17 
elections.  The opposition National Party, which created 
PHARMAC while in government in 1993, also supports an agency 
review. 
 
¶8. (SBU) PHARMAC says it welcomes such a review, which it 
hopes will bring about an increase in the budget for drug 
purchases.  According to Stuart Bruce, the agency's 
communications and external relations manager, PHARMAC last 
year ordered a review of its decision-making process for 
high-cost drugs and expects to consider proposed changes this 
year.  Bruce said PHARMAC has found it increasingly difficult 
to choose between funding expensive drugs for less common 
diseases and funding cheaper medicines that help larger 
numbers of patients. 
 
¶9. (C) A new health minister, Pete Hodgson, also may portend 
a more hospitable environment for the pharmaceutical 
industry.  According to Clarke of RMI, Hodgson, a former 
veterinarian and science teacher, acknowledges a link between 
a strong biotechnology sector -- one of the government's top 
economic goals -- and research and development funded by the 
pharmaceutical industry.  Faced with a restrictive business 
environment, the industry over the last decade has slashed 
its research spending in New Zealand.  Hodgson's predecessor, 
Annette King, took a different view of the pharmaceutical 
industry, telling its representatives that if the industry 
disappeared from New Zealand, the country would simply source 
its medicines elsewhere. 
 
Industry in flux 
---------------- 
¶10. (C) These potential changes come at a moment when many of 
the pharmaceutical firms are reporting that, for the first 
time in years, they are not cutting staff.  A couple company 
chief executives also noted that, for the first time in three 
to four years, they have succeeded in getting a new drug 
funded -- albeit, at the cost of accepting further reductions 
in the subsidized prices of other products.  On the other 
hand, GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) last year reduced its staff in 
New Zealand by 73 percent, to fewer than 15 positions.  It 
lost to competitor companies in trying to win subsidies for 
several of its leading drugs, and a couple of its competitors 
say that GSK is paying a price for publicly and aggressively 
challenging PHARMAC a couple years ago. 
 
¶11. (C) Many of the pharmaceutical companies believe that 
only a U.S. offer of free-trade negotiations would induce the 
New Zealand government to consider significant policy changes 
that would affect the industry's competitive position.  One 
company representative cited the government's suspension of a 
study on extending the effective patent life for 
pharmaceuticals as evidence of the government's decision to 
forgo any changes to pharmaceutical policies that might be 
used as trade-offs in negotiating a free-trade agreement 
(FTA).  The industry wants many of the same concessions that 
were provided in the Australia-U.S. FTA, particularly 
requiring greater transparency in the drug-purchasing 
agency's decision-making and the right to appeal its 
decisions.  In addition, the industry wants a longer 
effective patent life for pharmaceuticals and a change in 
PHARMAC's reference-pricing practice, or subsidizing a 
pharmaceutical at the level of the lowest-priced medicine in 
a therapeutic subgroup.  The industry wants a commitment to 
greater funding of pharmaceutical purchases. 
 
¶12. (C) Meanwhile, a local area working group (LAWG) was 
formed last year by eight pharmaceutical companies that are 
 
based in the United States or do business there.  The group 
includes two companies -- Pfizer and GSK -- that withdrew 
from RMI over the past two years in disagreement over RMI's 
priorities.  The LAWG's professed aim is to work on issues 
that might be raised in FTA negotiations and address concerns 
beyond just pharmaceuticals, such as investment in research 
and development.  However, RMI -- which LAWG members said 
would continue to serve as the industry's public spokesperson 
-- worries that there may not be room for both groups.  The 
formation of another industry group may give the government 
(and PHARMAC) more leverage in playing one company off 
another.  However, the LAWG's formation also may foreshadow a 
more aggressive approach by the industry toward the 
government. 
 
Comment 
------- 
¶13. (C) Notwithstanding U.S. government views on a possible 
FTA with New Zealand, post believes that the formation of a 
new coalition government provides a timely opportunity to 
foster dialogue between the pharmaceutical industry and the 
government.  Post is working with the British High Commission 
to co-host informal meetings between the industry and 
government that would aim to reduce the animosity that has 
characterized their relations.  (The British are assisting us 
to prevent the appearance of a U.S.-only initiative.)  This 
ideally would allow each side to gain a better understanding 
of each other and to recognize common goals.  The intent is 
to supplement the efforts of both RMI and the LAWG. 
Burnett