05ASUNCION815
PARAGUAY: KIDNAPPINGS AND THE FARC
Fri Jun 24 00:00:00 +0200 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Asuncion
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ASUNCION 000815 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/BSC 
NSC FOR KIM BREIER 
SOUTHCOM FOR POLAD DAN JOHNSON 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/23/2015 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINR PTER KCRM CO BR PA
SUBJECT: PARAGUAY: KIDNAPPINGS AND THE FARC 
 
REF: A. ASUNCION 668 
     ¶B. ASUNCION 589 
     ¶C. ASUNCION 246 AND PRECEDING 
 
Classified By: Polcouns James P. Merz for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1.  (C)  Summary.  An individual arrested in connection to 
the Ceclia Cubas kidnapping led investigators to the site 
where Maria Edith Bordon de Debernardi was held after she was 
kidnapped in November 2001. A Paraguayan prosecutor confirmed 
press reports clearly linking the two kidnappings.  He also 
indicated there was evidence of possible Colombian/FARC 
involvement in the earlier kidnapping as well as in the Cubas 
kidnapping.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.   (C)  According to Arnoldo Guizzio, the lead prosecutor 
on the Cecilia Cubas kidnapping, an individual arrested and 
detained in connection to the Cubas kidnapping is providing 
investigators with key information.  This unnamed informant 
provided investigators with the name of Mencia, who upon 
arrest in the Department of Caaguazu, was found reportedly in 
possession of a vehicle used in connection with the Cubas 
kidnapping.  On June 18, as part of plea bargain with 
prosecutors Mencia seeks to exempt him from charges, Mencia 
led investigators to the house located in a residential 
neighborhood on the outskirts of Asuncion where Maria Edith 
Bordon de Debernardi was held for over two months after she 
was kidnapped in November 2001.  Debernardi, who was 
eventually released upon payment of a ransom, confirmed that 
she had been held captive in a manmade tunnel underneath the 
house. 
 
Links between Kidnappings, Possible ties to Colombians 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶3.  (C)  A number of details linking the two kidnappings 
suggest Colombian/FARC involvement: 
 
-- Mencia testified that he rented the house where Debernardi 
was held at the request of Osmar Martinez, the Patria Libre 
Party (PPL) member arrested and detained on charges of 
orchestrating the Cubas kidnapping.  Martinez has since been 
charged with involvement in the Debernardi kidnapping as 
well. 
 
-- Mencia testified that on November 16, 2001, the night 
Debernardi was kidnapped, he saw in the house where she was 
held Juan Arrom and Anuncio Marti (PPL leaders living in 
Brazil as political refugees); Severiano Martinez (alias 
"Marcos") and Francisca Andino, PPL Secretary General, (both 
already charged in connection to the Cubas kidnapping and now 
charged for involvement in the Bordon kidnapping; the former 
is a fugitive and the latter has been arrested); Alcidos 
Oviedo Britez (alias "Cesar," recently sentenced to 18 years 
in jail for involvement in the Debernardi kidnapping); and 
Gilberto Setrini (remains a fugitive).  All have been 
identified as PPL activists. 
 
-- Mencia identified Oscar Luis Benitez (alias "Ramon") as 
one of the intellectual leaders of the Debernardi kidnapping. 
 Benitez remains a fugitive. 
 
-- Mencia revealed the aliases of a number of individuals 
implicated in the Cubas kidnapping. 
 
-- According to Mencia, a "foreigner" constructed in February 
and March 2001 the tunnel in which Debernardi was eventually 
held captive.  Mencia said he never saw this individual in 
person and did not explain why he thought the individual was 
a foreigner.  Guizzio indicated investigators believe the 
individual could have been Colombian with FARC ties. 
 
-- Separately, neighbors have told investigators that several 
Colombians lived down the street from the house where 
Debernardi was held at around the same time.  Investigators 
have requested the Migration Department review its records on 
Colombians who entered Paraguay around that time.  The 
Migration Department is notorious for its bad records. 
Paraguay requires no visa for entry of Colombians.  Guizzio 
indicated prosecutors were not hopeful the Migration 
Department would uncover helpful information. 
 
-- Guizzio informed PolCouns that individuals tied to the 
Bordon kidnapping later appeared in training video for the 
Cubas kidnapping. 
 
Duarte on Suspects in Brazil 
---------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (U)  In response to queries by the press, President 
Duarte said that he had not/not raised with President Lula 
during the Mercosur Summit Paraguay's outstanding request 
that Brazil return PPL leaders Arrom and Marti to Paraguay to 
stand trial on charges for involvement in the Debernardi 
kidnapping.  (Note: Brazil granted Arrom and Marti refugee 
status when they escaped from Paraguay and entered Brazil 
claiming they had been beaten by police and suffered the 
threat of political persecution if returned to Paraguay. End 
Note.)  However, Duarte said that he had raised this matter 
with Lula on prior occasions and hoped Lula would intervene 
to ensure these individuals face justice in Paraguay. 
 
¶5.  (C)  Comment.  Mencia's testimony confirms links between 
the Cubas and Debernardi kidnappings; both involved suspects 
with confirmed or reported links to the FARC, and the new 
evidence suggests, but does not prove, FARC involvement in 
the Debernardi kidnapping itself.  Prosecutors are hopeful 
Mencia will provide more information about the two 
kidnappings, including more names of individuals involved and 
information about arms caches.  End Comment. 
 
 
 
KEANE