08MBABANE244
TRADE UNIONS CHALLENGE SWAZI DEMOCRACY, MAKE COMPARISONS
Wed Aug 13 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Mbabane
R 130916Z AUG 08
FM AMEMBASSY MBABANE
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 3192
INFO SOUTHERN AF DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITYUNCLAS MBABANE 000244 
 
 
DEPT FOR AF/S (MHARRIS) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL ELAB ETRD KDEM WZ ZI
SUBJECT:  TRADE UNIONS CHALLENGE SWAZI DEMOCRACY, MAKE COMPARISONS 
TO ZIMBABWE 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY:  On July 21, the Southern African Trade Union 
Coordinating Council (SATUCC), a regional labor umbrella 
organization, called for a boycott of goods destined for Zimbabwe 
and Swaziland.  On August 10-11, the Congress of South African Trade 
Unions (COSATU), a SATUCC member, hosted a Zimbabwe-Swaziland 
Solidarity Conference that explored scenarios for achieving 
democratic change.  COSATU is trying to capitalize on the 
international attention Zimbabwe is receiving by linking it with 
Swaziland's democratic shortcomings.  COSATU is preparing a hostile 
reception for King Mswati III (HMK) and President Mugabe at the 
August 16-17 SADC Heads of State Summit in Johannesburg.  COSATU has 
also announced plans for a week long boycott of goods destined for 
Swaziland and Zimbabwe in September.  END SUMMARY 
 
ZIMBABWE-SWAZILAND SOLIDARITY CONFERENCE 
 
¶2.  On August 10, COSATU hosted the Zimbabwe-Swaziland Solidarity 
Conference in South Africa.  The conference concluded with a vague 
and undefined strategy for targeting the Government of the Kingdom 
of Swaziland (GKOS).  COSATU Secretary General Zwelinzima Vavi 
described HMK and the Swazi monarchy as an extension of British 
colonial control.  COSATU SecGen Vavi has repeatedly announced that 
HMK and President Mugabe are not welcome in South Africa, and wide 
spread protests are planned upon their arrival in South Africa for 
the August 16-17 SADC Heads of State Summit in Johannesburg.  COSATU 
sees this as the beginning of a "sustainable solidarity offensive" 
against King Mswati III and President Mugabe, and has created a SADC 
Campaign Coordinating Committee to manage the effort.  Their goal is 
to isolate the leaders through a "sustained, massive" publicity 
campaign.  COSATU will also oppose and lobby against the election of 
Swaziland to the SADC Chair of the Organ on Politics, Security and 
Defense. 
 
IMPLICATIONS OF BOYCOTT ON SWAZILAND 
 
¶3.  COSATU announced on August 12 that it is planning a week-long 
boycott of goods destined for Zimbabwe and Swaziland in September. 
Regarding the scope of the boycott, COSATU international secretary 
Bongani Masuku told EmbOff on August 13 that it could include 
electricity, since Swaziland imports this commodity.  It is likely 
that COSATU will try to hold the boycott in the first week of 
September during the 40/40 national celebrations.  Several regional 
heads of state are expected in Swaziland on September 5-6 for the 
celebrations, and the disruptions caused by a boycott would be 
highly embarrassing to GKOS and HMK.  COSATU demonstrated that it is 
capable of mobilizing the region and confronting any actor or 
government in April, with refusal to unload the An Yue Jiang, the 
ship carrying Chinese arms destined for Zimbabwe..  Swaziland -- 
land-locked, importing 80 percent of its food from South Africa, 
reliant on South Africa and Mozambique for electricity, and without 
any strong regional allies -- is a "soft" target.  Any transport 
boycott will have tremendous and immediate consequences. 
 
¶4.  COMMENT:  The attention of Southern African trade organizations 
towards Swaziland is likely a by-product of the massive regional 
mobilization against the Government of Zimbabwe.  Should COSATU and 
SATUCC mobilize any type of commercial transport boycott, the 
implications for Swaziland would be tremendous and impossible for 
GKOS and King Mswati to ignore, and would necessitate immediate 
resolution.  With Swaziland on the eve of elections and 40/40 
national celebrations, it is especially vulnerable to international 
criticism and negative attention. Post will immediately advise as 
situation develops and more information becomes available. 
 
 
PARKER