06BEIRUT1013
INL BUDGET CALL:  LEBANON RESPONSE
Thu Mar 30 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Beirut
VZCZCXYZ0003
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHLB #1013/01 0891402
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 301402Z MAR 06
FM AMEMBASSY BEIRUT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2840
INFO RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 4132UNCLAS BEIRUT 001013 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NEA/ELA, INL/RM, AND INL/AAE - RICHARD AND ROESS, 
DS, DS/IP/NEA 
AMMAN FOR LEGATT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ABUD ASEC EAID KCRM LE SNAR
SUBJECT: INL BUDGET CALL:  LEBANON RESPONSE 
 
REF: STATE 34328 
 
¶1.  (SBU) While Embassy Beirut is not an NAS post, it can 
conduct activities in support of INL's two performance goals: 
 
-- Countering international trafficking in drugs, persons, 
and other illicit goods; and 
 
-- Promoting international cooperation to combat drugs and 
crime. 
 
With this in mind, the following information is offered in 
response to the FY 2008 counter-drug and anticrime assistance 
planning guidance and budget call for the INL Bureau 
Performance Plan (reftel). 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Project Title:  Evidence Response Team Training 
 
--  Project Description:  In this new project, the Department 
is partnering with the FBI to provide needed training and 
technical assistance in the fields of crime scene management 
and post-terrorist incident investigation.  The object for 
the first year of training is to assist the Lebanese 
government in forming two ten-member Evidence Response Teams 
(ERTs).  Funding for FY-2006 comes from the Economic Support 
Fund, reallocated from USAID to the Department, with a 
Congressional waiver allowing its use for law enforcement 
purposes. 
 
--  Resources Requested:  USD 2 million for FY-07.  This 
project can be continued in future years using INL anticrime 
funds.  Funding for FY-06 is approximately USD 1 million. 
 
--  Resource Justification:  Building the Lebanese 
government's evidence-response capacity will require several 
years of core and specialty courses taught by FBI 
instructors.  This will contribute to achieving anticrime 
goals by helping the Lebanese government meet the challenge 
of properly investigating a terrorist campaign of 
destabilization, as the first step towards identifying and 
punishing the perpetrators, as well as deterring future 
attacks.  The course curriculum can be adjusted year-to-year 
as an integrated, long-term USG assistance plan for the 
Lebanese security sector takes shape. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Project Title:  Development of Lebanese Maritime 
Counter-narcotics. 
 
--  Project Description:  INL-funded maritime project 
commenced with a 1998 U.S. Coast Guard and Customs assessment 
but was suspended in 2003 due to lack of funding.  It aimed 
at building Lebanon's counter-narcotics capabilities using 
the Defense Institute of International Legal Studies' (DIILS) 
Model Maritime Service Code (MMSC) program.  Future phases 
include developing Lebanese interagency maritime legal 
procedures, coordination, and assisting the Lebanese 
government with training in maritime interdiction.  In 
addition to the existing maritime interdiction program, we 
envision follow-on programs in overland narcotics 
interdiction focused on the Syrian and Israeli borders and 
Bekaa Valley illicit drug eradication focused on opium and 
hashish. 
 
--  Resources Requested (specify the dollar amount and type 
of funds:  USD 195,000 each year for four years for a total 
of USD 780,000 for training funds, primarily for U.S. DIILS 
Mobile Training Teams.  Each year would include mobile 
training team assistance, classes, instruction materials, 
etc., in three separate areas:  maritime interdiction, 
overland interdiction, and domestic eradication. 
 
--  Resource Justification (indicate progress made toward 
major goals and objectives; explain what the requested funds 
will procure and how they will contribute to achieving 
counter-narcotics or anticrime goals).  Resources will permit 
completion of a multi-phased effort to develop a Lebanese 
interagency maritime counter-narcotics system with specified, 
deconflicted, clear legal authorities and responsibilities 
and substantive training in interdiction of narcotics 
traffickers and legal disposition of narcotics and narcotics 
trafficking associated materiel.  Counter-narcotics training 
will expand to include overland narcotics interdiction and 
Lebanese domestic illicit drug production. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Project Title:  Training for ISF Counter-Terrorism 
Unit 
 
--  Project Description:  The Internal Security Forces (ISF) 
has requested FBI assistance in the establishment of a new 
counter-terrorism unit.  This program would use FBI trainers 
to provide eight weeks of training courses to 20 ISF 
officers.  Specific courses would address counter-terrorism, 
information management, surveillance and 
counter-surveillance, counter-intelligence, interview and 
interrogation, raids and arrests, communications monitoring, 
and investigative techniques. 
 
--  Resources Requested:  USD 50,000. 
 
--  Resource Justification:  This training program would 
build the Lebanese government's capacity to counter terrorism 
threats.  This will contribute directly to achieving 
anticrime goals. 
FELTMAN