06BEIJING5698
MARCH 28 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: U.S.-CHINA TRADE
Tue Mar 28 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO4044
OO RUEHCN
DE RUEHBJ #5698/01 0871118
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 281118Z MAR 06
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1322
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHRL/AMEMBASSY BERLIN IMMEDIATE 1294
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA IMMEDIATE 0930
RUEHUNV/USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA IMMEDIATE 0850
RHHMUNA/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HI IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 005698 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL ECON PARM PHUM CH IR KN
SUBJECT: MARCH 28 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: U.S.-CHINA TRADE 
RELATIONS, IRAN, FMCT, ORGAN TRANSPLANTS, DPRK  VISITOR, 
JAPAN, ZHAO YAN 
 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  Key points made at the March 28 MFA press briefing 
are as follows: 
 
- U.S.-China trade frictions should not be politicized 
or overstated, while China's exchange rate regime must 
be rational and remain in line with the reality of the 
country's situation. 
 
- The March 30 foreign ministers' meeting on the 
Iranian nuclear issue is an important effort to 
resolve the matter peacefully. 
 
- Beijing has consistently supported efforts to 
promptly launch negotiations on the Fissile Material 
Cut-off Treaty (FMCT). 
 
- Accusations that China forcefully removes organs 
from criminals sentenced to death are complete 
fabrications. 
 
- During his recent visit to China, Korean Workers' 
Party (KWP) official Chang Song Taek traveled to Hubei 
and Guangdong Provinces and met Beijing Party 
Secretary Liu Qi. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
- A delegation representing seven Japanese China-Japan 
friendship organizations will visit China at the end 
of March and meet PRC leaders. 
 
- China's judicial authorities will handle NYT 
reporter Zhao Yan's case according to the law.  End 
Summary. 
 
U.S.-China Trade Relations 
-------------------------- 
 
¶2.  During the regular March 28 MFA press briefing, 
several reporters asked about the PRC view on the 
recent visit by U.S. Senators Graham, Schumer and 
Coburn as well as the upcoming vote in Congress on the 
Schumer-Graham bill.  MFA Spokesperson Qin Gang 
expressed the hope that the recent trip by Senators 
Graham, Schumer and Coburn will enhance their 
understanding of the situation in China and bilateral 
economic and trade relations, as well as help them 
adopt an objective and rational approach to handling 
bilateral ties.  Trade frictions should be resolved 
through consultation and should not be politicized or 
overstated.  Remarking that the RMB exchange rate is a 
sovereign Chinese issue, Qin asserted that Beijing has 
demonstrated a responsible and serious attitude on the 
matter.  China will take actions that match the 
conditions of China's social and economic development 
and take into account the impact of an exchange rate 
adjustment on global economic development.  China's 
exchange rate regime must be rational and remain in 
line with the reality of China's situation, he 
emphasized. 
 
¶3.  China maintains an optimistic view of U.S.-China 
trade relations and believes the general trend in 
bilateral trade is positive, despite certain problems, 
Qin remarked.  Trade has generated tangible benefits 
for both countries and stimulated global economic 
growth, but trade frictions must be handled in a 
rational and sensible manner.  Qin noted that 
Secretary of Commerce Gutierrez arrived in Beijing on 
 
SIPDIS 
March 27 and will meet with Premier Wen Jiabao, Vice 
Premier Wu Yi, Minister of Commerce Bo Xilai and 
officials from the State Intellectual Property Office. 
Qin also confirmed that National People's Congress 
(NPC) Foreign Affairs Committee Chairman Jiang Enzhu 
is leading a delegation to the United States this 
week.  Beijing hopes that exchanges between the two 
countries' legislatures and commercial agencies will 
enhance mutual understanding and resolve issues of 
common concern. 
 
Iranian Nuclear Issue 
--------------------- 
 
¶4.  While noting that China is "positively 
considering" its invitation to a March 30 meeting of 
P-5 and German foreign ministers in Berlin, Qin 
 
BEIJING 00005698  002 OF 003 
 
 
stressed that the authority of the international 
nonproliferation regime must be safeguarded.  There is 
still potential for resolving the Iranian nuclear 
issue within the IAEA framework, and the international 
community should step up its efforts.  The Berlin 
meeting is an important effort to resolve the issue 
peacefully and China hopes that it will help promote 
this objective.  Beijing is open to any suggestion 
that will help yield a diplomatic resolution, Qin 
concluded. 
 
FCMT Treaty 
----------- 
 
¶5.  Responding to a CCTV reporter's question, Qin 
stated that China has consistently supported efforts 
to promptly launch negotiations on the Fissile 
Material Cut-off Treaty (FMCT).  The FCMT is an 
important step toward multilateral disarmament, and 
its enactment will significantly reduce the risks 
posed by nuclear proliferation. 
 
Organ Transplants: Regulations and Accusations 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶6.  Asked about the motivation behind the regulations 
on organ transplants issued March 26, Qin maintained 
that there are no restrictions on foreigners' 
receiving transplants in China but that they must be 
conducted according to strict procedures.  The organs 
must be donated voluntarily.  Noting media reports 
that some transplanted organs are taken from executed 
convicts, Qin remarked that this is not a "significant 
phenomenon" and such cases are managed strictly and in 
the same manner as situations in which dying medical 
patients donate organs.  Accusations that China 
forcefully removes organs from criminals sentenced to 
death are complete fabrications, aimed at slandering 
China's judicial system and based on ulterior motives, 
Qin claimed. 
 
¶7.  Responding to accusations by U.S.-based Falun Gong 
organizations of the existence of concentration camps 
in Liaoning Province where Falun Gong members' organs 
are harvested, Qin argued that these claims are absurd 
and "too ludicrous" for China to protest.  Altering 
its original story, the Falun Gong has said that 6,000 
detainees are being held in a hospital, but how can a 
small hospital hold so many people, Qin remarked.  The 
Falun Gong has uttered many lies, such as claiming 
that nine million Communist Party members have left 
the Party.  Were this account true, the Communist 
Party would have already collapsed, Qin argued. 
 
DPRK Official Visits China 
-------------------------- 
 
¶8.  Qin noted that Korean Workers' Party (KWP) 
official Chang Song Taek recently led a goodwill visit 
to China at the invitation of the Chinese Communist 
Party (CCP).  He visited Hubei and Guangdong Provinces 
and met Beijing Party Secretary Liu Qi.  Promoting 
bilateral relations and cooperation in the "new 
context" serves the interests of China and North Korea 
as well as regional peace and stability, Qin 
commented. 
 
Sino-Japanese Relations 
----------------------- 
 
¶9.  Asked about a Japanese lawmaker's call for a 
summit meeting between President Hu Jintao and Prime 
Minister Koizumi, Qin simply stated that Japan and the 
international community clearly understand Beijing's 
position on Sino-Japanese relations.  He confirmed 
that a delegation comprised of seven Japanese China- 
Japan friendship organizations will visit China at the 
end of March, meet with Chinese leaders and discuss 
ways to improve bilateral ties.  Stressing that 
people-to-people exchanges play an important role in 
enhancing China-Japan relations, Qin stated that 
Beijing attaches great importance to the upcoming 
visit. 
 
Zhao Yan 
-------- 
 
 
BEIJING 00005698  003 OF 003 
 
 
¶10.  Asked for an update on the case of detained NYT 
journalist Zhao Yan, Qin reiterated that China's 
judicial authorities will handle the case according to 
the law. 
RANDT