06JAKARTA3291
COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR TSA ARMEN SAHAGIAN
Tue Mar 14 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Jakarta
VZCZCXYZ0002
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHJA #3291/01 0730906
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 140906Z MAR 06
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO RUEHGP/AMEMBASSY SINGAPORE 5210
INFO RUEANHA/FAA NATIONAL HQ WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 JAKARTA 003291 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SINGAPORE FOR TSA ASAHAGIAN 
FAA NATIONAL HQ WASDC FOR TSA INTERNATIONAL PROGRAMS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OTRA EAIR ID
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR TSA ARMEN SAHAGIAN 
 
REF: SINGAPORE 756 
 
¶1.  Embassy Jakarta welcomes and grants country clearance for 
Transportation Security Adminsitraiton (TSA) representative, 
Mr. Armen A. Sahagian to travel to Bali from 15-16 March, 
¶2006.  The purpose of the visit is to: (a) continue dialogue 
between the TSA  and Ministry of Communications (office of 
the DGAC) and Angkasa Pura I in Denpasar on how best to move 
forward regarding the Existing aviation security concerns 
identified by the public notice issued by the U.S. government 
for the international airport in Denpasar; and (b) continue 
logistical support for government of Indonesia's visit to 
united states to meet with TSA offices. 
 
¶2.  Embassy control officer for this visit will be Mark 
Carlson, who may be reached as follows: 
 
Office: 62-21-3435-9070 
Cell: 62-812-100-4938 
Fax: 62-21-3435-9977 
E-mail: CarlsonMC@state.gov 
 
¶3. Embassy understands that Mr. Sahagian has booked his own 
room at the Conrad Hilton Hotel in Nusa Dua and, other than 
country clearance, requries no further Embassy assitance. 
 
¶4.  All official travelers to Indonesia are encouraged to 
travel on a diplomatic or official passport (with at least 
six months validity remaining) and must be in possession of a 
valid visa issued at an Indonesian embassy or consulate 
abroad.  Travelers arriving without a valid visa may purchase 
an airport visa for USD 10.00 for a three-day validity or UDS 
25.00 for a thirty-day validity visa.  Payment must be made 
with the exact fee in U.S. dollars and there are no currency 
exchange facilities at the visa counters.  Please note that 
upon expiration of the 3-day or 30-day visa, travelers 
must/must depart Indonesia for at least two weeks and the 
visa cannot be renewed.  Post strongly encourages all TDY 
travelers to obtain visas in advance to avoid problems in 
case travel plans change unexpectedly. 
 
¶5.  All air travelers to Jakarta are subject to a departure 
tax of 30,000 Rupiah (approximately three USD) for domestic 
flights and 100,000 Rupiah (approximately 10.00 USD) for 
international flights.  This must be paid in local currency 
at the check-in desk.  It may not be paid in U.S. dollars. 
 
¶6.  Threat Assessment: The most recent Department of State 
travel warning cautions American citizens to defer 
non-essential travel to Indonesia.  The bombings of two 
restaurants in Bali on October 1, 2005, the Australian 
Embassy on September 9, 2004, the J.W. Marriott Hotel in 
Jakarta on August 5, 2003, and two nightclubs in Bali and the 
attack near the U.S. Consular Agency in Bali, both on October 
12, 2002, along with the current security situation within 
Indonesia, puts U.S. citizens and interests at risk.  All 
American citizens in Indonesia have been warned to evaluate 
their security posture and exercise maximum caution such as 
avoiding crowds and demonstrations and locations known to 
cater primarily to a Western clientele. Bombings and 
separatist violence in the provinces of Aceh and Papua (Iryan 
Jaya), Central and West Kalimantan, Maluku, North Maluku, 
Central and South Sulawesi and West Timor have contributed to 
unsafe conditions in all those regions.  On August 31, 2002, 
an ambush in Papua resulted in the deaths of two Americans 
and wounded eight other Americans.  Americans should avoid 
all travel to these areas. 
 
¶7.  The Embassy strictly controls the entry of laptop 
computers, personal digital assistants (PDAs), and other 
electronic devices into Embassy facilities, including 
annexes.  Personally owned or unapproved USG equipment 
(including all PDAs, cellphones, and pagers) may not enter 
the controlled access areas.  If you plan to bring official 
electronic equipment to post, please advise the make/model, 
and serial number or other control number.  Providing this 
information in advance will speed the entry of the equipment 
into the Embassy and annexes. 
 
¶8. ICASS Policy:  Each visitor, regardless of length of stay, 
must bring/forward fiscal data to pay for direct costs of the 
visit.  Each agency, organization, or visiting delegation 
will be charged for the actual costs attributed to their 
visit.  For TDYers over thirty (30) days, there is a charge 
for ICASS support services.  If your sponsoring agency is not 
signed up for ICASS services at post, please be prepared to 
sign an MOU for ICASS support services upon arrival.  The 
agency should provide post with a written communication, 
generated by the traveler's headquarters, that confirms the 
agency will pay ICASS charges for the TDYer, provides the 
 
JAKARTA 00003291  002 OF 002 
 
 
agency ICASS billing code that TDY support charges should be 
applied to, and authorizes the traveler to sign the ICASS 
invoice generated by the TDY module.  To request use of 
Mission services upon arrival at post, TDY personnel must 
complete and sign the form "Application and Approval for Use 
of U.S. Mission Services," attach their travel orders, and 
submit it to the Management Counselor for approval. TDY 
visitors will not have access to Mission services, including 
the Commissary, until the form is completed. 
 
¶9. Medical 
 
¶A. The Embassy in Jakarta operates a Health Unit that is 
accessible to personnel who have a current Class 1 or 2 
medical clearance issued by State MED. Military personnel 
whose agencies have signed an ICASS agreement also have 
access. 
 
¶B. TDYers who are federal employees and who have been on TDY 
travel outside of CONUS for less than 60 days in a calendar 
year may use the health unit for up to 60 days without a 
medical clearance. Those who will be traveling on government 
orders for more than 60 days per year should have obtained 
medical clearance before coming to post.  Without a 
clearance, health unit access will be denied. 
 
¶C. All visitors should have adequate medical insurance and 
especially Medical Evacuation Insurance.  Direct-hire State 
Department employees are already covered for medical 
evacuation.  Medical care in Indonesia is deficient and 
employees are frequently evacuated to Singapore for care. 
 
¶D. Bring copies of all their medical records and update 
immunizations prior to arrival, including Typhoid, Hepatitis 
A and Hepatitis B.  For travel to some areas outside Jakarta, 
malaria prophylaxis should be started before arrival. 
PASCOE