06KHARTOUM578
SUDAN BRIEFS: TRADE/AID TO KENYA; NORWAY IN
Tue Mar 07 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO0165
RR RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #0578/01 0660625
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 070625Z MAR 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1755
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE
RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 0010
RUEHIN/AIT TAIPEI 0001UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 000578 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL ETRD EPET SOCI SENV SU KE NO CH
TW, PLO 
SUBJECT: SUDAN BRIEFS: TRADE/AID TO KENYA; NORWAY IN 
DARFUR; CHINA OR TAIWAN IN SOUTH; NEW PA AMBASSADOR 
 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY:  This week's installment of news briefs not 
included in post's other reporting includes prospects for 
a Sudan-Kenya trade agreement, together with South 
Sudan's USD 1 million donation for Kenyan famine relief; 
Norway's assurances that it will continue to support 
peacekeeping and relief efforts in Darfur; a threat to 
kick China out of Southern Sudan's oil fields, and 
embrace Taiwan; where the new Palestinian ambassador in 
Khartoum has been for the past 26 years; and how the 
Government plans to lure more tourists to Sudan -- though 
perhaps not to Dinder National Park.  END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------------- 
Sudan and Kenya:  Trade, But also Aid 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  Sudan and Kenya have resumed negotiations on a 
bilateral trade agreement, following the visit of Kenya's 
Assistant Trade and Industry Minister, Abdirahman Ali, to 
Khartoum last week.  News of the talks was first 
mentioned in Nairobi's East African Standard on March 4, 
and later on March 6 in Khartoum's pro-government Sudan 
Vision.  Trade between the two countries has grown 200 
per cent in the past two years, largely due to a surge of 
Kenyan exports.  Kenyan officials have focused their 
efforts on reducing non-tariff barriers to the Sudanese 
market, such as visa regulations, though Sudanese 
officials are more concerned about Sudan's rising trade 
deficit with Kenya, now estimated at USD 16.4 million. 
 
¶3.  The Government of Southern Sudan (GoSS) has donated 
KSH 75 million (approximately USD 1 million) for famine 
relief in Kenya, Khartoum's Citizen newspaper reported on 
March 2.  Justine Yac Arop, GoSS Cabinet Affairs 
Minister, announced the donation during a visit to 
Nairobi, as a gesture of appreciation for Kenya's support 
for the people of Southern Sudan during the North-South 
civil war.  Arop's trip to Kenya is a prelude to the 
visit of First Vice President Salva Kiir Mayardit, who 
will attend the Southern Sudan Investment and Development 
Conference in Nairobi on March 14, according to the East 
African Standard.  "The conference will offer a forum for 
the Sudanese private and public sectors to showcase 
opportunities in the oil, gas, power, infrastructure, and 
agricultural sub-sectors," according to event organizers. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
Norway Committed to Sudan, Will Join Force in Darfur 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶4.  Norwegian Ambassador to Sudan Fridtjov Thorkildsen 
said Norway will continue to support the United Nations 
Mission in Sudan (UNMIS), and would most likely 
contribute additional troops to a U.N. peacekeeping 
operation in Darfur, according to an interview in the pro- 
government newspaper Sudan Vision on February 23. 
Thorkildsen said Norway's involvement in Sudan dated back 
to the 1972 Addis Ababa peace accords, and pointed out 
that Sudan is now the largest recipient of Norwegian aid. 
He denied that relations with Sudan were negatively 
affected by the Danish cartoon controversy, though he did 
not mention a Norwegian NGO's decision to suspend 
operations in Darfur on February 2 after one of its cars 
was stoned. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
Southern Sudan:  No to Beijing, Yes to Taipei? 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶5.  The South Sudan Defense Force (SSDF) and its 
political wing, the South Sudan United Defense Alliance 
(SSUDA), have pledged to revoke China's oil concessions 
in Southern Sudan, should the South vote for independence 
in the planned 2010-11 referendum, Khartoum's al-Wan 
newspaper reported on March 1.  The SSDF/SSUDA accused 
China of providing arms to the Government of National 
Unity (GNU) in return for access to Southern Sudan oil 
fields, and called upon Western investors to join them in 
disrupting Beijing's economic policy in Sudan.  The two 
anti-government groups were also reported to be working 
"very hard" to activate relations with authorities in 
Taiwan. 
 
----------------------------------- 
New Palestinian Ambassador to Sudan 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  The new Palestinian Ambassador to Sudan, Sayed al- 
 
KHARTOUM 00000578  002 OF 002 
 
 
Masri, arrived in Khartoum on February 6.  Contrary to 
initial reports that the ambassador was affiliated with 
Hamas, Embassy research confirms that he is a career 
diplomat, having served as the Palestinian Ambassador to 
Vietnam for over 26 years. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Cholera Outbreak Continues in South 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  The death toll from Southern Sudan's cholera epidemic 
has topped 127, the WHO reported on March 5, and 5600 
people have been infected.  The outbreak in Yei has been 
brought under control, but continues to rage in Juba, 
with between 100 and 150 cases reported each day.  The 
International Federation of the Red Cross and Red 
Crescent (IFRC) has appealed for CHF 1 million (USD 
879,000) to respond to the outbreak over the next three 
months. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
More Money for Tourism, but not for Dinder National Park 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
¶8.  Sudan will invest more money to attract international 
tourists, Under Secretary of the Ministry of Tourism and 
Wildlife Ali Mahjoub Atta al-Manan told Sudan Vision on 
February 28.  Sudan's earnings from tourism was already 
as large as its returns from animal husbandry, cotton, or 
sesame production, al-Manan noted, and the number of 
foreign tourists visiting Sudan in 2004 were "much more" 
than the figure for 2003.  To help develop the tourist 
industry, al-Manan said the Government of National Unity 
(GNU) would invest USD 150 million to establish more 
hotels, including floating hotels on the Nile, rest 
houses at archaeological sites in Northern Sudan, and 
improvements at Dinder National Park (see below). 
However, he also blasted foreign media for creating the 
impression that the country was unstable.  "There is only 
a limited war zone in Sudan," said the Under Secretary. 
 
¶9.  The United Nations Development Program (UNDP), 
meanwhile, has threatened to withdraw its funding of 
Dinder National Park in Blue Nile State, unless Sudan's 
Government of National Unity (GNU) makes good its 
commitment to provide USD 225,000 in funding for wildlife 
conservation.  Under a 2000 agreement between the UNDP 
and Sudan, the UNDP would provide USD 1.4 million for a 
three-phase biosphere reserve program in the park, 
focusing on education and "alternative agriculture" 
models for farmers living in the area.  Juba's Citizen 
newspaper quoted a UNDP source on February 28 that "the 
UNDP regrets Sudan, a petroleum exporting country, has 
failed to meet its counterpart contributions." 
 
WHITEHEAD