06KIGALI220
KIGALI CITY ELECTS WOMAN MAYOR
Mon Mar 06 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kigali
VZCZCXYZ0074
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHLGB #0220/01 0651526
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 061526Z MAR 06
FM AMEMBASSY KIGALI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2479
INFO RUEHXR/RWANDA COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHMFISS/CDR USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITYUNCLAS KIGALI 000220 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/C AND DRL 
EUCOM FOR POLAD 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM PHUM RW
SUBJECT: KIGALI CITY ELECTS WOMAN MAYOR 
 
REF:  A.  KIGALI 183 
 
      ¶B.  KIGALI 146 
 
¶1.  Summary:  In the final phase of 2006 local elections 
March 4, a woman parliamentarian was elected mayor of Kigali 
by an overwhelming majority.  As in the earlier phases of 
the electoral process (reftels), voter turnout was high.  An 
estimated 94 percent of the electoral college, comprised of 
elected members of the District Council and Sector Council 
Bureau, participated by secret ballot in the indirect 
election of the mayor and five other municipal officials. 
Foreign Affairs Minister Charles Murigande thanked the 
electors and the National Electoral Commission, and reminded 
the newly elected officials of their role as public 
servants.  He urged them to carry out with integrity the 
duties entrusted to them during their five-year term.  End 
summary. 
 
¶2.  On March 4, in the final phase of 2006 local elections, 
District Council and Sector Council Bureau members elected 
by secret ballot six Kigali City officials, including the 
mayor and two vice-mayors, to manage the city on a day-to- 
day basis.  Woman parliamentarian Dr. Aissa Kirabo Kakira, 
member of the ruling Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF), was 
elected mayor by an overwhelming majority of votes (164 to 
12) over the other female candidate.  According to the 
National Electoral Commission (NEC), approximately 94 
percent of the electoral college participated in the 
election. 
 
¶3.  Dr. Kakira thanked the electors for their support, and 
the NEC for its effective organization of the elections. 
She pointed out that a significant number of female 
candidates participated in the elections and hoped that that 
this trend would continue. 
 
¶4.  On behalf of the government, Foreign Affairs Minister 
Murigande also thanked the electors for their participation. 
He expressed his gratitude to NEC and the electoral college 
for concluding the local elections with integrity and 
transparency.  (Note:  Prominently displayed banners in the 
local language outside the polling station urged voters to 
vote for their leaders with "integrity, freedom, and 
transparency."  End note.)  Murigande noted that 
organization of elections in Africa, as elsewhere in the 
world, is a big and difficult task, at times complicated by 
confrontation, contested results, and other irregularities. 
He pointed out that the elections in Rwanda were conducted 
peacefully and successfully as a result of NEC's efforts. 
 
¶5.  Murigande extended his appreciation to the newly elected 
officials, reminding them of the trust given to them by the 
people of Kigali City through their representatives.  He 
urged them to uphold the trust during their five-year 
mandate and expressed the hope that at the end of their term 
they could show Kigali City that this trust had been used 
wisely for the benefit of the people.  Reminding them that 
there are those in Rwanda who seek leadership positions for 
private gain, Murigande expressed the hope that the newly 
elected officials sought their positions for the benefit of 
Kigali City and that they would make sacrifices so that the 
city could achieve great things. 
 
¶6.  The elections, like the earlier elections at the cell, 
sector, and district levels, were peaceful with no signs of 
coercion, intimidation or harassment of voters.  Overall, 
the process appeared fair and transparent, despite some 
minor inconsistencies.  The ballot box remained unsealed 
throughout the day, but was within full view of voters and 
observers.  Ballots were stamped by NEC, and five armed 
National Police provided visible but unobtrusive security. 
 
¶7.  Biography:  Dr. Kakira was elected as one of two women's 
representatives from the former Umutara Province in the 2003 
legislative elections and served as Member of Parliament in 
the Chamber of Deputies until her resignation March 4, 2005. 
Previously, she served as Extension Manager in the Ministry 
of Agriculture (2000-03), Program Manager for Oxfam-Great 
Britain (1997-2001), and Veterinary Project Officer for 
Handicap International Rwanda (1996-1997).  She holds a 
Masters of Science degree in tropical veterinary medicine 
and economics from James Cook University, Australia (1995), 
and a Bachelors degree in veterinary medicine from Makerere 
University, Uganda (1992).  She has been a member of the 
Rwanda Women Leaders' Caucus, Rwandan Women Parliamentary 
Forum, Parliamentary Forum for Sustainable Development, and 
Parliamentary Amani Group (an association focused on 
regional development and peaceful conflict resolution).  As 
a Rwandan born in Uganda, she holds dual citizenship.  She 
is fluent in English and Finnish.  Her husband is an officer 
in the Rwandan Defense Forces.  She will replace Theoneste 
Mutsindashyaka who was appointed governor of the Eastern 
Province in January 2006. 
 
¶8.  Comment:  Local sources predict that the administration 
of Kigali City will not change significantly as a result of 
the new mayor assuming power.  All phases of local elections 
were generally conducted in an orderly and efficient manner 
despite some minor logistical problems and possible 
political influence.  The next elections will be 
parliamentary elections in 2008, followed by presidential 
elections in 2010 and local elections in 2011. 
 
ARIETTI