06PARIS1301
UNESCO:  REQUEST FOR GUIDANCE, UNESCO CHAMPIONS
Thu Mar 02 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS PARIS 001301 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FROM USMISSION UNESCO PARIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: KPAO SCUL UNESCO
SUBJECT:  UNESCO:  REQUEST FOR GUIDANCE, UNESCO CHAMPIONS 
FOR SPORT 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY AND REQUEST FOR GUIDANCE:  UNESCO has an array 
of programs related to celebrity advocates, such as goodwill 
ambassadors, who help focus the world's attention on UNESCO 
as an organization.  The US Mission to UNESCO requests 
guidance on approaching Mr. Tiger Woods about becoming a 
UNESCO Champion for Sports.  Mission requests guidance on 
two points.  First, should the US nominate Mr. Woods? 
Second, who should approach Mr. Woods, Washington or the 
Mission?  The Mission has top-level contacts in golf that 
can assist in approaching Mr. Woods. 
END SUMMARY AND REQUEST FOR GUIDANCE. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
UNESCO Celebrity Advocates Program - Background 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶2.  UNESCO uses prizes and celebrities to "amplify" the 
mission of UNESCO.  While the prizes have, at times, been 
controversial, the celebrity advocate program is not.  First 
Lady Laura Bush is part of the celebrity advocate program 
and serves as the Honorary Ambassador for the Decade for 
Literacy.  Other categories in the celebrity advocate 
program include; Goodwill Ambassadors, Special Envoys, 
Champions of Sport, Artists for Peace and Scientists for 
Peace. 
 
¶3.  The five UNESCO Champions for Sport are: Pel (Brazil, 
soccer), Michael Schumacher (Germany, auto racing), Serhiy 
Bubka (Ukrane, Olympic pole-vaulter), David Douillet 
(France, Olympic judo), and Vyacheslav Fetisov (Russia, 
Olympic and NHL hockey).  US citizens who are celebrity 
advocates are: First Lady, Laura Bush (Honorary Ambassador 
for the United Nations Decade for Literacy), Mistalav 
Rostropovich (Goodwill Ambassador, cellist, conductor), 
Cheick Modibo Diarra (Goodwill Ambassador, NASA scientist), 
¶N. Scott Momaday (Artist for Peace, Native American writer, 
poet, painter, professor). 
 
¶4.  COMMENT:  The U.S. Mission feels that our next priority 
in the area of prizes and celebrities should be establishing 
high standards for UNESCO.  In addition to reforming the 
current practices of prizes and celebrity selection, the US 
can "raise the bar" by nominating truly world-class 
personalities like Tiger Woods.  END COMMENT. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
Champion for Sport - Why Tiger Woods? 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  Tiger Woods represents the best in sports.  He has 
achieved success in a sport that is extremely exacting and 
brutally objective.  Your score determines your success in 
golf, not your contract or reputation.  Integrity is key: 
players call penalties on themselves and keep their own 
score. 
 
¶6.  Tiger Woods' activities off the golf course are 
particularly pertinent to UNESCO.  He has established the 
Tiger Woods Foundation to promote health, education and 
welfare of children.  His values include integrity, honesty, 
discipline, responsibility and fun.  The recently launched 
Tiger Woods Learning Center focuses on science, math and 
language arts.  It is important to note that he began his 
foundation before the age of thirty, which shows his early 
commitment to helping children.  Further, the overlap in 
objectives of the Tiger Woods Foundation and UNESCO is 
indeed significant. 
 
Oliver