06SANJOSE584
MEDIA COVERAGE OF PRESIDENT BUSH'S CONGRATULATORY
Mon Mar 13 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy San Jose
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SAN JOSE 000584 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN JASON MACK 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV CS
SUBJECT: MEDIA COVERAGE OF PRESIDENT BUSH'S CONGRATULATORY 
CALL TO PRESIDENT-ELECT ARIAS 
 
 
¶1.  Most major news outlets reported on President Bush's 
congratulatory call to Oscar Arias on his election as 
president.  Arias freely discussed the topics and tenor of 
his conversation with President Bush, which lasted for 
approximately five minutes. 
 
¶2.  The press focused on three aspects of the conversation: 
 
--CAFTA-DR: On the U.S.-Central America-Dominican Republic 
Free Trade Agreement, Arias reported that Bush lamented the 
fact that Costa Rica is "losing time by not approving the 
deal, and that it's beginning to harm some businesses, above 
all textiles."  Arias reiterated his position that failure to 
approve CAFTA-DR will result in restricted access to U.S. 
markets and eventually lead to layoffs.  He told reporters 
that he assured President Bush that he will work to expedite 
ratification of CAFTA-DR. 
 
--Democracy: Arias reported that he and President Bush 
discussed Costa Rica's role in bolstering regional democracy, 
with President Bush concerned that some countries in the 
region are not moving in the "correct direction" to 
consolidate democratic institutions.  Arias said that 
President Bush asked for his help in promoting democracy, and 
Arias responded that he will use his position as President of 
the most established democracy in Latin America to help 
strengthen regional democracy.  When asked whether this meant 
that Costa Rica would have closer relations with the U.S., 
Mexico and Chile than with Venezuela and Bolivia, Arias, true 
to form, responded that Costa Rica would be "friends with the 
whole world," but clarified that there is no question that he 
is much more closely aligned ideologically with Ricardo Lagos 
of Chile than with Evo Morales or Hugo Chavez. 
 
--Relations: Arias stated his belief that Costa Rica will 
enjoy friendlier relations with the U.S. than during his 
previous administration.  Arias indicated he did not extend 
an invitation to President Bush, whom he described as 
amiable, to attend his May 8 inauguration ceremony because 
"the president of the United States never attends transfers 
of power." 
LANGDALE