06TELAVIV918
ISRAEL: SIXTH ANNUAL TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT
Tue Mar 07 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 09 TEL AVIV 000918 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR G/TIP: GAYATRI PATEL; NEA/IPA: JOSHUA DAVIS; 
NEA/RA: JOHN MENARD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD ASEC PREF ELAB IS ISRAELI SOCIETY GOI INTERNAL
SUBJECT: ISRAEL: SIXTH ANNUAL TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT 
(3 OF 4) 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 03836 
     Â¶B. TEL AVIV 596 
 
(SBU) This cable forms the third part of a four-part message 
in response to reftel A.  Embassy point of contact is poloff 
James Miller, phone (972)3-519-7437, fax (972)3-519-7484. 
 
For NGO reports about the failure of the IA adequately to 
enforce the law against passport confiscation, please see 
response, above, to question B in the overview section. 
 
-- F. Is there any information or reports of who is behind 
the trafficking?  For example, are the traffickers freelance 
operators, small crime groups, and/or large international 
organized crime syndicates?  Are employment, travel, and 
tourism agencies or marriage brokers fronting for traffickers 
or crime groups to traffic individuals? Are government 
officials involved?  Are there any reports of where profits 
from trafficking in persons are being channeled?  (e.g. armed 
groups, terrorist organizations, judges, banks, etc.) 
 
For more information about the traffickers, please see 
response, above, to question B in the overview section. 
 
-- Sex trafficking:  NGO representatives concur that evidence 
does not demonstrate extensive involvement in sex trafficking 
by Israeli employment, travel and tourism agencies.  One NGO 
plans to write a report to analyze the identity of sex 
traffickers and their networks based on court records.  They 
have applied for and received government permission to access 
these records. 
 
-- Labor trafficking: NGOs charge that some Israeli 
employment/manpower agencies profit from activities that 
constitute labor trafficking.  Foreign recruiters, smugglers, 
Israeli manpower agencies, and Israeli employers split the 
illegal fees that workers pay to come to Israel, according to 
NGOs.  Manpower agencies and employers profit from low wages 
and inadequate board and lodging. 
 
-- G. Does the government actively investigate cases of 
trafficking?  (Again, the focus should be on trafficking 
cases versus migrant smuggling cases.) Does the government 
use active investigative techniques in trafficking in persons 
investigations? To the extent possible under domestic law, 
are techniques such as electronic surveillance, undercover 
operations, and mitigated punishment or immunity for 
cooperating suspects used by the government?  Does the 
criminal procedure code or other laws prohibit the police 
from engaging in covert operations? 
 
During 2005, the police used various means to obtain evidence 
in trafficking cases.  These means include: agents working 
under-cover, surveillance, electronic monitoring of phone 
communications, filming of trafficking operations and 
interception of telephone conversations.  In addition, the 
INP initiated investigations rather than relying on sporadic 
complaints. 
 
A senior police contact reported that during the summer of 
2005 police officers did not fight trafficking at all because 
the INP ordered all officers to train for and support 
disengagement from the Gaza Strip. 
 
In 2003, the government established the Ramon Border Police 
unit to combat smuggling of persons, weapons and drugs across 
the border with Egypt.  In 2005, this special unit requested 
and received additional resources to prevent weapons 
smuggling and trafficking in persons.  It will receive 
additional manpower and resources as the GOI redeploys 
battalions formerly serving elsewhere to monitor and protect 
Israel,s borders with Jordan and Egypt (reftel B). 
 
NGO representatives say that, most often, police officials 
follow up complaints from NGOs or victims rather than 
actively initiating investigations on their own.  According 
to NGOs, most often the IA police -) instead of the INP,s 
crime investigation unit -- find trafficking victims while 
patrolling the streets for illegal immigrants.  The INP then 
follows up on these cases.  NGO workers also claim to know of 
-) but have not provided evidence of -- specific cases in 
which police from the IA arrested victims in the company of 
their traffickers or pimps, and deported the victims while 
the traffickers or pimps went free.  Moreover, NGOs say, 
police do not actively pursue traffickers by following leads 
accessible in public places, such as escort agency 
advertisements found in newspapers, the Internet, and small 
cards commonly placed on car windshields.  When they do 
follow these open leads, NGOs say, IA police often simply use 
escort agencies to arrange meetings with women whom they then 
deport if they do not have valid visas, rather than determine 
whether they are trafficking victims. 
 
Throughout the year, both the Israel Broadcasting Authority 
and the Second Authority for Television and Radio aired TV 
and radio programs focused on the social problems and crimes 
that lead to sex trafficking, including two full-length 
films.  Both Broadcasting Authorities also ran TV and radio 
programs about labor trafficking, discussing issues such as 
the legal status of foreign workers' children.  Some of these 
programs included open discussions with Members of Knesset, 
NGO workers, and officials at the IA.  In January and 
February, 2006, Israel,s Channel 1 and Channel 2 produced 
widely-watched special TV programs on trafficking.  In one 
program, a camera crew joined a Tel Aviv police unit in a 
raid on brothels that was organized after the police gathered 
concrete intelligence about hiding places.  When the police 
found the women locked in secret cupboards and spaces behind 
sealed walls, they assailed the victims with a shocking level 
of verbal abuse.  They found some 15 trafficking victims, all 
of whom NGOs claim the police then arrested and deported 
within two weeks.  NGOs also say that the police did not 
offer any of the victims time to reflect upon and evaluate 
the possibility of testifying, nor did the police transfer 
any of the women to the shelter. 
 
-- H. Does the government provide any specialized training 
for government officials in how to recognize, investigate, 
and prosecute instances of trafficking? 
 
The GOI continued to expand its efforts to train government 
officials, although such efforts generally took place in 
periodic seminars and lectures rather than through a 
systematic and broad-based approach.  The MFA included 
information on TIP in training programs for diplomats posted 
to source countries.  MOJ officials and NGOs trained new INP 
recruits at the Police Training Academy, border police 
interrogators, judges in immigrant detention centers, and 
prosecutors at the Institute for Continuing Education of 
Prosecutors and Legal Advisors.  As mentioned above, the IDF 
agreed to introduce an informational article on trafficking 
in women in its monthly circular, and to develop 
anti-trafficking seminars and lectures for IDF soldiers. 
 
The Immigration Administration (IA) initiated training and 
education for doctors working in the detention facilities to 
familiarize them with illnesses common to trafficking 
victims.  The IA has also joined forces with the Levinsky 
Clinic of the Ministry of Health in Tel Aviv, which deals 
with sexually transmitted diseases and plans to send 
representatives to visit the facilities to test for these 
diseases. 
 
In addition, a representative of the MOJ delivered May 24 a 
lecture on trafficking before senior officials of the IA. 
This lecture emphasized the international context of 
trafficking, the treaties that apply and the human rights 
perspective.  The exchange that followed led the 
Administration to issue a document to aid in screening and 
identifying victims of trafficking in their detention 
facilities. 
 
For more information, please also see response, above, to 
question B in the overview section. 
 
--I. Does the government cooperate with other governments in 
the investigation and prosecution of trafficking cases? If 
possible, can post provide the number of cooperative 
international investigations on trafficking? 
 
-- Sex trafficking: The government does cooperate with other 
governments in the investigation and prosecution of sex 
trafficking cases.  See question J, below. 
 
-- Labor trafficking: The GOI did not report cooperation with 
other governments in the investigation and prosecution of 
labor trafficking cases. 
 
-- J. Does the government extradite persons who are charged 
with trafficking in other countries?  If so, can post provide 
the number of traffickers extradited?  Does the government 
extradite its own nationals charged with such offenses?   If 
not, is the government prohibited by law form extraditing its 
own nationals?  If so, what is the government doing to modify 
its laws to permit the extradition of its own nationals? 
 
The government may extradite Israeli nationals under the 
provisions of the Extradition Law 5714-1954, as amended in 
2001, which specifically allows the GOI to extradite any 
person charged with a penalty punishable by more than one 
year in prison to a country with which it has an extradition 
treaty.  The GOI may also extradite an individual to any 
country that, along with Israel, is party to a multilateral 
international convention that contains extradition provisions. 
 
Israel also submits extradition requests to other countries 
in connection with trafficking cases in Israel. 
 
As a result of coordinated police efforts during the year, 
Russian officials extradited Israeli national Shota 
Shamelashvili to Israel, where he is currently on trial for 
trafficking in persons; American officials extradited another 
Israeli national, Yigal Mizrachi, to Israel, where he is 
currently serving a prison term for trafficking-related 
offenses; Ukrainian officials extradited Sergey Matatov to 
Israel, where he is currently on trial for trafficking in 
persons, and the Ukrainians also extradited to Israel Yevgeny 
Kanevski, who allegedly helped lead an international criminal 
organization for the trafficking of women from the Ukraine to 
Israel.  During the year, Israel received legal assistance 
from Russia and the Ukraine for the trial of several Israeli 
defendants indicted for trafficking in persons.  Also as a 
result of joint investigations, Israeli and Belarussian 
officials arrested several suspected members of two criminal 
groups that trafficked women from Belarus to Israel. 
 
-- K. Is there evidence of government involvement in or 
tolerance of trafficking, on a local or institutional level? 
If so, please explain in detail. 
 
No evidence exists to indicate that government officials 
traffic in persons. 
 
-- L. If government officials are involved in trafficking, 
what steps has the government taken to end such 
participation?  Have any government officials been prosecuted 
for involvement in trafficking or trafficking- related 
corruption? Have any been convicted?  What actual sentence 
was imposed?  Please provide specific numbers, if available. 
 
The GOI views its increasingly extensive training about the 
reprehensible nature of trafficking as a deterrent to police 
officers and other officials who consider violating 
trafficking laws.  The Israeli law that forbids sex 
trafficking applies to the entire population, including 
public officials.  A wide variety of anti-corruption laws 
also apply to public officials.  The state attorney used 
these laws to indict MK Shlomo Benizri in February 2006 on 
charges of bribery, for accepting gifts from a manpower 
company in exchange for information about quotas for foreign 
workers.  The police have also recommended pressing charges 
against MK Yair Peretz, former chairman of the Knesset 
Foreign Workers Committee, for helping a manpower company to 
break the law in return for reported thousands of shekels. 
The company continues to operate. 
 
NGO representatives maintain that policemen patronize 
brothels and on several occasions warned brothel owners of 
impending raids.  During the year, two NGOs surveyed 106 
trafficked women, 44 percent of whom claimed that policemen 
patronized their brothels. 
For the last five years the Department for Investigation of 
Police Officers, an autonomous division of the MOJ, has 
operated an exposure unit that focuses on professional 
ethics.  This unit conducts investigations that require 
intelligence deployment and long-term undercover activity. 
Its officers investigate accusations that directly or 
indirectly implicate police officers in trafficking, 
accepting sexual or other forms of bribes from prostitutes or 
brothel operators, and assisting felons by, for instance, 
providing advance notice of police raids.  The Department 
also established a joint procedure for collaboration with the 
IA which stipulates that, in cases in which the Department is 
about to conduct an investigation and a foreign worker is an 
essential witness, the IA will not deport or detain the 
worker until the end of the judicial procedure necessitating 
his presence in Israel. 
 
The Department for Investigation of Police Officers 
investigated an officer who had sexual relations, without 
payment, with an illegal resident who engaged in 
prostitution.  The department ordered the officer to take 
compulsory leave and has not yet decided the future of his 
service.  The Department completed an investigation of police 
officers who met, in 2002, with prostitutes from an escort 
service while a police operation was underway against the 
same service; the details of this meeting came to light 
during criminal proceedings in September 2004.  The 
department is currently reviewing disciplinary measures 
against these officers. 
 
In a recent case against police officers convicted of sexual 
crimes against a foreign worker, the Supreme Court accepted 
the appeal of the prosecution and increased one of the 
sentences to 42 months of imprisonment from 24 months (C.A. 
11088/04, 10670/04, 10721/04 Yaish et al. v. State of 
Israel).  In another case, a police officer confessed to and 
was convicted of demanding sexual favors from a woman whom he 
had threatened to arrest and deport if she did not comply. 
In December, a judge sentenced him to eight months in prison 
with an additional ten-month suspended sentence.  In another 
case, judges sentenced an officer from the IA charged with 
causing palpable injury to a foreign worker during his arrest 
to 15 months' imprisonment, 15 months' suspended 
imprisonment, and 10,000 NIS compensation to the victim.  The 
defendant appealed his conviction and sentencing, and the 
Supreme Court denied the appeal in November, 2005.  In a case 
that concluded in December, 2005, judges sentenced a police 
detective for acceptance of bribery, indecent behavior, 
sexual harassment and breach of trust to eight months' 
imprisonment and 10 months' suspended imprisonment 
 
Police investigated a former IA officer on charges of 
extorting money from foreign workers in return for 
facilitating their release from detention by transferring 
them to other employers.  Police charged that he abused the 
"closed skies" system, under which the government encourages 
employers to hire foreign workers from among those detained 
and awaiting deportation, rather than bringing in new ones 
from abroad.  Many foreign workers have complained to NGOs 
about similar abuse of this system.  The IA officer has not 
yet been indicted. 
 
The Department for Investigation of Police Officers reports 
that it received 15 complaints in 2005 of police officer 
violence against illegal residents, a significant reduction 
from the 50 it received in 2004.  Investigators concluded 11 
of the cases without indictment or disciplinary action, due 
to lack of evidence, and continue to investigate the four 
other complaints.  The Department has set a guideline that 
investigations of complaints made by foreign workers should 
be concluded within a maximum of 45 days.  In cases where 
prosecutors gather sufficient evidence for indictment, they 
can file the indictment through an accelerated procedure, 
including pre-trial testimony, to ensure that the proceedings 
will be effective even if the foreign worker leaves Israel. 
 
-- M. If the country has an identified child sex tourism 
problem (as source or destination), how many foreign 
pedophiles has the government prosecuted or 
deported/extradited to their country of origin? Does the 
country's child sexual abuse laws have extraterritorial 
coverage (like the U.S. PROTECT Act)? 
 
No evidence exists to indicate that child sex tourism occurs 
in Israel. 
 
Section 15 of the Penal Law provides that when an Israeli 
citizen or resident undertakes child sexual abuse activities 
abroad that would be illegal if conducted within Israel, he 
or she may still be charged in Israel with that crime, e.g., 
receiving sexual services of a child, child prostitution, 
child pornography, and trafficking in children. 
 
-- N. Has the government signed, ratified, and/or taken steps 
to implement the following international instruments? Please 
provide the date of signature/ratification if appropriate. 
 
--ILO Convention 182 concerning the prohibition and immediate 
action for the elimination of the worst forms of child labor. 
 
The government ratified ILO Convention 182 on December 16, 
Â¶2004. 
 
--ILO Convention 29 and 105 on forced or compulsory labor. 
 
The government ratified these conventions on July 7, 1955, 
and April 10, 1958, respectively. 
 
--The Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of 
the Child (CRC) on the sale of children, child prostitution, 
and child pornography. 
 
The government signed this protocol on November 14, 2001, but 
has not ratified the conventions. 
 
--The Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in 
Persons, especially Women and Children, supplementing the UN 
Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime. 
 
The government signed this instrument on November 14, 2001, 
but has not ratified it. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
Â¶6.  (SBU) PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
-- A. Does the government assist victims, for example, by 
providing temporary to permanent residency status, relief 
from deportation, shelter and access to legal, medical and 
psychological services?  If so, please explain.  Does the 
country have victim care and victim health care facilities? 
If so, can post provide the number of victims placed in these 
care facilities? 
 
-- Sex trafficking 
 
Temporary or permanent residency status 
 
Trafficking victims cannot receive permanent residency status 
in Israel unless they marry an Israeli citizen or convert to 
Judaism according to Orthodox requirements.  The Interior 
Ministry provides temporary visas (usually for up to one 
year, and occasionally renewable for another year) to victims 
serving as material witnesses in court cases.  In some 
instances, the Ministry grants permission for them to obtain 
employment, and the GOI reported a rise in the number of 
victims receiving this permission during 2005.  During the 
year, the Interior Ministry reports that it granted 24 women 
visas to reside and to work in Israel; six women visas to 
reside in Israel but not to work; eight women one-year visas 
to reside but not to work in Israel; and two women 
humanitarian visas to reside but not to work in Israel.  The 
Ministry also issued 30 laissez-passers for victims lacking 
passports.  Over the course of 2005, 46 shelter residents 
worked outside the shelter in stores, bakeries, restaurants, 
and the cosmetics industry. 
 
The government during 2005 also began to grant temporary 
visas and work permits on humanitarian grounds to some 
victims who did not testify in court.  In some cases, the 
Interior Ministry awarded visas to victims of trafficking to 
allow them a period of recovery.  In one such case, the 
Ministry granted to a victim who had been trafficked as a 
minor a third visa extension, for six months, after two 
one-year visas.  To help a victim to stay in Israel in 
humanitarian circumstances, the de facto coordinator submits 
a request for temporary visa status to a senior official in 
the Population Administration, a department in the Interior 
Ministry.  This senior official evaluates each application 
individually, before submitting a recommendation to the 
director general of the Population Administration.  The 
director general then makes the final decision whether to 
approve or deny the visa. 
 
NGO representatives acknowledge that the Interior Ministry 
granted more visas to victims in 2005, but note that the 
Ministry still denies approximately one half of the victims, 
applications.  NGOs also criticize the slow evaluation 
process for what they describe as its unpredictable and 
seemingly arbitrary nature.  They claim that the Ministry did 
not follow any identifiable logic or pattern in explaining 
its visa refusals, or in establishing the length and 
conditions of the visas it approves.  Some of the 
explanations for decisions reflected, NGOs aver, hostility 
toward victims and a lack of understanding about the nature 
of trafficking. 
 
During 2005, the Legal Aid Division of the MOJ began to help 
the de facto coordinator handle the increased number of visa 
requests.  Legal Aid now prepares victims, requests for 
temporary residence visas once they have concluded their 
court testimony.  Legal Aid does not charge for this service. 
 
Relief from deportation 
 
Senior police officers in the INP, the IA, the detention 
centers, and the Ramon Border Police told poloff that they 
implemented a major policy change during 2005.  They began to 
send all suspected victims of trafficking for the purpose of 
sexual exploitation immediately to the shelter for trafficked 
women in Tel Aviv.  They said they no longer transfer to the 
shelter only those women who agree to testify, while 
deporting the rest.  During 2005, according to the GOI, 78 
percent of the women who stayed in the shelter testified 
against their traffickers, and the shelter accepted on a 
purely humanitarian basis, without testimony, 15 percent of 
the shelter residents, including pregnant women, women with 
children, women under 18, sick women or women at risk at 
their country of origin.  In addition, the police have begun 
to transfer women to the shelter to afford them time to 
decide whether they wish to testify against their 
traffickers; in 2005, according to the INP, three women took 
advantage of this deliberation period. 
 
NGO representatives questioned the consistency of this 
practice as well as the ability of police officers to 
identify trafficking victims during the short period of time 
that precedes the victims, deportation.  NGOs noted that 
sometimes women do not seek immediately to identify 
themselves as trafficking victims, for fear of either the 
Israeli authorities or the traffickers.  The IA, NGOs claim, 
often deported victims before they had time to recover from 
the trauma of trafficking, captivity and arrest. 
 
The INP also reports that it began during 2005 to perform 
risk assessments in cases where trafficking victims claimed 
they or their families might face danger if returned to their 
countries of origin.  Police intelligence, with the 
assistance of Interpol and the INP delegate abroad, assessed 
victims' risk status in Israel and in their countries of 
origin.  In three cases during the year, the police concluded 
that women would be endangered if they returned to their home 
countries; GOI officials say the government did not deport 
these women. 
 
Shelter 
 
On February 15, 2004, the GOI opened in Tel Aviv, with 
funding support from the U.S. government, the first shelter 
for trafficking victims.  The shelter can accommodate a 
maximum of 50 persons.  The government reported that, over 
the course of the year, 105 trafficked women, 45 of whom 
arrived in 2004, and eight children resided in the shelter. 
A steering committee for the shelter makes decisions on 
matters of policy and practice, and includes representatives 
from the Ministry of Social Affairs, police, Ministry of 
Public Security, MOJ, Ministry of Health, and the NGO Keshet, 
as well as the director of the shelter.  Personnel from the 
Ministry of Public Security guard the shelter, providing 
protection for the women and accompanying them to court 
proceedings and meetings with the District Attorney. 
 
The government provides to all women residing in the shelter 
legal, medical and psychological services and eligibility to 
apply for a temporary visa.  The Memorandum of Agreement 
signed in 2004 between the U.S. and Israeli governments 
stipulates that a "preference" be afforded to women who agree 
to testify against their traffickers, but police have, until 
this year, transferred to the shelter only those women who 
agreed to testify. 
 
The Interior Ministry, in cooperation with the ITL Ministry, 
has established a system of issuing work permits to 
trafficking victims residing in the shelter without limiting 
them to a specific job or field.  This system is not 
available to trafficking victims who do not reside in the 
shelter. 
 
On January 1, 2006, the Knesset amended the Law regarding 
Israel Economic Recovery Program to exempt employers of women 
residing in the shelter from paying a foreign workers levy, 
amounting to eight percent of the women's wages.  This 
important amendment removed a disincentive to employ former 
victims of trafficking. 
 
During the year, the state attorney took steps to guarantee 
the privacy of trafficking victims.  On September 22, he 
instructed the district attorneys, the heads of departments 
in the state attorney's office, and the head of the 
Department for Investigation of Police Officers to use 
initials rather than the full names of trafficking victims in 
indictments. 
 
Legal services 
 
Legal Aid in 2005 provided legal assistance to victims in the 
shelter to help them to submit visa applications and to 
appeal their refusal, and to file civil suits against their 
traffickers.  In addition, the director general of the MOJ 
issued a policy decision to broaden Legal Aid to include all 
sex trafficking victims, including those in the detention 
facilities.  The GOI has set the date of April 23, 2006 for 
implementation of this program. 
 
Medical and psychological services 
 
The Ministry of Health provided to the shelter a physician 
and access for residents to the nearby Ichilov Hospital.  It 
also financed health care services, including general 
check-ups, gynecological care, urgent dental care, pregnancy 
and birth care, emergency room care, hospitalization, 
hospital care and operations as needed, contagious and 
infectious diseases care, sexually transmitted disease care 
(including HIV treatment), medications, and aftercare 
supervision. 
 
The Ministry also provided a professional psychologist and a 
social worker to offer regular counseling sessions to victims 
on an individual basis, augmented by group activities, art 
therapy, and an array of personal and professional enrichment 
activities.  To educate trafficking victims and the public 
about the shelter, the staff created a website in 2005. 
 
The country does not have specific victim care and victim 
health care facilities.  NGOs note that victims of sex 
trafficking whom the police did not refer to the shelter 
generally did not receive legal, medical, or psychological 
services. 
 
Safe Return 
 
The shelter staff report that they operate a "Safe Return" 
project that involves risk assessment and counseling with 
psychologists and social workers to determine victims' need 
for assistance in the return and rehabilitation process in 
their countries of origin.  Most victims feared returning to 
their home countries, shelter staff report; as a result, 70 
percent of the women who returned home in 2005 asked for 
assistance.  They reportedly received assistance at the 
shelter in Tel Aviv, and from NGOs and IOM in their countries 
of origin.  According to the GOI, the shelter maintains 
contact with 50 aid and assistance NGO's in countries of 
origin.  The shelter's staff members say they try to remain 
in contact with victims following their return home. 
 
-- Labor trafficking 
 
Temporary or permanent residency status 
 
During 2005, the Interior Ministry provided visa extensions 
to trafficking victims serving as material witnesses in court 
cases.  In some instances, the Ministry allowed witnesses to 
obtain other employment, although NGOs say the Ministry 
rarely granted work permits to witnesses.  More typically, 
NGOs claim, the government either detained workers pending 
conclusion of the trial, or deported them before they had an 
opportunity to testify.  Those who received permission to 
work had to overcome the usual prohibitions on changing 
employers, including the challenge of locating an employer to 
hire them within the same sector where they previously 
worked.  Often, NGOs report, clerks in the ITL Ministry 
required workers to produce a release letter from their 
former employer before changing jobs, even though the 
Ministry regulations no longer require these letters. 
 
According to current procedures, to apply for a work permit, 
a trafficked worker must seek an administrative ruling from 
the Interior Ministry, and workers generally require the 
assistance of a lawyer to complete this process.  During the 
year, the Ministry considered applications on a case-by-case 
basis, taking into account the length of time the worker had 
been in country and would need to stay in order to complete 
court testimony.  Victims who left the country needed to 
re-enter with a valid visa, which deterred most victims from 
leaving or, if they did, from returning. 
 
Relief from deportation 
 
The IA may grant foreign workers, including trafficking 
victims, a temporary stay of deportation if they have a 
complaint pending before the Crime Unit of the IA. 
 
Legal Aid 
 
The government does not provide state-funded Legal Aid to 
foreign workers.  They rely, instead, on NGOs.  The 
government does not provide to NGOs funding for this service. 
 
Medical Care 
 
According to the Foreign Workers, Law, employers must 
provide medical insurance to their foreign workers.  NGOs 
aver that employers generally provide only limited coverage, 
and some provide none at all.  Detained foreign workers 
receive basic medical care in the detention facilities. 
 
Foreign workers in Tel Aviv receive social services from a 
special welfare unit in the Tel Aviv Municipality.  They do 
not receive psychological treatment. 
 
-- B. Does the government provide funding or other forms of 
support to foreign or domestic NGOs for services to victims? 
Please explain. 
 
Currently, the government provides funding only to the 
shelter in Tel Aviv.  It does not fund or provide other 
support to foreign or domestic NGOs for provision of services 
to victims.  Prior to the opening of the shelter in February 
2004, police housed witnesses in police-funded hostels, but 
police sources claim they have stopped this program and now 
send sex trafficking victims to the shelter in Tel Aviv. 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
JONES