06WELLINGTON160
TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS - NEW ZEALAND 3/2006
Wed Mar 01 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 WELLINGTON 000160 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT PASS USAID 
EAP/ANP FOR DRICCI 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP ROWEN, G, INL, DRL, PRM, IWI, EAP/RSP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM PHUM SMIG KFRD ASEC PREF ELAB NZ
SUBJECT: TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS - NEW ZEALAND 3/2006 
 
REF: STATE 3836 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified 
 
¶1. (SBU) Following are responses for the Trafficking in 
Person report for New Zealand, keyed to reftel: 
 
Begin responses: 
 
¶21. Overview of a country's activities to eliminate 
trafficking in persons: 
 
¶A. New Zealand has been a country of destination for 
internationally trafficked women in the commercial sex 
industry.  No new confirmed cases of internationally 
trafficked persons have been brought to the attention of the 
authorities since 2001, although there was evidence that some 
women from Asia and other parts of the world including 
Eastern Europe were working illegally in the country as 
prostitutes.  Although prostitution has been decriminalized, 
it remains illegal for nonresidents to work in the commercial 
sex industry.  Most knowledgeable sources estimate that the 
extent of the problem is minimal on the scale of perhaps a 
few dozen individuals per year. 
 
Shakti Migrant Services Trust, an antitrafficking NGO, 
reported abuses resulting from the immigration of Indian 
women for arranged marriages, and provided services to abused 
women through four refuges located in Auckland, Christchurch 
and Tauranga.  While not providing specific numbers of those 
supported, Shakti reported that one of its 5-bed facilities 
was at full census for part of 2005.  In December the UN's 
special rapporteur on human trafficking, while on a private 
visit to the country, asserted in the press that although in 
many cases such groups as mail-order brides, migrant workers, 
foreign fishermen, and those in arranged marriages enter the 
country voluntarily, they could be at risk of losing their 
autonomy and becoming victims of trafficking. 
 
¶B. In the past, source countries of trafficked individuals 
have included Thailand, China, and other Asian countries. 
The primary destination in New Zealand is usually Auckland, 
New Zealand's largest city.  Commercial sexual exploitation 
of children was a problem, and this has been the subject of 
increased focus by regional and national governmental and 
non-governmental organizations over the past year. 
 
Under the Prostitution Reform Act, it is illegal to use a 
person under 18 years of age in prostitution.  A study by the 
Prostitution Law Review Committee completed in April 2004 
estimated that approximately 200 people under the age of 18 
were working as prostitutes, with the majority (60 percent) 
working on the street.  A January 2006 police sweep for 
underage persons working in the "red light" district of 
Christchurch yielded four persons under age 18, including one 
age 12 and one age 14.  There has been no confirmation that 
the persons were engaging in prostitution, and the persons 
ages 12 and 14 had been reported missing from foster homes 
prior to the sweep.  Christchurch is considered to have the 
greatest problem with underage sex workers. 
 
Following the January 2001 decision ending visa free entry 
for Thai nationals, there have been indications that the 
level of Thai commercial sex workers has waned.  There has 
been an increase in Chinese sex workers coming from 
Cantonese-speaking parts of Asia.  There are also small 
numbers of sex workers from other parts of the world, 
including Eastern Europe.  More recently, there was evidence 
that some women from the Czech Republic and Brazil were 
working illegally in the country as prostitutes.  (Note: The 
Czech Republic and Brazil are among newer countries 
participating in New Zealand's visa waiver program.  End 
note.)  Commercial sex work is not legal for non-residents; 
however, these activities would generally be prosecuted as 
immigration violations if uncovered.  The New Zealand 
Prostitutes Collective (NZPC) indicated that there has been 
an increase in non-New Zealand resident sex workers in areas 
where there language schools and universities. 
 
Limited evidence of internationally trafficked persons into 
New Zealand suggests that most understand that they are going 
to work in the commercial sex industry.  In the past, 
trafficked individuals also worked in the construction and 
garment industries.  From time to time, "bonds" are required 
for commercial sex workers to pay for entry into New Zealand 
and pimps/facilitators have been known to withhold passports 
pending payment of the "bonds." 
¶C. Resources appear adequate given the size of the problem. 
GNZ funds programs through its ministries as well as 
providing funding to NGOs that deal with trafficking issues. 
 
¶D. There is no plan to document the extent of trafficking; 
instead the focus is on ensuring that programs exist to deal 
with traffickers and victims as they come to light.  The 
Government's strategy has been outlined in New Zealand's 
recent National Plan of Action, which will address the 
prevention of trafficking in persons, protection of victims, 
prosecution of traffickers, and the reintegration of victims 
(See 22J). 
 
¶22. PREVENTION: 
 
¶A. Yes, New Zealand is at the forefront of international 
efforts to combat trafficking in persons.  New Zealand 
acknowledges that trafficking is a problem, although they 
have disagreed with the USG definition of children engaged in 
the commercial sex industry, often defining this as child 
abuse or neglect.  The Prostitution Reform Act was passed in 
an effort to protect commercial sex workers and in particular 
to block the commercial sexual exploitation of children.  New 
Zealand's trafficking legislation defines minors as those 
under 18 years of age.  The Act prohibits child sex tourism, 
and citizens who commit child sex offenses overseas can be 
tried in New Zealand courts. 
 
¶B. The Department of Labour; the Human Rights Commission; the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade; the Ministry of 
Justice; the Ministry of Health; the Department of Child, 
Youth and Family; and the New Zealand Police. 
 
¶C. A highly successful Thai language anti-trafficking 
campaign was launched in 1999 to target Thai women in the 
commercial sex industry.  The government extends substantial 
resources to combat trafficking in persons. 
 
NGOs including the New Zealand Prostitute's Collective 
(NZPC), the Maxim Institute, the Women's Refuge, Shakti 
Migrant Services Trust and the Salvation Army offer programs 
to commercial sex workers on the street, offering "life 
options."  While the major NZ organization dealing with 
trafficking (End Child Prostitution and Trafficking, or 
ECPAT) primarily targets demand, all NGOs focus on offering 
assistance to victims.  The NZPC has helped underage 
prostitutes to find alternate employment or assisted them in 
returning to school. 
 
¶D. Yes.  New Zealand supports international efforts to combat 
trafficking.  A number of these campaigns are now provided in 
a range of languages to make new immigrants and refugees 
aware of their rights while living in New Zealand, including 
employment rights and human rights. 
 
¶F. There are excellent cooperative relations between the 
government, NGOs and elements of civil society on the 
trafficking issue.  The GNZ funds many NGOs and civil society 
institutions combating this problem. 
 
For example, the government worked with nongovernmental 
organizations (NGOs) to address trafficking in children and 
provided funding for NGO outreach programs in Auckland and 
Christchurch that provided accommodations and other support 
for young persons at risk for involvement in prostitution. 
The government had a national plan of action against the 
commercial exploitation of children developed in concert with 
NGOs and completed a progress review of the plan during the 
year; its report on the review was scheduled for release in 
¶2006. 
 
To respond to abuse occurring within arranged marriages, 
Shakti Migrant Services Trust worked with Immigration New 
Zealand to add an additional condition for a person to be 
eligible to sponsor a spouse's or partner's immigration to 
New Zealand:  that the sponsor is not a perpetrator of 
domestic violence which resulted in granting a residence 
permit to a victim of the sponsor's violent actions.  The 
condition added to limitations on the number of partner 
sponsorships (no more than one) and time since last 
sponsorship (not less than five years). 
¶G. Yes. 
 
¶H. Yes, while in the past the National Human Rights 
Commission coordinated responses to these problems, the 
Department of Labour has been named the primary coordinating 
agency for anti-trafficking efforts.  The Government actively 
participates in multilateral and efforts to prevent, monitor, 
and control trafficking. 
 
¶J. Yes.  The Government of New Zealand initiated the process 
to develop a National Plan of Action against Trafficking in 
Persons in February 2005, naming the Department of Labour 
(which includes the Immigration Service) as the lead agency 
in coordinating anti-trafficking strategies.  The GNZ plans 
to hold a whole-of-government meeting on the plan in late 
March 2005, and expects to hold a public session later in the 
year. 
 
While the Department of Labour is the lead coordinating 
agency, the Department of Internal Affairs; Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs and Trade; the Department of Child, Youth and 
Family Services; the Office of the Commissioner for Children; 
the New Zealand Law Society; the Ministry of Pacific Island 
Affairs; End Child Prostitution, Child Pornography and 
Trafficking of Children for Sexual Purposes (ECPAT); Ministry 
of Youth Affairs; Ministry of Justice; Ministry of Health; 
Ministry of Social Development; Human Rights Commission; New 
Zealand Customs Service; and the Ministry of Education are 
all involved in the development and implementation of NZ's 
anti-trafficking plan.  The plan is moving to final stages, 
and consultations are ongoing.  The plan will include input 
from NGOs. 
 
The agencies and ministries mentioned in 22B support a wide 
range of programs that, while not always specifically 
addressing trafficking, are working to explain worker rights 
and keep minors from entering the commercial sex industry. 
 
¶23. INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION OF TRAFFICKERS: 
 
¶A. In February 2002, New Zealand passed tough legislation 
criminalizing human smuggling and trafficking.  The 
Transnational Organized Crime Bill was adopted on June 17, 
2002 as an amendment to the Crimes, Extradition, Immigration, 
Passports and Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters Amendment 
Acts. 
 
¶B. New Zealand's anti-trafficking legislation imposes 
penalties of up to 20 years in prison and USD 325,000 (NZD 
500,000) in fines. 
 
¶C. Sexual violation is punishable by a term of imprisonment 
not to exceed 20 years. 
 
¶D. The 2003 Prostitution Reform Bill legalized prostitution, 
and solicitation was no longer a crime.  The legislation set 
a minimum age of 18 to work in the industry, gives 
prostitutes the same workplace protections as other 
industries, and provides for a licensing regime for brothels. 
 In addition, the law removes a client's ability to defend 
himself from prosecution based on his belief that an underage 
sex worker was 18 years or older, and extends prosecution to 
any person receiving financial gain from an act involving an 
underage sex worker. The law prohibits sex tourism, and 
citizens who commit child sex offenses overseas can be 
prosecuted in New Zealand courts. 
 
There were no reports of abuse or the involuntary detention 
of women involved in prostitution during the year; however, 
there were several credible reports that women smuggled into 
the country were forced into prostitution to repay 
substantial debts to traffickers.  There were also reports 
that some foreign commercial sex workers had their passports 
withheld by employers until bonds were repaid.  There were 
also allegations that children engaged in prostitution did so 
to repay debts to local gangs. 
 
A Prostitution Law Review Committee was created in 
conjunction with the Act and is tasked with reviewing the 
operation of the Act and reporting on its findings within 5 
years.  The Committee released a report in April 2005 that 
reported on the number of sex workers in New Zealand. The 
report provided baseline data against which to assess the 
longer term impact of the legislation. 
 
Police have noted that it is difficult to prosecute under-age 
commercial sex workers as the police are prevented from 
requiring identification.  As many child prostitutes do not 
see themselves as victims, and do not cooperate with the 
police, the police are finding it difficult to indict 
violators. 
 
In August 2005, the Manukau City Council (Control of Street 
Prostitution) Bill passed its first stage in Parliament, and 
was referred to the Local Government and Environment Select 
Committee.  The bill provides for local control over street 
prostitution in Manukau City by prohibiting solicitation for 
prostitution in public places by prostitutes, clients and 
persons acting on their behalf.  The Select Committee is due 
to report on the bill in June 2006. 
 
¶E. Yes.  During the year three brothel operators and one 
client were prosecuted for the use of persons under age 18 in 
prostitution.  The client and two of the brothel operators 
were convicted, and one operator was awaiting trial at year's 
end. 
 
¶F. There is no clear evidence on this subject; however, 
police speculate that small-scale Asian organized crime 
groups participate in this illegal trade.  The police have a 
dedicated unit for international organized crime, which may 
overlap with anti-trafficking efforts. There are no reports 
of government officials having been involved in this trade. 
 
¶G. Yes. 
 
¶H. The government has provided training to other government 
officials -- particularly non-governmental organizations in 
Thailand -- on methods to protect child witnesses in criminal 
proceedings. 
 
¶I. Yes.  The government participates in all international 
fora on anti-trafficking, and has in the past worked closely 
with the Government of Thailand to assist victims of 
trafficking. 
 
¶J. Yes.  The government allows extra-territoriality to apply 
in child sexual exploitation cases committed by New 
Zealanders overseas. 
 
¶K. No. 
 
¶L. N/A 
 
¶M. While there is not a large-scale problem; NZ has 
cooperated in the prosecution of NZ citizens that have 
engaged in child sex tourism overseas. 
 
¶N. ILO Convention 182 was ratified on June 14, 2001.  ILO 
convention 105 was ratified on June 14, 1968.  The Optional 
Protocol to the convention on the rights of the child on the 
sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography 
was signed on September 7, 2000. The protocol to prevent, 
suppress and punish trafficking in persons, especially women 
and children, supplementing the UN convention against 
transnational organized crime was ratified on July 19, 2002. 
 
¶24. PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS: 
 
¶A. The government has provided short-term sanctuary, witness 
protection, access to medical services and repatriation. 
Sexual abuse victims are eligible for support from the 
Accident Compensation Corporation.  This includes medical 
assistance at state expense. 
¶B. Yes.  The government supports a wide range of NGOs 
including the New Zealand Prostitutes Collective that provide 
services to commercial sex workers some of whom may have been 
trafficked. 
 
¶C. Yes.  Post has no knowledge of trafficked victims who have 
been jailed, fined or deported.  Illegal immigrants have been 
jailed, fined and deported. 
 
¶D. Yes.  In smuggling cases, the government encourages 
victims to support investigations and prosecutions of 
smugglers. 
 
¶E. Yes.  Victims are encouraged to participate in the 
investigation and prosecution of trafficking have access to 
the legal system to seek redress.  The Human Rights 
Commission successfully represented a Thai sex trafficking 
victim to the New Zealand Disputes Tribunal, and she 
recovered the NZD 6000 she paid traffickers for what she 
believed would be restaurant work. 
 
¶F. The government provides extensive protection and recovery 
support to victims and witnesses (See 24 A and B). Much of 
victim recovery support and refuge is managed through NGOs, 
to which the government provides funding.  For child victims, 
if placement back in the home or foster care is not 
appropriate, they are placed in a care and protection unit 
operated by the Department of Child, Youth and Family 
Services.  The government provides special training in 
dealing with all aspects of children and the law.  GNZ has 
successfully prosecuted at least one case of witness 
intimidation. 
 
¶G. In 1999, the Human Rights Commission set up a "safe house" 
program to assist Thai sex workers in escaping prostitution 
in New Zealand.  The Commission worked collaboratively with 
the Department of Immigration, New Zealand Police, New 
Zealand Prostitutes' Collective, Shakti Migrant Service 
Trust, and the Thai Embassy to assist a number of victims 
escape from the Auckland sex trade and return them to 
Thailand. 
 
Representatives from the Department of Labour and the Human 
Rights Commission have participated in and conducted numerous 
training workshops for recognizing victims and perpetrators 
of trafficking.  The Government of New Zealand is an active 
participant in international fora concerning human 
trafficking, including the Bali Process and the Asia Pacific 
Forum of National Human Rights Institutions. 
 
The Department of Labour's Immigration Service has conducted 
border control training workshops and document examination 
training for the immigration and border control staff of 
Pacific countries.  The Immigration Service has also provided 
passenger screening training to staff of airlines serving New 
Zealand and the Pacific. 
 
¶H. New Zealand citizens and residents are entitled to a wide 
range of social, mental and physical services, regardless of 
circumstance. 
 
¶I. ECPAT New Zealand, Ending Child Prostitution and 
Trafficking, is the lead NGO in this field and works closely 
with the government. 
 
End responses. 
 
¶2. (U) Embassy POC for trafficking in persons issues is 
Political Officer Tod Duran, Telephone (644) 462-6043 Fax 
(644) 472-3537. 
 
¶3. (U) Post estimates that the Political Officer spent 60 
hours in preparation of the TIP report cable. 
McCormick