09BEIRUT137
LEBANON: NOMINATIONS FOR FY-09 MEPI STUDENT LEADERS
Tue Feb 03 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beirut
VZCZCXRO1697
PP RUEHAG RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHDF RUEHIK RUEHKUK RUEHLZ RUEHROV RUEHSR
DE RUEHLB #0137/01 0341300
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 031300Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIRUT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4127
INFO RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVE
RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVE
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 09 BEIRUT 000137 
 
NEA/PI FOR SULLIVAN 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: KMPI KPAO PREL LE
SUBJECT: LEBANON: NOMINATIONS FOR FY-09 MEPI STUDENT LEADERS 
PROGRAM 
 
¶1.  (U) On January 23 and 26, a four-member post panel conducted 
interviews with short listed applicants for this summer's MEPI 
Student Leaders Program. Due to the large number of applications 
received this year by highly qualified Lebanese and Palestinian 
applicants (born and residing in Lebanon), the panel has selected 
six principal Lebanese candidates and two alternates based on their 
qualifications for the program, as well as six Palestinian 
candidates who come from particularly different and difficult 
socio-economic milieu (being refugees) and could not be compared to 
the Lebanese candidates but deserve an equal opportunity. 
 
¶2.  (U) The six principal Lebanese nominees are in rank order: 
Mario Abou Zeid, Joelle Eid, Sanaa Maalouf, Veronique El Kartabany, 
Marwan Abdallah, Hiba Kamal. The three alternates are in rank order: 
 Michele Fenianos, Sarah Khalil, and Mohammad Awad. 
 
¶3.  (U) Following is complete biographical data and post 
justifications for the ten principal nominees: 
 
Mario Abou Zeid 
 
a.  Abou Zeid; 
 
b.  Mario; 
 
c.  Sharbel; 
 
d.  01/22/1988; 
 
e.  Mazraat Yashouh, Al Maten; 
 
f.  Abou Zeid building 3d floor; 
 
g.  Midan street; 
 
h.  Lebanon; 
 
i.  Male; 
 
j.  Mazraat Yashouh, Al Maten, Midan street, Abou Zeid building 3d 
floor; 
 
k.  Mobile: 961-3-103283; 
 
l.  Mario.abouzeid@gmail.com; 
 
m.  None; 
 
n.  Sagesse University; 
 
o.  BA Politcial Science and International Affairs (2006-present); 
 
p.  Outreach officer at the Lebanese Association for Democratic 
Elections- Civil Campaign for Electoral Reform project, 
Beirut-Lebanon; 
 
q.  Elected Students Representative in high school(2003-2004)- 
Received Scholarship 'Merite ble vert' from Bank Audi/La Sagesse 
High School- Champion of the Sagesse High Schools Chess Tournament- 
champion of the Lebanese High Schools Basketball tournament- Best 
Junior Basketball player in Al Maten-Lebanon during the Pepsi Talent 
Scout 2003 program- High school delegate for the Youth Connection 
program with "Oum El Nour" organization for rehabilitation and drugs 
prevention- Elected President of the Committee of Youth 
Congregations- Al Maten Al Jabal region; 
 
r. Extreme Adventure Sports Instructor and trainer at "La Reserve- 
Afqa"- Volunteer at the Lebanese Association for Democratic 
Elections (LADE)- President of the Maten Committee and member of the 
Executive Central committee of the "Lebanese Youth Congregations"; 
 
s.  basketball, football, tennis, athletics, horse riding, mountain 
climbing, abseiling, caving, hunting, fishing, archery, chess, 
astrology, music and reading; 
 
t. Assistant Manager at "Total Lebanon, BHV Gas Station" during the 
2006 July War; 
 
u. None; 
 
v. Very good oral and written English as evidenced by application 
and interview; very good answers; hard worker and high leadership 
potential. 
 
 
Joelle Eid 
 
a.  Eid; 
 
b.  Joelle; 
 
c.  Bassam; 
 
d.  12/24/1988; 
 
e.  Beirut; 
 
f.  Lebanon; 
 
g.  Lebanon; 
 
h.  Lebanon; 
 
i.  Female; 
 
j.  Rabweh, 6th street, Antoine Eid bldg, Beirut, Lebanon; 
 
k.  Mobile: 961-70-4176969 ; 
 
l.  joelle.eid@gmail.com; 
 
m.  None; 
 
n.  Lebanese American University- Byblos; 
 
o.  International Affairs/Political Science (September 
2006-present); 
 
p.  Since September 2007, Joelle has been working with the 
international Catholic Migration Committee (ICMC) in translating 
Department of Homeland Security Missions (DHS) with Iraqi Refugees 
at the US Embassy - She has also had an internship with UNHCR; 
 
q.  None; 
 
r.  None; 
 
s.  politics, debates and reading; 
 
t.  Since September 2008, Joelle has been the director of Training 
at the Global Classrooms LAU Model United Nations Program 
(GC-LAUMUN)- From September 2006 until June 2008 she was a trainer 
and school relations coordinator at the same institute- She was the 
President of the International Affairs Club of the Lebanese American 
University from September 2007 until July 2008- Between 1999 and 
2008 she was a scout member and leader at the Association des Guides 
Du Liban (AGDL); 
 
u.  None; 
 
v.  Excellent oral and written English as evidenced by application 
and interview; 
 
w.  Evidenced real interest in MEPI programs as she had applied to 
this program in 2007; 
 
 
Sanaa Maalouf 
 
a.  Maalouf; 
 
b. Sanaa; 
 
c. Elias; 
 
d. 05/05/1988; 
 
e. Beit El Kiko, Metn; 
 
f. Lebanon; 
 
g. Lebanon; 
 
h. Lebanon; 
 
i. Female; 
 
j. Beit El Kiko, Street 13, building no.4, Metn-Lebanon; 
 
k. Mobile: 961-03-343746 ; Home : 961-04-928481 
 
l. sanaamaalouf393@hotmail.com; 
 
m. None; 
 
n. University of Balamand; 
 
o. Health Promotion (September 2006-present); 
 
p. Works as a Research Assistant with World Vision for the Frontline 
project since January 2009- Internship with UNHCR from July 2008 
until September 2008; 
 
q. Placed on the Dean's Honor List in the Faculty of Health Sciences 
in all academic semesters from Fall 2006 until Fall 2008; 
 
r. None; 
 
s. drawing, photography, sports, hiking and reading; 
 
t. Secretary in the "4D" University Development Club since 2007- 
Player in the Beit El Kiko Basketball Girls Team- Volunteer with 
Amnesty International's Regional office in Beirut- Volunteer with 
the Saint Vincent De Paul charitable association; 
 
u. None; 
 
v. Excellent English language skills as evidenced by application and 
interview; 
 
w. Sanaa wants to get a Master's degree and then a PHD in Health 
studies. She aims at holding a decisive position at the Lebanese 
Health Ministry in order to make and implement policies to improve 
the local health sector. 
 
 
Veronique El-Kartabany 
 
a.   El-Kartabany; 
 
b. Veronique; 
 
c. Badoui; 
 
d. 07/15/1988; 
 
e. Zgharta; 
 
f. Lebanon; 
 
g. Lebanon; 
 
h. Lebanon; 
 
i. Female; 
 
j. Mejdlayah, Zgharta, Haret Jdideh road, Badoui El-Kartabany 
building; 
 
k. Home: 961-6-662085; Mobile: 961-70-145856; 
 
l. veronica_ik7@hotmail.com; 
 
m. None; 
 
n. University of Balamand; 
 
o. Translation as a Major and Political Science as a 
Minor(2006-present); 
 
p. Since February 2006, Veronique has been working as the main 
Assistant at the Balamand University Office of Student 
Affairs/International Student division- She is also a free-lance 
translator for students and private companies such as Technoway; 
 
q. She was placed on the Honor List in 2006; 
 
r. None; 
 
s. dancing, knitting, presenting, writing, reading, hiking, and 
decorating; 
 
t. Founder of the Ladies Club at the Balamand University through 
which she organized an Awareness Campaign for the prevention of 
Breast Cancer and celebrations for the Independence Day- She is an 
active member of the Cine Club, the International Cultural Club and 
the Human Rights Club, as well as being a member of the Career Fair 
Committee and the Folk Dance Club, at the university.  She is a 
former member of "Al-Inaya Al Ilahiya Association for Handicaps and 
Elders" and a former member of the Mont La Salle Scouts in Zgharta 
(what does this organization do?). 
 
u. None; 
 
v. Excellent oral and written English as evidenced by application 
and interview; 
 
w. Veronique exhibits a lot of maturity and has great leadership 
potential, in addition to a sense of humor. 
 
 
 
Marwan Abdallah 
 
a.  Abdallah; 
 
b.  Marwan; 
 
c.  Fouad; 
 
d.  03/26/1988; 
 
e.  Batroun; 
 
f.  Lebanon; 
 
g.  Lebanon; 
 
h.  Lebanon; 
 
i.  Male; 
 
j.  Rashana main street, Fouad Abdallah Residence,  Batroun- 
Lebanon; 
 
k.  Home: 961-6-720336; Mobile: 961-70-856350; 
 
l.  marwan360@hotmail.com; 
 
m.  None; 
 
n.  Lebanese American University (LAU)Byblos; 
 
o.  Political Science/International Affairs; 
 
p.  President of the university campus Discovery Club and member of 
the International Affairs Club- He is also an active member of the 
Youth Planning Council of "Caritas Lebanon" charitable organization 
and a volunteer with the Institute of Diplomacy and Conflict 
Transformation, in addition to being a member of theSkiing Society; 
 
q.  None 
 
r.  None; 
 
s. basketball, soccer, swimming, politics, travel and history; 
 
t.  Marwan has been working since January 2007 as a waiter at the 
"Crepaway" restaurant in Batroun area. 
 
u.  Good written and oral English skills as evidenced by application 
and interview; 
 
v.  Marwan demonstrates good civil service activities and 
involvement.  He is a hard worker and has great leadership 
potential. 
 
 
Hiba Kamal 
 
a.  Kamal; 
 
b.  Hiba; 
 
c.  Doukan/Zoukan; 
 
d.  12/02/1986; 
 
e.  Druze; 
 
f.  Aley; 
 
g.  Lebanon; 
 
h.  Lebanon; 
 
i.  Female; 
 
j.  Shoueifat El-Hadad, Shaaban building, 4th floor, Aley, Lebanon; 
 
k.  Home:  961-5-432697; Mobile:  961-3-064474; 
 
l.  hibakamal_d@hotmail.com; 
 
m.  None; 
 
n.  Notre Dame University (NDU); 
 
o.  MA in International Affairs and Diplomacy (BA graduate from AUST 
in Journalism in 2008); 
 
p.  Hiba has been working since 2007 with the Arabic News Broadcast 
(ANB) first as a coordinator then presently as a reporter, writing 
international political reports- She was trained as a news editor at 
the Voice of Lebanon (VOL)between November 2006 and May 2005; 
 
q.  Received a certificate from the American University of Science 
and Technology (AUST)for being a top student at the Speech 
Communication course; 
 
r.  None; 
 
s.  Good oral and written English as evidenced by application and 
interview; 
 
t.  Hiba is already doing her Master's degree although considered 
under the usual age limit.  She exhibits a strong and independent 
personality and serious work commitment. 
 
 
¶4.  (U) The six principal Palestinian nominees, whom would 
undoubtedly enrich the MEPI Lebanon Alumni Network, are in rank 
order:  Fatima Al Dimassi, Mohamad Bakri, Saleh Al Dimassi, Mohamad 
Fathalla, Mohamad Himmo, and Ahmad Abdul Hadi. 
 
Fatima Al Dimassi 
 
a.  Fatima; 
 
b.  Al Dimassi; 
 
c.  Bassam; 
 
d.  12/21/1987; 
 
e.  Palestinian; 
 
f.  "Shatila" camp ; 
 
g.  Beirut; 
 
h.  Lebanon; 
 
i.  Female; 
 
j. "Shatila" camp, next to "Horsh" Beirut, UNRWA buildings area, 
"Wahiba" store building, 2nd floor, Beirut, Lebanon; 
 
k.  Mobile:  961-70-945639; 
 
l.  thatoma_kute@hotmail.com; 
 
m.  None; 
 
n.  Beirut Arab University (BAU); 
 
o.  Major studies, Business (since 2006); 
 
p. Minor studies, Media (since 2008) 
 
q. Lebanese University 
 
r.  Fatima volunteered as a secretary to the Personnel Field Officer 
at the UNRWA Lebanon Field Office from June 2008 until August 2008; 
 
s.  Received a certificate of good service from UNRWA Lebanon Field 
Office; 
 
t.  None; 
 
u. interested in media, research and reporting; 
 
u.  Good oral and written English as evidenced by application and 
interview; 
 
v.  Fatima is very poised, dynamic and has leadership potential. She 
has self-confidence and is studying business management and media at 
different universities as she is ambitious and would like to focus 
on media awareness for political issues; 
 
 
Mohamad Bakri 
 
a.  Mohamad; 
 
b.  Bakri; 
 
c.  Salahiddin; 
 
d.  07/19/1988; 
 
e.  Palestinian; 
 
f. COB: Libya 
 
g. Saida; 
 
h.  Lebanon; 
 
i.  Male; 
 
j. First floor, Abdo Sido building, above Abo Alool market, Dalua 
street, Saida city, Lebanon; 
 
k.  Home: 961-07-724409  Mobile:  961-03-330855; 
 
l.  bakrionline@hotmail.com; 
 
m.  None; 
 
n.  Lebanese University in Saida; 
 
o.  English language and literature (since 2006); 
 
 
p.  Mohamad is very involved in community service and volunteering. 
He  trained in first aide in high school and volunteered with a 
university group in extinguishing forest fires that broke out in 
Lebanon during summer 2007 and April 2008.  He also volunteered and 
helped the Saida municipality in cleaning the sea shore of the 
cityand helped the refugees that fled from Southern Lebanese 
villages and came to Saida during the July 2006 war; 
 
q.  Mohamad worked full time during summer 2008 as an accountant at 
"Abo Riyad", a local center in Saida.  He also worked from September 
2007 until May 2008 as a public relations officer with the Lebanese 
Technical Institute of Saida; 
 
r.  None; 
 
s.  interested in traveling, making and hosting friends from 
different cultures and internet networking; 
 
t.  Good oral and written English as evidenced by application and 
interview; 
 
u.  Mohamad wants to be a teacher and inform students about America 
after he returns from the program  He is a strong advocate of 
women's rights and upports women leadership in society.  He is 
helpful, creative and thinks "out of the box"; 
 
 
Saleh Al Dimassi 
 
a.  Saleh; 
 
b.  Al Dimassi; 
 
c.  Bassam; 
 
d.  12/21/1986; 
 
e.  Palestinian; 
 
f.  "Shatila" camp ; 
 
g.  Beirut; 
 
h.  Lebanon; 
 
i.  Male; 
 
j. "Shatila" camp, next to "Horsh" Beirut, UNRWA buildings area, 
"Wahiba" store building, 2nd floor, Beirut, Lebanon; 
 
k.  Mobile:  961-70-945639; 
 
l.  hazolat_2@hotmail.com; 
 
m.  None; 
 
n.  Beirut Arab University (BAU); 
 
o.  Science, Biochemistry (since 2006); 
 
p.  Saleh volunteered with the Qatar Red Crescent to collect 
information on families at the Shatilla camp and distribute in kind 
subsidiaries during and after the July 2007 war in Lebanon.  He has 
also volunteered in Beirut UNRWA polyclinic in 2008 as a medical lab 
technician. 
 
q.  None; 
 
r.  Good oral and written English as evidenced by application and 
interview; 
 
s.  Saleh is committed to community projects and believes a leader 
grows from grassroots. He is eager to have a cross-cultural learning 
experience; 
 
 
Mohamad Fathalla 
 
a.  Mohamad; 
 
b.  Fathalla; 
 
c.  Zaki; 
 
d.  08/31/1988; 
 
e.  Palestinian; 
 
f.  Hamra ; 
 
g.  Beirut; 
 
h.  Lebanon; 
 
i.  Male; 
 
j. Leon street, Hamra area, Omar Ghalayini building 3d floor, 
Beirut, Lebanon; 
 
k.  Mobile:  961-70-811471; 
 
l.  mohdfatha@hotmail.com; 
 
m.  None; 
 
n.  Lebanese American University (LAU); 
 
o.  Economics, Finance (since 2006); 
 
p.  Mohamad has been an active member of the Palestinian Cultural 
Club since 2006. He has also volunteered in Palestinian refugees 
camps, helping children with their studies and teaching them 
computer and English language; 
 
q. Mohamad has been working the last 2 years as an Assistant in his 
university's Education Department. 
 
r.  Graduate high school with Distinction; 
 
s.  None; 
 
t.  interested in politics, human rights issues and economics; 
 
u.  Good oral and written English as evidenced by application and 
interview; 
 
v.  Mohamad has good public relations skills, is open-minded and 
exhibits good leadership potential; 
 
 
Mohammed Himmo 
 
a.  Mohammed; 
 
b.  Himmo; 
 
c.  Bassam; 
 
d.  10/17/1986; 
 
e.  Palestinian; 
 
f.  Tarek Il Jdedeh ; 
 
g.  Beirut; 
 
h.  Lebanon; 
 
i.  COB: KSA, Khobar; 
 
j.  Male; 
 
k. Tareek El Jadedeh, Ard Jalloul, Beirut, Lebanon; 
 
l.  Mobile:  961-70-821693; 
 
m.  moudy1408@hotmail.com; 
 
n.  None; 
 
o.  Art, Science & Technology University in Lebanon; 
 
p.  Business, Management Information System  (since 2007); 
 
q.  Mohammed volunteered with the Lebanese Civil Defense in 2008, 
assisting in transporting injured people to the hospital; 
 
r.  Received a reward from the St.Georges School for the Dram Film 
Festival and an honor award by the school principle for 
accomplishing this project successfully; 
 
s.  None; 
 
t.  Working as a customer service officer since November 2008 at a 
small private company. 
 
u.  interested in travelling, swimming and playing football; 
 
v.  Good oral and written English as evidenced by application and 
interview; 
 
w.  Mohammed wants to be an entrepreneur in the IT sector. He is 
very focused on working towards self-improvement and enhancing 
employment rights ; 
 
Ahmad Abdul Hadi 
 
a.  Ahmad; 
 
b.  Abdul Hadi; 
 
c.  Hassan; 
 
d.  05/12/1987; 
 
e.  Palestinian; 
 
f.  Beirut; 
 
g.  Beirut; 
 
h.  Lebanon; 
 
i.  Male; 
 
j. Tareek El Jedideh, 'Hassan Khaled' street, facing 'Imam Ali' 
mosk, 'Sammak' building, 8th floor ; 
 
k.  Mobile:  961-70-995186; 
 
l.  mado_278@hotmail.com; 
 
m.  None; 
 
n.  Beirut Arab University (BAU); 
 
o.  Business (since 2006); 
 
p.  Ahmad volunteered with the Qatar Red Crescent, supervising a 
group to collect information about families in "Shatilla" camp and 
to give them in kind subsidiaries during and after the July 2006 war 
in Lebanon; 
 
q.  None; 
 
r. interested in music, swimming and fishing; 
 
s.  Understandable oral and written English as evidenced by 
application and interview; 
 
t.  Ahmad is strongly committed to continued service within the 
Palestinian community.  He expressed his desire to dialogue with 
Israeli youth to fill the communication gap ;5.  (U) Although it 
would be unjust to compare Lebanese and Palestinian applicants due 
to their very different backgrounds and needs for the program, if we 
have to make the difficult decision to come with a merged and 
minimized list for both categories, the nominees would be in rank 
order:  Mario Abou Zeid, Joelle Eid, Fatima Al Dimassi, Mohamad 
Bakri, Sanaa Maalouf, and Saleh Al Dimassi.  The alternate nominees 
are in rank order: Marwan Abdallah, Hiba Kamal, and Veronique El 
Kartabany. 
 
¶6.  (U) Post action officer: Jacqueline Ward; telephone number: 
961-4-542600 ext.4432; fax number: 961-4-544318; email address: 
wardjl2@state.gov 
 
¶7.  (U) Biographical data and justification for alternate candidates 
will be provided as needed. 
 
SISON