09DUBLIN86
IRISH BANKING WOES: POLITICAL QUICKSAND
Thu Feb 26 00:00:00 +0100 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Dublin
VZCZCXRO3191
RR RUEHDBU RUEHFL RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHNP RUEHROV RUEHSR
DE RUEHDL #0086/01 0571207
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 261207Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY DUBLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9811
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RUEHBL/AMCONSUL BELFAST 0913
RUEATRS/TREASURY WASHDCC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 DUBLIN 000086 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR TREASURY VIMAL ATUKORALA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/11/2019 
TAGS: PGOV PREL ECON EFIN EI
SUBJECT: IRISH BANKING WOES: POLITICAL QUICKSAND 
 
DUBLIN 00000086  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
Classified By: Acting Pol/Econ Section Chief Dwight Nystrom; reasons 1. 
4(b/d) 
 
¶1. (C)  Summary: Recently, the Finance Minister Brian Lenihan 
announced a recapitalization plan for Ireland's two largest 
banks.  The terms of the recapitalization stated that the 
government would receive preferred shares in exchange for the 
investment and the Minister for Finance would name 25 percent 
of both banks' boards of directors.  The compensation of bank 
executives will be reduced by at least 33 percent.  These 
banks are viewed to be the strongest in Ireland and 
economists and ex-management of other banks indicate that 
Ireland's smaller banks will likely require government 
support.  Further, troubles continue to unfold at Anglo-Irish 
bank, with the revelation of an additional Euro 451 million 
in bad debt associated with the bank financing the purchase 
of its own shares.  The Irish police executed a search 
warrant on Anglo-Irish's offices in connection with the 
growing scandal.  According to several of our contacts, the 
banking sector troubles are becoming a political problem for 
the government.  As well, the small, generalist Department of 
Finance is finding it difficult to deal with the twin crises 
of the banking meltdown and an expandig fiscal deficit.  End 
Summary. 
 
OWNERSHIP 
-------- 
 
¶2. (U) Under the terms of the recapitalization plan, the 
Government will provide Euro 3.5 billion in Core Tier 1 
capital to Allied Irish Bank (AIB) and Bank of Ireland (BOI). 
 In return, the government will receive preference shares 
with a fixed dividend of 8 percent payable in cash or 
ordinary shares in lieu of cash.  Until the fifth anniversary 
of the issue, the banks have the ability to repurchase the 
preference shares at par value.  After that time, they may be 
repurchased at 125 percent of face value.  Warrants attached 
to the preference shares enable the government to purchase up 
to 25 percent of the existing shares if share prices reach a 
specific level.  The strike price for the first 15 percent is 
Euro 0.976 for AIB and Euro 0.52 for BOI.  The strike price 
for the balance is Euro 0.375 for AIB and Euro 0.20 for BOI. 
As of market close on February 23, the share prices for AIB 
and BOI were Euro 0.58 and Euro 0.30, respectively.  If a 
bank redeems up to Euro 1.5 billion of the state investment 
in new preference shares from privately sourced Core Tier 1 
capital prior to December 31, then the warrants will be 
reduced pro rata to that redemption to an amount representing 
not less than 15 percent of its ordinary shares. 
 
MANAGEMENT AND FUNDING SOURCES 
------------------------------ 
 
¶3. (C) The Minister for Finance will name 25 percent of the 
directors at each of the banks.  Additionally, the government 
will receive 25 percent of the voting rights in respect of 
change of control and board appointments.  All directors of 
both banks will resign prior to the 2009 annual general 
meetings.  Additionally, compensation of senior executives 
will be cut by at least 33 percent.  They will receive no 
bonuses or salary increases related to performance in 2008 or 
¶2009.  Payments to non-executive directors will be reduced by 
at least 25 percent.  The recapitalization program will be 
funded from the National Pensions Reserve Fund, with Euro 4 
billion from the fund's current reserves and Euro 3 billion 
from a front loading of the Exchequer contributions for 2009 
and 2010.  Alan Barrett of the Economic and Social Research 
Institute (ESRI) indicated that the expenditure and related 
indebtedness is relatively minor given Ireland's debt to GDP 
at the beginning of 2009. 
 
CONTINUED DIFFICULTIES AT ANGLO-IRISH 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (U)  On February 20, Anglo-Irish Bank revealed that it 
lent 10 customers (nicknamed "the golden circle" in Ireland) 
Euro 451 million to purchase Anglo-Irish shares, with 75 
percent of the loans secured by the shares and 25 percent 
secured by the participants' "personal assets."  David Drumm, 
Anglo-Irish's former chief executive, assembled the group to 
purchase 10 percent of the bank's shares in order to prevent 
shares acquired through contracts for difference with 
businessman Sean Quinn coming to market.  He feared that this 
would have led to a sharp decline in share price.  On 
February 22, the Irish Times reported the names of four of 
the investors, all of whom are well-known real estate 
developers.  Anglo-Irish expects to write off Euro 300 
million in relation to this transaction. 
 
 
DUBLIN 00000086  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶5. (U) On February 24, the Garda (the Irish police force) 
executed a search warrant on a number of Anglo-Irish Bank 
offices in Dublin.  According to press reports, the police 
are searching for documents that could provide evidence of 
offenses under company law.  Justice Minister Dermot Ahern 
said, "legislation is in place to bring to justice those who 
may have played hard and fast with the financial security of 
this country."  He continued, "we operate the rule of law. 
As far as I am concerned, that provides that, whether you 
have a balaclava, a sawed-off shotgun or a white collar and 
designer suit, the same rules apply." 
 
THE FUTURE OF BANKING IN IRELAND 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (C) Economists generally agree that AIB and BOI are on 
sound footing.  However, they have expressed considerably 
more concern over the smaller banks.  Barrett indicated that 
the Irish people would have been better served had 
Anglo-Irish been allowed to fail.  Rumors continue to 
surround the future of Irish Nationwide, whose former 
Chairman, Dr. Michael Walsh, resigned on February 17.  The 
building society is currently run by 71 year old former 
managing director, Michael Fingleton.  Following his surprise 
resignation, Walsh stated that Irish Nationwide could not 
survive without significant government support.  The 
Department of Finance is currently reviewing the likely 
capital needs of Irish Nationwide, Irish Life & Permanent, 
and EBS building society.  Barrett indicated that there would 
likely be continuing fallout in the sector. 
 
¶7. (C) Emboffs have had recent conversations with others who 
agree with Barrett that there is more to come from the 
banking scandals.  Andrew McDowell, economic advisor to 
opposition party Fine Gael, said that Fine Gael hopes that 
the Euro 7 billion bank recapitalization scheme works but 
that it is probably only a temporary solution. 
Unfortunately, he said that was all the money the government 
could pull together at the time.  He worried that in three 
months the government will need to inject fresh capital into 
the banks and he was unsure where this money would come from. 
 Fine Gael preferred the idea of setting up a "bad bank" that 
would hold the bank,s impaired assets.  McDowell also 
believes that we have not seen the end of revelations of 
misconduct in the banking sector.  However, he said for the 
time being opposition parties are not going to cause a fuss 
over the issue because of the fragility of the economy but in 
a few months "all bets are off." 
 
¶8. (C) Eoin Fahy, chief economist at KBC Asset Management, 
worried that the scandals at Ireland's banks are permanently 
damaging the country's image as a safe, steady place for 
financial institutions to do business.  He said that the 
"light touch" regulatory system that has served to draw in 
these firms will be revamped with the result that firms will 
leave.  Fahy confirmed that the low corporate tax rate is 
"untouchable" but he worried if this was enough to keep these 
companies in Ireland (Note: Fahy is on the Commission on 
Taxation, which was tasked by the government to make 
recommendations about how to improve the tax code.  End 
Note.)  Fahy noted that it is "quite likely" that the Fine 
Gael leadership knows the identity of "the golden circle" 
individuals but he is not convinced that the Fianna Fail 
leadership does.  He asked two Cabinet-level Fianna Fail 
members (who happen to be personal friends) whether they knew 
the identities.  They maintained they did not.  Nevertheless, 
he believes, "this will not end well for the government." 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶9. (C) Economists generally believe that the banking sector 
will weather the current storm and that AIB and BOI will 
emerge from the wreckage.  However, the fate of the smaller 
banks is more uncertain.  Our contacts agreed that the 
banking crisis is rapidly becoming a political headache for 
the government and that the government's raid on 
Anglo-Irish's offices may be an indication of the desire to 
deal firmly with the problem.  The public has come to believe 
that the revelations about Anglo-Irish to date represent only 
the tip of the iceberg.  Beyond the scandals, the 
government's lack of institutional capacity to deal with the 
banking crisis and a burgeoning fiscal deficit at the same 
time is worrying.  According to Barrett, the generalist 
nature of the civil service diminished the ability to 
adequately monitor and regulate financial institutions and 
allowed larger organizations to dictate to the regulators, 
who were wholly incapable of understanding the deception 
present in Anglo-Irish.  Unless the government acts quickly 
 
DUBLIN 00000086  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
to rectify this problem, Ireland's tarnished reputation could 
blacken further. 
FAUCHER