09STATE14020
UNAMID: INSTRUCTIONS FOR UN SECURITY COUNCIL
Sat Feb 14 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
O 140007Z FEB 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 
INFO AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM IMMEDIATEUNCLAS STATE 014020 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SU KPKO PREL
SUBJECT: UNAMID: INSTRUCTIONS FOR UN SECURITY COUNCIL 
CONSULTATIONS 
 
Â¶1.  This is an action request.  USUN is requested to draw 
from the following talking points for the 2/17 consultations 
on the UN-Africa Union Mission in Darfur (UNAMID). 
 
Begin Talking Points: 
 
General: 
-The United States thanks the Secretary General for preparing 
this report on the deployment of UNAMID. 
 
-We continue to extend our appreciation to the UNAMID 
peacekeepers, who are braving a hazardous security 
environment to provide assistance to the embattled civilians 
of Darfur. 
 
Deployment: 
-The United States notes that UNAMID has now deployed 64 
percent of its authorized military strength, as well as the 
Secretary General,s observation that the Government of 
Sudan,s cooperation has been important.  We also note the 
contribution that the Tripartite Committee for the Deployment 
of UNAMID has made in increasing UNAMID,s deployment 
capability. 
 
-We are pleased that the United States has been able to help 
facilitate UNAMID,s deployment, most recently by providing 
air-bridge support for the movement of heavy logistics 
vehicles for the UNAMID Rwandan contingent, which was 
executed with excellent cooperation among the United States, 
the UN, and the Government of Sudan. 
 
-We are pleased to be continuing our cooperation through U.S. 
airlift assistance to help transport containers containing 
critical troop equipment from El Obeid and Nyala to El 
Geneina. 
 
-But the United States shares the Secretary General,s 
concern that UNAMID,s operational impact continues to be 
undermined by logistical constraints and an inadequate supply 
of critical equipment.  We would appreciate a detailed list 
from the UN of what would be needed to make UNAMID troops 
already in the field more effective. 
 
-Furthermore, we are concerned that troop and 
police-contributing countries scheduled to deploy in 2009 are 
missing certain equipment and assets that they need to deploy 
in a timely fashion.  We ask these countries to make 
transparent their needs to the UN and request the Friends of 
UNAMID to consider helping to close these gaps. We request 
that UN DPKO work swiftly with Troop Contributing Countries 
to carry out pre-deployment visits and other necessary steps 
as soon as possible, and where necessary to deploy UN 
personnel to TCCs to actively assist in their deployment 
preparations. 
 
Political Process: 
-The United States continues to fully support the efforts of 
the Joint United Nations-African Union Chief Mediator for 
Darfur, Djibril Bassole, to bring all parties in the Darfur 
conflict toward a peaceful resolution. 
 
-Mr. Bassole is working toward a cessation of hostilities and 
a Framework Agreement that establishes parameters for a final 
peace.  We welcome the fact that the Government of Sudan and 
the rebel Justice and Equality Movement (JEM) have taken a 
step towards peace by meeting in Doha and urge them to 
quickly reach a ceasefire agreement. 
 
-The United States is watching the progress of the Darfur 
discussions underway in Doha with great interest. 
 
Security and Cooperation: 
-The need for a mediated, vigorous peace process has only 
been accentuated by the January JEM attack on Muhajeriya and 
the Government of Sudan,s harsh response, including the use 
of aerial bombardments in violation of UN Security Council 
Resolution 1591. The United States joins the Secretary 
General in condemning these actions. 
 
-We commend UNAMID for maintaining its commitment to 
assisting civilians in Muhajeriya. The restrictions on the 
movement of UNAMID personnel imposed by the Government of 
Sudan following the violence, in violation of its Status of 
Forces Agreement with the UN, are flatly unacceptable. 
UNAMID,s monitoring role is critical and must be respected. 
 
-We also remain concerned about the sections of the report 
that cite ongoing restrictions on humanitarian personnel 
imposed by the Government of Sudan.  This is particularly 
troubling in light of the increased vulnerability and 
displacement of civilians in Darfur. 
 
Closing Observations: 
- We appreciate the UN,s follow-up work in providing a 
report on the August 25, 2008, Kalma Camp incident, which 
concluded that the Government of Sudan,s indiscriminate and 
disproportionate use of force violated international 
humanitarian law.  Thirty-three civilians died, and 108 were 
wounded. 
 
-This episode only highlights the tragic consequences of this 
conflict and the urgency of the need for a peaceful solution. 
 
Questions to Ask: 
-The report notes that Ethiopia has pledged 5 helicopters. 
What further action is needed to deploy these helicopters? 
When will UNAMID be prepared to receive them? 
 
End Talking Points. 
 
 
CLINTON