09WELLINGTON36
NZ NATIONAL DAY UNDERSCORES GOOD RELATIONS WITH MAORI
Fri Feb 13 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Wellington
VZCZCXRO0835
RR RUEHDT RUEHPB
DE RUEHWL #0036/01 0440303
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 130303Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY WELLINGTON
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5679
INFO RUEHNZ/AMCONSUL AUCKLAND 1847
RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA 5382
RUEHAP/AMEMBASSY APIA 0535
RUEHDN/AMCONSUL SYDNEY 0795
RUCNARF/ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 WELLINGTON 000036 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR STATE FOR EAP/ANP 
PACOM FOR J01E/J2/J233/J5/SJFHQ 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM KDEM NZ
SUBJECT: NZ NATIONAL DAY UNDERSCORES GOOD RELATIONS WITH MAORI 
 
WELLINGTON 00000036  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary.  On February 6, New Zealand Prime Minister John 
Key joined Maori leaders at Waitangi, the site of the signing of the 
country's founding document, to commemorate New Zealand's National 
Day.  In recent years, this traditional event has been characterized 
by hostility by Maori activists over perceived historical and 
contemporary grievances.  Although Key himself was the victim of 
minor outburst at Waitangi, the day was nonetheless widely seen as 
the most harmonious and cordial Waitangi Day in recent memory.  This 
served to underscore the good relationship that currently exists 
between the new National-led Government and Maori, largely thanks 
Key's positive and inclusive approach toward Maori in the new 
government.  End Summary. 
 
NZ's National Day Means Protests for Some 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU)  On February 6, Prime Minister John Key, several members of 
his caucus, opposition politicians and Maori leaders and dignitaries 
descended on the small seaside township of Waitangi, north of 
Auckland, to commemorate New Zealand's National Day.  Waitangi is 
the site of the February 6, 1840 signing of New Zealand's founding 
document, the Treaty of Waitangi, between Maori tribes and the 
Crown.  New Zealand's National Day is commonly known as Waitangi 
Day. 
 
¶3. (SBU)  Rather than a day of celebration, protest is typically the 
main act at Waitangi, particularly in recent years.  Some Maori 
activists use this day to protest against perceived historical 
injustices related to the signing of the Treaty of Waitangi or 
policies of the government perceived as detrimental to Maori 
interests.  Such protests are usually directed at visiting political 
leaders and have been known to turn confrontational and violent. 
 
PM Key Assaulted on Arrival at Waitangi 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU)  Prime Minister Key, in his first visit to Waitangi as 
Prime Minister, was the victim of an isolated act of aggression at 
the 2009 Waitangi commemorations.  When Key alighted from his car on 
arrival, two Maori objected to his admission to the hallowed Te Tii 
Waitangi lower marae (Maori meeting place) and managed to breach the 
security cordon and briefly manhandle Key.  The assailants were 
quickly seized and led away.  A 19-year old and a 33-year old were 
later remanded in custody after they appeared in court on assault 
charges.  Though clearly shaken, Key was unhurt by the attack.  The 
Minister of Maori Affairs and co-leader of the Maori Party, Dr. Pita 
Sharples, was standing near Key when the attack happened and was 
knocked to the ground.  He too emerged unscathed. 
 
History of Hostility towards Visiting Politicians 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶5. (SBU)  The attack on Key has historical precedent.  Recent 
attacks on New Zealand politicians attending commemorations at 
Waitangi have demonstrated how fraught with risk such a visit can 
be.  In 1998, then- opposition Labour Party leader Helen Clark was 
reduced to tears when her right to speak at the Te Tii Waitangi 
lower marae was angrily challenged by the well-known Maori activist 
Titewhai Harawira (Note:  Maori protocol prohibits women delivering 
an address at a marae.  End Note.).  As a result, Clark chose never 
to return to the lower marae and instead commemorated the National 
Day elsewhere in Waitangi.  In 2004, then Prime Minister Clark was 
heckled and jostled as she walked around Waitangi.  That same year, 
the then-National Party leader Dr. Don Brash was pelted with mud by 
angry Maori activists as he was being interviewed by journalists at 
Waitangi. 
 
¶6. (SBU)  In contrast, John Key's appearance at Waitangi in 2008, as 
the new leader of the National Party, was free of incident and he 
was warmly welcomed by Maori.  The good impression made by Key 
during the 2008 visit set the context for his return to Waitangi a 
year later as prime minister. 
 
PM Assault Roundly Condemned by Maori Leaders 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU)  Maori leaders, including Titewhai Harawira, immediately 
condemned the actions of the two men who assaulted Key.  They all 
asserted that the assailants did not represent the views of the 
majority of Maori.  Despite the attack, Key was warmly welcomed at 
Waitangi by Maori leaders and the public.  Key was quick to downplay 
the attack and affirmed that he was "not going to let a couple of 
glory seekers go out there and try and put the wrong perception on 
today."  He affirmed that it would not stop him from returning to 
the lower marae in the future and he would not let it detract from 
 
WELLINGTON 00000036  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
improved relations with Maori.  Said Key, "New Zealand is moving on, 
it's changing, and the way forward is through dialogue, an exchange 
of views and an understanding of each other's positions.  It's not 
from thumping the prime minister when he gets out of the crown car." 
 In a public relations coup, he invited two young Maori admirers to 
sit with him at the event, which was widely caught by the media 
cameras. 
 
¶8. (SBU)  The scuffle at the entrance to the lower marae was the 
only incident to mar what was almost uniformly seen as the most 
optimistic and festive Waitangi Days is recent memory.  Sharples 
called the 2009 event "one of the best." 
 
Key's Unite and Conquer Strategy with Maori 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU)  Key's governing strategy is central to his Government's 
good relationship with Maori, which is in stark contrast to his 
predecessor, Helen Clark.  Key's decision to invite into government 
the Maori Party at the 2008 election was very astute, even though he 
did not need its votes to form a governing majority.  At the 2005 
election, Clark stated that in terms of a governing partner option 
the Maori Party was "the last cab off the rank."  At the 2009 
Waitangi celebrations, Key praised the Maori Party for realizing it 
was better to be "part of the solution, not part of the problem" 
when it went into coalition with National. 
 
¶10. (SBU)  Maori leaders appreciate Key's efforts. Sharples asserted 
that Maori are today feeling positive, after seeing the relationship 
between the Maori Party and the government at Waitangi.    Notably, 
even Titewhai Harawira praised the new government's approached to 
Maori, which has invited Maori to sit at the same table.  "I think 
that's so wonderful," she said. 
 
¶11. (SBU)  Prior to Waitangi Day, Key had approved a request by 
Maori to fly a Maori flag on Auckland's Harbour Bridge on Waitangi 
Day.  As PM, Helen Clark never engaged on this issue and left the 
decision to the National Transport Authority, who never assented to 
the request on the basis that only national flags can be flown on 
the Bridge.  In Waitangi, Key went further and promised to have a 
Maori flag flying alongside the national flag from Parliament, 
Premier House (his official residence in Wellington) and Auckland 
Harbour Bridge on Waitangi Day in 2010. 
 
Comment:  Political Fight for Maori Vote Remains 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶12. (SBU)  In the midst of proclamations of a renewed spirit at 
Waitangi and a new era of relations with Maori, politics were never 
far from the surface.  At Waitangi, both Key and new Labour Party 
Leader Phil Goff disagreed over which party has most to offer Maori. 
 Both leaders were accompanied by large numbers of their respective 
parliamentary caucus and used the opportunity to woo Maori voters. 
Key cited the support deal with the Maori Party and stated that 
National has more to offer Maori than any other party. Goff, who 
like Key was also well received at Waitangi, rubbished the claim and 
asserted that Labour remains a strong friend of Maori.  However, 
Goff has not particularly endeared himself or his party to Maori 
since becoming Labour's leader following the 2008 election defeat. 
Maori Party co-leader Tariana Turia called Goff "bloody patronizing" 
after he claimed that her party would face an electoral backlash for 
siding with National because most of its supporters gave their party 
vote to Labour.  Turia also noted that "while Labour goes and loudly 
tells (Maori) everything they do for them, the most empowering 
opportunities have come from National governments."  End Comment. 
 
Keegan